78

AGRICULTURE CROP - INSURANCE
SCHEMES

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’
WELFARE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY EIGHTH

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2308

SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

AGRICULTURE CROP INSURANCE
SCHEMES

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’
WELFARE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 1S [2+ WL

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 19 {2+ 202%

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)

Gh


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

REPORT

PART- I
1 Introductory
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME
MONITORING AND AWARENESS OF SCHEMES
DELAY IN FURNISHING OF DATA TO AUDIT

00 WU >

PART - Il

PAGES

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

(vil)

viii)

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

1. Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on

10.11.2017

I. Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) held on

21.05.2018

il Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) held on

07.11.2019

IV Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on

14.12.2023

City

01
02
08

18
22

24-37


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rioh

10... Shri Abhishek Singh

11. Prof. Ram Shanker

12. छा. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
49. Shri Shantaram Naik’
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy”
24. Shri Ajay Sancheti
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav |

1 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 28 July,

2017. पु
2 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18

August, 2017.

Tae है
गा जा


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak

2 YN O2arR छ DV

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”

9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

10. Shri Abhishek Singh

11. Shri Gopal Shetty

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

18. Shri Shwait Malik

19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
21. Shri 0. M. Ramesh*®

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav"

3 Elected w.e.f. 6 August, 2018 for filling vacancies.

++] ४-


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

छा a FON

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

N

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

8... Shri Jagdambika Pal

9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

10 Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13... Shri Jayant Sinha

14... Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Shri P. Bhattacharya*
20. Shri 0. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

4 Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar
Kalita from Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.

जी न


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

SNOAR ON

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury ss -__——s Chairperson

MEMBERS.

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
Shri 0. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021,

tan

NVI


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS ,
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri. Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi®

9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara®
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

ONOARYN

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy”
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi®

3 Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.

07.07.2021.
6 lected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.

07.07.2021.
7 Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.

07.07.2021.
8 Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f.

07.07.2021. है
- हि Ne


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal
5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9. Shri Brijendra Singh
10... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh |
12. Shri Jayant Sinha
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C.M.Ramesh |

20. — Shri Vijayasai Reddy
21... Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

-- ५ -


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
40. Shri Brijendra Singh
41. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien*
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

OPNAARON

©

SECRETARIAT.
1. Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Executive Officer

Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy Eighth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Agriculture Crop Insurance Schemes’ based
on C&AG Report No. 7 of 2017 relating to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers’ Welfare.

2. The C&AG Report No. 7 of 2017 was laid on the Table of the House on
21.07.2017.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2017-2018), selected the aforesaid
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare on the subject matter on 10
November, 2017. Thereafter, the Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) &
(2019-20) continued with the examination of the subject and took further
evidence on 21 May, 2018 and 07 November, 2019 respectively. In the
subsequent terms during the period (2020-24), the Committee again took up
the subject for detailed examination and report.

4, Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 14.12.2023.
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part- Il of the Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for taking oral
evidence and obtaining information on the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare for tendering evidence
before them and furnishing the requisite information in connection with the
examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

/4 December, 2023 Chairperson,
2S Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


“REPORT
PART -।
I INTRODUCTORY

The C&AG Report No.7 of 2017 contains significant results of the Performance
Audit of Agriculture Crop Insurance Schemes of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’
Welfare, Agricultural Insurance Corporation and nine selected States for the five year
period commencing from Kharif season 2011 till Rabi season 2015-16.

2. The Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) selected the subject for detailed
examination and took oral evidences of the representatives of Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare (DAC&FW) under the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare and obtained written replies on the subject. Based on
the oral evidences and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail.

3. Over the past three decades, Government of India (GOI) has introduced
successive agricultural crop insurance schemes to help the farming community. To this
end, GOI introduced the Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme (CCIS) in 1985,
which was replaced by the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) from Rabi
season 1999-2000. The Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) was
introduced on pilot basis in 50 districts from the Rabi season 2010-11, and the pilot
Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) from Kharif season 2007. These two
pilot schemes were merged into an umbrella National Crop Insurance Programme
(NCIP) from Rabi season 2013-14 replacing NAIS. However, NAIS was allowed to be
continued in some States, as per their option, upto Rabi season 2015-16. From Kharif
season 2016, GOI introduced the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and Re-
structured WBCIS by replacing NAIS and NCIP.

4. The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare (DAC&FW)
under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare is responsible for budgetary
control, release of funds and overall administration of the schemes at the Central level.
Funds under the schemes are released by both GOI and State Governments to the
Agricultural Insurance Company of India Limited (AIC), who had been designated as the
sole insurance company (or Implementing Agency) under NAIS and as the channelizing
agency through whom insurance premium are remitted to the insurance company
(including itself) to the farmers (over and above the farmers’ share) under the schemes,
with GOI and the concerned State governments equally sharing the subsidy burden.
Claim payments are equally shared by the GOI and the concerned State Governments
in the case of NAIS (above a threshold to be paid by AIC). In all other schemes, the
burden of claim payments is entirely. borne by the concerned insurance company. Audit
examined the records of DAC&FW, nine selected State Governments, AIC and private

2


insurance companies covering the period from Kharif season 2011 to Rabi season
2015-16.

A. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

a) Mechanism for timely release of funds by State Governments

5. Funds are released by GOI and State Governments to AIC on 50:50 basis
towards share in premium subsidy under NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS along with claims
over and above 100 per cent of premium collected under NAIS (for food and oilseed
crops) to the Implementing Agencies (IAs). In turn, AIC releases to private insurance
companies their share of premium subsidy (MNAIS and WBCIS). The schemes are
demand driven and funds are released by GOI and State Governments on demand from
AIC.

6. As per Audit, though DAC&FW invariably released their share on time, instances
of delayed release by State Governments were observed. Such delays impacted on the
release of insurance compensation to affected farmers defeating the objective of
providing timely financial assistance to the farming community. The guidelines were
silent on the utilisation of savings, if any, due to difference between premium collected ,
and claims payable by AIC under NAIS and AIC retained the savings. AIC failed to
exercise due diligence in verification of claims by private insurance companies before
releasing funds to them. AIC failed to take reinsurance cover on behalf of GOI and State
Governments under NAIS despite requirement in the guidelines. At the same time, AIC
took reinsurance cover for its own share of claim liability. AIC furnished Utilisation
Certificates (UCs) to DAC&FW only at the time of demand for fresh funds and not within
a week of release of funds as required in the guidelines. Since implementing agencies
did not ensure submission of UCs by Bank/Fls, even the minimum assurance that
claims had been distributed to beneficiary farmers is lacking.

b) Savings under NAIS with Agriculture Insurance Company of India

Limited (AIC)

7. As per NAIS guidelines issued in July 1999, the IA was required to meet the
entire liabilities up to 100 per cent of premium in the case of food crops and oilseeds,
and 150 percent of premium in the case of commercial and horticultural crops. Liabilities
in excess of these limits were to be shared equally by GOI and the State Governments
till complete transition to actuarial regime in a period of five years. Thereafter, all claims
up to 150 percent of premium would be met by the IA for a period of three years, the
limit of which would increase to 200 percent thereafter. Claims above these limits would
be met out of corpus fund to be created with equal contributions of GOI and the State
Governments.


8. Audit scrutiny revealed that from 1999-2000 (Rabi Season) to 2015-16 (Rabi
Season) i.e. in 33 seasons, AIC had accumulated savings of Z 2518.62 crore from the
collection of premium amount (amount of premium collected =14,0561.81 crore less
AIC’s share of claims paid = 11,538.19 crore). Audit observed that the guidelines were
silent on the utilization of savings if any, due to difference between premium collected
and claims payable by AIC and as such AIC retained the savings. Audit also noticed
that DAC&FW has taken & 200 crore of the savings from AIC under the direction of the
Ministry of Finance in the year 2009. DAC&FW has been taking up the matter with AIC
and Ministry of Finance to return the savings on the ground that AIC was being
reimbursed all operational expenses for implementation of the scheme and there was
no justification for AIC to retain the savings. In December, 2009, the Ministry of Finance
directed AIC to release = 200 crore to DAC&FW stating that these funds are being
drawn “from retained profits/reserves (created out of NAIS activities). In April, 2014 the
Ministry of Finance did not agree to permit AIC to release further funds stating that the
release of € 200 crore in December, 2009 has been objected by the Auditors and such
release of funds will reduce the solvency ratio of AIC as per IRDA's regulations.
However, C&AG could not find any such comment of auditor and it was only found that
Statutory Audit has only qualified that = 200 crore is being shown as “Advances and
other Assets” in the balance sheet of AIC and the amount had not been adjusted
against retained profit/reserves. Regarding solvency ratio the audit had observed that
the decision to maintain this ratio is to be taken by the shareholders of the AIC (viz. all
government insurance companies and NABARD) in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, and is not to be linked with the issue of remitting of savings by AIC to the
Government of India. Further, it has been mentioned by the audit that DAC&FW, in
January, 2017 have taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for the remittance of
savings to the Consolidated Fund of India.

9. In this regard, during the oral evidence held on 7 November, 2019, Secretary,
DAC&FW further stated as follows:

“In certain areas where the crop was good and- monsoon was good, there was a
saving that goes to the AIC. The AIC kept that amount with them. The C&AG
pointed out that this saving should be given back to the Government of India.
When this recommendation was taken up with the AIC and DFS, what the AIC is
saying is that as per the official guidelines, there is no provision to revert back the
savings. We took up the matter again and again with the DFS....... The DFS is
saying it is to be returned.”

10. | When enquired about the progress in the matter, the Ministry in a written reply
mentioned as follows:


“AIC has placed the matter before its Board of Directors on 14" November, 2018.
Board of Directors of the AIC has suggested to refer the matter to the Ministry of
Finance, Government of India with facts and inputs provided by AIC, so that,
MOF, GOI can suggest the way forward to close the issue of adhoc payment of
200 crore and savings by AIC so that it is brought to a logical conclusion as
suggested by C&AG. Accordingly, DAC&FW is preparing a Note for
consideration of COS. The request for placing the matter before Committee of
Secretaries (COS) has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 22"4 January,
2020. Reply in the matter is awaited. The Cabinet Secretariat has been reminded
on 20" May, 2020 and 9" July, 2020 in the matter.

c) Release of funds to private companies

11. On being enquired about the guidelines for release of funds to private companies
and the actions taken by the Department, the Department stated as under:-

“As per guidelines under MNAIS and WBCIS, all Private Insurance companies
were required to submit the provisional/estimated coverage based on the districts
allotted to them. After consolidating the data, the demand of 50% of 601 fund
was raised and same was disbursed to the Private Insurance companies
according to the conditions mentioned in the sanction order of GOI. Further, all
Private Insurance companies submitted final business statistics to AIC, based on
which AIC demanded GOI subsidy and after receiving it, the same was released
to all the implementing empanelled Private Insurance companies in terms of
Govt. of India sanction order. At the time of release companies were asked to
furnish requisite UCs for the funds already released. Moreover, as AIC was one
of the implementing companies, they could therefore not undertake verification of
coverage of other insurance companies as other companies have their
objections. Further, States being equal partners, were also supposed to verify the
coverage of all concerned insurance companies. DAC & FW is of the view that
during the period of audit up till Rabi 2013-14, WBCIS and MNAIS were
implemented only on pilot basis and covered only a few States. Further, AIC
released the subsidy to private companies only after they submitted the entire
coverage data to DAC & FW, on the basis of which specific directions to release
the funds to private companies were given by DAC & FW, hence the Department
is of the view that under the circumstances subsidy was being released as per
procedure and there was no deliberate negligence by AIC. Greater due diligence
both by the DAC & FW and AIC before releasing funds has been achieved by
way of monitoring through National Crop Insurance Portal under the new scheme
of PMFBY. The crop insurance portal is now capturing granular data including
details of Aadhaar seeded accounts and land record of beneficiary farmers. Now


the entire GOI share of subsidy is released to AIC based on the data available
Portal. Further, before AIC releases premium subsidy to other insurance
companies and for self, they are required to seek approval of the DAC & FW.”

12. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“Since AIC was the agency for releasing payment to private insurance
companies it was responsible to ensure compliance of DAC&FW guidelines
issued in October 2009. The AIC did not fulfill its obligations under the guidelines
before releasing the final payments to the insurance companies.”

d) Reinsurance

13. Audit in their Report has highlighted that as per NAIS guidelines, AIC was
required to obtain appropriate re-insurance cover in the international re-insurance
market. Audit observed, however, that while AIC had arranged for re-insurance support
only for their own share of claims under NAIS, they did not arrange re-insurance support
for the share of claims to be borne by GOI and the State governments. Had such re-
insurance been provided, liabilities of GOI and the State governments amounting to
%21,989.24 crore could have been reduced. AIC replied (October 2016) that as regards
NAIS (for food and oilseed crops), Governments acted as reinsurers by sharing the risk
whenever the claims exceeded the stipulated margin. In so far as actuarially rated
products like WBCIS, MNAIS ‘and NAIS (for commercial and horticultural crops) are
concerned, where AIC was fully responsible for all the claims, adequate reinsurance
protection was availed of. AIC’s reply is not acceptable as the scheme (NAIS)
guidelines provided that IA (AIC) is responsible for arranging re-insurance support for
the entire scheme claims under NAIS and not for the AIC portion alone.

e) Submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs)

14. As per the operational guidelines of schemes, IAs i.e., AIC as well as other
empanelled private insurance companies were responsible for providing crop
insurance to farmers under the agriculture crop insurance schemes. IAs are not
required to deal directly with the loan disbursing points and instead deal only
with nodal points (of the concerned Bank/Financial Institutions) mostly at
district level. IAs are required to receive details of insured farmers from the
nodal points, and calculate the claims, if any. In the case of MNAIS and
WBCIS, the private insurance companies forward the claims for premium
subsidy to AIC, which in turn, include their own. premium subsidy claims and
approach GOI and State Governments for release of their shares. In respect of
NAIS, AIC approaches GOI and State Governments for their share of premium subsidy
and claim liabilities. On receipt of funds from GO! and State
Governments, AIC releases the premium subsidy to the private insurance

6


companies (in respect of MNAIS and WBCIS) and claim amounts (in respect
of NAIS) to the nodal points. DAC&FW issued standing instructions (March 2014) to AIC
to mandatorily furnish state-wise and company-wise UCs to DAC&FW within a week of
release. Audit, however noticed that AIC did not furnish periodic returns, as
mandated, to DAC&FW. Instead, AIC furnished UCs only at the time of
requirement of fresh funds from DAC&FW. Audit also observed that during the period
covered in audit, four States, Assam, Haryana, Maharashtra and Odisha, released
funds to all the [As (AIC and private insurance companies). Of these, two States, viz.,
Assam and Haryana released %1.66 crore and %84.21 crore, but did not teceive UCs.
Out of %3,409.33 crore released by Maharashtra, UCs for %3,365.86 crore were
outstanding. As per National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP) guidelines, Bank/Fls
are required to submit UCs to IAs within 15 days of credit of claims amounts to
beneficiary farmers. Audit scrutiny of records of AIC revealed that in many cases
Bank/Fls failed to submit UCs to AIC. Consequently, AIC did not have even the
minimum assurance from the Bank/Fls that they had distributed the claims
amounts to beneficiary farmers.

15. When asked as to why the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Rajasthan and
Telangana failed to submit the UCs and the action taken by the Department, the
Department explained as under:-

“State Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that at the time of
disbursement of claims to various Nodal Banks under various schemes, AIC had
supplied required formats of Discharge Vouchers & Utilization Certificates
requesting the banks to return the UCs duly signed after filling required data in
respect of confirmation of fund utilisation and AIC is still following-up with the
Nodal Banks on regular intervals. But UCs have been received from few banks,
due to the reasons like merger of banks and claims were settled on declaration
basis without details of individual farmers. Now when pursuing with banks for
UCs, the bank officials, particularly who come on transfer, are requesting for
farmers list which is not available with AIC. However, the Bankers are being
requested to furnish UCs, duly verifying the declaration data furnished by bank.
State Government of Rajasthan has intimated that premium subsidy utilisation is
monitored by the Department. UCs are collected by the insurance companies
from the banks. Instructions given to insurance company, banks and State Level
Bankers' Committee (SLBC) to provide pending UCs. In addition to the earlier
submitted UCs, %75.63 crore UCs has been received from insurance company.
Department has been regularly following up through calls/letters in order to
- collect the pending UCs for the seasons. Other States have been requested to
furnish their views/reply. But no response has been received, so far. They have
been reminded again. DAC & FW is of the view that as per provisions of


16.

erstwhile scheme of NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS claims were settled by the
concerned insurance companies to the concerned nodal banks. Therefore, UCs
are pending from banks and not from the State Governments in these States.
70% of the UCs have been provided by the banks. A list of banks who have not
provided the UCs has been provided to the Ministry of Finance by the AIC vide
their Email dated 06" November, 2019 for instructions to the banks for early
furnishing of UCs. DAC & FW has also forwarded the same to Department of
Financial Services vide letter dated 03.12.2019. AIC has also been directed to do
rigorous monitoring and arrange to collect UCs through their Regional Offices in
a time bound manner. To resolve the issue, AIC has also been directed to raise
the matter in State Level Bankers Committee of the concerned States. Further, at
the request of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and
AIC, Insurance Division, Department of Financial Services has once again written
vide letter No. H-12013/14/2017-Ins.Il dated 19" December, 2019 to the
CMD/MD/CEOs of Public Sector Banks/NABARD alongwith bank-wise list of
pending UCs and requested them to furnish the pending UCs in time bound
manner to resolve the issue of pending UCs under NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS.”

On being asked whether the Department has initiated any action against AIC for

not furnishing the Utilization Certificates within a week of release of funds, the
Department submitted as under:-

17.

“Crop insurance schemes are multi-agency schemes and fulfilling the roles and
responsibilities though is the responsibility of each stakeholder, this also depends
upon fulfillment of responsibility by other stakeholders. In the instant case, to
provide UCs within a week, AIC was dependent on other insurance companies
and Financial Institutions/banks. On its part, AIC had adhered to the timeliness of
UC submission subject to the Financial Institutions/banks and other insurance
companies fulfilling their responsibilities. Therefore, AIC had provided provisional
UCs during the year, mostly alongwith the proposal for release of funds and
audited UCs after completion of the financial year and annual audit of AIC.
However, AIC has been asked to adhere to the Operational Guidelines of the
scheme and obtain UCs from other insurance companies timely and submit the
same timely to DAC &FW. Further, under existing PMFBY insurance companies
are crediting the claim amount directly into the farmers' account, to the extent
UCs are not required from the banks.”

Audit in their updated vetting comments stated as under:-

“As per Guidelines. of PMFBY, Insurance Companies in consultation with
concerned State Governments will transfer claims directly into bank accounts of


eligible farmers, however in case that is not feasible for loanee farmers, the
Insurance Companies may transfer claims through bank branches which will
credit the claims amount to respective beneficiary loan account positively within
seven days. If Bank Branches/ Nodal banks are not able to do so within this time
period then they will be liable to pay interest (at prevailing rate of interest for
saving account) for the delayed period to the eligible farmers. The Banks shall
issue a certificate within 30 days to the insurer that entire money received for
settlement of claims has already been credited in to the account of beneficiaries.
However, improvement made by the Ministry can be verified during audit.”

B. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME

a) Non-maintenance of Data base

18. Under NAIS guidelines, the IAs were only required to provide returns/statistics to
GOI (and not the States). Audit observed that IAs did not provide periodic (monthly or
quarterly) returns on NAIS to the Governments. Instead statistical data to support their
claims were furnished at the time of requirement of funds. No separate requirements
regarding furnishing of periodic returns/statistics were issued under MNAIS
and WBCIS till they were integrated under NCIP. Thereafter (i.e., from Rabi
season 2013-14), IAs were required to furnish monthly progress returns/
statistics or any information demanded by the governments. The NCIP
guidelines also stipulated that IAs were required to obtain and upload
comprehensive detailed of insured farmers on their websites. Audit, however,
did not observe any instance of IAs either furnishing monthly progress reports/
statistics to the governments even under the NCIP or uploading details of
insured farmers on their websites. Audit also’ did not observe any instance
where DAC&FW or AIC verified and analyzed the statistical data at the time
of release of funds. Audit highlighted that in the absence of requirement under the
guidelines, neither the Governments (GO! and State Governments) nor IAs have any
role in maintaining databases of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop-wise and area-wise)
under any of the schemes despite substantial financial contribution by way of premium
subsidy and claim liability. Consequently, they were wholly dependent on the
information furnished in consolidated format by loan disbursing branches of Banks/FI.

19. Regarding efforts for maintaining a consolidated database of beneficiaries and
other measures, the Department replied as under:-

“Department has captured village level data of farmers alongwith exhaustive
demographic and land details. Various use cases have been envisaged and
some are already in practice:


e To rationalize the crop premium and address adverse selection.

e Monitors enroliment numbers year on year basis. Capacity building
of channels like Common Service Center (CSC) where they are
lagging behind as well as new channels like Post Office are being
explored.

e To promote non-loanee enrollment.

© To implement a layer of block chain over the databases and
transactions for better tracking of premium, claim payment,
application status and remove delays therein.

e To verify the individual land parcel details captured with land record
system of State, for better service delivery by removing the need of
scanning paper based records.

This all will make the scheme more transparent, easily understandable for
farmers and also help in formulation and implementation of risk mitigation
schemes for welfare of farmers.”

b) Coverage of farmers

20. Audit scrutiny revealed that coverage of farmers in the country as well as in the
nine selected States under the schemes was very low compared to the population of
farmers as per Census 2011. While the percentage coverage of farmers in the country
for crops covered under Kharif season ranged from 14 per cent to 22 per cent and from
per cent to 12 per cent in case of crops covered under Rabi season, the percentage
coverage of farmers in nine selected States ranged from 26 per cent to 42 per cent for
crops covered under Kharif season and from 9 per cent to 16 per cent in the case of
crops covered under Rabi season. Further, coverage of non-loanee farmers was
negligible. No data of sharecroppers and tenant farmers was maintained despite the
fact that the guideline provided for their coverage under the schemes. Though the
budget allocation included specific provisions for coverage of SC/ST category, no data
of such coverage and utilisation of. funds for this category was maintained. It was
noticed that 97 per cent of the farmers had opted for sum insured equivalent to loan
amount under NAIS indicating that either the loanee farmers were intent on covering the
loan amount only (in which case, the scheme acted more as loan insurance than as
crop insurance) or wére not aware or were not informed appropriately by loan
disbursing Bank/Fls about the full provisions of the scheme. Even though the schemes
provided for notifying the lowest possible unit of defined area, only Odisha has achieved
this by defining the village as the unit for paddy crop w.e.f. Rabi 2010-11. Deficiencies
were noticed in CCEs and weather data. There were discrepancies in the data relating
to area sown and area insured. Further, the integrity of the data provided by the State
Governments in this respect and used by AIC was not ensured. There were delays in
issue of notifications, receipt of declarations from Bank/Fls within cut-off dates, delays in

10


receipt of yield data from State governments, delay in processing of claims by IAs, and
irregularities in disbursement of claims by Bank/Fls to farmers’ accounts, incorrect
selection of insurance companies and deficiencies in the performance of insurance
companies.

21. The crop insurance schemes were framed to provide insurance cover to the
farming community against yield losses. These schemes were to be implemented in the
States through the IAs (AIC and private insurance companies) and Bank/Fls operating
in the respective States. Review of the implementation of these schemes in the nine
selected states revealed non-maintenance of database of farmers, non-coverage of
non-loanee farmers, delays in notification at least one month in advance of the
commencement of each season, the crops and area covered and also nominate the
concerned insurance company. Audit however, observed delays of up to 132 days, 136
days and 171 days in case of NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS respectively in issue of such
notifications by the nine selected States, deprival of benefits to farmers due to delayed
submissions of declarations by the Bank/Fls, lesser or non-monitoring of Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs), stipulated under the scheme, by agricultural departments of
States, deficiencies in the functioning of the working of Reference Weather Stations (s)
in test check of records of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Telengana, delay in providing weather data to Agriculture Department.

22. On enquiry as to whether the Department is planning to cover the share croppers
and tenant farmers under NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS, the Department stated as under:-

“Sharecroppers and tenant farmers were eligible for coverage under erstwhile
NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS. But there coverage was very low due to non-
availability of documentary proof for their insurable interest required for taking
crop insurance. However, as per provisions of Operational Guidelines of the
existing scheme i.e. PMFBY all farmers including sharecroppers and tenant
farmers growing the notified crops in the notified areas are eligible for coverage.
However, farmers should have insurable interest for the notified/insured crops.
The.non-loanee farmers are required to submit necessary documentary evidence
of land records prevailing in the State (Records of Right (RoR), Land possession
Certificate (LPC) etc.) and or applicable contract/agreement details/ other
documents notified/ permitted by concerned State Govt. in case of
sharecroppers/tenant farmers and the same should be defined by the respective
States in the notification itself. Further, the Agricultural Land Leasing Act, 2016
prepared by the NITI Aayog and circulated to the States and if adopted by States
will facilitate to increase coverage sharecroppers and tenant farmers under
PMFBY.”

23. Audit in their updated vetting comments stated as under:-

1


“As per New Scheme, all farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers
growing the notified crops in the notified areas are eligible for coverage.
However, farmers should have insurable interest for the notified/insured crops.
The non-loanee farmers are required to submit necessary documentary evidence
of land records prevailing in the State (Records of Right (RoR), Land possession
Certificate (LPC) etc.) and/or applicable contract/agreement details/other
documents notified/permitted by concerned State Government in case of
sharecroppers/tenant farmers and the same should be defined by the respective
States in the notification itself.”

०) Delay in issue of notification

24. As per the scheme guidelines, State Governments are to notify area, crop and
the insurance company in the area at least one month in advance of the crop season.
The audit found that there are delays upto 132, 136 and 171 days in notifications in the
nine States audit scrutinized. The Ministry pleaded that the delays were due to
administrative reasons and farmers were not affected. The audit report highlighted the
fact that due to delay in issue of notification Bank/Fls were not aware of the area and
crop covered under insurance and under which insurance company.

25. Under the crop insurance schemes Banks and Fis are required to adhere to the
cut off dates notified by the state governments for submission of insurance proposals,
liability for declarations received after the cut-off date rests with the bank/Fis and not
189. Audit mentioned that this delay has given chances to Banks to coordinate with
wrong insurance company and non-loanee farmers are not getting the right choice as
the farmers approaches the nominated insurance companies at an advanced stage,
after knowing the actual status of his standing crop, leading to the insurance companies
not accepting the proposal. Audit observed that out of 9 States under scrutiny in case of
6 States Bank/Fls submitted the declarations after the cut-off dates or provided deficient
information to AIC resulting in rejection of proposals and consequently about 35,651
farmers are denied getting insurance. 6

26. Audit scrutiny of records of selected States revealed instances where
Implementing Agencies rejected the claims of farmers due to deficiencies in submission

" of proposals by the Bank/Fls (₹ 37.01 crore); delays of up to 249 days by Bank/Fls in
remittance of compensation claims to the bank accounts of farmers (% 443.05 crore);
non-remittance of compensation claims by Bank/Flis to the accounts of beneficiaries
even though the IAs have transferred the funds (% 2.54 crore) etc.

27.. Audit found that there are instances where certain States have implemented one
scheme in one year and another in other years during the period of Audit i.e. 2011-12 to
2016-17. For example Gujarat implemented pilot Modified National Agricultural

12


Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) only in 2011-12 & 2012-13 and pilot Weather Based Crop
Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) only 2011-12. As they did not implement these schemes
thereafter, there is no fund release in 2013-14 to 2016-17 under MNAIS and from 2012-
13 to 2016-17 under WBCIS. Whereas, they continued to implement the National
Agricultural insurance Scheme (NAIS) in all of these years and fund was released
accordingly.

28. When enquired as to why there is no uniformity in the implementation of MNAIS
and WBCIS, the Department stated as under:-

“Crop Insurance Schemes are demand driven. During the period of C&AG Audit
from 2011-12 to 2015-16, up until Rabi 2013-14 the crop insurance schemes
being implemented were NAIS which was an administered premium scheme and
actuarial premium based MNAIS and WBCIS were being implemented as pilot
schemes. In 2013-14, National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP) was
introduced and MNAIS and WBCIS were approved as its full-fledged scheme
components and NAIS was proposed to be withdrawn. The scheme guidelines
were comprehensive and the scheme implementation demanded more readiness
from the States in terms of budget, infrastructure, manpower etc. Moreover, the
actuarial premium rates were high for farmers and to keep it from increasing it
was capped and correspondingly the sum insured was reduced, which in turn
resulted in lower risk coverage/claims if any. States/implementing insurance
companies were finding it difficult to cater to the demands of the scheme
guidelines. In fact, even in 2013, the States were not in readiness to implement
MNAIS and WBCIS as part of NCIP and most of the States including Gujarat did
not implement the MNAIS/WBCIS further and continued to implement NAIS with
the approval of GOI. Government in the meanwhile also announced review of
NCIP and intention to introduce a new scheme; this also affected the
implementation of MNAIS/WBCIS in place of NAIS.”

d) Eunctioning of Reference Weather Stations (RWS)

29. Audit observed that RWS are identified by the SLCCCI out of available Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS). The guidelines stipulate that all the equipment, weather
sensors, etc., of the RWS should be of standard specifications, installed properly and
calibrated regularly as per the guidelines of World Meteorological Organization
(WMO)/india Meteorological Department (IMD). The guidelines also provide for
’ certification of weather station equipments, exposure conditions, maintenance, and data
quality by an accreditation agency, who may randomly visit some of the weather
stations from time to time. Audit had highlighted deficiencies in the functioning of RWSs
like non monitoring of RWSs, non-reliability on the accuracy of data collected by RWSs,

13


non-installation of RWSs, non certification of AWS equipments provided by third party
data provider etc.

30. When asked about the measures taken by the Department to improve the
functioning of Reference Weather Stations (RWS), the Department stated as under:-

“Normally weather station data is being used for Restructured Weather Based
Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS). For this State Government is allowed to set
up Automatic Weather Stations in Private Public Participation (PPP) and under
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). State Governments notify the weather
stations in notification for implementation of the scheme including weather
stations of Indian Meteorological Department and it is the responsibility of the
State Government to ensure correctness of data.”

e) Crop Cutting Experiments

31. One of the requirements as per the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme is to
obtain accurate and timely yield data based on the stipulated number of Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs,) at the level of insurance unit which is village/village panchayat for
major crops and may be higher unit for minor crops. Against this requirement, the
infrastructure and manpower at ground level is hugely deficient in terms of both quality
and numbers which is making it difficult the CCEs in such large numbers, which is
necessary for timely settlement of claims of farmers.

32. When asked about the efforts to formulate a statistically robust sampling
methodology to minimize/substitute the conventional sampling for conduct of Crop
Cutting Experiments (CCEs) for estimation of yield been completed, the Department
replied as under:-

“Revised Operational Guidelines for PMFBY (Section 20) envisage use of
innovative technologies for accurate crop yield estimation and timely settlement
of claims. In view of this, this Department (DAC & FW) has had taken following
initiatives under PMFBY for smooth implementation of the scheme;

i) Pilot Study on Optimization of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) and
Improving Crop Yield Estimation

The study was conducted in 4 Districts in the 4 States (one in each State)
during Kharif season’for Rice and cotton crop. During Rabi season 2015-16, the
study is being conducted in B districts in 4 States (two in each State) of India for
Wheat, Rice and Rabi Jowar crop. The States are Haryana, Karnataka,
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh. In each district, CCEs sites were generated
based on various remote sensing data (both optical and microwave) and

4


Unmanned Arial Vehicle (UAV) derived vegetation indices. Approximately 250
CCEs were conducted in each District. These data were analysed for
understanding the minimum number of CCEs required forgetting block level yield
with defined accuracy level.

ii) Smart Sampling Technique and Optimization of CCEs (Pilots and .
implementation)

With a view to reduce total number of CCEs and improving distribution of
locations of CCEs to be conducted under PIVFBY, Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare through IMNCFC had engaged 8 national/ international/private
agencies for conducting pilot studies in Kharif 2018 and Rabi 2018-19. Kharif
2018: in 12 States, 23 Districts, 5 Crops (Bajra, Cotton, Maize, Paddy and
Soybean). Rabi 2018-19: in 8 States and 23 Districts, 5 Crops (Wheat, Chickpea,
Mustard, Paddy, Potato). This Department has formed High Power Committee
(HPC) under the chairmanship Additional Secretary, DAC&FW, New Delhi to
evaluate results obtained from the pilot studies conducted for optimization. of
CCEs and Smart Sampling Technique. The Committee comprises
representatives from ISRO, MNCFC, CGIAR, NSSO, IASRI, DES and Principal
Secretaries (Agri) of selected States. The HPC meeting was convened under the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, DAC&FW, New Delhi on 15.07.2019 for
evaluating results obtained in the pilot studies. It was observed that about 30-
75% of the CCEs could be reduced using the technology and distribution of
locations for conducting CCEs could be improved significantly. Owing to good
accuracy of results obtained in the pilot studies, this Department through national
nodal agencies (IVNCFC, SAC, NRSC, State Remote Sensing Agencies) Smart
Sampling Technique is being implemented in selected 96 districts of 9 Rice
growing States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Telangana, Karnataka, Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh) from Kharif 2019. CCEs
Optimization approach developed to reduce number CCEs is being implemented
in 5 Rice growing States namely Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Haryana, Odisha,
Madhya Pradesh from Kharif 2019. The Smart Sampling technique is proposed
to be implemented for 5 Rabi 2019-20 crops, i.e. Wheat, Rapeseed & Mustard,
Sorghum and Rice in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana and Uttar Pradesh.

iii) | Gram Panchayat Level Direct Yield Estimation using Technology
(Pilots)

For accurate yield estimation and timely settlement of claims, this Department
through Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC) has engaged 16

15


33.

international/national/private agencies for conducting pilot studies to develop
technology driven approaches for direct yield estimation at gram Panchayat level.
The pilot studies are being conducted in selected 59 districts of 14 States in
Kharif 2019. Results of these pilot studies will be submitted in February 2020.”

f) Delay in Settlement of Claims

Audit observed that National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP) guidelines

provided for settlement of claims by the Implementing Agencies (IAs) within 45 days of
receipt of Government subsidy for insurance premium and receipt of yield/weather data
from State Governments. However, on scrutiny of records of AIC for the year 2011-16,
five out nine States took more than 45 days as prescribed in the guidelines. In reply the
Department had stated that delay in receipt of weather data, premium subsidy and
dispute between State and insurance companies delayed settlement of claims.

34.

35.

In this regard, the Department further stated as under:-

“As per provisions of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) admissible
claims are generally paid by the insurance companies within two months of
completion of Crop Cutting Experiments/harvesting period subject to availability
of yield data and total State share of premium subsidy from concerned State
Government within time. However, settlement of claims in some States get
delayed due to reasons like delayed transmission of yield data; late release of
their share in premium subsidy by some States, yield related disputes between
insurance companies and States, non receipt of account details of some farmers
for transfer of claims and National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) related
issues, etc. Though the provisions have been made in the Operational
Guidelines of the scheme for timely release of State Government share in
premium subsidy, still there are delays in release of their share by some States.
However, Central Government releases its share of premium subsidy in advance
to the Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. which is fund routing agency
under the scheme, and permits it to immediately use the funds on receipt of
share from State Government. Further, this Department is regularly monitoring
the implementation of PMFBY including timely settlement of claims through one
to one/weekly meetings with States and insurance companies and weekly video
conference with all stakeholders. Moreover, provision of penal interest @12%
has been made in the Revised Operational Guidelines if the Insurance Company
delay the claims or State Government delays its share in premium beyond
specified period.”

When asked as to whether any default has been found and penal provisions

been imposed, the Ministry submitted as under:

16


36.

“Following the launch of PMFBY in 2016, since it was the first year of
implementation and the stakeholders were facing several teething issues, this
Department extended the cut off dates for debit of premium and remittance to
insurance companies. From Kharif 2017 data has to be entered by Banks/other
intermediaries directly on portal and there are teething issues faced by them
even in this respect. Hence, several relaxation in terms of timeline have been
provided to facilitate them. At the same time, to ensure claim settlement is not
hampered due to delayed submission of data on portal, this Department allowed
insurance companies to settle the claims on the basis of consolidated
declarations by concerned banks, but the banks and insurance companies must
ensure balance data is uploaded on the portal subsequently. From Kharif 2018,
however, a separate window of time will be provided for data reconciliation on the
portal, after which data entry on the portal wrt. enrolment will automatically shut
down. Till date penal provision has not been applied on any of the State.
However, letter has been issued to State Government of Madhya Pradesh asking
them to explain why penalty should not be imposed for not releasing its share in
premium subsidy for previous seasons. The objective of launching the new
scheme PMFBY is to provide a simple and affordable crop insurance scheme to
ensure comprehensive risk cover of crops for farmers against all non-preventable
natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest, provide adequate claim amount
and timely settlement of claims. To ensure timely payment of claims to farmers,
scheme envisages mandatory use of smart phone/CCE-Agri App for real time
transfer of yield data for settlement of claims on national crop insurance portal
and transfer of claim amount directly to the beneficiary bank account. Penalty
has been imposed on the States who are not using smart phones for collection of
CCE data. Provision of payment of 12% by insurance companies for delay in
settlement of claims over a prescribed period and on State Governments for
delay in release of their share in premium’ subsidy has been incorporated in
Revised Operational Guidelines of the scheme.

g) Coverage of excess sown area

Audit had highlighted in some cases insured area was in excess of sown area

which indicate that while collecting premium from the farmers by the Bank/Fls it was not
ensured that the farmers had actually sown the declared crops for which they availed
the crop loan implying thereby that atleast some insurance was for the loan and not for
the crop. Audit had also highlighted that the NCIP guidelines stipulate that the loans
given for unsown areas will not be covered by the scheme. The farmer will not be
entitled to receive compensation merely because the Bank/Fls have disbursed the loans
or (in the case of non-loanee farmers) proposals have been submitted. The State

17


government is required to closely monitor the status during the crop season, through
District Level Monitoring Committees (DLMC). The Committee also found that in the test
case audit found that in Beed district for Kharif season in 2015 the cultivable area was
66,042 hectare, area sown was 51,397 hectare and area insured was 1,11,615 hectare.
Thus, insured area exceeded sown area by 117%. State Bank of India, Beed District
Central Cooperative Bank and Bank of Maharashtra paid insurance to farmers twice or
thrice on the same crop. The State Bank of Hyderabad intimated about 88 cases of
double payment amounting to ¥27.58 lakh to the District Magistrate. While Taluka
Agriculture Officer maintain the sowing area report, Banks and Insurance company
keep record of farmers and area sown. Beed Central Cooperative Bank has returned
57.67 crore to AIC.

37. To a query on action taken by the Department to resolve the issue of insuring
area in excess of sown area, the representative of the Ministry, during oral evidence
held on 21% May, 2018, informed the Committee as under:

“Now, we have taken care of the issue of unsown area through remote sensing
technology. We have a Mahalanobis Centre for Crop Forecasting. Sir, We have
rectified and with additional data we will further rectify and then such situation will
not occur.”

38. The Department further stated as under:-

“Area insured is sometimes inflated due to various reasons like inconsistency in
furnishing the sown area data by the States, tendency of farmers to declare high
value crops or crops having historically high claims, non-change of crops in
banks data for loanee farmers etc. In some instances as in Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh, Bihar investigation were also carried out to identify the ghost
beneficiaries and appropriate action taken by the concerned State Government.

Therefore, to address the issue under the new scheme of PMFBY
provision has been made that Area Discrepancy will be applied only to those
major crops for which Normal area sown data at the Block/Taluka level shall be
provided by Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC) based on the
remote sensing data etc after factoring the areas remains unsown and failed
germination/plantation due to adverse climatic conditions and shall be made
available on National Crop Insurance Portal. No other data from any source
including State Govt. will be considered. If the difference between insured area
and sown area provided by MNCFC is greater than 30% at Block/Tehsil/ Taluka,
all Insured Units (IUs) of such Block/Tehsil/ Taluka will fall under acreage
discrepancy category and should be treated as having ‘excess’ insurance
coverage. Accordingly excess insured area shall. be treated as un-insured and

18


corresponding farmer's premium will be forfeited and the same will be
surrendered to Technology Fund of GOI and may be utilized for leveraging
technology in PMFBY for improvement of technology/research/Impact
assessment etc and towards assistance to States for cost of incremental CCEs |
Premium subsidy refunded by ICs due to application of ACF shall be refunded to
Central/State Govt. in ratio of 50:50. :

However, to eliminate such instances and to develop a fool-proof system
an integrated crop insurance portal has been developed to capture all information
for better monitoring and transparency alongwith linking of Aadhar and land
records for deduplication and use of satellite data/drones for verification of areas
sown.”

39. Audit in their updated vetting comments stated as under:-

“As per PMFBY, Area Discrepancy will be applied only to those major crops for
which Normal area sown data at the Block/Taluka level shall be provided by
MNCFC based on the remote sensing data etc. after factoring the areas remains
unsown and failed germination/plantation due.to adverse climatic conditions and
shall be made available on National Crop Insurance Portal. No other data from
any source including State Goverments will be considered.”

९. MONITORING AND AWARENESS OF SCHEMES
a) Need for strengthening of the monitoring mechanism

40. Audit noted that agriculture crop insurance schemes are to be implemented as
per the operational modalities of the schemes. The Schemes provided for monitoring by
601, State governments and IAs through National Level Monitoring Committee,
Technical Support Unit, State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance, District
Level Monitoring Committee and periodical inspections by IAs.

41. Audit observed that monitoring of the schemes by GOI, State Governments and
Implementing Agencies was very poor as (i) Technical Support Unit (TSU), an
independent agency under the guidance of DAC&FW, has not been set up to monitor
implementation of the crop insurance schemes, (ii) Periodical Appraisal Reports were
not prepared by the DAC&FW despite of 14 years of operation of the schemes, (iii)
SLCCCI and DLMC did not carry out the work allocated to them effectively and (iv)
Implementing Agencies also did not carry out the monitoring of the schemes as
assigned to them effectively. Even though huge funds under the schemes were
provided to private insurance companies, there was no provision for audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India to ensure proper utilisation of funds by these
insurance companies. Though capping of premium under NCIP restricted the liability of

19


the governments under the schemes, the loanee farmers were deprived of full benefits
of the insurance coverage.

42.

When asked as to whether there is any provision for fixing responsibility in the

monitoring mechanism/operational guidelines against the erring officials, the
Department stated as under:-

43,

44,

“Specific monitoring mechanism was not available under NAIS. However,
provisions were made in MNAIS/WBCIS regarding monitoring mechanism. State
Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) of the concerned
State had been made responsible for monitoring of the Scheme in its State,
However, a National Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC) under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, DAC & FW is presently looking after the scheme at
national level. Further the role and responsibilities of each stakeholder have been
clearly mentioned in the Operational Guidelines of the scheme. To ensure
transparency, accountability and timely payment of claims to farmers, provisions
regarding payment of interest @12% to farmers by insurance companies for late
settlement of claims and by States to insurance companies for late remittance of
premium subsidy have been incorporated in revised Operational Guidelines. Day
to day monitoring system has further strengthened under PMFBY with:-

- Weekly Video Conferences, *

- One to one meetings on State specific issues with States and
insurance companies concerned.

- Weekly meeting of insurance companies.

- Integrated crop insurance portal also provides an effective real time
monitoring tool for all stake holders.”

In this regard, the Department further stated as under:-

“While accepting the observations of the audit regarding specific monitoring
mechanism under erstwhile schemes, improvements made under PMFBY have
been highlighted in the reply of the DAC & FW. Provisions are also being made
to disburse all admissible claims directly to the bank accounts of eligible farmers
through Crop Insurance Portal with PFMS for better transparency and
accountability.”

Audit in their updated vetting comments stated as under:-

“In PMFBY, provisions are made to disburse all admissible claims directly to the
bank accounts of eligible farmers through Crop Insurance Portal with PEMS for
better transparency and accountability. Further, for implementation and execution

20


of the Scheme, the Govt. of India has designed and developed a National Crop
Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www. pmfby.gov.in) which is expected to bring in better
administration and coordination amongst stakeholders viz. Farmers, States,
Insurers and Banks as well as real-time dissemination of information and
transparency.

Review and Monitoring Committee at State and District levels is set up
under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary (Agriculture/Cooperation) and
District Collector respectively for periodical review (preferably monthly) of
implementation of Scheme and also verify the coverage etc. Integration of
National Crop Insurance Portal with IT infrastructure of Insurance Company for
seamless and real-time data flow of following stages to the Insurance
Companies, direct integration of National Crop Insurance Portal with the IT
system of respective Insurance Companies is established.”

b) Lack of awareness

45. Audit observed that scheme guidelines require adequate publicity to be given in
all the villages of the notified districts/ areas. All possible means of electronic and print
media, farmers’ fairs, and exhibitions including SMS messages, short films, and
documentaries shall be utilized to create and disseminate awareness, benefits and
limitations of the Scheme among the cultivators and the agencies involved in
implementing the Scheme. Agriculture/Cooperation Departments of the States in
consultation with Insurance Companies shall work out appropriate Plan for adequate
awareness and publicity three months prior to the start of coverage period. Audit found
that out of 5,993 farmers surveyed, only 2,232 (37 per cent) were aware of the schemes
and knew the rates of premium, risk covered, claims, loss suffered, etc., and the
remaining 63 per cent farmers had no knowledge of insurance schemes highlighting the
fact that publicity of the schemes was not adequate or effective.

46. Noting that more than 85 percent of farmers are small and marginal farmers
including SC/ST, when enquired about the steps taken to ensure targeted delivery and
create awareness of stakeholders of the scheme, the Department stated as under:-

“To enhance the awareness about Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)
among all the stakeholders Government regularly undertake comprehensive
publicity and awareness programme to educate the farmers about the benefit of
crop insurance schemes. After launch of PMFBY during 2016, 525 one day
seminar/kisan fairs were organized at various Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
throughout the country. Further, under the Central Sector Scheme of "Mass
Media Support to Agriculture Extension Scheme (MMSAE)", Government is
doing publicity and creating awareness about schemes of the Department
including PMFBY. Audio Visual spot on PMFBY is being telecast/broadcast

21


47.

through DD, DD Kisan and AIR under sponsored programme of Mass Media
Scheme from time to time. PMFBY is also one of the focused area for Krishi
Kalyan Abhiyan, implemented in two phases during Kharif 2018 and Rabi 2018-
19 in the selected aspirational districts. The campaign focused on disseminating
information through group meetings of farmers, training of functionaries and
leveraging the potential of Gram Sabhas in respective Gram Panchayats. In
addition, several communications have also been sent to the public
representatives including Members of Parliament, representatives of Panchayati
Raj Institutions etc. to encourage farmers to take benefit of the scheme. -
Thereafter, in addition to above Government has also taken several initiatives
including active involvement of all stakeholders especially States and
implementing insurance companies for conduct of publicity campaign/awareness
programmes including organization of camps in the rural areas to build farmer
awareness about crop insurance schemes. Insurance companies have been
asked to utilize 0.5% of gross premium collected by them for publicity and
awareness generation. Other activities for awareness generation involve the
publicity of features and benefits of the scheme through advertisements in
leading National/local News Papers, telecast through audio-visual media,
distribution of pamphlets in local languages, participation in agriculture
fairs/mela/goshti, dissemination of SMS through Kisan Portal/national crop
insurance portal and conduct of workshops/ trainings of State officials, financial
institutions and farmers. For non-loanee farmers since crop insurance is optional,
the Common Service Centres (CSCs) and online enrolment have been activated
to provide the services besides traditional modes like banks and insurance
intermediaries. Due to the efforts made by the Government coverage of non-
loanee, for whom the coverage is voluntary, has increased from 5% under
erstwhile schemes to 34%, which shows the acceptability of the scheme on
voluntary basis. Similarly, all implementing States also undertaking publicity and
awareness of the scheme by organizing camps, fairs/melas/goshtis, door to door
campaign through. field functionaries of extension, agriculture, revenue
department, Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA). Maharashtra
Government has also undertaken Samrudh Shetkari Abhiyan - a campaign for all
farm related schemes including PMFBY at village level, between 25" May to 10”
June i.e. at the beginning of Kharif 2019 season. Farmers' training was organized
in 17909 villages of the State during this abhiyan....”

Audit in their updated vetting comments stated as under:-

“Improvements have been made by the Ministry under PMFBY over the erstwhile
schemes. As per guidelines an adequate publicity needs to be given in all the

22


D

48.

villages of the notified districts/areas. All possible means of electronic and print
media, farmer's fair, exhibitions, SMS, short films, and documentaries shall be
utilized to create and disseminate awareness about provisions and benefits of
the Scheme among the cultivators and the agencies involved in implementing the
Scheme. Agriculture/Cooperation Departments of the State shall work out
appropriate plan for awareness generation and publicity on an on-going basis
from three months prior to the start of coverage period. Similarly, Insurance
Companies will conduct Publicity and Awareness immediately on receipt of
award of work. All the publicity material/information should necessarily be
uploaded on the National Crop Insurance Portal along with coverage/frequency/
duration date etc.”

DELAY IN FURNISHING OF DATA TO AUDIT

It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the details of funds

received by Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited (AIC) as contribution from
State Government for implementation of Schemes during 2011-12 to 2016-17 was
provided by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW)
after completion of the performance Audit.

49.

When asked about the reasons for delay in providing details of funds received by

AIC as contribution from State Government for implementation of Schemes during 2011
~12 to 2016-17, the Department stated as under:-

50.

“The entire data was available with AIC, therefore, they were asked to furnish the
data regarding contribution received from State Government. Due to the reasons
like time taken by AIC to compile and re-conciliation of data with its respective
Regional Offices and State Governments and also the late demand (almost at
the end of their study) by the Audit Party, furnishing of said data to the Audit
Party was delayed.

Audit contended as under-:

“The reply of the Ministry that data from State Government was sought by the
Audit Party at the end of the Performance Audit is incorrect as —

a) Performance Audit was conducted from 19" April, 2016 to 16”
February, 2017 and the audit requisitioned information from DAC&FW
during 11 April, 2016 to 30" September 2016 vide various memoranda
issued to the DAC&FW.

b) Vide audit memo no.9,10,11,12&13 issued to the Department in July
2016, the fund released by State Governments under different heads for
implementation of different kind of schemes was requisitioned. However,
reply was not furnished even after issuing reminder on 16.08.2016.

23


c) In December 2016, an audit memo was again issued to the department
vide which the actual expenditure incurred by 501 and each implementing
State/UT during the period 2011-12 to 2015-16 for implementation of
different kind of schemes was also requisitioned. Information was not
provided despite issuing reminder in February 2017. Hence, the data was
not made available to audit till the finalisation of PA.”

51. The Ministry clarified as under:-

“It is informed that the specific information i.e. “details of funds received by
Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited (AIC) as contribution from
State Governments for implementation of Schemes during 2011-12 to
2016-17" was asked by the Inspecting Team vide Special Audit Memo
No.4 dated 06.02.2017 i.e. just 10 days before the completion of Audit and
the same was forwarded to AIC on 08.02.2017. AIC replied to the memos
vide its letters dated 14 & 15 February, 2017 and the same was forwarded
to the Inspecting Team immediately by the Division. However, the basic
information relating to the crop insurance schemes was immediately
furnished to the C&AG Audit Team during formal/ informal discussions
about the scheme. Replies/information relating to Audit Memo- No. 9-12
dated 18.07.2016 were given on 12.09.016 on receipt of information from
AlC/concerned State Governments.”

24


PART Il
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTORY

Over the years, the Government of India had been introducing successive
agricultural crop insurance schemes, with such variations vis-a-vis the pre-
existing scheme, as felt appropriate to help the farming community. In 1985, the
Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme (CCIS) was introduced, which was
replaced by the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) from 1999-2000
and further modified in 2010-11. A Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme
(WBCIS) was also introduced on pilot basis in 2007. These Schemes were merged
into an umbrella programme, namely, National Crop Insurance Programme
(NCIP). In 2016, the Government introduced the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima
Yojana (PMFBY) and re-structured WBCIS by replacing NAIS and NCIP.

Audit examined the records of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare, selected State Governments, Agriculture Insurance Company (AIC)
covering the period from Kharif season 2011 to Rabi season 2015-16 and pointed
out various shortcomings in the implementation of the agricultural crop
insurance schemes in the C&AG Report no. 7 of 2017 on the subject “Agriculture
Crop Insurance Schemes”. Audit had pointed out deficiencies in financial
management like delay in release of funds by the State Governments, ambiguity
in the guidelines on utilization of savings, lacunae in verification of insurance
claims by private insurance companies, failure of AIC to take reinsurance cover
on behalf of Government and States, delay in furnishing of Utilisation Certificates
(UCs) by AIC, failure to ensure submission of UCs by Banks/Fls, etc. Audit had
also found irregularities like non-maintenance of database of insured farmers,
sharecroppers and tenant farmers, ST/SC category farmers by Government and
States, low coverage of farmers (loanee as well as non-loanee) under the
Schemes, delays in issue of notifications, receipt of yields data, processing
claims by implementing agencies, deficiencies in crop cutting experiments and
functioning of Automatic Weather Stations, discrepancies in data on area sown
and area insured, shortfall in monitoring the implementation of the Schemes and
spreading awareness on schemes etc. The observations and recommendations of
the Committee are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

25


Mechanism for timely release of funds by State Governments

1. The Committee note that under NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS, funds were
released by GOI and State Governments to AIC on 50:50 basis towards share in
premium subsidy along with claims over and above 100 per cent of premium
collected under NAIS (for food and oilseed crops) to the Implementing Agencies
(IAs). In turn, AIC released to private insurance companies their share of premium
subsidy (MNAIS and WBCIS). Audit scrutiny revealed that though Department of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) invariably released their share on time,
instances of delayed release of the subsidy by State Governments were
observed. The Committee observe that in view of the fact that the very basis of
the funding pattern designed under schemes required GO! and State
Governments to release their share in premium subsidy along with claims, any
delay by State Governments would have surely impacted the release of insurance
claim to affected farmers, thereby defeating the very objective of providing timely
financial assistance to the farming community which faced partial or full failure of
crops due to natural calamities, pests and disease. The Committee, while
expressing the view that the DAC&FW should have played a proactive role to
impress upon the States to scrupulously follow the guidelines of the erstwhile
schemes, are hopeful that necessary steps have been taken to ensure timely
release of funds by the State Governments in the implementation of the PMFBY,
which is currently operational.

Savings under NAIS with Agriculture Insurance Company of India
Limited (AIC)

2. The Committee note that in terms of NAIS guidelines issued in July 1999,
the IA (GIC till March 2003 and AIC thereafter) was required to meet the entire
liabilities up to 100 percent of premium in the case of food crops and oilseeds,
and 150 per cent of premium in the case of commercial and horticultural crops.
Liabilities “in excess of these limits were to be shared equally by GOI and the
State Governments till complete transition to actuarial regime in a period of five
years. Thereafter, all claims up to 150 per cent of premium would be met by the IA
for a period of three years, the limit of which would increase to 200 per cent
thereafter. Claims above these limits would be met out of a corpus fund to be
created with equal contributions of GOI and the State Governments. However, the
guidelines were silent on the utilization of savings, if any, due to difference
between premium collected and claims payable by AIC. Audit observed that
during the period of operation of NAIS (from Rabi season1999-2000 to Rabi
season 2015-16, i.e., 33 seasons), AIC had. accumulated savings of €2,518.62
crore, from the collection of premium (amount of premium collected: 714,056.81

26


crore less AIC’s share of claims paid: € 11,538.19 crore) and due to the absence
of guidelines regarding the fate of savings retained the same. Audit also noticed
that the Ministry of Finance directed AIC in December 2009 to release %200 crore
to DAC&FW stating that these funds were being drawn from the retained profits/
reserves (created out of NAIS activities) of AIC as a prelude to the recasting of the
scheme and stopping the excess premium of individual States being appropriated
as profits by AIC. The Committee were apprised that consequent upon objection
by the Audit on retention of saving by AIC, the DAC&FW took up the matter with
AIC and Ministry of Finance to return the savings on the ground that AIC was
being reimbursed all operational expenses for implementation of the scheme, and
there was no justification for AIC to retain the savings. As per the information
made available to the Committee by the DAC&FW, the matter was under
consideration. While hoping that a decision may have been taken on the matter
by now and the issue of adjustment of savings under NAIS has been taken to its
logical conclusion by DAC&FW, Ministry of Finance and AIC, the Committee
express optimism that a system for utilization of savings would have been
evolved by now. The confusion over retention of savings by AIC was created due
to absence of specific guidelines in this regard. The Committee are hopeful that
the Ministry have taken necessary measures to plug the loopholes, found in the
erstwhile schemes, in the new scheme and a well deliberated rule/provision
regarding utilization of premium have been incorporated in the guidelines on
implementation of the PMFBY. The Committee wish to be apprised of the
necessary details in this regard.

Release of funds to private companies

3. As per the operational guidelines of schemes, IAs i.e., AIC as well as other
empanelied private insurance companies were responsible for providing crop
insurance to farmers under the agriculture crop insurance schemes. Further [As
were required to receive details of insured farmers from the nodal points (of the
concerned Bank/Financial Institutions), and calculate the claims, if any. In the
case of MNAIS and WBCIS, the private insurance companies forward the claims
for premium subsidy to AIC, which in turn, include their own premium subsidy
claims. and approach GOI and State Governments for release of their shares. In
respect of NAIS, AIC approaches GOI and State Governments for their share of
premium subsidy and claim liabilities. On receipt of funds from GOI and State
Governments, AIC release the premium subsidy to the private insurance
companies (in respect of MNAIS and WBCIS) and claim amounts (in respect of
NAIS) to the nodal points. However the Committee note that the Agriculture
Insurance Company (AIC) released %3,622 crore as premium subsidy to 10 private

27


insurance companies without compliance to any of the guidelines. In reply
Ministry contended that AIC released the subsidy to private companies only after
they submitted the entire coverage data to DAC & FW, on the basis of which
specific directions to release the funds to private companies were given by DAC
& FW and hence subsidy was released as per procedure and there was no
deliberate negligence by AIC. The Department had also submitted that AIC being
one of the implementing agencies could not undertake verification of coverage of
other insurance companies as other companies had their objections. The
Committee are discontented over the stand of the DAC&FW for not undertaking
verification of coverage of other insurance companies, and feel that AIC, being
the agency for releasing payment to private insurance companies, was
responsible for exercising due diligence before releasing the payments and
ensure compliance to the operational guidelines of schemes. The Committee are
of the view that necessary directions ought to have been issued to the
implementing agencies, including empanelled private insurance companies, to
mandatorily undertake physical verification of details of claims of insured farmers
from the nodal points before release of fund. Further the Committee recommend
that a timeframe may also be fixed for periodic evaluation of the performance of
all empanelled insurance companies.

Reinsurance

4, The Committee note that as per NAIS guidelines, AIC was required to
obtain appropriate re-insurance cover in the international re-insurance market.
However, AIC had arranged for re-insurance support only for their own share of
claims under NAIS, it had not arranged re-insurance support for the share of
claims to be borne by GOI and the State Governments. In this regard, AIC stated
that as regards NAIS (for food and oilseed crops), Governments acted as
reinsurers by sharing the risk whenever the claims exceeded the stipulated
margin. In so far as actuarially rated products like WBCIS, MNAIS and NAIS (for
commercial and horticultural crops) were concerned, where AIC was fully
responsible for all the claims, adequate reinsurance protection was availed of.
The Committee observe from the reply of AIC that while the scheme (NAIS)
guidelines provided that IA (AIC) was responsible for arranging re-insurance
support for the entire scheme claims under NAIS and not for the AIC portion
alone, the reply of AIC was conspicuously silent on the observation of Audit on
reduction of liabilities of GO! and the State Governments to the extent of
Rs.21,989.24 crore, if the re-insurance cover was obtained. In view of the fact that
huge financial support could have been provided as pointed out by Audit in the
wake of seeking re-insurance cover in the international re-insurance market, the
issue of divergence of guidelines by AIC needs to be enquired into. The

28


Committee, therefore while emphasizing the need for devising a robust
compliance mechanism, desire that reason for failure to comply with the NAIS
guidelines be identified and appropriate action taken against the erring officials
responsible for it.

Submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs)

5. The Committee note that DAC&FW issued standing instructions to AIC in
March, 2014 to mandatorily furnish state-wise and company-wise UCs to
DAC&FW within a week of release. Further, National Crop Insurance Programme
(NCIP) guidelines require Bank/Fls to submit UCs to IAs within 15 days of credit
of claims amounts to beneficiary farmers. Audit scrutiny revealed. that AIC did not
furnish periodic returns, as mandated, to DAC&FW. Instead, AIC furnished UCs
only at the time of requirement of fresh funds from DAC&FW. As regards the
guidelines for submission of UCs by Banks/Fls, Audit observed that in many
cases Bank/Fis failed to submit UCs to AIC. Regarding reason for failure to
furnish Utilization Certificates by AIC within a week of release of funds as
required by the Department, the Department stated that Crop insurance schemes
are multi-agency schemes and fulfilling the roles and responsibilities was the
responsibility ‘of each stakeholder, this also depended upon fulfillment of
responsibility by other stakeholders. Moreover, on its part, AIC had adhered to
the timelines of UC submission subject to the Financial institutions/banks and
other insurance companies fulfilling their responsibilities. In the opinion of the
Committee, AIC cannot shy away from the responsibility of furnishing UCs in a
time bound manner by merely placing the onus on the Banks/Fls. The Committee
therefore, while expressing surprise over the manner the funds were released
without verifying the requirements based on any documentary proof, stress on
the need to evolve a mechanism to ensure strict compliance of guidelines of the
PMFBY for timely submission of UCs for enabling maximum utilization of funds
for the benefit of the farmers.

Non maintenance of Data base

6. The Committee note that under NAIS guidelines, the IAs
were only required to provide returns/statistics to GOI (and not the States).
Audit observed that IAs did not provide periodic (monthly or quarterly) returns
on NAIS to the Governments. Instead statistical data to support their claims
were furnished at the time of requirement of funds. No separate requirements
regarding furnishing of periodic returns/statistics were issued under MNAIS
and WBCIS till they were integrated under NCIP. Thereafter (i.e., from Rabi
season 2013-14), IAs were required to furnish monthly progress returns/

29


statistics or any information demanded by the Governments. The NCIP
guidelines also stipulated that IAs were required to obtain and upload
comprehensive details of insured farmers on their websites. However, Audit had
pointed out that IAs did not furnish monthly progress reports/ statistics to the
Government even under the NCIP nor upload details of insured farmers on their
websites. Moreover neither DAC&FW nor AIC verified and analyzed the statistical
data at the time of release of funds. According to the information made available
to the Committee, DAC&FW admitted in December 2016 that beneficiary data was
not available with them or the IAs and that the same were maintained by the
banks. In view of the fact that prior to 2013-14, under the schemes, IAs were
required to provide periodic (monthly and quarterly) returns on NAIS to the
Governments, the Committee are constrained to observe that IAs failed to meet
this guideline and instead they furnished statistical data to support their claims at
the time of requirement of funds. Regrettably, the IAs continued to deviate from
the stipulated guidelines even after 2013-14 which sought them to obtain and
upload comprehensive details of insured farmers on their websites. In light of the
fact that the fund requirements were assessed based on the beneficiary data, the
Committee are of the view that the methodology adopted by DAC&FW to
ascertain the authenticity of the statistical data provided by the IAs needs to be
examined. The Committee also feel that absence of specific guidelines on role of
DAC&FW or IAs in maintaining the database of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop-
wise and area-wise) led to such a situation where substantial financial
contribution was made by the Governments and their agencies without
confirming whether it reached the intended beneficiaries. In view of the above,
the Committee are constrained to observe that the erstwhile schemes were not
formulated taking into consideration the very basis of targeted beneficiaries. The
Committee are hopeful that database of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop-wise and
area-wise) is updated and made available on real time basis on the online portal
that has since been made operational, and is accessible to DAC&FW, IAs and
Banks/Fis. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures. taken
towards ensuring real time updation of data.

30


Coverage of farmers

7. Audit scrutiny revealed that coverage of farmers in the country as well as
in the nine selected States under the erstwhile schemes was very low compared
to the population of farmers as per Census 2011. While the percentage coverage
of farmers in the country for crops covered under Kharif season ranged from 14
per cent to 22 per cent and from 8 per cent to 12 per cent in case of crops
covered under Rabi season, the percentage coverage of farmers in nine selected
States ranged from 26 per cent to 42 per cent for crops covered under Kharif
season and from 9 per cent to 16 per cent in the case of crops covered under
Rabi season. Further, coverage of non-loanee farmers was negligible. No data of
sharecroppers and tenant farmers was maintained despite the fact that the
guidelines provided for their coverage under the schemes. Audit also. observed
that though the budget allocation included specific provisions for coverage of
SC/ST category, no data of such coverage and utilisation of funds for this
category was maintained. According to the information furnished to the
Committee, some of the factors attributable to low coverage of farmers were lack
of awareness about the schemes among the farming community and delays in
settlement of claims to farmers. Taking note of the fact that the percentage of
coverage of farmers under the schemes was very low despite the fact the entire
insurance claim liabilities of the farmers were being borne by the Governments,
the Committee are of the considered view that the factors attributable for the poor
performance of the schemes are required to be identified and appropriately
addressed. The Committee, while seeking to be apprised of the percentage of
farmers covered under the PMFBY, also desire to be apprised of the remedial
measures taken by the Department and its implementing agencies to further
improve the performance of the ongoing scheme so that maximum numbers of
farmers are covered under the scheme.

Delay in issue of notification

8. The Committee note that as per operational guidelines of the erstwhile
schemes, State Governments were required to notify the crop, area and insurance
company one month in advance of each crop season and also nominate the
concerned insurance company. However, the Committee found that there were
delays of up to 132 days, 136 days and 171 days in case of NAIS, MNAIS and
WBCIS respectively in issuance of such notifications by the nine States selected
by Audit. Explaining the reasons, the Department stated that the delays were due
to administrative reasons. While taking exception to the prolonged administrative
delays leading to non issuance of. notifications of important nature, the
Committee desire that appropriate action may be taken against the officials

31


responsible for the delay. The Committee would also like to point out that
insurance scheme benefits can only be availed by those farmers who had taken
loans for notified crops in notified areas. Moreover, in the absence of notification,
Banks and Fis would be unaware of basic information like insurance covered
crops, areas covered and insurance company which would in turn impede the
intended beneficiaries from availing the benefits of the schemes on time. The
Committee would, therefore, stress on impressing upon the State Governments
to ensure issue of notifications of insured crops and areas covered, under the
PMFBY, along with details of the nominated insurance companies in a time bound
manner.

Functioning of Reference Weather Stations (RWS)

9. The Committee find that Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance
Scheme (RWBCIS) which empowers the State Level Coordination Committee on
Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) to select some Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) as
Reference Weather Stations (RWS) aims to mitigate the hardship of the insured
farmers against the likelihood of financial loss on account of anticipated crop
loss resulting from adverse weather conditions relating to rainfall, temperature,
wind, humidity etc. Further, RWBCIS uses weather parameters as “proxy” for
crop yields in compensating the cultivators for deemed crop losses. Audit
scrutiny revealed that there were glaring deficiencies in the functioning of the
RWS like non monitoring of RWSs, non-reliability on the accuracy of data
collected by RWSs, non-installation of RWSs, non-certification of AWS
equipments provided by third party data provider etc. According to Audit, such
deficiencies led to delay in providing weather data to Agriculture Department. In
this regard, the Department had pointed out that State Governments specify the
weather stations in the notifications for implementation of the schemes which
include the weather stations of Indian Meteorological Department and it is the
responsibility of the State Government to ensure correctness of data.
Notwithstanding the fact that the role of monitoring the functioning of RWSs and
ensuring accuracy of data collected rests with the State Governments, the
Committee are of the view that DAC&FW should also play a proactive role and
impress upon the State Governments to review the functioning of all Reference
Weather Stations (RWSs) and also undertake inspections for necessary
updations so as to ensure accurate weather predictions. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the measures taken towards ensuring real time
updation of data/information, received from the RWSs, on the website of the
Department concerned.

32


Crop Cutting Experiment

10. The Committee note that one of the requirements as per the Operational
Guidelines of the Schemes is to obtain accurate and timely yield data based on
the stipulated number of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) at the level of
insurance unit which is village/village panchayat for major crops and may be a
higher unit for minor crops. Against this requirement, the Committee note that the
infrastructure and manpower at ground level is hugely deficient in terms of both
quality and numbers making it difficult to undertake CCEs in such large numbers,
thereby delaying timely settlement of claims of farmers. Towards this end, the
Committee have been informed by the Department that the Revised Operational
Guidelines for PMFBY (Section 20) envisage the use of innovative technologies
for accurate crop yield estimation and timely settlement of claims and initiatives
like Pilot Study on Optimization of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) and
improving Crop Yield Estimation, Smart Sampling Technique and Optimization of
CCEs (Pilots and implementation), Gram Panchayat Level Direct Yield Estimation
using Technology (Pilots) etc. While acknowledging the significance of the
initiatives taken by the Department, the Committee also. feel that immediate
necessary action may be taken to provide adequate manpower and infrastructure
at the ground level and stress on the need to involve local farmers in CCEs.
Further, while emphasizing the need to ensure that the Crop Cutting Experiment
(CCEs) techniques/methods employed by the Departments concerned are
accurate to gauge the impact and extent of crop failure, the Committee
recommend that best practices of CCEs of different States may also be emulated
across the country to have accurate and timely data on crop yield.

Delay in settlement of claims

11... The Committee note that National Crop Insurance Programme guidelines
mandated settlement of claims by Implementing Agencies within 45 days of
-receipt of Government subsidy and receipt of yield/weather data from State.
Governments. Audit scrutiny of records of AIC revealed that during 2011-16, five
out of the nine selected States took more than the prescribed time of 45 days with
delays of up to 1,069 days in processing claims. The Committee have been
informed that there were delays in settlement of claims due to non-receipt of
subsidy share of State Governments, litigations, verification of claims by State
Governments, reconciliation, booking errors etc. Taking serious note of the
inordinate delays of up to 1,069 days, much beyond the stipulated period of 45
days in processing the claims, the Committee are constrained to observe that the
basic objective of the Schemes to provide timely benefit of insurance claim to the
farmers who were at risks like natural calamities, pests and disease that lead to

33


partial or full failure of crops was denied. In this regard, the Committee would
express the view that insurance coverage premium received from the farmers be
reimbursed proportionately along with interest accrued, in the event of non-
receipt of fund share from State Governments. The Committee, while being
hopeful that all necessary actions have been taken to ensure implementation of
the guidelines of the new scheme in true spirit, would emphasize on ensuring that
the prescribed time limits for settlement of claims are adhered to without fail. In
this regard, the stakeholders concerned are also to be issued strict guidelines for
effective implementation of the scheme.

Coverage of excess sown area

12. The Committee note that as per NCIP guidelines, loans given for unsown
areas was not covered by the scheme. However, Audit observed that in the Beed
District, Maharashtra, for Kharif season in 2015, against the cultivable area of
66,042 hectare, the area sown and insured was 51,397 hectare and 1,11,615
hectare respectively. Thus, insured area exceeded sown area by 117% which led
to double and triple payment of insurance to farmers on the same crop.
Considering the fact that the Taluka Agricultural Officer maintains the report on
the sowing area, Banks and insurance company keep record of farmers and area
sown, the Committee fail to fathom the basis of the huge variation in the details of
areas sown vis-a-vis insured. In this regard, the Committee have been informed
that the Department had rectified and resolved the issue of insurance coverage of
unsown area through remote sensing technology operated by the Mahalanobis
National Crop Forecasting Centre. While taking note of the efforts of the
Department, the Committee are hopeful that the data published by the
Mahalanobis National Crop Forecasting Centre are also made available to all
Departments/Stakeholders concerned seeking feedbacks/inputs. The Committee
recommend that details of cultivable area, sown area, farmers etc. are also made
available on a common platform to ensure easy access for all stakeholders. The
Committee also recommend that the State Governments concerned closely
monitor the status during the crop season, through their District Level Monitoring
Committees (DLMC). The Committee also desire to be apprised of the concrete
action taken by the Department in this regard.

Need for strengthening the Monitoring mechanism

13. The Committee note that as per Clause 18 of NAIS guidelines, the scheme
was to be implemented in accordance with the operational modalities as worked
out by IA in consultation with DAC&FW and the operation of the scheme was to

34


be reviewed annually. Further, DAC&FW and the IA were also required to prepare
periodical appraisal reports on the scheme. Audit observed that no such report
was prepared by the DAC&FWI/IA even after 14 years of operation of the
schemes. No Technical Support Unit (TSU) under the guidance of the DAC&FW
was established to monitor the implementation of the crop insurance schemes,
product structuring, standardization and benchmarking of products,
rationalization of premium rate/subsidy, issuing guidelines for installation and
accreditation. of weather stations, creation of national grid for statistical data for
the purpose and issuance of directives to insurance companies. According to
DAC&FW, the crop insurance schemes were being monitored regularly through
various measures. Even the State Level Coordination Committees on Crop_
Insurance (51000) and District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) were not
constituted. In the opinion of the Committee, since Government of India and State
Governments incur substantial financial liabilities on account of premium
subsidy and claim reimbursement under the schemes, the monitoring mechanism
should have been made more effective and robust. The Committee would like to
caution that non-constituting a robust monitoring committee would cast doubts
on the efficacy of the system of disbursal of funds as no appraisal reports are
prepared, data maintained and, feedback obtained from the concerned
implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore recommend that the
monitoring mechanism should be strengthened so as to ensure that every penny
of the Government is duly accounted for.

Lack of awareness

14. Audit observed that 97 per cent of the farmers had opted for sum insured
equivalent to loan amount under NAIS, indicating that either the loanee farmers
were intent on covering the loan amount only (in which case, the scheme acted
more as loan insurance than as crop insurance) or were not aware or informed
appropriately by loan disbursing Bank/Fls about the full provisions of the
scheme. Further, 63 per cent of the farmers surveyed during audit were not aware
of the schemes. In view of huge proportion of farmers surveyed found to have
been unaware of the schemes, the Committee are constrained to observe that
Departments concerned have failed in adequately disseminating information on
the agricultural insurance schemes to the farmers. With a view to reach out to
targeted farming community in right earnest, the Committee are of the view that
all measures should have been taken to disseminate the benefits of the schemes
both through print and electronic media and Melas/workshops organized as part
of awareness campaign. Further, to ensure better coordination and prompt
redressal of grievances of farmers, the Committee recommend that the possibility

35


of nominating local public representatives as members to the State Level
Coordination Committees on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) and District Level
Monitoring Committee (DLMC) may be explored.

Non-furnishing of data to Audit

15. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that despite repeated
requests for furnishing details of funds received by Agriculture Insurance
Company of India Limited (AIC) as contribution from State Government for
implementation of Schemes during 2011-12 to 2016-17, the same was not
provided to the Audit by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Farmers
welfare (DAC&FW). In reply, the Department stated that due to reasons like time
taken by AIC to compile and re-conciliation of data with its respective Regional
Offices and State Governments and also the delayed demand (almost at the end
of their study) by the Audit Party, furnishing of said data to the Audit Party was
delayed. The Committee are of the opinion that the onus of timely furnishing
requisite data lies with the Department and the AIC and thus basic data like
details of fund contribution of State Governments should be readily available with
the nodal implementing agency, i.e the AIC and the Department. The Committee,
therefore desire that in future both the Department and the insurance companies
should timely provide data/records as and when sought by Audit for effective
scrutiny.

Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)

16. The Committee note that in 2016, the Government introduced the Pradhan
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and re-structured WBCIS by replacing NAIS
and NCIP. PMFBY which aims to provide a comprehensive insurance cover
against failure of the crop thus helping in stabilising the income of the farmers
covering ail Food & Oilseeds crops and Annual Commercial/Horticultural Crops
for which past yield data is available and for which requisite number of Crop
Cutting Experiments (CCEs) are being conducted under General Crop Estimation
Survey (GCES). The Committee also note that as per revised operational
guidelines of PMFBY, various initiatives have been envisaged to address some of
the shortcomings noticed during the implementation of the previous schemes.
The remedial measures taken by the Department inter alia include collection of
details of individual insured farmers (both loanee and non-loanee) like name,
fathers’ name, Bank Account number, Aadhaar number, village, categories -
small and marginal/SC/ST/Awomen, insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured,
premium collected, Government subsidy etc. and submission of electronically
using web form or Core Banking Solution Integration module along with

36


electronic submission of crop wise consolidated declarations on or before final
cutoff date by Bank branches/Common Service Centers/ intermediaries;
developing a National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) to facilitate better
administration and coordination amongst all stakeholders viz. farmers, States,
insurers and banks as well as real-time dissemination of information and
transparency; making available Yield data based on CCEs online on National
Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) to the concerned Insurance Company by the State
Government within a month from the date of final harvest of individual crop;
payment of interest @12% to farmers by insurance companies for late settlement
of claims and by States to insurance companies for late remittance of premium
subsidy to ensure transparency, accountability and timely payment of claims to
farmers, day to day monitoring system with weekly video conferences, one to one
meetings on State specific issues with States and insurance companies
concerned, weekly meeting of insurance companies, making of provisions to
disburse all admissible claims directly to the bank accounts of eligible farmers
through Crop Insurance Portal with PFMS for better transparency and
accountability; comprehensive publicity and awareness programme to educate
the farmers about the benefit of crop insurance schemes through electronic and
print media, farmers’ fair, exhibitions, SMS, short films, documentaries etc.;
utilization of 0.5% of gross premium collected by Insurance companies for
publicity and awareness generation; activation of Common Service Centres
(CSCs) for non-loanee farmers and online enrolment to provide the services
besides traditional modes like banks and insurance intermediaries. While
appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department under PMFBY, the Committee
hope that the shortfalls and deficiencies found in the implementation of the
earlier Schemes have been adequately addressed and corrective measures taken
in regard to the ongoing Scheme. To ascertain the effectiveness of the new
scheme viz. PMFBY, the Committee recommend that a study covering the aspects
of enrolment in crop insurance by farmers, coverage of States, insurance claims
_ made. vis-a-vis settled, amount of. interest paid to farmers by insurance
companies for late settlement of claims and by States to insurance companies for
late remittance of premium subsidy since its inception may be undertaken so
that gaps are identified and necessary corrective actions taken for effective
implementation of the scheme. The Committee are of the considered view that
this will go a long way in achieving the intended objective of supporting
sustainable production in agriculture sector by way of providing financial support
to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of unforeseen events;
stabilizing the income of farmers to ensure their continuance in farming;
encouraging farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural practices and
ensuring flow of credit to the agriculture sector which will contribute to food

37


security, crop diversification and enhancing growth and competitiveness of
agriculture sector besides protecting farmers from production risks. In addition
to above, while emphasizing on the need for concerted effort to provide
insurance coverage to every vulnerable farmer across the Country, the
Committee desire that alongwith benefits of technology viz. Aadhar linked land
records, DBT facilities, the Department may also explore the possibility of
integrating data base of Kisan Card, Soil Health Card etc. for easing the delivery
mechanism.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
December, 2023 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

38