19
DELAY IN COMMISSIONING OF CCTV
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM, IRREGULAR
LTC © CLAIMS AND AVOIDABLE
EXPENDITURE ON HIRED SERVERS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report (167
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)

NINTEENTH REPORT

SSS SSS SS SCS लक

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

wat

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


. .PAC NO. 2200

NINTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

DELAY IN COMMISSIONING OF ८८1५
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM, IRREGULAR LTC
CLAIMS AND AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE ON
HIRED SERVERS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report (16 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha One ,...... ०४५०५

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ../4..77.9,.77, &!

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
‘NEW DELHI

हि September, 2020/Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS me EE;—————_ (iii)
COMMITTEE (2020-21) :
INTRODUCTION (iv)
CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........................

CHAPTER Ill

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration .

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

Minutes of the 4" Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on 28'" August, 2020,

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the, Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha 7



BY N

sewn an

- Oo

20.

21,
22,

AYN :४

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

RD

(2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

hri T. R. Baalu

hri Subhash Chandra Baheria
hri Sudheer Gupta

mt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Ajay (Teni) Misra

hri Jagdambika Pal

nAnn

hri Vishnu Dayal Ram

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
r. Satya Pal Singh

hri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

८2 ८2 2 ८2 2 0? 0

AY

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar _

Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant

Vacant

SECRETARIAT ह

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar ५ Joint Secretary.
Shri. M.L.K. Raja - Director

Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja - Additional Director
Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary



INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been

authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok

; Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations

of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report

(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Delay in Commissioning of CCTV Surveillance

System, Irregular LTC Claims and Avoidable Expenditure on Hired Servers’
relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs. .

2. The One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2018. Replies of the Government to
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 25
October, 2019. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and
thereafter adopted the Report at their sitting held on 28 August, 2020. Minutes of the
sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action © Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty-fourth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il.

NEW DELHI: . Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

17 September, 2020 हे Chairperson

2 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations, of the Committee contained in

their One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Delay in

commissioning of CCTV surveillancé system”, “Irregular Leave Travel Concession

claims" and “Idling of servers and software and avoidable expenditure on rent of hired

servers’ relating to Ministry of Home Affairs.
2.

The One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sab ha) was

presented to the Parliament -on 19.12.2018. It contained — six

Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the

Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are

broadly categorised as follows:

3.

(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government हे
Para Nos. 1- 6.
Total:06
Chapter II
(ii) Observation/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
NIL
Total:Nil
Chapter II
(iii) | Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter IV
(iv) Observation/ Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter V

The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that

Delhi Police (DP) and Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA/Ministry) failed to assess and
determine technical requirement for CCTV surveillance system in high security areas

which resulted in a CCTV surveillance project awarded in February 2013 for New

Delhi and Central District remaining incomplete despite an expenditure of 42.94

crore; the inflated Leave Travel Concession claims submitted by employees in some

|


offices of Delhi Police were passed without due scrutiny resulting in irregular
reimbursement amounting to %2.56 crore; Delhi Police failed to synchronize the
purchase of server and software with the procurement of leased internet lines
resulting in idling of servers and software for ‘three and half years and avoidable
- expenditure of 1.11 crore on hired servers.

4.+ The Committee had recommended various measures to be undertaken by
Ministry of Home Affairs and Delhi Police as well as NIC for effective coordination
between various agencies and to streamline and expedite contracts for procurement.
5. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred
and Twenty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will
now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which merit comments.
6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish Action
Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in

Chapter | within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House.

Recommendation at Para No. 2

7. The Committee had observed that the Ministry approved the use of 1,888
surplus CCTV cameras and associated equipment left over from the Commonwealth
Games 2010 (CWG) items for use during Phase 2(b) of the installation of the CCTV
Surveillance System by Delhi Police (DP) across its policing jurisdiction to monitor
and resolve crimes.and address security challenges. The contract for the supply,
installation, and commissioning of CCTV Surveillance System in the high security
areas was awarded to M/s Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) in
February 2013 and was to be completed within 150 days of receipt of road cutting
permission from civic agencies for the respective sites. The Committee were aghast
to note that the CCTV Surveillance system could not be made operational due to
non-receipt of sufficient quantity of CWG items for three years between July 2012
and June 2015. The Committee were further dismayed that while the leftover CWG
equipment lay idle for so many years, DP incurred wasteful expenditure of a huge
amount of * 21.02 lakh per month for renting CCTVs causing double loss to the
Government exchequer. While noting that Delhi Police along with ECIL sent
numerous letters to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and other agencies

~Qe


concerned for transfer of equipment by the venue owners viz. Sports Authority of
India, Delhi University and Jamia Milia Islamia University, the Committee were
disappointed to note that DP did not seek MHA's intervention fo pursue the matter
and the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS) for no obvious reasons, slept
over the requests. The Committee were unhappy to note that apart from writing
letters, DP did not proactively engage with the Ministries and organizations
concerned to expedite supply of CWG equipment. The Committee had désired to
know why MHA did not monitor the implementation of the project and aggressively
pursue the matter with the concerned organizations despite itself giving the approval
for the same. The Committee had recommended that in matters requiring
coordination between several agencies/ organizations, a committee may be formed
by MHA and ail other ministries as the case may be, consisting of a representative
each from the organizations concerned to enable effective coordination and speedy
resolution of issues. The Committee had further exhorted the MHA to set up a

monitoring mechanism for all such angoing projects.

8. The Ministry of Home Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under:

“The progress of CCTV project was reviewed regularly in the Ministry of Home
Affairs and during the review meetings both Delhi Police and M/s ECIL
assured completion of the project in a time bound manner. The physical as
well as financial progress of all Schemes/ projects is reviewed regularly at
various levels in MHA. Project Monitoring Committee comprising all the

' stakeholders monitors the progress of projects under Delhi Police Building
Programme. A High Powered Committee on Traffic Management in the NCT
of Delhi was set up on 28.09.2018 with all the stakeholders. As recommended
by the Public Accounts Committee, a Committee comprising all the
stakeholders, namely, MHA, Delhi Police, South Municipal Corporation of
Delhi (South MCD), New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and M/s Electronics
Corporation. of India Ltd. (ECIL), has been set up in MHA on 10.05.2019 .... to
monitor implementation of Phase 2(b) CCTV System.”

9. The Committee had noted that the CCTV Surveillance system to be
installed using surplus equipment left over. from the Commonwealth Games
2010(CWG) could not be made operational due to non-receipt of sufficient
quantity of CWG items for three years between July 2012 and June 2015. While
the leftover CWG equipment lay idle for so many years, DP incurred wasteful
expenditure to the tune of & 21.02 lakh per month for renting CCTVs, causing
loss to the Government exchequer. The Committee had desired to be apprised

of the reasons as to why the Ministry had not monitored the implementation of

—2-


the project and pursued the matter with the organisations concerned and
exhorted that a monitoring mechanism for all such ongoing projects may be
set up. The Committee had, further, recommended that a committee be formed
by MHA and all other ministries consisting of a representative each from the
organizations concerned to enable effective coordination and speedy
resolution of.issues. The Committee 1018 from the action taken replies of the
Ministry that the progress of CCTV project was reviewed regularly in the
Ministry of Home Affairs and during the review meetings both Delhi Police and
M/s ECIL assured completion of the project in a time bound manner. The
Committee are astonished to note that despite being well aware of the delay in
the completion of project, Ministry did not take any action to expedite
procurement of the CWG items. The Committee while noting that the
lackadaisical monitoring by the Ministry resulted in wasteful expenditure on
renting CCTVs recommend that the Ministry may review progress of all
ongoing projects under them and apprise the Committee of the status of
completion within six months of the presentation of this Report. The
Committee also reiterate their recommendation that a robust monitoring
mechanism be set up and periodic review of the projects undertaken to ensure
their timely completion. The Committee, while acknowledging that a
Committee has been formed to monitor the implementation of the aforesaid
project, desire to be apprised. of the status of installation of the surveillance

system.

Recommendation at Para No. 3
10. The Committee had noted that on account of technological advancement in

the period between 2012 and 2015 and availability of better CCTV Cameras which
provided improved:picture quality in comparison to the CCTV cameras procured and
installed through M/s ECIL and of CWG cameras, it was decided by Delhi Police to
change the specifications to procure the latest Technology CCTV cameras to be
installed in high sensitive areas and VIP/VVIP movementroute areas of New Delhi
District. The Committee had also noted with consternation that despite numerous
deliberations and revisions by DP, MHA and ECIL, the amended proposal had still
not been finalised till date. This indicated lack of coordination between MHA and DP.
While noting that the project would be completed within 2 years from the date of
execution/signing of revised contract for phase 2(b), and in view of the criticality of
the surveillance system, the Committee had recommended that MHA along with DP

Ly.


‘
2
fF

may take the necessary steps to resolve pending issues and ensure finalization of
the contract with ECIL so that the CCTV surveillance system may be operationalised
urgently. While also noting that ECIL bills for Phase 2(a) and Phase 3 were kept
pending for atleast two years, the Committee had desired that MHA/DP may evolve a
mechanism to ensure timely payments to vendors/service providers. The Committee
had further recommended that since technological advancements are fast paced,
there should be periodic assessment of the quality of cameras and equipment being
used and where necessary; the same should be upgraded at the earliest and the
MHA/DP may consider adding provision to this effect in the contract. The Committee
had also exhorted the MHA/DP to ensure regular maintenance of the CCTV

surveillance system for efficient functioning of the same.

11. The Ministry of Home Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under:

"Approval of the Competent Authority for revised contract for Phase-
2(b) was conveyed on 13.02.2019 (Annexure-II), at an estimated cost of Rs.
147.07 crore for installation of 2727 Nos. CCTV Cameras at six
areas/locations with the following conditions:-
1. While executing the contract by M/s ECIL with Delhi Police, as and
when a firm cost is finalized after their tendering action for procuring
items/services, for execution of instant project, the same will be
informed to Delhi Police along with the details and due justification
about reasonableness of the final cost; and Delhi Police will take
necessary action for obtaining the approval of competent authority on
he final cost accordingly. हे
हे 2. Delhi Police in consultation with their Internal Financial Adviser (IFA)
will ensure due adjustment of advance lying with M/s ECIL unutilized as
per extant orders cum standard accounting norms.
3. Revised contract may be finalized by Delhi Police in consultation with
IFA/Delhi Police in accordance with the provision of GFR 2017, MoF,
2017 for procurement of goods & service and CVC guidelines on the
subject. Delhi Police may also ensure the incorporation of suitable
provision as per the advice as mentioned in para (i), above, besides
incorporating essential clauses regarding “Fall Clause”, firm delivery
* schedule, Liquidated damage, responsibility for obtaining permission
_ from various local bodies/administrative department etc.
In pursuance of the approval, a letter of Intent was issued by Delhi Police to
ECIL vide letter No: 2532/Ph-2(b)/Revised TC Prop./CSA/Q-I(B)/P&L dated
20.02.2019 (Annexure-lll) for acceptance. The same has been accepted by
M/s ECIL vide letter No. EC/ISG/SSPD/DPP II/18-19 (Annexure-IV). As
further reported by Delhi Police, necessary provision/clause has been
incorporated in the contract as under:

(i) Clause No. 6.1: with regard to finalization of firm cost after tendering
process by M/s ECIL for procuring items/services, for execution of the

—S-


12.

instant project alongwith the details and due justification about
reasonableness of the final cost.

(ii) Clause No. 6.6: adjustment of advance lying with M/s ECIL against
phase-2(b), timeline for firm delivery period, Liquidated Damage,
responsibility for obtaining permission from various local
bodies/administrative department etc.

(iii) | Clause No. 6.13: provision of “Fall Clause”.

After necessary incorporation and compliance/comments of condition laid
down in the approval dated 13.02.2019, revised draft contract for Phase-2(b)
is under process for vetting by IFA/Delhi Police before executing the same
with M/s ECIL.

As regards, pending bills for phase-2(a) and Phase-3 CCTV project, it is
submitted that payment of Rs. 41.28 Crore has been released by Delhi Police
to M/s ECIL during: the financial year 2018-19 (till 31.03.2019) against the bills
of approx. Rs.:55.13 Crore, after recovery of liquidated damage of Rs. 8.50
Crore (Annexure-V). Besides, remaining bills/claims ‘of approx. Rs. 15.00
Crore are under scrutiny in Delhi Police for approval and payment will be
released after completing the due process and after obtaining sanction of the
competent authority during the current financial year 2019-20.

The Technical specifications and quality of the CCTV camera system of
Phase-2(b) CCTV project has been revised as per technological advancement
by the technical committee/ Delhi Police and accordingly the revised approval
for installation of 2727 CCTV cameras has been obtained from the Competent
Authority on 13" February 2019. Further, the quality of cameras and
equipment used shall be assessed periodically by the monitoring committee at
user district level and by P&L Unit/ Delhi Police on regular basis. Accordingly,
a provision under clause 14.9 (iii)-"Ad-hoc works” has been incorporated in the
contract, as per details given below (Annexure-VI):

“Such works also includes up-gradation of any equipments viz. cameras
storage, back-up etc., if required necessary for effective functioning, on
chargeable basis.”

Monitoring of the regular maintenance of the CCTV surveillance system will be

.done at different levels in Delhi Police i.e (i) at district/ unit level (being user),

(li) Provisioning & Logistics office of Delhi Police collecting regular status
report about functioning of CCTV systems from different user offices of Delhi
Police and M/s ECIL and (iii) meeting through DCP/P&L for coordinating with
different agencies to discuss the issues related to functioning/ maintenance of
CCTV system.."

The Committee had noted that on account of technological advancement

in the period between 2012 and 2015 ,it was decided by Delhi Police to change

the specifications to procure the latest Technology CCTV cameras to be

installed in high sensitive areas and VIP/VVIP movement/route areas of New

Delhi District. However, despite numerous deliberations and revisions by DP,

MHA and ECIL, the amended proposal could not be finalised. While noting that

the project would be completed within 2 years from the date of

छः


execution/signing of revised contract for phase 2(b), the Committee had
recommended that MHA along with DP may take necessary steps to resolve
pending issues and ensure finalization of the contract with ECIL so that the
CCTV surveillance system may be operationalised urgently. The Committee
note from the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry that after
‘incorporation and compliance of conditions laid down in the approval dated
13.02.2019, the revised draft contract for Phase-2(b) was under process for
vetting by Internal Financial Advisor /Delhi Police before execution of the same
by M/s ECIL. The Committee are concerned to note the inordinate delay in
execution of contract of such crucial nature and enjoin upon the Ministry to
immediately finalise the contract with ECIL and ensure operationalisation of

the CCTV surveillance system and apprise the Committee thereof.

Recommendation at Para No.6

13. The Committee note that at present, the ZIPNET-Zonal Integrated Police
Network project is participated by 8 States ie. Rajasthan, Haryana, Delhi, U.P.,
Chandigarh, Punjab, Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh, under the Inter-State Co-
ordination of Crime/Criminal Information wherein the information of missing persons,
un-identified dead bodies, un-identified persons found, stolen vehicles, un-claimed
vehicles, stolen missing Mobiles, is provided in public domain. The Committee are of
the considered opinion that it is vital that such information may be shared across
India for early solution of related cases. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the MHA may take necessary steps within a stipulated timeframe to integrate the rest
of the States. and Union Territories under the Inter-State Co-ordination of

Crime/Criminal Information to enable real time information exchange.

14, The Ministry of Home Affairs in the Action Taken Notes ‘have
submitted as under:

“As reported by Delhi Police, at present the ZIPNET application is hosted in
Data Centre, SCRB, 37 Floor, PS Kamla Market, New Delhi and information is
shared/accessed at Inter-State level as well as general public for the following
member States:- ,
Delhi

Rajasthan

Haryana :

Uttar Pradesh

Uttrakhand

Chandigarh

QPaRWN>


7. Punjab
8. Himachal Pradesh

05 Internet Leased Lines (ILL) - 10 Mbps each, is subscribed with M/s MTNL
are being utilized by DP for information and dissemination to all concerned
corners. Moreover, the same resources are used for.On-Line Criminal Dossier
System, Crime and Criminal Information System (CCIS),
Conviction/Involvement System, Citizen Services of CCTNS, MACT (Motor
Accident Claims Tribunal), Interactive district web pages, Criminal Tagging
System, Motor Vehicle Theft (MVT) App., Property Theft App. and Lost Report
App.

As regards the Committee’s recommendation to integrate the rest of the
States and Union Territories under the Inter-State Co-ordination of
Crime/Criminal Information to enable real time information exchange, MHA is
implementing Interoperable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) with the objective
to integrate the pillars of criminal justice system namely, Police, Courts,
Prisons, Forensics and Prosecution and share the crime and criminal data with
the Law Enforcement Agencies across India on.near real time basis. ICUS also
contains data on missing persons, un-identified dead bodies, un-identified
persons found, stolen vehicles, un-claimed vehicles, stolen missing bodies,
etc. and access has been provided to the Central Investigating Agencies and
Police in States/ UTs.”

15. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-

“Interoperable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) for real time information

exchange is stated to be under implementation, however, the time frame for

completion of the same and progress made thereof is yet to be intimated.”
16. The Ministry of Home Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have further submitted ,
as under: ह

“The system will become operational in Financial Year 2019-20 and will be

available to States/UTs for use.”
17. The Committee, while noting that the ZIPNET-Zonal Integrated Police
Network project-’covered 8 States i.e. Rajasthan, Haryana, Delhi, U.P.,
Chandigarh, Punjab, Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh, under the Inter-State
Co-ordination of Crime/Criminal. Information system, had recommended that
MHA may take necessary steps, within a stipulated timeframe, to integrate the
rest of the States and Union Territories under the project to enable real time
information exchange. The Committee observe from the action taken reply that
the Ministry is implementing Inter-operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) with
the objective to integrate the pillars of criminal justice system namely, Police,
Courts, Prisons, Forensics and Prosecution and share the crime and criminal

data with the Law Enforcement Agencies across India on real time basis. The

—S-


Committee desire to be apprised of the status of implementation of the said
system and the resultant impact of the same in enabling real time information
exchange. The Committee note that under ICJS, access has been provided to
the Central Investigating Agencies and Police in States/ UTs whereas under
ZIPNET project, information is shared/accessed at Inter-State level as well as
general public in the, member states. The Committee desire that rest of the
States may also be dovered under the ZIPNET project to enable information

sharing and access across the country within a defined time frame.


CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation
The C&AG of India in their Report no. 4 of 2018, Compliance Audit, Union

Government (Civil) brought out certain observations related to the Ministry of
Home Affairs (MHA). The Committee examined three Audit Paras viz. 10.1, 10.2
and 10.3 of the said report pertaining to “Delay in commissioning of CCTV
surveillance system”, “Irregular Leave Travel Concession claims” and “Idling
of servers and software and avoidable expenditure on rent of hired servers”
respectively. In Para 10.1, Audit observed that the Delhi Police (DP) and
Ministry of Home Affairs failed to assess and determine technical requirement
for CCTV surveillance system in high security areas which resulted in a CCTV
surveillance project awarded in February 2013 for New Delhi and Central
District remaining incomplete as of October 2017 despite an expenditure of
42.94 crore. Further, the Delhi Police had been incurring a monthly
expenditure of = 21.02 lakh on hiring CCTV cameras for these areas. In para
10.2 it was revealed that employees in some offices of Delhi Police submitted
Leave Travel Concession (LTC) claims with inflated air fares in violation of
Government orders. These were passed without due scrutiny resulting in
irregular reimbursement amounting to ¥2.56 crore to 435 employees. According
to para 10.3, Delhi Police failed to synchronize the purchase of server and
software with the procurement of leased internet lines resulting in idling of
servers and software for three and half years and avoidable expenditure of
%1.11 crore on hired servers. The observations/ recommendations of the
Committee on important issues are contained in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Para 1, Part-II, of 1247 Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
Para (1) above is Audit observations reproduced and hence no reply is recorded.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
No further comments.

—/o7


Observation/Recommendation
The Committee observe that in July 2012, MHA approved the use of 1,888

surplus CCTV cameras and associated equipment left over from the
Commonwealth Games 2010 (CWG. Items) for use during Phase 2(b) of ‘the
installation of the CCTV Surveillance System by Delhi Police (DP) across its
policing jurisdiction to monitor and resolve crimes aid address security
challenges. The contract for the supply, installation, and commissioning of
CCTV Surveillance System in the high security areas was awarded to M/s
Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) in February 2013 and was to be
completed within 150 days of receipt of road cutting permission from civic
agencies for the respective sites. The Committee are aghast to hote that the
CCTV Surveillance system could not be made operational due to non-receipt of
sufficient quantity of CWG items for three years between July 2012 and June
2015. The Committee are dismayed that while the leftover CWG equipment lay
idle for so many years, DP incurred wasteful expenditure of a huge amount of &
21.02 lakh per month for renting CCTVs causing double loss to the
Government exchequer. While noting that Delhi Police along with ECIL sent
numerous letters to MYAS and other agencies concerned for transfer of
equipment by the venue owners viz. Sports Authority of India, Delhi University
and Jamia Milia Islamia University, the Committee fail to understand why DP
djd not seek MHA’s intervention to pursue the matter and the MYAS for no
obvious reasons, slept over the requests. The Committee are unhappy to note
that apart from writing letters, DP did not proactively engage with the Ministries
and organizations concerned to expedite supply of CWG equipment. The
Committee would also like to know why MHA did not monitor the
implementation of the project and aggressively pursue the matter with the
concerned organizations despite itself giving the approval for the same. The
Committee recommend that henceforth,. in matters requiring coordination
between several agencies/ organizations, a committee may be. formed by MHA
and all other ministries as the case may be, consisting of a representative each
from the organizations concerned to enable effective coordination and speedy
resolution of issues. The Committee further exhort the MHA to set up a

monitoring mechanism for all such ongoing projects.

[Para 2, Part Il, of 124" Report of Public Accounts Committee

था |


(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
The progress of CCTV project was reviewed regularly in the Ministry of Home Affairs

and during the review meetings both Delhi Police and M/s ECIL assured completion

of the project in a time bound manner. The physical as well as financial progress of

all Schemes/ projects is réviewed regularly at various levels in MHA. Project
Monitoring Committee comprising all the stakeholders monitors the progress of
projects under Delhi Police Building Programme. A High Powered Committee on
Traffic Management in the NCT of Delhi was set up on 28.09.2018 with all the
stakeholders. As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, a Committee
comprising all the stakeholders, namely, MHA, Delhi Police, South Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (South MCD), New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and M/s
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL), has been set up in MHA on 10.05.2019

(Annexure-l) to monitor implementation of Phase 2(b) CCTV System.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
No further comments

है Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that on account of technological advancement in the

period between 2012 and 2015 and availability of better CCTV Cameras which
provided improved picture quality in comparison to the CCTV cameras
procured and installed through M/s ECIL and of CWG cameras, it was decided
by Delhi Police to change the specifications to procure the latest Technology
CCTV cameras to’ be installed in high sensitive areas and VIP/VVIP
movement/route areas of New Delhi District. However, the Committee note with
consternation that despite numerous deliberations and revisions by DP, MHA
and ECIL, the amended proposal has still not been finalised till date. This
indicates lack of coordination between MHA and DP. While noting that the
project would be completed within 2 years from the date of execution/signing
of revised contract for phase 2(b), and in view of the criticality of the
surveillance system, the Committee recommend that MHA alongwith DP may
take the necessary steps to resolve pending issues and ensure finalization of
the contract with ECIL so that the CCTV surveillance system may be

operationalised urgently. While also noting that ECIL bills for Phase 2(a) and

—j2-


Phase 3 were kept pending for atleast two years, the Committee desire that
MHA/DP may evolve a mechanism to ensure timely payments to
vendors/service providers. The .Committee further desire that since
technological advancements are ;fast paced, there should be periodic
assessment of the quality of cameras and equipment being used and where
necessary; the same should be upgraded at the earliest and the MHA/ DP may
consider adding provision to this effect in the contract. The Committee also
exhort the MHA/DP to ensure regular maintenance of the CCTV surveillance

system for efficient functioning of the same.

[Para 3, Part — Il, of 124" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16" Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
Approval of the Competent Authority for revised contract for Phase-2(b) was

conveyed on 13.02.2019 (Annexure-ll), at an estimated cost of Rs. 147.07 crore for
installation of 2727 Nos. CCTV Cameras at six areas/locations with the following
conditions:-
4. While executing the contract by M/s ECIL with Delhi Police, as and when a
firm cost is finalized after their tendering action for procuring items/services,

for execution of instant project, the same will be informed to Delhi Police
alongwith the details and ‘due justification about reasonableness of the final

cost; and Delhi Police will take necessary action for obtaining the approval of

competent authority on the final cost accordingly.

5. Delhi Police in consultation with their Internal. Financial Adviser (IFA) will
ensure due adjustment of advance lying with M/s ECIL unutilized as per
extant orders cum standard accounting norms.

6. Revised contract may be finalized by Delhi Police in consultation with
‘IFA/Delhi Police in accordance with the provision of GFR 2017, MoF, 2017
for procurement of goods & service and CVC guidelines on the subject.
Delhi Police may also ensure the incorporation of suitable provision as per
the advice as mentioned in para (i), above, besides incorporating essential
clauses regarding “Fall Clause”, firm delivery schedule, Liquidated damage,
“responsibility for obtaining permission from various local
bodies/administrative department etc.

—~|4-


In pursuance of the approval, a letter of Intent was issued by Delhi Police to ECIL
vide letter No. 2532/Ph-2(b)/Revised TC Prop./CSA/Q-I(B)/P&L dated 20.02.2019
(Annexure-lll) for acceptance. The same has been accepted by M/s ECIL vide letter
No. EC/ISG/SSPD/DPP ॥/॥18-19 (Annexure-IV). As further reported by Delhi Police,

necessary provision/clause has been incorporated in the contract as under:

(iv) | Clause No. 6.1: with regard to finalization of firm cost after tendering process
by M/s ECIL for procuring items/services, for execution of the instant project
alongwith the details and due justification about reasonableness of the final
cost.

(v) Clause No. 6.6: adjustment of advance lying with M/s ECIL against phase-
2(b), timeline for firm delivery period, Liquidated Damage, responsibility for
obtaining permission from various local bodies/administrative department etc.

(vi) Clause No. 6.13: provision of “Fall Clause”.

After necessary incorporation and compliance/comments of condition laid down in the
approval dated 13.02.2019, revised draft contract for Phase-2(b) is under process. for
vetting by IFA/Delhi Police before executing the same with M/s ECIL.

As regards, pending bills for phase-2(a) and Phase-3 CCTV project, it is submitted
that payment of Rs. 41.28 Crore has been released by Delhi Police to M/s ECIL
during the financial year 2018-19 (till 31.03.2019) against thé bills of approx. Rs.
55.13 Crore, after recovery of liquidated damage of Rs. 8.50 Crore (Annexure-V).
Besides, remaining bills/claims of approx. Rs. 15.00 Crore are under scrutiny in Delhi
Police for approval and payment will be released after completing the due process
‘and after obtaining sanction of the competent authority during the current financial
year 2019-20.

The Technical specifications and quality of the CCTV camera system of Phase-2(b)
CCTV project has been revised as per technological advancement by the technical
committee/ Delhi Police and accordingly the revised approval for installation of 2727
CCTV cameras has been obtained from the Competent Authority on 13" February
2019. Further, the quality of cameras and equipment used shall be assessed
periodically by the monitoring: committee at user district level and by P&L Unit/ Delhi
Police on regular basis. Accordingly, a provision under clause 14.9 (iii)-“Ad-hoc
works” has been incorporated in the contract, as per details given below (Annexure-
VI):

lhe


“Such works also includes up-gradation of any equipments viz. cameras,
storage, back-up etc., if required necessary for effective functioning, on

chargeable basis.”

Monitoring of the regular maintenance of the CCTV surveillance system will be done
at different levels in Delhi Police ie (i) at district/ unit level (being user), (ii)
Provisioning & Logistics office of Delhi Police collecting regular status report about
functioning of CCTV systems from different user offices of Delhi Police and M/s ECIL
and (iii) meeting through DCP/P&L for coordinating with different agencies to discuss
the issues related to functioning/ maintenance of CCTV system.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
No further comments

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that Government of India (GOl). permitted alf
employees including non-entitled employees to travel by Air India to North East
region and by any airline to Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) on Leave Travel
Concession (LTC) in 2008 and 2010, which facility was extended from time to
time. The air tickets for travel on LTC were to be purchased either directly from!
the airlines at booking counters/websites of the airlines or by utilizing the
services of authorized travel agents. The Committee observe that on scrutiny’
of travel details of 1196 employees of Delhi Police, it was found that in the case
of 435 employees, air tickets had neither been directly purchased from the
airline nor from the authorized travel agents. Airfare amounting to %2.56 crore

claimed by these employees and reimbursed by Delhi Police was also higher
than the cost of tickets shown on the website of the airline charged from these
employées' and these employees had not submitted original tickets of the
airline and the air fares claimed appeared to be inflated. However, the claims
were allowed by the concerned authorities without exercise of due diligence
and without ensuring compliance with the extant instructions. In this regard,
the Committee note that 97% of the recovery has been effected and the
remaining amount is being recovered; the Vigilance Unit of Delhi Police has
been directed to scrutinize the claims of all 1196 cases and take necessary

disciplinary action and that Delhi Police has initiated a vigilance enquiry into

-४-


the matter to fix responsibility of erring officials. The Committee desire that the
vigilance enquiry is expedited so that erring officials are punished at the
earliest. The Committee further note that directions have been given to all the
Districts/Units of Delhi Police to strictly scrutinize all LTC claims as per extant
guidelines besides verifying authenticity’ genuineness of the air tickets before’
releasing the payment. The Committee strongly feel that the fact that irregular
LTC claims were passed and were only revealed after being pointed out by
Audit, shows that the system of internal audit failed miserably in discharging
its responsibility effectively. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a
mechanism for strong internal control followed by internal audit may be put in

place in Delhi Police to avoid recurrences of such irregularities.

[Para 4, Part - II, of 1247 Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
1. As per observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee and

instructions of GOI, Delhi Police has directed all the Districts/Units to verify the
LTC claims and to effect recovery in case any excess payment is made. As
reported by Delhi Police, LTC claims are being thoroughly checked and the air
tickets submitted by the police personnel are randomly verified from the airline
concerned for their genuineness. If any kind of misuse of LTC is detected,
+ necessary disciplinary action will be initiated against the defaulters by Delhi
Police, as per LTC rules. Undertaking from the applicant is also taken that he
has purchased air tickets from the authorized agents or directly from the
airlines booking counters/ website of. airlines. Committee has been formed by
Delhi Police.at District/Unit level for strong internal control mechanism to avoid
recurrences of such irregularities in future and for verifying the authenticity and
genuineness of the air tickets from concerned airlines.
2. Verification of air fare claimed by the Government servant in respect of other
cases js under progress and as soon as the reply is received from the airlines,

urther necessary action as per extant rules will be initiated by Delhi Police.

The details of claims verified by the airlines as on date is as under:-

Block Year No.’ of claims verified by airlines and | Total amount to be Recovery
referred for vigilance enquiry recovered made
2010-13 42 23,22,844 95,750

LI ७-८


2014-17 [es sid 36,88,869 1,10,212

3... As reported by Delhi Police, their Internal Audit also detected 331 LTC claims
during scrutiny of records of Districts/Units and pointed out a recovery of Rs.
73,21 ,283/- from the employees concerned, after verification of tickets from
concerned airlines

4. 98.52% of recovery pointed out by AG (Audit) has been effected by Delhi
Police as on 31.03.2019 and Rs. 1,63,092/- will be recovered shortly. An
amount of Rs. 55146/- was shown twice by AG(Audit) who have been
requested to reduce the amount from the total recovery. Further, sincere
efforts for’ recovery of remaining amount of Rs. 2,83,326/- from
retirees/expiry/death cases is already taken up by Delhi Police and is being
followed up with the concerned for depositing the ineligible amount. In case
the amount could not be recovered, approval of the competent authority for
waiver of recovery will be obtained by Delhi Police

5. As reported by Delhi Police, Vigilance Enquiry is still under way to find out the
actual amount paid to the airlines and thereby, the difference of both the
amount i.e. claimed by the LTC beneficiaries and the actual amount paid to
the airlines concerned. However, it is clear from the Vigilance Eni uiry
conducted so far that various OMs issued by the Ministry of Financé

(Department of Expenditure) as well as Ministry of Personnel, Publid
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) have been

over looked by the Dealing Assistants and their supervisory officers while
clearing the LTC claims. The competent authority has approved regular :
departmental enquiry against the 07 Dealing Assistants and Show Cause
Notice for censure to 05 supervisory officers without prejudice to the final

outcome of the findings of Vigilance Enquiry.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
The final outcomes of all cases referred to vigilance inquiry may be intimated to PAC.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
Delhi Policé has been directed to provide final outcomes of Vigilance inquiry for

onward transmission to PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

{fe


The Committee note that the State Crime Record Bureau (SCRB) of Delhi
Police under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) initially hosted the Zonal
Integrated Police Network (ZIPNET) for sharing information on missing
persons/goods with the neighbouring States and the Online Criminal Dossier
System (OCDS) for investigating officers on the server of the National
Informatics Centre (NIC). The Committee observe that since NIC shut down
Delhi Police applications from their server without any prior intimation, Delhi
Police decided to host these applications on two alternate servers hired from a
private agency through limited tender. The Committee also note that Delhi
Police subsequently decided to-host the two systems on in-house servers in
SCRB to save the annual expenditure on hiring and procured and installed the
same. The Committee further note that the same could not be utilized for more
than three anda half years as tender for procurement of leased internet lines
was not finalised. While Delhi Police took eight months to finalise the
specifications, MHA raised several queries on the proposal finally conveying
administrative approval after a year in May 2015 to finalise the contract in open
tender on completing all codal formalities. Subsequent proposals of Delhi
Police were also not approved by MHA due to the former’s failure to adhere to
the codal formalities prescribed in the General Financial Rules and incomplete
documentation. Delhi Police could finally order the leased internet lines from
MTNL in September 2016 after MHA delegated financial powers to Delhi Police
in March 2016 for leasing of lines. The installation work of internet leased lines
was completed in March 2017. In the first instance, the Committee are
dismayed af the general response of NIC to a specific query of the Committee
wherein it was submitted that as a matter of practice, NIC does not shutdown
servers hosting websites. The Committee are alarmed to note that it is only
upon receipt of Office Memorandum from Lok Sabha Secretariat that NIC
requested Delhi Police for details in the matter. The Committee are distressed
that there is no system in NIC to inform and address problems related to key
organizations such as Delhi Police who have such an important responsibility
towards the public. The Committee, therefore, recommend that NIC may
institute a mechanism for prioritized redressal of issues related to important
organizations. The Committee also feel that DP on its part failed to pursue the
matter for not shutting the server with NIC in view of the importance of core

policing information at the inter-state level and are further perturbed at the lack

|e


Toe

of coordination between DP and NIC, The Committee desire that in the present
arrangement with MTNL and inhouse servers, DP may ensure that any issue be
resolved immediately and maintenance of the servers be done on a regular
basis to avoid recurrence of such instances. The Committee also desire that
DP may ensure proper documentation and compliance with GFRs while
tendering for projects. 7 é
[Para 5, Part - Il, of 424th Report of Public Accounts Committee
: (16 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
NIC has informed that pursuance to the observation/ recommendations of the 124"
Report of the Public Accounts Committee, NIC has devised a mechanism to address
the issues reported by the key/ sensitive organizations of Government of India by
defining an escalation matrix.

1. NIC officials posted in.the Ministry will be informed about the issue (Response
Level-1). He/ She will attempt to resolve the problem using his/ her expertise. ;

2. The officer at the response Level-1 will also intimate the service desk to initiate
the redressal process, if required.

3. The same will be intimated to the Head of the NIC Division (HoD)
simultaneously (Response Level-2). HoD will get in touch with the NIC service
stakeholders to resolve the issue, if not done so at the earlier level.

’ 4, If the problem is still not resolved within 10 hours, will be escalated to the
Head of Group (HoG) (Response Level-3) for necessary intervention and

action at the highest level.

Delhi Police has“ reported that the’ observation/recommendations passed by the
Public Accounts Committee have been noted for meticulous compliance.
Application/website of Delhi Police are running in Data Centre through Leased Line of
MTNL etc: on in-house NIC servers etc. Delhi Police is using multiple networks
acquired after following the procedures laid down in GFR, leaving no chance for
dependency on any single network operation. Also Delhi Police is maintaining co-
ordination with NIC at senior level. Besides, maintenance of the in-house servers
installed for the purpose being done on a regular intervention to avoid recurrence of
such instances. Apart from this, proper documentation and compliance with GFRs

will be ensured by Delhi Police in future while tendering for projects.

व


Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
No further comments.

. Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that at present, the ZIPNET-Zonal Integrated Police

Network project is participated by 8 States i.e. Rajasthan, Haryana, Delhi, U.P.,
Chandigarh,’ Punjab, Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh, under the Inter-State
Coordination of Crime/Criminal Information wherein the information of missing
persons, un-identified dead bodies, un-identified persons found, stolen
vehicles, un-claimed vehicles, stolen missing Mobiles, is provided in public
domain. The Committee are of the considered opinion that it is vital that such
information may be shared across India for early solution of related cases. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the MHA may take necessary steps
within a stipulated timeframe to integrate the rest of the States and Union
Territories under the Inter State Co-ordination of Crime/Criminal Information to
enable real time information exchange.
[Para 6, Part - Il, of 1247 Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
As reported by Delhi Police, at present. the ZIPNET application is hosted in Data

Centre, SCRB, 3% Floor, PS Kamla Market, New Delhi and information is
shared/accessed at Inter-State level as well as general public for the following
member States:- ,

9. Delhi

10. Rajasthan

11. | Haryana

. 12. Uttar Pradesh

13. Uttrakhand

14. Chandigarh

15... Punjab

16. Himachal Pradesh

05 Internet Leased Lines (ILL) - 10 Mbps each, is subscribed with M/s MTNL are

being utilized by DP for information and dissemination to all concerned corners.

=Q0-


Moreover, the same resources are used for On-Line Criminal Dossier System, Crime
and Criminal Information System (CCIS), Conviction/involvement System, Citizen
Services of CCTNS, MACT (Motor Accident Claims Tribunal), Interactive district web
pages, Criminal Tagging System, Motor Vehicle Theft (MVT) App., Property Theft
App. and Lost Report App.

As regards the Committee's recommendation to integrate the rest of the States and: :

Union Territories under the Inter-State Co-ordination of Crime/Criminal Information to
enable real time information exchange, MHA is implementing Interoperable Criminal

Justice System (ICJS) with the objective to integrate the pillars of criminal justice

system namely, Police, Courts, Prisons, Forensics and Prosecution and share the -

crime and criminal data with the Law Enforcement Agencies across India on near real
time basis. ICUS also contains data on missing persons, un-identified dead bodies,
un-identified persons found, stolen vehicles, un-claimed vehicles, stolen missing
bodies, etc. and access has been provided to the Central Investigating Agencies and
Police in States/ UTs :

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN . :
Interoperable Criminal Justice System, (ICJS) for real time information exchange is

stated to be under implementation, however, the time frame for completion of the

same and progress made thereof is yet to be intimated.

' Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
The system will become operational in Financial Year 2019-20 and will be available

to States/UTs for use.

8 |—


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
’ DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

— 2


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-

—AS-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__ September, 2020 Chairperson,
Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) हे Public Accounts Committee

— Ate


CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21) HELD
ON 28TH AUGUST, 2020.

GP ON Oak WN

11.
12.

f

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 2g August, 2020 from 1500 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

OK SABHA
hri T.R Baalu

ti Subash Chandra Baheria
mt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
hri Jayant Sinha
hri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA
hri Naresh Gujral
Shri C.M Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Li
5
5
5
5
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
5
5
5
R
s

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G Chandrasekhar

Shri MLK Raja . ..,

Shri Paolienlal Haokip

_ to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

- Chairperson

Members

- Joint Secretary
- Director
- Additional Director

—2s-


-2-

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms.Shubha Kumar - Dy.CAG
2. Shrik. Srinivasan - DG
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar - DG
4. Ms.Ritika Bhatia - PD i
5, Shri 5.५, Singh - PD

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

pores eke ee frees

PART-|

1. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson, welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of India

to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the Members
on the following Draft Reports:-

(a) * avery ee oon
(0) *ह* eee freed wee
(०) ike ike wee,
(d) Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
124" Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, "Delay in
Commissioning of CCTV Surveillance System”, “Irregular Leave Travel
Concession Claims” and “Idling of Servers and Software and Avoidable
Expenditure on Rent of Hired Servers”: and

(8) कर 1 eed eed eee |

2. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any
modifications/changes. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports
in the light of factual verification/vetting comments, if any and present the same to
Parliament on behalf of the Committee.

Qe


a -3-

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives of the Office
of the C&AG of India for assisting the Committee in the examination of the subjects.

week ke ee eee

The Committee then adjourned.

<i


3


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

_ APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH .

REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1 to 6.

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
hm

the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. Nil.
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
%

accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil.

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

%

Para Nos. Nil.

Se

2b

06

Total : 06
Percentage:100% |

Total : 00
Percentage: Nil

Total : 00
Percentage: Nil

Total.: 00
Percentage: Nil