102
“Loss of opportunity to earn additional

freight and extra expenditure on haulage:
South Western Railway (SWR)”

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

HUNDRED SECOND REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2332

HUNDRED SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

“Loss of opportunity to earn additional
freight and extra expenditure on

haulage: South Western’ Railway

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iii)

INTRODUCTION (iv)

REPORT

PART- 1

| Introduction

Nl Para no 2.2 “Loss of opportunity to earn additional freight and extra
expenditure on haulage”

PART -॥
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

APPENDICES
1. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-
24) held on 21-11-2023.

॥. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-
24) held on 05-02-2024.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

RON>

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
Dr. K. Laxman

Shri Derek O' Brien!
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT

Dr. Sanjeev Sharma
Shri Partha Goswami
Dr. Faiz Ahmad

Shri Charanjeet Singh

Joint Secretary
Director

Under Secretary
Executive Officer

' Blected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Hundred Second Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Loss of opportunity to earn additional freight
and extra expenditure on haulage: South Western Railway (SWR)” based on
Para 2.2 of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board). हु

2. The C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 was laid on the Table of the House
on 21.12.2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject
matter on 21 November, 2023. Based on the oral evidence and written
replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on
05.02.2024. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and
form Part- Il of the Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2024 Chairperson,

Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


PART- |
INTRODUCTION

1. The Committee have learnt that South Western Railway South
Western Railway (SWR) Administration failed to supply BOXNHA rakes
with BOXNEL wagons on the Tornagallu - Ranjitpura route resulting in loss
of opportunity to earn additional freight of Rs. 48.24 crore for the period
from 2013-14 to 2020-21. Besides, SWR also incurred an extra expenditure

of Rs. 5.22 crore on haulage of excess number of rakes during this period.

2. The C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 for the year ended 2022 contains
significant results of the compliance audit of the Ministry of Railways of the

Union Government.

३... Public accounts Committee (2023-24), selected the aforesaid C&AG

Report for examination and report.

4... The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), considered the subject for
detailed examination, took oral evidence of the representatives and other
officials of Ministry of Railways on 21.11.2023 and obtained written replies
on the same. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the

Committee examined the subject in detail.

5. Para no 2.2 “Loss of opportunity to earn additional freight and

extra expenditure on haulage”

“Ministry of Railways (MoR) sanctioned (December 2007) the
Torangullu (TNGL) - Ranjitpura (RNJP) route as 25 tonnes Axle load
routes for loading of Iron Ore in specified wagons. BOXNEL,
BOBSNMI and BOYEL wagons were’ cleared for operation 6n this
route with a Permissible Carrying Capacity (PCC) ranging from 68

1


tonnes to 77 tonnes with loading tolerance of two tonnes. Two to
three dedicated BOXNHA (BOXN Higher Axle) rakes of BOXNEL
wagons with PCC of 77 tonnes were in use on this 23 km stretch till
2011-12 for transporting Iron Ore. Review of records of
Mechanical/Operating department, South Western Railway
(SWR)/Hubli pertaining to the period of 2013-14 to 2017 and from
2020-21 onwards (till September 2021) revealed that a total 6587
rakes (on an average 1013 rakes per year) were loaded from RNJP
to JSW Steel Ltd. (JSWT)/TNGL during the period. For loading Iron
Ore, BOXN rakes consisting of BOXNHS/BOXNHL wagons having
PCC ranging from 68 - 70 tonnes per wagon were supplied to JSWT
instead of BOXNHA rakes consisting of BOXNEL wagons or higher
capacity wagons. Records were not made available to verify the
reasons for stoppage of operation of BOXNEL wagons or non-
supply of other wagons having the similar PCC. Review of the
Wagon Holding of SWR also revealed that BOXNEL wagons were
not available under holding. Audit observed that the rake size of 59
BOXNHS/BOXNHL wagons could carry 4130 tonnes per rake
against 4484 tonnes that could have been carried in the BOXNHA
rakes with BOXNEL wagons. A total weight of 354 tonnes per rake
was less carried during the period. Thus, non-supply of the
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons by SWR Administration
resulted in foregone opportunity to earn an additional freight
amounting to हैं 48.24 crore. Further, the line capacity of notified
route of RNJPTNGL/JSWT remained underutilized due to non-
supply of higher capacity rakesAvagons during the period. SWR
Administration also did not make concerted efforts to include
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons or wagons of similar PCC in
Wagons Holding of SWR for arranging supply of the appropriate
rakes at RNJP. Audit also noticed that during the period, 6587 rakes
moved from RNJP to. JSWT with approximate tonnage of
2,60,37,492 tonnes whereas only 5806 rakes of higher Axle load
carrying 76 tonnes per wagon would have been sufficient to carry
the same tonnage. Thus, the SWR Administration incurred an extra
expenditure amounting to € 5.22 crore towards haulage of 781 rakes
in excess. The matter was taken up with MoR in May 2022. In reply,
they stated (July 2022) that four BOXNEL rakes which were
supplied for loading of Iron Ore between RNJP-JSWT route were in
operation up to 2011-12. These BOXNEL rakes were sent to ECoR
as per the Railway Board's instructions due to higher demand over
ECoR. It was also stated that two BOBSN rakes (first rake in 2013-

2


14 and second rake in 2016-17) were supplied which have PCC of
62 tonnes for loading in 25T Axle route. These rakes having higher
capacity for loading in 25 tonnes Axle route in RNJP-TNGL were in
operation from 2013-14 until now and utilized sufficiently. The reply
of MoR was not acceptable. The SWR Administration failed to have
higher PCC rakes/wagons in its holding to cater to the need of
increased demand of Iron Ore on RNJP to JSWT route. The PCC of
BOBSN wagons supplied by SWR were of 62 tonnes capacity which
was far less as compared to BOXNEL with PCC of 76 tonnes even
though the route was notified for 25 T Axle Load and has the
capacity to run rakes of higher capacity wagons (76 tonnes).
Further, in respect of haulage of 781 excess rakes, MoR has not
clarified the issue. The fact will remain same as the supply of rakes
with lesser PCC will require more rakes when compared to rakes
with higher PCC. Thus, failure of SWR Administration to supply the
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons resulted in loss of opportunity
to earn an additional freight amounting to Rs. 48.24 crore for the
period from 2013-14 to 2020-21 onwards.. The Railway
Administration also incurred an extra expenditure amounting to Rs.
5.22 crore on haulage of 781 rakes in excess during the perioa”.

6. The Ministry in their Background Note have stated as under:

“The Rolling Stock utilization is planned and monitored by Railway
Board in consultation with Zonal Railways after assessing the
requirement and efficient utilization within the overall network of
Indian Railway for optimizing the fulfillment of available traffic
demand. After 2010 there is a continuous decrease in Iron Ore
demand on SWR. Supreme Court imposed ban on iron ore loading
for export in Goa and Karnataka in 2012. Due to this, iron ore
loading drastically came down .Earlier, BOXNEL rakes were
provided to SWR for loading of iron ore in RNJP-JSWT circuit upto
2011-12 where 25T axle load was permissible. Four (4) BOXNEL
rakes were in operation between RNJP-TNGL section upto 2011.
Meanwhile, in 2011, JSWT commissioned track hopper
infrastructure for unloading iron ore for BOBSN type of rakes. This
infrastructure enables efficient unloading and turn-round of BOBSN
rakes on an average of 1.5 rakes per day. JSWT siding Free time
notified for BOXN rake is 8 hours and BOBSN rake is 2.5 hours.
Hence to-optimize freight ‘loading’ in RNJP-JSWT section BOBSN
type of rakes are fit to be chosen for loading and unloading.

3


Subsequently, two BOBSN rakes were supplied for loading during
2013-14 (First rake) & 2016-17 (second rake) in SWR, which has
higher capacity for loading in 25T Axle route between RNJP-JSWT.
BOBSN rakes have permissible carrying capacity (PCC) of 69T over
25T Axle route as against PCC of 60T over CC+8 routes. These
BOXNEL rakes were sent to EcoRly as per Railway Boards
instructions due to higher demand over EcoR sector. Due to closure
of Donimalai Mines in RNJP, BOBSN rakes were withdrawn in June
2018 due to no demand for iron ore in this sector. Again, two
BOBSN rakes were re-inducted in October, 2020 due to re-opening
of Donimalai Mines and increased demands for iron ore loading
between RNJP-JSWT sector. SWR was given BOBSNM wagon
which has payload of 69T on 25T axle load and better turn round
time because of loading time of 2.5 hours only against 8 hour of
BOXNEL wagons. With Engine on Load unloading facility in
BOBSNM1, the Rolling Stock detention is further reduced by saving
time in bringing loco and the attachment, pressure ready, BPC
validation, etc. BOBSNM1 wagons were introduced because the
customer, JSW(T) has constructed and installed the necessary
infrastructure for unloading of BOBSNM1 on the basis of better
efficiency in operation. Hence, there was no revenue loss to the
Railways.

When the Committee asked as to how the Railways arrived at the
figure of freight amounting to Rs. 48.24 crore, a representative replied

as under:

“Actually, this calculation is based on how much could have been
earned had the higher capacity rakes been operated on this line
versus what is actually being earned by using a lower capacity rake.
In this kind of issues, | think the exact amount is basically shows an
order of magnitude. It is not as if railways has really lost this much
amount but it represents the order of magnitude that had they
operated higher capacity wagons as per the capability and capacity of
the line, the earnings would have been more. This is the crux of the
para.”


8.

On enquiring about the reasons for stopping the operation of

BOXNEL wagons or not supplying other wagons with a similar PCC on this

route, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

9.

the

“The BOXNEW/wagons were transferred out of SWR to EcoR with
routes having more capacity for running trains with these wagons on
account of longer routes/track kilometers fit for carrying them where
they have been utilized more effectively & efficiently. In 2011-12
JSWT started installation of track hopper facility which started
operation in the year 2016-17 with induction of 2 BOBSN rakes. It
may be noted that the track capable of running high-capacity wagons
was 23 Km only and the requirement of rakes was less than 2 per
day before 2011-12. Therefore, it was not considered reasonable to
further induct or continue the operation of high-capacity wagons in
SWR when these rakes could be used more effectively, efficiently
and remuneratively in other railways where tracks fit for running these
high-capacity wagons was substantially more. Hence the high-
capacity wagons/rakes being operated on SWR were transferred to
ECoR’.

On being enquired about the reasons of not providing the records to
audit, as Audit has stated that records were not

made available to verify the reasons for stoppage of operation of BOXNEL

wagons or non-supply of other wagons having the similar PCC, the

Ministry, in their written reply, stated as under:

10.

“All available records were provided to audit.”

On being asked why were BOXNHS/BOXNHL wagons with a lower

PCC supplied to JSW Steel Ltd. instead of the higher capacity BOXNHA
rakes, as specified by the MoR, the Ministry stated in their written reply as

under:

“Since the high capacity wagons (BOXNHA) were not available with
SWR, the wagons available like BOXNHS, BOXNHL were supplied
~ for loading to meet the customer demand”.


11. When asked as_ to what actions are being taken to address this
issue, as the report highlights that extra expenditure was incurred due to
the haulage of 781 excess rakes, the Ministry stated in their written reply as
under:
“Usage of excess rakes appears to have been arrived at on the basis
of difference between the tonnage carried by high capacity wagons &
that carried by other wagons. However, Audit has not taken into
consideration the effective utilization of high-capacity rakes in EcoR,
which resulted into additional earning and saving of several such
rakes in ECoR. If it were to be considered in totality over the Indian

Railways, there is no haulage of excess rakes, as pointed out by
Audit”.

12. Upon enquiring about what additional clarifications the MoR would
like to provide to substantiate and justify their stance in light of the audit
report indicating dissatisfaction with the Ministry of Railways’ response, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“In light of the audit report indicating dissatisfaction with the Ministry

of Railways’ response, the Railway Board submitted its final ATN
explaining the issue more clearly’.

13. When asked to provide details on the steps taken by the MoR to
ensure that appropriate rakes with higher PCC are supplied for operation
on the Torangullu - Ranjitpura route going forward, the Ministry stated in
their written reply as under:
“As of now, there are two dedicated BOBSNM1 rakes with 25 tonne
axle load wagons operating on the TNGL-RNJP section. These rakes

are supplied as per the demand placed by JSWT, as the arrangement
of unloading of Hopper wagons is available in SWR only with JSWT”.

14. On being asked about the measures that will be implemented to
prevent such discrepancies in wagon supply and to optimize the utilization

of the notified route in the future, the Ministry stated as under:

6


“To utilize the notified route, two BOBSNM1 rakes are deployed
which are operated as closed circuit rakes”.

15. When asked as to how the MoR plan to make up for the foregone

opportunity to earn an additional freight amounting to %48.24 crore for the

period from 2013-14 to 2020-21 onwards, as mentioned in the report, the
. Ministry stated in their written reply as under:

“The revenue loss has been calculated based on the tonnage lost on

SWR. However, the gains made in ECoR due to running of these

high-capacity wagons appear to have been overlooked. Hence, if the

entire operation of high capacity wagons is considered in totality there
would be no loss of revenue”.

16. On being asked to explain the reasoning behind the decision to send
BOXNEL rakes to East Coast Railway (ECoR) due to higher demand, and
how this decision was made in light of the decreasing demand on SWR, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:
“As mentioned in the query, to meet the high demand in ECoR, the
high capacity wagons were transferred to ECoR as there was much
less demand in SWR. Also as mentioned earlier, ECoR had more
routes capable of running the rakes with high-capacity wagons which

would result in effective & advantageous utilization of high capacity
wagons in 500२.

17. On being asked to provide details of the criteria and considerations
for selecting these rakes, and how their deployment was optimized for
freight loading on the RNJP-JSWT route, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:

“BOBSN is a specific type of wagon with side discharge requiring

unloading infrastructure suitable for its operation which is not
available at all terminals”.

18... On being asked about the measures taken. to.ensure that BOBSN
rakes were effectively utilized and maintained for iron ore loading after their

7


re-induction in October 2020, following the reopening of Donimalai Mines,
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:
“It is informed that 340 rakes were loaded in 2021-22 & 408 rakes in

2022-23. These rakes have been worked with locomotives
attached/available at terminal to operate without any detention”.

19. On being asked as to how the Ministry plans to adapt its rolling stock
allocation and utilization strategies to optimize freight operations on various
routes, given the evolving demands and changes in wagon types, the
Ministry stated as under:
“The Rolling Stock utilization is planned and monitored by Railway
Board in consultation with Zonal Railways after assessing the

requirement and efficient utilization within the overall network of
Indian Railway”.


Part Il

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee learn that South Western Railway (SWR)
Administration failed to supply BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons
on the Tornagallu - Ranjitpura (11061 - RNJP) route resulting in loss of
opportunity to earn additional freight of Rs.48.24 crore for the period
from 2013-14 to 2020-21. Besides, SWR also incurred an extra
expenditure of Rs.5.22 crore on haulage of excess number of rakes
during this period. Issues highlighted in the Audit Report have been
examined by the Committee and commented upon suitably in the

succeeding paragraphs.

2. Failure _of South Western Railway (SWR) Administration to
supply BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons on the Tornagallu -
Ranjitpura route.

The Committee note from audit observation that due to failure in
supply of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons on the TNGL-RNJP
route, SWR missed an opportunity to earn additional freight of Rs.
48.24 crore for the period , 2013-14 to 2020-21. SWR Administration
also did not make concerted efforts to include BOXNHA rakes with
BOXNEL wagons or wagons of similar PCC in Wagons Holding of
SWR for arranging supply of the appropriate rakes at RNJP. From the
submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that high capacity
wagons (BOXNHA) were not available with SWR, and the wagons
available, such as BOXNHS and BOXNHL were supplied for loading to

meet the customer demand. Besides, in 2011, JSWT (JSW Steel Ltd.) ~~


commissioned track hopper infrastructure for unloading iron ore for
BOBSN type of rakes. This infrastructure enables efficient unloading
and turn-round of BOBSN rakes on an average of 1.5 rakes per day.
JSWT siding Free time notified for BOXN rake is 8 hours and BOBSN
rake is 2.5 hours. Hence to optimize freight loading in RNJP-JSWT
section BOBSN type of rakes are fit to be chosen for loading and
unloading. Subsequently, two BOBSN rakes were supplied for loading
during 2013-14 (First rake) & 2016-17 (second rake) in SWR, which has
higher capacity for loading in 25T Axle route between RNJP-JSWT.

Observing the above facts, the Committee infer that BOXNHA
rakes with BOXNEL wagons should have been procured well in time
and supplied in order to ensure that losses were not incurred in the
first instance. The loss of opportunity to earn additional freight
amounted to loss of prospective revenue to the tune of Rs. 48.24
crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry need to
make an estimate of requisite number of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL
wagons with maximum carrying capacity to ensure that non-
availability of such rakes/wagons does not affect Railway’s
operational requirements in any manner. The Committee are also of
the view that their rolling stock allocation and utilization strategies
are rationalized in such a way that freight operations are optimized
and basic economic concept of ‘cost-benefit ratio’ is fulfilled. The
Committee are of the view that the argument, ‘No loss in totality’ put
forward by the Railway’s on the one hand and ‘Non- availability of
high capacity BOXNHA wagons with the SWR’, on the other, as put
forth by the Ministry in their written reply are not acceptable. The

10


Committee also desire to be apprised of the current status in this

regard.
3... Incurring excess expenditure due to haulage of 781 rakes in
excess :

The Committee note from audit observation that SWR Administration
incurred an extra expenditure amounting to = 5.22 crore towards
haulage of 781 rakes in excess and this would continue till Railway
Administration deploys BOXNHA rakes for operation on RNJP to
JSWT route. From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee find
that SWR was given BOBSNM wagons which have payload of 69T on
25T axle load and better turn round time because of loading time of
2.5 hours only against 8 hour of BOXNEL wagons. With Engine on
Load unloading facility in BOBSNM1, the Rolling Stock detention is
further reduced by saving time in bringing loco and the attachment,
pressure ready, BPC validation, etc. BOBSNM1 wagons were
introduced because the customer, JSW (T) has constructed and
installed the necessary infrastructure for unloading of BOBSNM1 on
the basis of better efficiency in operation. Hence, there was no
revenue loss to the Railways. The Committee are of the view that SWR
should take care that line capacity of notified route is optimally
utilized. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Railways
need to ensure that appropriate rakes with higher PCC are supplied
on the Tornagallu - Ranjitpura route to ensure that continued loss of
revenue due to excess haulage is checked forthwith. This would also
result in fulfilling the basic financial logic of ‘Money saved is money
_earned’. The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry need to
examine the possibility of adoption of ‘Enterprise Resource Planning’

11


software system to streamline collection of real time data on wagon
availability, wagon allocation, and tracking and management of cargo
trains. The software will empower the Railways in bringing about a
holistic improvement in resource management which will, in the long
run, provide enhanced service reliability, sustainable growth, and

increased profitability for Indian Railways.

अर अंक

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2024 हे Chairperson,
Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

12