30

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2016-17)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 47 Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

THIRTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEETNH LOK SABHA

wena जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2238

THIRTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND

CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2016-17)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 4" Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabhaon: ——sasessesseserseseee

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka)

(ii)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION ................. हज eee eee मनन

CHAPTER |

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER Ill

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

TC) 00) 5 aE EEE

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .... te
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ..............-.
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Peiteration .................. न ज  ह हनन

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
1088 .............-- जज ताल नह हर

APPENDICES:

Minutes of the 100 sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on
4" February, 2021

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fourth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

a)


9९ ३ 9 7? की ४

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS |
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta /
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

"Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav
Vacant
Vacant
SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja oe Deputy Secretary

iW)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirtieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Excesses
Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2016-17)" relating to various
Ministries/Departments.

2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on थी
February, 2020. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Thirtieth Report at their Sitting held on 4" February, 2021. Minutes of the
Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations. and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-Il.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 Chairperson,
Magha,1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

w)


REPORT
PART -।

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Fourth Report (17'" Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2016-17)".

2. The Fourth Report (17" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/iaid in Rajya
Sabha on 4" February, 2020, contained 9 Observations and Recommendations. The Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received
from the concerned Ministries/Departments and are broadly categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-9
Total: 9
Chapter - Il

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter -IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter -V


2

3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the concerned Ministries/Departments on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding Paragraphs, the
Committee deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their
Recommendations.
A. Excess expenditure incurred during the year 2016-17

(Recommendation Para No. 1)
4, The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for the
financial year 2016-17 revealed that a total excess expenditure of हैं 190,247.84 crore was
incurred in 12 cases under seven Grants/Appropriations. Upon noticing that this amount of
excess expenditure incurred revealed a steep increase during the last ten years, the
Committee felt that incurring of such a huge amount of excess expenditure over and above
the budgetary provisions sanctioned by the Parliament is contrary to the principle of ensuring
proper and judicious utilisation of public funds besides undermining the Parliamentary
financial control. While observing that the unabated large excess expenditure is self-
manifestation of inherent deficiencies to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring
of the expenditure flow, the Committee impressed upon the Ministries/Departments
concerned to embark upon all possible prudent and effective measures so as to contain
excess expenditure to the barest minimum and honour the prescribed financial propriety.
5. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs - Budget Division), in their
Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM), which conducted a study to
analyse the issue of excess expenditure over the Budget, and to propose an informed
system of budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on analysis of Indian
experience and global best practices, has submitted its report.

NIFM has made numerous recommendations such as Centralised Monitoring System,
reduction in number of Supplementary Demands for Grants, increase the
accountability of the Chief Accounting Authorities, re-definition of unit of appropriation
to higher level, align the powers for re-appropriation of funds, revise the definition of
New Service/New Instrument of Service, categorisation of charged expenditure as
standing appropriations, multi-year budget allocations, simple chart of accounts, etc.
NIFM also brought out findings from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i) Australia
(ii) Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United Kingdom.

These recommendations of NIFM are being studied in this Ministry.

Department of Expenditure was requested to issue instructions to all
Ministries/Departments to avoid excess expenditure. Department of Expenditure has,
vide its O.M. dated 10.09.2020, requested Chief Accounting Authorities to take all


3

measures to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure so that excess is
avoided. Scrupulous scrutiny of the budget proposal, both at the time of preparation of
budget and supplementary with the objective of eliminating excess expenditure, under-
spending, wrongful re-appropriations have also been emphasized."
6. The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their recommendations
contained in their earlier Reports to avoid the excess expenditure, the National
Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) conducted a study to analyse the issue of
excess expenditure and submitted its Report, wherein NIFM had made several
recommendations to control excess expenditure which are being studied in the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs). While appreciating this, the
Committee would like to know as to when the Report of the NIFM was received and
what action has since been taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) to implement the recommendations made therein. The Committee expect that
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) would take all necessary
measures to implement the recommendations of NIFM within definite time-limit. The
Committee would also desire to be apprised of the findings reached by NIFM on the
basis of the Desk Study on excess expenditure in Australia, Canada, Republic of
Ireland, New Zealand and United Kingdom. They further find that the Department of
Expenditure has requested the Chief Accounting Authorities to take all measures to
ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure so that excess expenditure is
avoided. The Committee would also like the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) to monitor and ensure scrupulous adherence to the instructions issued
in this regard by the Chief Accounting Authorities in all the Ministries/Departments, so
as to avoid the incurrence of excess expenditure on a recurrent basis.

8. Incurring of excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants

(Recommendation Para No. 3)
7. In their Fourth Report (177 Lok Sabha) the Committee were concerned to note that
during the financial year 2016-17, excess expenditure was incurred even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations in all the eleven cases by the respective
Ministries/Departments to meet their additional requirements. As the trend of incurring excess
expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants continues despite the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee, year after year, the Committee were inclined to believe
that no sincere efforts have been made by the Ministries/Departments to adequately visualize


4

and prepare their Budget Estimates even at the Supplementary Grant stage. As a result in
most of the cases, Supplementary Grants were obtained without proper assessment with the
result that even the additional provision proved inadequate to meet the actual requirement of
funds by the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Committee, therefore, desired that
Ministries/Departments should keep close watch over the trend of expenditure and when any
need for additional funds arises they should realistically assess their requirement of funds in
advance and approach Parliament by presenting Supplementary Grants in time. The
Committee also recommended that the Ministries/Departments should evolve an effective
and robust mechanism in coordination and consultation with C&AG and CGA, through which
the progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to ensure that
the expenditure does not over shoot the limit authorized by Parliament. Budget controlling
officers concerned should also be cautioned against the trend of excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary Grants.

8. While explaining the reasons for incurring excess expenditure despite obtaining
Supplementary Grant during the year 2016-17, the Department of Posts, in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:

"The Department had sought Supplementary Grants in view of the trend of the
expenditure and demands preferred by the circles. It has already been mentioned that
the amount projected was not provided in full by the Ministry of Finance, which
contributed to the incurring of excess expenditure.

SUPPLEMENTARY |DEMAND PROJECTED BY|SUPPL. APPROVED BY
BATCH DEPARTMENT (@ in crores) MoF (8 in crores)
je 645.00 150.00 for IPPB only

an 902.53 NIL

It is pertinent to add here that unless the department is given sufficient funds by the
Ministry of Finance for operational expenses it becomes difficult to extend the
obligatory services and maintain the functional efficiency of India Posts. Out of total
excess expenditure around 90% expenditure pertained to salary and pension which
are mandatory in nature and cannot be curtailed. However, efforts have been made
through close monitoring to keep excess expenditure to the minimum. All Heads of
circles are also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within the budgetary
allocations and to ensure that no expenditure is incurred in absence of funds
allocation. Moreover, subordinate units of Departments of Posts are also being
instructed regularly to project realistic demands for funds."

9. The Committee observe that according to Department of Posts, the amount of
Supplementary Grants as projected by them, was not provided in full by the Ministry of


5

Finance, which largely contributed to the incurring of excess expenditure under the
Grant operated by them during the year 2016-17. The Committee regret to note from
the reply that Department of Posts has chosen not to take any specific measures for
streamlining/critically examine their existing procedures for seeking Supplementary
Grants while placing the onus on Ministry of Finance for not adequately providing
funds at Supplementary Grants stage. The Committee are of the considered view that
either the funds were sought by the Department of Posts without proper assessment
or the demands were not placed before the Ministry of Finance in time. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Posts should evolve an
effective coordination mechanism with Ministry of Finance and place their demands
well in advance with proper assessment, so as to get all the demands provisioned in
their Demands for Grants by Ministry of Finance in future and no excess expenditure
is incurred in the absence of fund allocation. They should also make thorough
scrutiny of the budget as well as supplementary proposals with the objective of
eliminating excess expenditure.

८. Persistent Excess Expenditure
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

10. In Para 4 of their original Report, the Committee observed that the various Civil
Ministries/Departments and the Ministry of Railways had been incurring large amount of
excess expenditure continuously. The Committee were surprised to note that the existing
budgeting mechanism in these Ministries/Departments still suffers from various loopholes
and lacunae even after constitution of High Level Committee. While noticing that the problem
of exceeding budgetary provisions can easily be traceable with the use of IT and e-
governance the Committee impressed upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to tighten
their financial administration so as to stop recurrence of excess expenditure under any
Grant/Appropriation of the Ministries.

11. | The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation
have submitted as follows:

"In this Para the Committee observed that the scrutiny of the Grants/Appropriations
registering persistent excess for the five years period i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has
revealed in the Revenue-Charged Section of Grant-Defence Pension, persistent
excess occurred.

In this regard, this Ministry is of the view that it is not possible to accurately forecast
court decrees and their impact in terms of charged expenditure during the year.


6

Whenever more court cases were anticipated, a Supplementary Grant has been
obtained for materialization of more court cases. However, despite obtaining
Supplementary Grant, excess occurred in the previous year due to finalization of more
court cases and the booking of this obligatory expenditure by certain Controllers
towards the fag end of the financial year leading to the said excess.

As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the budget
estimating authorities of all the Services, to prepare their budget exercising utmost
caution and accuracy while estimating and projecting the requirement of funds. While
intimating the ceilings of Budget Estimates as well as Revised Estimates, it is
reiterated time and again that expenditure should not exceed the allocation. Latest
such instruction was issued by MoD (Fin) vide 1.0 No, 1(11)/Bud.1/2019 dated
16.01.2020.

Further, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
(PAC) under Para 6 of 68" Report on Excess over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriation (2014-15) a High Level committee was constituted to identify the
loopholes in the budgeting procedure of the Ministry of Defence under the
Chairmanship of AS & FA. Seven meetings of the Committee have been convened till
date, where important decisions on reviewing the pace of expenditure progress and
monitoring the booking and compilation status, to avoid excess expenditure, have
been spelt out."

12. The Committee wish to highlight the fact that the instructions issued by Ministry
of Defence time and again to avoid the excess expenditure incurred under the Grants
operated by them have not produced tangible results. The Committee feel that mere
issuing of instructions would not provide desired results unless some stringent
measures are taken against the concerned officers for inaccuracies and errors in their
budgetary estimates leading to recurring excess expenditure under the Grants of
Ministry of Defence. Moreover, in the present age of technological advancement and
instant connectivity between all the services, there is no valid justification for
incurring excess expenditure year after year. Upon noticing that seven meetings of the
High Level Committee constituted by Ministry of Defence have been convened till
date, where important decisions to avoid excess expenditure have been spelt out, the
Committee recommend that sincere efforts should be made to implement the
decisions of the High Level Committee besides establishing sound and efficacious
budgetary mechanism to ward off incidents of excess expenditure under the Grants
operated by Ministry of Defence in future.

Jee #फअे के


रण --
CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation of the Estimates Committee of the Estimates Committee

The Committee’s examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for
the financial year 2016-17 has revealed that a total excess expenditure of =
\ q Q 24 शा crore was incurred in 12 cases under seven Grants/Appropriations. The
} ‘ defaulting Ministries are Ministry of Finance (Appropriation No.33- Repayment of
Debt), Ministry of Defence (Grant No.21- Defence Pensions and Grant No. 23-
Cabinet outlay on Defence Services), Ministry of Communications (Department of
Posts) (Grant No.13- Department of Posts) and Ministry of Railways-six cases
under three Grants/Appropriations. This amount of excess expenditure incurred
during the financial year under review has revealed a steep increase during the last
ten years. The Committee note that bulk of the excess expenditure was on the civil
side viz = 186954.42 crore under one Appropriation i.e. Appropriation No. 33-
Repayment of Debt. The Committee feel that incurring such huge amount of
excess expenditure over and above the budgetary provisions sanctioned by
Parliament at different stages of budget are contrary to the principle of ensuring
Proper and judicious utilization of Public funds besides undermining the
Parliamentary financial control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these
Ministries is self-manifestation of inherent deficiencies to ensure proper budgeting
and subsequent monitoring of the expenditure flow. The Committee have
repeatedly been emphasizing over the years for plugging the extant loopholes and
impediments with a view to restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum. To illustrate in their 367 Report (167 Lok sabha), the Committee
had desired that an Expert Group in each Ministry/Department representing all the
budget controlling authorities be constituted in order to find out the precise
reasons of failure in effectively checking the trend of excess expenditure and to
evolve a mechanism to oversee the monthly expenditure trend of various
Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
have informed that they are awaiting the report from National Institute of
Financial Management (NIFM) on the study being undertaken on the trend and
causes of excess expenditure based on which, the recommendation from High
Level Inter-Ministerial Group is also expected. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the salient features of the report on study being undertaken by the
NIFM, as and when completed. In the meantime, the Committee would like to
impress upon the Ministries/Departments concerned to embark upon all possible
prudent and effective measures so as to contain excess expenditure to the barest
minimum and honour the prescribed financial propriety.

(Paragraph 1 of 4" Report (2016-17) (777 Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee]


-e-

Action Taken by the Government:

1. The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

2. National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM), which conducted a study to
analyse the issue of excess expenditure over the Budget, and to propose an
informed system of budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on analysis
of Indian experience and global best practices, has submitted its report.

3. NIFM has made numerous recommendations such as Centralised Monitoring
System, reduction in number of Supplementary Demands for Grants, increase the
accountability of the Chief Accounting Authorities, re-definition of unit of
appropriation to higher level, align the powers for re-appropriation of funds, revise
the definition of New Service/New Instrument of Service, categorisation of charged
expenditure as standing appropriations, multi-year budget allocations, simple chart
of accounts, etc.

4. NIFM also brought out findings from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i)
Australia (ii) Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United
Kingdom.

5. These recommendations of NIFM are being studied in this Ministry.

6. Department of Expenditure was requested to issue instructions to all
Ministries/Departments to avoid excess expenditure. Department of Expenditure
has, vide its O.M. dated 10.9.2020 (copy enclosed), requested Chief Accounting
Authorities to take all measures to ensure proper planning and monitoring of
expenditure so that excess is avoided. Scrupulous scrutiny of the budget proposal,
both at the time of preparation of budget and supplementary with the objective of
eliminating excess expenditure, under-spending, wrongful re-appropriations have
also been emphasized.

7. This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. dated .2020.

Lok Sabha Secretariat
Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

F.No. 6(1)-B(AC)/2020 dated 17.9.2020


“१८

Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
( Budget Division )

Recommendation/Observation of the Estimates Committee

The Committee are seriously concerned to find that during the financial year
2016-17, excess expenditure had been incurred even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations in all the eleven cases by the respective
Ministries/Departments to meet their additional requirements. The percentage of
excess expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these 11 cases
ranged from 2.46 percent (in Appropriation No. 7- Working Expenses-Repair and
Maintenance of Plant and Equipment) to 1045470.01 percent (in Capital Voted
section of Grant No. 23- Capital outlay on Defence Services). To illustrate the
sector—wise details, Supplementary Grants to the tune of % 1088731.00 crore was
allocated for the two excess registering Grants/Appropriations operated by the
Civil Ministries/Departments but this fell short by % 189154.26 crore. In case of
Postal Services Supplementary Grants of = 150.41 crore was obtained which fell
short by % 936.48 core. Further, in case of Defence Services Supplementary Grants
of % 2.47 crore was obtained in two cases of one Grant operated by Ministry of
Defence, still an excess expenditure of हैं 146.31 crore was incurred. In respect of
Railways, even though Supplementary Grants of = 195.95 crore was obtained in
five cases, an excess expenditure of = 10.71 crore was incurred. As the trend of
incurring excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants still
continues despite the recommendations of the PAC, year after year, the
Committee are inclined to believe that no sincere efforts have been made by the
Ministries/Departments to adequately visualize and prepare their Budget
Estimates even at the Supplementary Grants stage. As a result in most of the
cases, Supplementary Grants were obtained without proper assessment with the
result that even the additional provision proved inadequate to meet the actual
requirement of funds by the Ministries/Departments concerned. It is, therefore,
imperative that Ministries/Department should keep close watch over the trend of
expenditure and when any need for additional funds arises they should
realistically assess their requirement of funds in advance and approach Parliament
by presenting Supplementary Grants in time. The Committee also recommend
that the Ministries/Departments should evolve an effective and robust
mechanism in coordination and consultation with C&AG and CGA, through which
the progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to
ensure that the expenditure does not overshoot the limit authorized by
Parliament. Budget controlling officers concerned should also be cautioned
against the trend of excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants.

The Committee find from their scrutiny of select cases of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations under Capital-charged section of Appropriation No.-33 -
Repayment of Debt, the Ministry of Finance had incurred an expenditure of =
567,8,82.32 crore, over and above the total sanctioned provision of % 54,91,868.78
crore which included Supplementary Appropriation of % 10,85,437.70 crove.
Excess expenditure under this appropriation was the net result of total savings of
हु 5,10,303.11 crore and total excess of 8 6,97,257.52 crore under various sub-


“16 —

heads of this appropriation. The Committee are perturbed to note that but for the
savings under various sub-heads, the overall excess expenditure under this
appropriation would have been much larger. The contributory reasons as stated
by the Ministry for this excess expenditure are higher payments on account of
large volume of buybacks, switching and claims of outstanding amounts of
matured Government securities by the investors which remained not claimed in
the previous years and due to higher volume of amount withdrawn by the State
Governments in the last days of the financial year to meet their financial
obligations. The Ministry have further submitted that efforts are being made to
keep the variations to the minimum, but it is difficult to precisely estimate these
repayment requirements as the same are influenced by the market conditions,
lodgement of the claims by the investors, State Governments in the case of
investment in 14 days Treasury bills and schedule of payments set by the
International Financial Institutions. The Committee though take into consideration
the difficulties expressed by the Ministry, they are, however, of the view that
excess expenditure of such large magnitude in spite of a huge ameunt of
Supplementary Appropriation is tantamount to bad budgeting. The Committee
consider it absolutely necessary that supplementary provisions should be
obtained with more precision and the Ministry of Finance, being the nodal
Ministry, should set an example for the other Ministries/Departments to follow to
contain huge excesses.

(Paragraph 3 and 6 of 47 Report (2016-17) (17 Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts
Committee]

Action Taken by the Government :

1. The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

2. It may be submitted that of the total excess expenditure of % 1,90,247.84 crore
occurred in 2016-17, an amount of हैं 1,87,007.25 crore is on account of charged
expenditure. Of % 1,87,007.25 crore, % 1,86,954.42 crore was from Appropriation
No.33 — Repayment of Debt, mainly due to higher volume of amount withdrawn by
the State Governments in the penultimate days of the financial year to meet its cash
requirement. The excess expenditure of % 1,86,954.42 crore in Appropriation No.33
~ Repayment of Debt occurred despite obtaining a Supplementary appropriation for
%10,85,437.69 crore in the year 2016-17. Excess expenditure of = 6,97,088.43 crore
was on account of repayment of 14-Days Treasury Bills. This was partially off-set by
savings occurred in other heads, which resulted into a net excess expenditure of %
1,86,954.42 crore in the Appropriation No.33-Repayment of Debt. The instrument
'14-Days Treasury Bills' is for keeping the surplus amount of State Governments with
Union Government. As the tenor of the instrument is too short, the pattern of
investment in the instrument and withdrawal therefrom on maturity by the State
Governments is highly unpredictable. In certain cases, the amounts deposited by
State Governments in the last month of any fiscal are also withdrawn before
maturity. Despite obtaining a supplementary appropriation for the instrument '14-
Days Treasury Bills' for % 5,63,742 crore, excess expenditure occurred in this
Appropriation, The balance excess expenditure of % 52.83 crore under charged
category was mainly due to payments arising out of Court orders.

(Contd..2/-)


धो न
न
3. With the corrective action taken by this Ministry, the excess expenditure

occurring in centralised Appropriation - Repayment of Debt has been declining aver
the years, as is evident from the following Table:

(crore )
[Year _—i| Excess Expenditure in Appropriation -Repayment of Debt |
| 2016-17 | i
| 2017-18 | 8
2018-19 ees
| 20920 | 0.00

4. The excess expenditure of % 3,240.58 crore under voted section is mainly due to
payment of pension (% 2,199.56 crore) to Defence retirees due to increased rate of
relief in Pensions and Gratuity arising out of implementation of the recommendation
of 7" Central Pay Commission, salary/personal entitlements/operational expenses of
Department of Posts (% 936.48 crore) and payments arising out of contractual
obligations, supplies, construction, purchase of land and other capital expenditure of
Defence Services (2104.54 crore).

5. In compliance with the observations of the Committee, Department of
Expenditure has, vide its O.M. dated 10.9.2020 (copy enclosed), issued necessary
instructions to the Chief Accounting Authorities to regulate and monitor the progress
of expenditure.

6. This Ministry has been keeping strict vigil on the Progress of expenditure of the
Government throughout _ the year and = after — mid-year review,
Ministries/Departments are advised to seek approval of Parliament through
Supplementary Demands for Grants wherever additional funds have been provided
over and above budgeted estimates.

7. This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. dated 2020.

Lok Sabha Secretariat
Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

F.No. 6(1)-B(AC)/2020 dated 17.9.2020


=j2-
Ministry of Finance

Department of Economic Affairs
( Budget Division )

Recommendation/Observation of the Estimates Committee

The Committee’s examination of excess expenditure over the past few years has
revealed that the various Civil Ministries/Departments and the Ministry of Railways
have been incurring large amount of excess expenditure continuously. However,
while there is considerable decline in excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of
Railways during the year 2016-17, excess expenditure incurred by the Civil
Ministries/Departments indicates steep rise during the year under review. Further, in
case of Defence Services and Postal Services, excess expenditure which was nil during
the year 2015-16 has been more than rupees hundred crore during the fiscal 2016-17.
Further, scrutiny of the Grants/Appropriations registering persistent excess for the
five years period i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has revealed that in Revenue-Charged
Section of Grant-Defence Pensions, persistent excess occurred. In response to the
Committee’s recommendations contained in their 88" Report (16" Lok Sabha), the
Ministry of Finance apprised that a high level Committee with AS & FA(Acquisition) as
Chairperson and representatives from Army, Navy, Air Force and representatives
from Department of Economic Affairs and CGA has been setup to identify the
loopholes in the budgetary process. It is surprising that the existing budgeting
mechanism in these Ministries/Departments still suffers from various loopholes and
lacunae even after the constitution of High Level Committee. As the problem of
exceeding budgetary provisions can easily be traceable with the use of IT and e-
governance and the Committee impress upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments
to_tighten their financial administration so _as to stop recurrence _of excess
expenditure under any Grant/Appropriation of the Ministries.

[Paragraph 4 of 4" Report (2016-17) [777 Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee]

Action Taken by the Government :

The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

2, It may be pertinent to submit that Ministry of Railways, while reducing the incidence
of excess expenditure over the years, did not incur any excess expenditure in the year
2017-18. This was largely due to merger of 16 Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Railways into one single Demand for Grants for Ministry of Railways on merger of
Railway Budget with Union Budget from Budget for 2017-2018.

3. As regards excess expenditure occurred in the Demands for Grants of Civil and
Defence Ministries, the excess expenditure in 2016-17 was largely due to Defence
Pensions (% 2,199.84 crore), Capital Outlay on Defence Services (%146.31 crore) and
centralised Appropriation - Repayment of Debt (%1,86,954.42 crore).

(Contd..2/-)


ना 1B

4. It may further be submitted that while expenditure of Ministries/Departments are, at
Present, monitored by the respective Chief Accounting Authorities, Ministry of Finance
also regulates expenditure of Ministries/Departments through stipulation of Monthly
Expenditure Plan (MEP) under Cash Management Guidelines.

5. In addition, this Ministry has also issued instructions to Ministries that the provisions
under Rule 209(6)(iii) of GFR shall strictly be complied so that the releases to the various
implementing agencies (IAs) have to be regulated/rationalised keeping in view the bank
balance of the recipients before making every fresh release. Specific instructions were
also issued for use of PFMS portal for all types of payments, including ‘just in time
releases’ to the extent possible.

6. This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. dated .2020.

Lok Sabha Secretariat
Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

F.No, 6(1)-B(AC)/2020 dated17.9.2020


“IY
Ministry of Finance

Department of Economic Affairs
( Budget Division )

Recommendation/Observation of the Estimates Committee

The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation in an earlier Report the
Ministry of Finance have constituted a high level Inter-Ministerial Group under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 20.06.2018 to review the excess expenditure and to
recommend measures and mechanism of eliminating occurrence of such excess
expenditure. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry of Finance to
overcome the problem of excess expenditure, the Committee expect that the high-level
Inter Ministerial Group will hasten up their review and submit their report within a
defined time-limit by recommending prudent measures to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure in future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the study being conducted in this regard by National Institute of Financial Management
and the approximate time for completion of the study. The Committee would also like the
Ministry of Defence to monitor and ensure scrupulous adherence to the instructions issued
to the Vice Chiefs of the Services so as to contain the expenditure within the approved
ceilings. Instructions in this regard issued to all field formations may be furnished to the
Committee.

{Paragraph 8 of 6” Report (2016-17) (177 Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee]

Action Taken by the Government:

1. The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

2. National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM), which conducted a study to analyse
the issue of excess expenditure over the Budget, and to propose an informed system of
budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on analysis of Indian experience and
global best practices, has submitted its report.

3. NIFM has made numerous recommendations such as Centralised Monitoring System,
reduction in number of Supplementary Demands for Grants, increase the accountability of the
Chief Accounting Authorities, re-definition of unit of appropriation to higher level, align the
powers for re-appropriation of funds, revise the definition of New Service/New Instrument of
Service, categorisation of charged expenditure as standing appropriations, multi-year budget
allocations, simple chart of accounts, etc.

4. NIFM also brought out findings from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i) Australia (ii)
Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United Kingdom.

5. These recommendations of NIFM are being studied in this Ministry.

6. This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. dated 2020.

Lok Sabha Secretariat

Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
F.No. 6(1)-B(AC)/2020 dated 17.9.2020


“IY
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs

( Budget Division )

Recommendation/Observation of the Estimates Committee

The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation in an earlier Report the
Ministry of Finance have constituted a high level Inter-Ministerial Group under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 20.06.2018 to review the excess expenditure and to
recommend measures and mechanism of eliminating occurrence of such excess
expenditure. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry of Finance 0
overcome the problem of excess expenditure, the Committee expect that the high-level
Inter Ministerial Group will hasten up their review and submit their report within a
defined time-limit by recommending prudent measures to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure in future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the study being conducted in this regard by National Institute of Financial Management
and the approximate time for completion of the study. The Committee would also like the
Ministry of Defence to monitor and ensure scrupulous adherence to the instructions issued
to the Vice Chiefs of the Services so as to contain the expenditure within the approved
ceilings. Instructions in this regard issued to all field formations may be furnished to the
Committee.

(Paragraph 8 of 6" Report (2016-17) (17 Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee]

Action Taken by the Government:

1. The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

2. National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM), which conducted a study to analyse
the issue of excess expenditure over the Budget, and to propose an informed system of
budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on analysis of Indian experience and
global best practices, has submitted its report.

3. NIFM has made numerous recommendations such as Centralised Monitoring System,
reduction in number of Supplementary Demands for Grants, increase the accountability of the
Chief Accounting Authorities, re-definition of unit of appropriation to higher level, align the
powers for re-appropriation of funds, revise the definition of New Service/New Instrument of
Service, categorisation of charged expenditure as standing appropriations, multi-year budget
allocations, simple chart of accounts, etc.

4. NIFM also brought out findings from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i) Australia (ii)
Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United Kingdom.

5. These recommendations of NIFM are being studied in this Ministry.

6. This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. — dated .2020.

Lok Sabha Secretariat

Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
F.No. 6(1)-B(AC)/2020 dated 17.9.2020


TERIMOST INIMEDIATE,

Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)

Recommendation

Subject to the Observations/Recommendations made in the preceding
paragraphs, the Committee recommend that the expenditure referred to in paragraph

43 of Part -1 of this Report be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1)
(b) of the Constitution of India.

{Paragraph 2 & 9
of Fourth Report of PAC
(Seventeeth Lok Sabha)}


lh गा Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)

Action Taken Note(On Paragraph 9)

As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for
Excess Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government relating to 2016-2017 was
submitted to Parliament in the Monsoon Session, 2020. The Parliament has passed
the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularizing the
money drawn in excess of the amounts authorized by the Parliament for the year
2016-2017, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the
Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part Il, Section 4 dated 280 September, 2020 as
Act No.27 of 2020, after obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess

amount drawn in 2016-2017 stands regularized. Action taken in this regard is,
therefore, completed.

This Note has been vetted by Audit, vide their (0.0. No. Para selection & MIP/
2020-21/357 dated 23.11.2020.

ie Kumar Mishra)
Additional Secretary (Budget)

Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-1
MOF, DEA (Budget Division) ID No.7 (1)-B (SD)/2020 dated MOE, DEA (Budget Division) ID No.7 (1)-B (SD)/2020 dated 2 December, 2020



>|० 10181 गत

ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ON
सा OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS 2016-17

(FINAL)

L. The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways
for the financial year 2016-17 has revealed that a total excess expenditure of
2190270.18 crore was incurred in 12 cases under seven Grants/Appropriations.
‘The defaulting Ministries are Ministry of Finance (Appropriation No. 33 —
Repayment of Debt), Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21 — Defence Pensions and
Grant No. 23 — Cabinet outlay on Defence Services), Ministry of
Communications (Department of Posts) (Grant No. 13 — Department of Posts)
and Ministry of Railways- six cases under three Grants/Appropriations. This
amount of excess expenditure incurred during the financial year under review
has revealed a steep increase during the last ten years. The Committee note that
bulk of the excess expenditure was on the civil side viz 7 186954.42 crore under
one Appropriation ic. Appropriation No. 33 — Repayment of Debt. The
Committee feel that incurring such huge amount of excess expenditure over and
above the budgetary provisions sanctioned by Parliament at different stages of
budget are contrary to the principle of ensuring proper and judicious
utilization of Public funds besides undermining the Parliamentary financial
control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these Ministries is self
manifestation of inherent deficiencies to ensure proper budgeting and
subsequent monitoring of the expenditure flow. The Committee have repeatedly
been emphasizing over the years for plugging the extant loopholes and
impediments with a view to restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum. To illustrate in their 36th Report (16th Lok Sabha), the
Committee had desired that an Expert Group in each Ministry/Department
representing all the budget controlling authorities be constituted in order to find
out the precise reasons of failure in effectively checking the trend of excess
expenditure and to evolve a mechanism to oversee the monthly expenditure
trend of various Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) have informed that they are awaiting the report from
National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) on the study being
undertaken on the trend and causes of excess expenditure based on which, the
ommendation from High Level Inter-Ministerial Group is also expected. The
Vemmittee would like to be apprised of the salient features of the report on
study being undertaken by the NIPM, as and when completed. In the meantime,
the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministries/Departments
concerned to embark upon all possible prudent and effective measures so as to
contain excess expenditure to the barest minimum and honour the prescribed
financial propriety.

(Sl. No.1; Appendix If; Para 1 of the 4" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
17th Lok Sabha)


->18-
Action Taken

The original Grant of €23122.00 crore under Revenue Section (Voted) was
augmented to %23272.41 crore by obtaining supplementary grant of 2150.41 crore.
Against this, the actual expenditure of the Department was % 2420889 Crore which
resulted in excess expenditure by % 936.48 Crore during the financial year 2016-17. The
excess expenditure is 4.02% of the total Grant and and is accepted. As per
recommendation of the PAC, the department has constituted an “Expert Group" to find out
the precise reasons of failure in effectively checking the trend of excess expenditure and to
evolve a mechanism to oversee the monthly expenditure under the Chairmanship of Sr.
DDG(PAF). Minutes of first meeting of the expert group were conveyed to PAC vide this
department letter No, 25-1/2017-18/BGT/ Dated: 20.12.2017 and another report
including issues discussed during the Second meeting of Expert Group which was
conducted on 19.06.2018 was submitted to Hon'ble Chairman PAC vide this department
letter of even No. dated 19.11.2018. The ‘Expert Group’ emphasized that monitoring at
apex level through video conference with heads of circles to review expenditure regularly
has proved to be an effective expenditure management tool and it is helping the
department in controlling the expenditure and keeping it within budgetary allotment. It
has been directed to the circle offices to project realistic demand at BE/RE/FG stage in
consultation with their IFAs, in view of MEP/QEP of the circle and saving noticed may be
surrendered immediately without waiting for the year end. The department has also
undertaken the monthly exercise of head wise expenditure monitoring for all the circles for
financial year 2019-20 onwards.

This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
udit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

/180 dated 22.09, 2020. \w
रस

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020- 21 dated
08.10.2020).


alq~

2 A comparative scrutiny of the Union Government Appropriation Accounts
(Railways) for the year 2016-17 and the Explanatory Notes furnished by the Ministry of
Railways indicating the detailed reasons for excess expenditure incurred by them over
Voted Grants/charged Appropriations has revealed that there was a miscla: ation of
expenditure of % (+) 7,99,433 under Appropriation No,-16- Assets, Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement - capital and Railway Funds. ‘Taking into account the
effect of this misclassification, the actual excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of
Railways during the year 2016-17 works out to® 33,21,47,541 instead of
& 33,13,48,108 as indicated in Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts (2016-
17). Thus, the total amount of actual excess expenditure incurred during the financial
year 2016-17, which requires regularization by Parliament under Article 115 (1) (b) of
the Constitution is of the order of F 1902,70,26,06,087 incurred in eleven cases of seven
registering Grants/Appropriations.

excess

(SL. No.2; Appendix Hf; Para 1 of the 4*" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
17" Lok Sabha)

Action Taken
It does not relate to Department of Posts.

This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020. \wp

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020-21 dated
08.10.2020).



-2e-

3 The Committee are seriously concerned to find that during the financial year
2016-17, excess expenditure had been incurred even after obtaining Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations in all the eleven cases by the respective Ministries/Departments
to meet their additional requirements. The percentage of excess expenditure over the
Supplementary Grants in respect of these 11 cases ranged from 2.46 percent (in
ppropriation No. 7 -Working Expen: -Repair and Maintenance of Plant and
quipment) to 1045470.01 percent (in Capital Voted section of Grant No. 23 - Capital
outlay on Defence Services). ‘To illustrate the sector-wise details, Supplementary Grants:
the tune of [1088731.00 crore was allocated for the two excess registering
ants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/Departments but this fell short
by 2189154.26 crore, In case of Postal Services Supplementary Grants of = 150.41 crore
was obtained which fell shor 936.48 crore. Further, in case of Defence Services
Supplementary Grants of ¥ 72.47 crore was obtained in two cases of one Grant operated
finistry of Defence, still an excess expenditure of & 146.31 crore was incurred. In
espect of Railways, even though Supplementary Grants of = 195.95 crore was obtained
in five cases, an excess expenditure of € 10.71 crore was incurred. As the trend of
incurring ss expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants still continues
despite the recommendations of the PAC, year after year, the Committee are inclined to
believe that ao sincere efforts have been made by the Ministries/Departments to
adequately visualize and prepare their Budget Estimates even at the Supplementary
Grants stage. As a result in most of the cases, Supplementary Grants were obtained
without proper assessment with the result that even the additional provision proved
inadequate to .meet the actual requirement of funds by the Ministries/Departments
dit is, therefore, imperative that Ministries/Departments should keep close
er i nd of expenditure and when any need for additional funds arises they
ould ceaiisticilly assess their requirement of funds in advance and approach
presenting Supplementary Grants in’ time. The mmmittee also
recommends that the Ministries/Departments should evolve an effective and robust
mechanism in coordination and consultation with C&AG and CGA, through which the
progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to ensure
hat the expenditure does not overshoot the fimit authorized by Parliament. Budget
conrolling officers concerned should also be cautioned against’ the trend of
vacess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants,

concert
cot

Sarhament |

(St. No.3; Appendix व; Para 1 of the 4"" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
17" Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

The Department had sought supplementary grants in view of the trend of the expenditure
and demands preferred by the circles. It has already been mentioned that the amount
projected was not provided in full by the Ministry of Finance, which contributed to the
incurring of excess expenditure.

PROJECTED BYSUPPL. APPROVED BY MoF
TMENT (Zin crores) (Zin crores,

oT Oh 00 for PPB only
NIL.



-2—

Ie ix pertinent to add here that unless the department is given sufficient funds by the
Ministry of Finance for operational expenses it becomes difficult to extend the obligatory
services and maintain the functional efficiency of India Posts. Out of total excess
expenditure around 90% expenditure pertained to salary and pension which are
mandatory in nature and cannot be curtailed. However, efforts have been made through
close monitoring to keep excess expenditure to the minimum. All Heads of circles are also
advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within the budgetary allocations and
te ensure that no expenditure is incurred in absence of fund allocation. Moreover,
subordinate units of Department of Posts are also being instructed regularly to project
realistic demands for funds.

This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020. Ww
Ne

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secreta
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020-21 dated
08.10.2020).


>99 5:

expenditure over the past few years has revealed that

4. The Committee’s examination of excess
the various Civil nistries/Departments and the Ministry of Railways have — been

incurring large amount of excess xpenditure continuously. However, while there
is considerable decline in excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during the
year 2016-17, excess expenditure incurred by the Civil Ministries/Departments indicates steep
ise during the year under review. Further, in case of Defence Services and Postal Services,
-uss expenditure which was nil during the year 2015-16 has been more than rupees hundred
pre during the fiscal 2016-17. Furthe! y of the Grants/Appropriations registering
persistent excess for the five years period ic. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has revealed that in
Revenue-Charged Section of Grant- Defence Pensions, persistent excess occurred. In response to
the Committee’s recommendations contained in their 88th Report (16th Lok Sabha), the
Ministry of Finance apprised that a high level Committee with AS & FA (Acquisition)
Chairperson and representatives from Army, Navy, Air Force and representatives from
Department of Economic Affairs and CGA has been setup to identity the loopholes in the
budgetary process. It is surprising that the existing budgeting mechanism वी thes
Ministries/Departments still suffers from various loopholes and lacunae even after the
constitution of the High Level Committee, As the problem of exceeding budgetary provision
can easily be traceable with the use of 11 and e-governance and the Committee impress upon
che defaulting Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial administration so as to stop
recurrence of excess expenditure under any Grant/Appropriation of the Minis!

(Sl. No.4; Appendix व; Para 1 of the 4% Report of the Public Accounts Committee 170 Lok
abha)

Action Taken

It isa fact that department has incurred NH, excess expenditure during the year 2015-16,
But itis again to point out that out of total excess expenditure around 00% expenditure pertained
te salary and pension which are mandatory in nature. Remaining expenditure was incurred for
operating the functional units of the Department. As it has already aves stated, he increase in
expenditure under salaries was due to revision of Pay & allowances consequent upon
implementation of 7th Central Pay commission recommendations, Increase in pension was due to
revision of pension on account of implementation of 7th CPC recommendations. The excess
venditure during the year 2016-17 was cus mamly because of tinplementation of 7th CPC
s. Moreover, tie concerned divisions have been instructed to look into the
information in respect of new recruits and likely retirements during the current financial year
which is an esyenal requirement for realistic projection of fund for salary and pension and to
avoid exces: penditure. It is also to bring to your kind natice that the department has not
incurred excess expenditure in the year 2017-18.

This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr
Birector Audit, (Finance & Conimiunication) vide Uieir letter No. Para Selection & MIP/2020-
21/180 dated 22.09.2026

recommendation

gnature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts.

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.
09.10.2020)

dated



2
5. The Committee note with concern that huge quantum of excess
expenditure to the tune of § 2199.56 crore under revenue-voted section of Grant No.
21-Defence Pensions and = 104.55 crore under capital-voted section of Grant No. 23-
Capital Outlay on Defence services has been incurred. In respect of Grant No. 21, the
contributory reasons, according to the Ministry of Defence, were booking of pending
pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount under suspense on the
instruction of Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) O.M: dated
05.09.2017 and due to implementation of 7th Central Pay Commission orders in case
of Defence Civilians. As regards Grant No. 23, the main contributory reasons adduced
were payment of Customs and Excise duties; Committed Liabilities; payment in respect
of Cabinet Committee of Secretaries approved contracts for Rockets for Smerch;
payment of excise duty by Director General of Ordnance Factories as well as advance
payment in respect of emergency procurement; committed Habiliti payment for
rolling stock; additional requirement sought for carry over works; China Study Group
(CSG) Roads; Infra Development in Eastern Sector and Married Accommodation Project;
land acquisition from Government of W Bengal at Diamond Harbor (Mouza
Dakshinpur); enhancement of requirement in respect of specialist and general purpose
vehicles; higher outgo due to payment of Customs duty on imported equipment;
substantial increase in expenditure under Annual Maintenanee Work Plan ete. The
Committee do not consider these as compelling reasons for incurring excess
expenditure as many of these could have been anticipated well in advance and
factored into at the time of finalisation of Grants and obtaining Supplementary Grants
three times. Surprisingly, as a remedial measure, the Ministry have merely re-circulated
their old instructions for containing excess expenditure. The Committee feel that apart
from routine re-circulation of old instructions which have proved ineffective in
plugging the loopholes and rectifying the deficiencies, itis imperative on the part of
the Ministry of Defence to devise concrete and innovative wi and means in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline their budgeting
mechanism so that excess expenditure is avoided altogether.

(SI. No.
17" Lok 5;

Appendix I; Para 1 of the 4" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
abha)

Action Taken

1६ does not relate to Department of Posts.
This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020, Nuts

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

of Communic
08.10.2020).

tions. (Department of Posts} OM No.25-2/2020-2) dated



2६ --

6. The Committee find from their scrutiny of select cases of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations under Capital-charged section of Appropriation No. 33-
Repayment of Debt, the Ministry of Finance had incurred an expenditure 0R567,8,82.32
crore, over and above the total sanctioned provision of 5491868.78 crore — which

included Supplementary Appropriation of %1085,137.70 crore. Excess
expenditure under this appropriation was the net result of total savings of
% 510303.11 crore and total excess of ¥ 697257.52 crore under various sub-heads of
this appropriation, The Committee ave perturbed to note that but for the savings under
various sub-heads, the overall excess expenditure under this appropriation would have
been much larger. The contributory reasons as stated by the Ministry for this excess
expenditure are higher payments on account of large volume of buybacks, switching
and claims of outstanding amounts of matured Government securities by the investors
timed in the previous years and due to volume of amount
withdrawn by the Stare Governments in the last days of the financial year to meet their
linancial obligations. The Ministry have further submitted that efforts are being made to
keep the variations to the minimum, but it is difficult to precisely estimate these
repayment requirements as the same are influenced by the market conditions,
lodgment of the claims by the investors, State Governments in the case of investment in
14 day ‘Treasury bills and schedule of payments set by the International Financial
Institutions. The Committee though take into consideration the difficulties expressed by
the Ministry, they are, however, of the view that excess expenditure of such large
magnitude inspite of a huge amount of Supplementary Appropriation is tantamount to
bad budgeting. The Committee consider it absolutely necessary that supplementary
provisions should be obtained with more precision and the Ministry of Finance, being
the nodal Ministry, should set an example for the other Ministries/Departments to
follow to contain hug:

which remained not (

४ EXCESSES.

(SL No.6; Appendix 1; Para 1 of the 4" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
17" Lok Sabha)

Action | en
16 dees not relate to Department of Post
This Action Taken Report has been approved hy Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &
MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020.

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020-21
08.10.2020).


“ae -

7. During the financial year under review, the Department of Posts incurred an
x xpenditure of 2936.18 crore under Revenue-Voted section of Grant No. 13-
Postal Services. This excess expenditure was despite obtaining Supplementary Grants
to the tune of 150.41 crore. Scrutiny of the Explanatory Note furnished by the
Department indicates that the excess expenditure was mainly due to increase in the
expenditure under salaries and pension on account of revision of pay and allowances
consequent upon implementation of 7th Pay Commis ss under ‘Travelling
Expense (TE) was due to carrying out of more inspection work, monitoring project roll
out and hike in ‘Travelling Allowance (TA) rates, ete. The Committee were earlier
informed that a detailed review of expenditure was undertaken at the Head Quarter
level based on which exhaustive instructions were issued. ‘The Committee are, however,
skeptical of the efficacy of the instructions issued by the Department in checking ९१०९:
expenditure as would be corroborated from the above facts. The Committee, therefore.
urge the Department to overhaul their prevailing expenditure review mechanism and
evolve a system to enfor ufficient checks and balances against any wanton sanction
and excess expenditure under this Grant.

(Sl. No.6; Appendix II; Para 1 of the 4" Report of the Public Accounts Committee
177 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken
Department of Posts is pleased (0 inform the committee that department has implemented
its IT project Core System integrator (CSI) from 2017. Further data sharing through server
to server integration with PFMS has started from 1 October 2019. Steps have been taken
to make available the revenue and expenditure data on real time basis to monitor excess
expenidicure. ‘orts have been made to bring in stringent and effective monitoring
mechanisms to ensure that in future nu such excess expenditure takes place. Deparunent
wd like to emphasize that the video conferencing done with heads of circles to review
expenditure regularly has proved to be an effective expenditure manayement tool and itis
helping the department in controlling the expenditure and keeping the same with in
budgetary allotment. As such the department of Posts has managed to register NIL excess
expenditure during 2017-18.

This Action Taken Report has been approved i peary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020. पु
a

rature of Additional Secretary /foint Seer
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

(Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020-21 dated
08.10.2020).


-2b—

8B. The Committee are displeased to note that despite their repeated caution, the
Ministry of Railways have not been able to eliminate misclassification of expenditure in
their accounts. During the last 10 financial years, the Committee have come across 48
cases of misclassification of expenditure, This unabated trend of persistent
misclassification of expenditure seems to have acquired endemic proportion in the
Ministry of Railways. The Committee while taking a serious view of such recurring
phenemenon of misclassification recommend that the officers responsible for such
malady should be given adequate opportunities to enhance their budgeting skills f
which responsibility be fixed for such repeated lapses.

‘ailing

Action Taken

It does not relate to Department of Posts.

Th tion Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their leccer No. Para Seivction &

MIP/2020-2 1/180 dated 22.09.2020. \wy
|

Signature of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Pasts

‘Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.
08.10.2020).

dated



~~
9. Subject to the observations/recommendations made in the preceding
graphs, the Committee recommend that the expenditure referred to in para 14 of
1 of this Report be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115 (1)
(b) of the Constitution of India.

Action Taken
16 does not relate to Department of Posts,
This Action Taken Report has been approved by Secretary (Posts) and vetted by Pr.
Director Audit, (Finance & Communication) vide their letter No. Para Selection &

MIP/2020-21/180 dated 22.09.2020 YW
Y

Signature of Additional Sccretary/Juint Secretary
Ministry of Communications
Department of Posts

'ए of Communications, (Department of Posts) OM No.25-2/2020- 21 dated
08.10.2020).


ACTION TAKEN IN RESPECT OF GRANT NO. 21- DEFECE
PENSIONS ON THE FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK
SABHA) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON
“EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2016-17)’.

Name of the Ministry Ministry of Defence

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee’s examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and
Railways for the financial year 2016-17 has revealed that a total excess
expenditure of = 190270.18 crore was incurred in 12 cases under seven
Grants/Appropriations. The defaulting Ministries are Ministry of Finance
(Appropriation No. 33-Repayment of Debt), Ministry of Defence(Grant No. 21-
Defence Pensions and Grant: No. 23-Capital outlay on Defence Services),
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) (Grant No. 13-
Department of Posts) and Ministry of Railways-six cases under three
Grants/Appropriations. This amount of excess expenditure incurred during
the financial year under review has revealed a steep increase during the last
ten years. The Committee note that bulk of the excess expenditure was on
the civil side viz = 186954.42 crore under one Appropriation i.e. Appropriation
no. 33- Repayment of Debt. The Committee feel that incurring such huge
amount of excess expenditure over and above the budgetary provisions
sanctioned by parliament at different stages of budget are contrary to the
principle of ensuring proper and judicious utilization of Public funds besides
undermining the Parliamentary financial control. The unabated large excess
expenditure by these Ministries is self-manifestation of inherent deficiencies
to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of the expenditure
flow. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing over the years for
plugging the extant loopholes and impediments with a view to restricting the

1


“24 -
quantum of excess expenditure to the barest minimum. To illustrate in their
36" Report (160 Lok Sabha), the Committee had desired that an Expert
Group in each Ministry/Department representing all the budget controlling
authorities be constituted in order to find out the precise reasons of failure in
effectively checking the trend of excess expenditure and to evolve a
mechanism to oversee the monthly expenditure trend to various
Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) have informed that they are awaiting the report from National Institute
of Financial Management (NIFM) on the study being undertaken on the trend
and causes of excess expenditure based on which, the recommendation from
High Level Inter Ministerial Group is also expected. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the salient features of the report on study being undertaken
by the NIFM, as and when completed. In the meantime, the Committee would
like to impress upon the Ministries/Departments concerned to embark upon
all possible prudent and ‘effective measures so as to contain excess
expenditure to the barest minimum and honour the prescribed financial
propriety.

[Para No. 1 of 47 Report of PAC 2016-17 (17 Lok Sabha) ]

ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY

In this Para the Committee observed that out of total excess

expenditure of हैं 190270.18 crore incurred in 12 cases under seven

Grans/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of हैं 2199.84 crore only was
incurred under Grant No.-21, Defence Pensions during the year 2016-17.
न In the Financial Year 2016-17 the actual Position under Grant No.-21-
Defence Pensions is as under : (हें ॥ Crs.)
7 Approved Ceiling Fixed | Actual Excess/

BE 2016-17 | RE 2016-17 Expenditure | Savings
2071-02 | 82332.66 85625.96 87825.80 2199.84



-Zo~
° The Excess expenditure under the Grant occurred was mainly due to
increased rate of relief of Pensions/Growth in Pensions and implementations
of various Govt Orders/7" CPC orders for revision of pensions and booking
of pending pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount under
suspense. The booking of expenditure over RE 2016-17 has been made on
the advice/direction of Ministry of Finance.
° Moreover, the expenditure for which cash flow had already taken place
in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending
pension scrolls had to be booked under the Defence Pensions Head to clear
the amount lying under RBI/PSB Suspense to reflect the true picture of cash
flow from the Govt account.
° Further, the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a
committed expenditure and cannot be stopped for want of Budget.
° As a measure of control, time and again, the Govt. of India in the
Ministry of Defence have been advising all the budget estimating authorities
of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis
taking into consideration all the related aspects such as commitments, trend
of expenditure and the anticipated expenditure.
° In addition to above the following measures have been adopted to
improve the preparation of budget estimates for Defence pensions:
(a) Computerized Database of Pensioners
Computerization of pensioners data in respect of old defence pensioners has
been completed, implementing “Project Sangam”, which aimed at issue of
Corrigendum PPOs in respect of pre-2006 defence pensioners.. This
database of pensioners is available for improved budget estimation and

accounting.


- 31-

[9) Pension Accounting System
E-pension accounting tem using electronic scrolls has been successfully
implemented by PCDA(P) Allahabad w.e.f. November 2013. consequent
upon the merger of five associate banks of 581 namely State Bank oF
Hyderabad, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, State Bank of Travancore.
State Bank of Patiala and State Bank of Mysore in State Bank of India, at
p nt, 24 banks are in existence. All 24 banks are submitting e-scrolls in

ne

ed format. Percentage of the e-scrolls from the banks is almost 99

o

against the RBI advise. This will ensure a robust and efficient pension
accounting system.

‘ In pursuance of the recommendation of the Public Account
Committee(PAC) under Para 6 of the 68" Report on Excess over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriation (2014-15) a High Level Committee was
constituted to identify the loopholes in the budgeting procedure of the Ministry
of Defence under the Chairmanship of AS & FA vide MoD(Fin) ID No.
6(3)/Bud-I/2015 dt. 14/08/2017( copy enclosed).

e Seven meetings of this Commit
important decisions on reviewing the progressive pace of expenditure and
monitoring the booking and compilation status, to avoia excess expenditure,

have been spelt out.

« Any directions/guidelin d by Ministry of Finance in future te
improve the budgetary sys in Defence Pensions will also be followed
sirictly.

पा
(8.1५. Das)
Addi. FA& JS


—=32-

ACTION TAKEN IN RESPECT OF GRANT NO. 21- DEFECE
PENSIONS ON THE FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK
SABHA) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON
"EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2016-17)”.

Name of the Ministry Ministry of Defence

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee's examination of excess expenditure over the past few
years has revealed that the various Civil Ministries/Departments and the
Ministry of Railways have been incurring large amount of excess expenditure
continuously. However, while there is considerable decline in excess
expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during the year 2016-17,
excess expenditure incurred .by the Civil Ministries/Departments indicates
steep rise during the year under review. Further, in case of Defence Services
and Postal Services, excess expenditure which was nil during the year 2015-
16 has been more than rupees hundred crore during the fiscal 2016-17.
Further, scrutiny of the Grants/Appropriations registering persistent excess
or the five years period i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has revealed in the
Revenue —Charged Section of Grant-Defence Pensions, persistent excess
occurred. In response to the Committee’s recommendations contained in
heir 88" Report(16" Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Finance apprised that a high
evel Committee with AS&FA (Acquisition) as Chairperson and
representatives from Army, Navy, Air Force and representatives from
Department of Economic Affairs and CGA has been setup to identify the
loopholes in the budgetary process. Itis surprising that the existing budgeting

mechanism in these Ministries / Departments still suffers from various

loopholes and lacunae even after the constitution of the High Level
Committee. As the problem of exceeding budgetary provision can easily be

5


“ 33-—

traceable with the use of IT and e-governance and the Committee impress
upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial
administration so as to stop recurrence of excess expenditure under any
Grant/Appropriation of the Ministries.

[Para No. 4 of 4" Report of PAC 2016-17 (17" Lok Sabha) ]

ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY

In this Para the Committee observed that the scrutiny of the
Grants/Appropriations registering persistent excess for the five years period
i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has revealed in the Revenue —Charged Section
of Grant-Defence Pensions, persistent excess occurred.

In this regard, this Ministry is of the view that it is not possible to

accurately forecast court decrees and their impact in terms of charged
expenditure during the year. Whenever more court cases were anticipated, a
Supplementary Grant has been obtained for materialization of more court
cases. However, despite obtaining Supplementary Grant, excess occurred in
the previous years due to finalization of more court cases and the booking of
this obligatory expenditure by certain Controllers towards the fag end of the
financial year leading to the said excess.
° As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising
the budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget
exercising utmost caution and accuracy while estimating and projecting the
requirement of funds. The latest instructions in this regard has been issued
vide MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Fin/Bud-Il/2018-19 dt.1/10/2019.


-3y-

Pubiic Account

01

* Further. in pursuarice of the recommendation of th
Committee(PAC) under Para 6 of the 68° Report on Excess over Voted

Grants and Charged Appropriation (2014-15) a High Level Commitiee was
constituted to identify the loopholes in the budgeting procedure of the Minisiry
of Defence under the Chairmanship of AS & FA. Seven meetings of this
Committee have been convened till date. where important decisions on
reviewing the progressive pace of expenditure and monitoring the booking

and compilation status. to avoid excess expenditure. have been spelt out.

—TAN Das)
Addl. FA& JS


-35—

ACTION TAKEN IN RESPECT OF GRANT NO. 21- DEFECE
PENSIONS ON THE FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK
SABHA) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON
"EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2016-17)”.

Name of the Ministry Ministry of Defence

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee note with concern that huge quantum of excess expenditure
to the tune of % 2199.56 crore under revenue-Voted section of the Grant No.
21- Defence Pensions and 2104.55 crore under capital —-voted section of
Grant No. 23- Capital Outlay on Defence Services has been incurred. In
respect of Grant No.-21, the contributory reasons, according to the Ministry
of Defence, were booking of pending pension scrolls received from banks to
clear amount under suspense on the instruction of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) O.M. dt. 05.09.2017 and due to
implementation of 7" Central Pay Commission orders in case of Defence
Civilians. As regards Grant No. 23, the main contributory reasons adduced
were payment of Customs and Excise duties; Committed Liabilities: payment
in respect of Cabinet Committee of Secretaries approved contract for Rockets
for SMERCH; payment of excise duty by Director General of Ordinance
Factories as well as advance payment in respect of emergency procurement;
committed liabilities; payment for rolling stock; additional requirement sought
for carry over works; China Study Group (CSG) Roads; Infra Development in
Eastern Sector and Married Accommodation Project; land acquisition from
Government of West Bengal at Diamond Harbor (Mouza Dakshinpur);
enhancement of requirement in respect of specialist and general purpose
vehicles; higher outgo due to payment of Customs duty on imported
equipment; substantial increase in expenditure under Annual Maintenance
Work Plan etc. The Committee do not considers these as compelling reasons

8


_ 3७-
for incurring excess expenditure as many of these could have been
anticipated well in advance and factored into at the time of finalization of
Grants and obtaining Supplementary Grants three times. Surprisingly, as a
remedial measure, the Ministry have merely re-circulated their old instructions
for containing excess expenditure. The Committee feel that apart from routine
circulation old instructions which have proved ineffective in plugging the
loopholes and rectifying the deficiencies, it is imperative on the part of the

Ministry of Defence to devise concrete and innovative ways and means in

consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline their

budgeting mechanism so that excess expenditure is avoided altogether.

[Para No. 5 of 4" Report of PAC 2016-17 (177 Lok Sabha) ]

ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY
The actual Position under under Revenue —Voted Section of Grant
No.-21- Defence Pensions for the Financial Year 2016-17 is as under :

= in thousands

Revenue Total Approved Actual Saving(-)
Section Amount Expenditure Excess (+)
Voted O- 82331,66,00 87824,15,77 | +2199,55,77
S - 3292.94.00
85624,60,00
° The Excess expenditure under the Grant occurred was mainly due to

increased rate of relief of Pensions/Growth in Pensions and implementations
of various Govt Orders/7" CPC orders for revision of pensions and booking
of pending pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount under
suspense. The booking of expenditure over RE 2016-17 has been made on
the advice/direction of Ministry of Finance.

° Moreover, the expenditure for which cash flow had already taken place

in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending


“31 -

pension scrolls had to be booked under the Defence Pensions Head to clear
the amount lying under RBI/PSB Suspense to reflect the true picture of cash
flow from the Govt account.
° Further, the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a
committed expenditure and can not be stopped for want of Budget.
. As a measure of control, time and again, the Govt. of India in the
Ministry of Defence have been advising all the budget estimating authorities
of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis
taking into consideration all the related aspects such as commitments, trend
of expenditure and the anticipated expenditure.
° In addition to above the following measures have been adopted to
improve the preparation of budget estimates for Defence pensions:
(a) Computerized Database of Pensioners
Computerization of pensioners data in respect of old defence pensioners has
been completed, implementing “Project Sangam”, which aimed at issue of
Corrigendum PPOs in respect of pre-2006 defence pensioners. This
database of pensioners is available for improved budget estimation and
accounting.

(b) Pension Accounting System
E-pension accounting system using electronic scrolls has been successfully
implemented by PCDA(P) Allahabad w.e.f. November 2013. consequent
upon the merger of five associate banks of SBI namely State Bank of
Hyderabad, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, State Bank of Travancore,
State Bank of Patiala and State Bank of Mysore in State Bank of India, at
present, 24 banks are in existence. All 24 banks are submitting e-scrolls in
the desired format. Percentage of the e-scrolls from the banks is almost 99%
against the RBI advise. This will ensure a robust and efficient pension

accounting system.

10


~3g-
« in pursuance of the recommendation of the Public Account
Committee(PAC) under Para 6 of the 68" Report on Excess over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriation (2014-15) a High Level Committee was
constituted to identify the loopholes in the budgeting procedure of the Ministry
of Defence under the Chairmanship of AS & FA vide MoD(Fin) ID No.
6(3)/Bud-1/2015 dt. 14/08/2017( copy enclosed).

. Seven meetings of this Committee have been convened till date, where

important decisions on reviewing the progressive pace of expenditure and
monitoring the booking and compilation status, to avoid excess expenditure,
have been spelt out.

. Any directions/guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance in future to

improve the budgetary system in Defence Pensions will also be followed

strictly.

ता
| छू ३ 098)

Addl. FA& JS

I
F

il


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4
3 q ~

Ministry of Railways
Recommendation No. 1

The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts
of the Union Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal
Services and Railways for the financial year 2016-17 has revealed that a
total excess expenditure of Rs. 190270.18 crore was incurred in 12
cases under seven Grants/Appropriations. The defaulting Ministries are
Ministry of Finance {Appropriation No. 33 - Repayment of Debt),
Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21 -Defence Pensions and Grant No.
23 - Cabinet outlay on Defence Services), Ministry of Communications
(Department of Posts} (Grant No. 13 - Department of Posts) and Ministry
of Railways- six cases under three Grants/Appropriations. This amount
of excess expenditure incurred during the financial year under review

has revealed a steep increase during the last ten years. The
Committee note that bulk of the excess expenditure was on the civil
side viz Rs. 186954.42 crore under one Appropriation i.e.

Appropriation No. 33 - Repayment of Debt. The Committee feel that
incurring such huge amount of excess expenditure over and above the
budgetary provisions sanctioned by Parliament at different stages of
budget are contrary to the principle of ensuring proper and judicious
utilization of Public funds besides undermining the Parliamentary
financial control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these
Ministries is self manifestation of inherent deficiencies to ensure
proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of the expenditure flow.
The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing over the years for
plugging the extant loopholes and impediments with a view to
restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the barest minimum.
To illustrate in their 367 Report (16 Lok Sabha), the Committee had
desired that an Expert Group in each Ministry/ Department
representing all the budget controlling authorities be constituted in
order to find out the precise reasons of failure in effectively checking
the trend of excess expenditure and to evolve a mechanism to oversee
the monthly expenditure trend of various Ministries/Departments. The
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have informed
that they are awaiting the report from National Institute of Financial
Management (NIFM) on the study being undertaken on the trend and
causes of excess expenditure based on which, the recommendation from
High Level Inter-Ministerial Group is also expected. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the salient features of the report on study
being undertaken by the NIFM, as and when completed. In the
meantime, the Committee would like to impress upon the
Ministries/Departments concerned to embark upon all possible prudent
and effective measures so as to contain excess expenditure to the
barest minimum and honour the prescribed financial propriety.
Recommendation No. 1 of 47 Report of
Public Accounts Committee


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4
-Yor

[377 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken Note

The above recommendation takes into account the excess expenditure
incurred by various Central Ministries as a whole including Railways. It is
to be mentioned here that the excess expenditure has been incurred under
five cases in three Appropriations i.e. appropriations no. 4, 7 & 16 instead of
six cases mentioned in the para. [t may also be mentioned that the incidence
of excess expenditure on Railways at Rs.10.79 cr has registered noticeable
decline in 2016-17. The observation of the Committee nonetheless is noted.

Audit vide their U.O. No. 113-RA-111/2-1/18 dated 07.07.2020
vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-

“No further comments.” Digitally signed by BASAN
KUMAR SINGH
Date:Tue Jul 28 13:11:45 1ST
“2020 : हि
Reason: Approved

(8. K. Singh)
Exe. Director Finance (E)

(Ministry of Railway’s Case No. 2020-BC-PAC/XVII/4 dated 29 .07.2020)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

पी.

Ministry of Railways
Recommendation No. 2

A comparative scrutiny of the Union Government Appropriation
Accounts (Railways) for the year 2016-17 and the Explanatory Notes
furnished by the Ministry of Railways indicating the detailed reasons
for excess expenditure incurred by them over Voted Grants/
charged Appropriations has revealed that there was a misclassification
of expenditure of Rs. (+) 7,99,433 under Appropriation No. -16- Assets,
Acquisition, Construction and Replacement - capital and Railway
Funds. Taking into account the effect of this misclassification,
the actual excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways
during the year 2016-17 works out to Rs. 33,21,47,541 instead of
Rs. 33,13,48,108 as indicated in Indian Railways Appropriation
Accounts’ (2016-17). Thus, the total amount of actual’ excess
expenditure incurred during the financial year 2016-17, which requires
regularization by Parliament under Article 115 (1) (b) of the
Constitution is of the order of Rs. 1902,70,26,06,087 incurred in eleven
cases of seven excess registering Grants/Appropriations.

Recommendation No. 2 of व Report of
Public Accounts Committee

(17*® Lok Sabha)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

~U2-

Action Taken Note

Regularization of excess expenditure is considered after taking into
account the Gross Excess and Misclassification, if any. Accordingly, the total
amount of excess required to be regularized is Rs. 107917697/- only under
Charged Appropriations as proposed in the Explanatory Note submitted by
the Ministry of Railways. The excess of Rs. 224229844/- under Voted Grant
pointed out by the committee turned into ‘Saving’ of Rs. 572563156/- after
taking into account the misclassification and will, therefore, not require
regularization. The detailed position of excess to be regularized is as under:

Charged Appropriation: {Amt. in
Rs.)
5. Grant No. Gross Excess Excess|Misclassification| Excess to be
No. regularized
1 4 777229 |_ 0 | 777229
2 7 52739 |_ 0 | 52739
3 16- Cap. 80475428 237798 80713226
4 16-Rly. 4399326 561635 4960961
Fund
5 16-RSF 21413542 | 0 | 21413542
Total 107118264 799433 107917697
Voted Grant:
[ S.No. | No. | Grant No. | Gross Excess | Misclassification Saving
1 16- RSF 224229844 | (-) 796793000 572563156

Audit vide their U.O. No. 113-RA-111/2-1/18 dated 07.07.2020
vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-

हि अर Digitally signed by BASANT
No further comments. KUMAR SINGH

Date:Tue Jul 28 13:08:32 IST
2020
Reason: Approved

(8. K. Singh)
Exe. Director Finance (E)

(Ministry of Railway’s Case No. 2020-BC-PAC/XVII/4 dated 24 .07.2020)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

-UZ—

Ministry of Railways
Recommendation No. 3

The Committee are seriously concerned to find that

during the financial year 2016-17, excess expenditure had been
incurred even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/ Appropriations in
all the eleven cases by the respective Ministries/Departments to meet
their additional requirements. The percentage of excess expenditure
over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these 11 cases ranged
from 2.46 percent {in Appropriation No. 7 - Working Expenses - Repair
and Maintenance of Plant and Equipment) to 1045470.01 percent
{in Capital Voted section of Grant No. 23 - Capital outlay on Defence
Services). To illustrate the sector-wise details, Supplementary
Grants to the tune of Rs.1088731.00 crore was allocated for the two
excess registering Grants/Appropriations operated by ‘the Civil
Ministries/Departments but this fell short by Rs. 189154.26 crore.
In case of Postal Services Supplementary Grants of Rs.150.41 crore was
obtained which fell short by Rs.936.48 crore. Further, in case
of Defence Services Supplementary Grants of Rs.2.47 crore was
obtained in two cases of one Grant operated by Ministry of Defence,
still an excess expenditure of Rs. 146.31 crore was incurred. In respect
of Railways, even though Supplementary Grants of Rs. 195.95
crore was obtained in five cases, an excess expenditure of Rs.10.71
crore was incurred. As the trend of incurring excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary Grants still continues despite the
recommendations of the PAC, year after year, the Committee are
inclined to believe that no sincere efforts have been made by the
Ministries/Departments to adequately visualize and prepare their
Budget Estimates even at the Supplementary Grants stage. As a result
in most of the cases, Supplementary Grants were obtained without
proper assessment with the result that even the additional provision
proved inadequate to meet the actual requirement of funds by the
Ministries/Departments concerned. It is, therefore, imperative that
Ministries/Departments should keep close watch over the trend
of expenditure and when any need for additional funds arises they
should realistically assess their requirement of funds in advance and
approach Parliament by presenting Supplementary Grants in time. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministries/Departments should
evolve an effective and robust mechanism in coordination and
consultation with C&AG and CGA, through which the progress
of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to
ensure that the expenditure does not overshoot the limit authorized by
Parliament. Budget controlling officers concerned should also
be cautioned against the trend of excess expenditure despite obtaining
Supplementary Grants.


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4
Wy -

Recommendation No. 3 of 47. Report of
Public Accounts Committee

(17 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken Note

The instances and amount of excess expenditure on Railways both in
term of number of instances and total amount involved have registered
noticeable decline in 2016-17. However, the concern of the committee is
noted for further reducing the same in future.

Audit vide their U.O. No. 113-RA-111/2-1/18 dated 07.07.2020
vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-

“No further comments.” Digitally signed by BASAN™
KUMAR SINGH |
Date:Tue Jul 28 12:39:49 IST
2020
Reason: Approved

(B. K. Singh)
Exe. Director Finance (E)

(Ministry of Railway’s Case No. 2020-BC-PAC/XVII/4 dated 24 -07.2020)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

Ministry of Railways
Recommendation No. 4

The Committee’s examination of excess expenditure over the past
few years has revealed that the various Civil Ministries/Departments
and the Ministry of Railways have been incurring large amount of
excess expenditure continuously. However, while there is considerable
decline in excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways
during the year 2016-17, excess expenditure incurred by the Civil
Ministries/ Departments indicates steep rise during the year under
review. Further, in case of Defence Services and Postal Services, excess
expenditure which was nil during the year 2015-16 has been more than
rupees hundred crore during the fiscal 2016-17. Further, scrutiny of the
Grants/Appropriations registering persistent excess for the five years
period i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has revealed that in Revenue-
Charged Section of Grant-Defence Pensions, persistent excess occurred.

_In response to the Committee’s recommendations contained in their
887 Report (167 Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Finance apprised
that a high level Committee with AS& FA (Acquisition) as Chairperson
and representatives from Army, Navy, Air Force and
representatives from Department of Economic Affairs and CGA has been
setup to identify the loopholes in the budgetary process. It is
surprising that the existing budgeting mechanism in these
Ministries/Departments still suffers from various loopholes and lacunae
even after the constitution of the High Level Committee. As the
problem of exceeding budgetary provision can easily be traceable with
the use of IT and e-governance and the Committee impress upon the
defaulting Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial
administration so as to stop recurrence of excess expenditure under
any Grant/Appropriation of the Ministries.

Recommendation No. 4 of 4t Report of
Public Accounts Committee

(17% Lok Sabha)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

-—Yb—-

Action Taken Note

The observation of the committee is noted for being more careful in
future. Railway is making all efforts to control expenditure within the
sanctioned grant. The Committee has appreciated that there is considerable
decline in excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during
the year 2016-17.

Audit vide their U.O. No, 113-RA-111/2-1/18 dated 07.07.2020
vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-
Digitally signed by BASAN1
KUMAR SINGH
Date:Tue Jul 28 12:35:58 IST
2020
Reason: Approved

“No further comments.”

(B. K. Singh)
Exe. Director Finance (E)

(Ministry of Railway’s Case No. 2020-BC-PAC/XVII/4 dated 2.4 .07.2020)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

-५१--

Ministry of Railways

Recommendation No. 8

The Committee are displeased to note that despite their repeated
caution, the Ministry of Railways have not been able to eliminate
misclassification of expenditure in their accounts. During the last 10
financial years, the Committee have come across 48 cases of
misclassification of expenditure. This unabated trend of persistent
misclassification of expenditure seems to have acquired endemic
proportion in the Ministry of Railways. The Committee while taking a
serious view of such recurring phenomenon of misclassification
recommend that the officers responsible for such malady should be
‘given adequate opportunities to enhance their budgeting skills failing
which responsibility be fixed for such repeated lapses.

Recommendation No. 8 of 47 Report of
Public Accounts Committee

(177 Lok Sabha)


File No.2020-BC-PAC-XVII-4

~UG =

Action Taken:

Railways are monitoring the position on misclassification of
expenditure, as a part of internal control mechanism. Railway Board issue
suitable directives from time to time to strengthen the internal check
mechanism to avoid instances of misclassification. As a result, Railways
have achieved significant improvement in controlling misclassifications as
would be evident from the following: -

(Rs. in crore)

Year | No. of Items Amount Total Exp. ~% of Total Exp. -
2016-17 128 367.75 324255.88 0.113
2017-18 22 61.20 381567.61 0.016
2018-19 11 6.18 428203.44 0.0014

Audit vide their U.O. No. 113-RA-111/2-1/18 dated 07.07.2020
vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-

“No further comments.”

(8. K. Singh)
Exe. Director Finance (E)

(Ministry of Railway’s Case No. 2020-BC-PAC/XVII/4 dated 2.4 .07.2020)

Digitally signed by BASANT
KUMAR SINGH
Date:Wed Jul 22 14:54:25 IST

2020

Reason: Approved


“7 ५१-

CHAPTER वा

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT

-Nil-


एप

90177

CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-Nil-


-S[~-

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-Nil-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 . Chairperson,

Magha,1942 (Saka) है Public Accounts Committee


—52- Confidential

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-
21) HELD ON 4™ FEBRUARY, 2021.

The Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) sat on Thursday, the 4" February, 2021

from 1430 hrs to 1440 hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

oN OAS wD

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
Members
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shree Sudheer Gupta
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav


“3 ८

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G.Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2... Shri S.R.Mishra - Director
Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - Additional Director

QFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

1. Shri Deepak Anurag - Director General
2. Shri K.S. Subramaniam - Director General
3. ४5. Kavita Prasad - Director General
4... Shri 5. V. Singh - Principal Director
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the

Office of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions
of the Members on the following Draft Reports:-

i ferecs preers porees
ii. hike peeers he

iii, Pevers peers Peeers

iv. poeees peers pores

v. ees peeres pores

Vi. preres peeers whe

vii. Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the

observations/Recommendations contained in 4" Report (17" Lok Sabha) on
the subject “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2016-
17)’.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports
without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light
of factual verification done by the Audit.

The Committee then adjourned.

Jeg I


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

=5yu—

APPENDIX-I
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1 to 09

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. -Nil

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. -Nil

09

Total : 09
Percentage: 100%

Total : 0

Percentage: 0

Total : 0
Percentage: 0

Total : 0
Percentage: 0