58

‘FINANCIAL LOSS DUE TO NON-RECEIPT OF
COMPLETION-CUM-OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE’,
"LOSS DUE TO FAILURE TO LEVY
DEPARTMENTAL CHARGES' AND ‘UNDUE
BENEFIT TO CONTRACTOR”

{Action Taken. by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 257 Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2287

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

‘FINANCIAL LOSS DUE TO NON-RECEIPT OF
COMPLETION-CUM-OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE’,

‘LOSS DUE TO FAILURE TO LEVY DEPARTMENTAL
CHARGES’ AND 'UNDUE BENEFIT TO CONTRACTOR”

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 25"" Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 14:42. 202-2

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Public Accounts Committee contained in their

Twenty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2022-23)

INTRODUCTION (iv)
CHAPTER | Report... 2
CHAPTER Il | Observations/Recommendations which have been IF

laccepted by the Government ................--५--०-०--
CHAPTER Ill | Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the | 26
replies received from the Government..............06
CHAPTER IV | Observations/Recommendations in respect of
Which replies of the Government have not been| *7
accepted by the Committee and which require
eiteration .............---००००००००००००००००००-००००५-»«०--«--००-००«०-
CHAPTER V | Observations/Recommendations in respect of 2B
hich the Government have furnished interim
replies ...
APPENDICES
| *Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Public
[Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on 57 |
December, 2022
s Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
lon the Observations/Recommendations of the 24

*Not attached



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

4. — Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9... Shri Brijendra Singh

10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh

20. Vacant’

21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director
3. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

* Shri ५. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha

on 21 June, 2022.
cu)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Financial Loss due to non-receipt of completion-cum-occupancy certificate’, loss
due to failure to levy departmental charges' and ‘Undue benefit to contractor’
relating to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.

2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaj/laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 9" February, 2022. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 27 June, 2022. The
Committee considered and adopted the Fifty-eighth Report at their Sitting held on 05
December, 2022. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are given at Appendix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

07 December, 2022 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


2

CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Financial
Loss due to non-receipt of Completion-cum-Occupancy Certificate’, ‘Loss due to
failure to levy departmental charges' and 'Undue benefit to contractor’ relating to
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.
2. The Twenty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the
Parliament on 09.02.2021. It contained six Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly

categorised as follows:-

(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government
Para Nos. 1-6.
Total: 06
Chapter Il
(ii) | Observation/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter Ill
(iii) | Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter IV


3

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter V

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
that non-receipt of Completion-cum-Occupancy certificate for staff quarters of
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) at Dwarka, New Delhi, resulted in
expenditure of Rs. 2.81 crore incurred on their construction being rendered idle.
It was also found that additional expenditure of Rs. 0.88 crore on maintenance
and watch and ward of the quarters and payment of HRA and non-receipt of
Licence Fee amounting to Rs. 1.53 crore was incurred. It was also observed that
CPWD failed to levy departmental charges on construction works for the
Currency Note Press and India Security Press, Nasik resulting in short collection
of revenue of Rs.0.59 crore because of confusion over the status of these
Presses. It was further observed that CPWD extended undue benefit of Rs. 0.56
crore to the contractor in violation of contract conditions.

4. The Committee had recommended various measures to be undertaken by
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs such as strengthening the monitoring
mechanism of projects to ensure that any instance of delay/ deviation is
escalated automatically for the attention of senior officers for time bound
resolution; implementation of the ERP system within a fixed timeframe; to be
apprised of the impact of the WBPMS in terms of number of projects that have
been completed on time as well as the number of projects that were delayed or
are running behind schedule since the implementation of the web based
monitoring system; clear guidelines alongwith SOPs to be issued to all the
agencies concerned regarding such ancillary works so that the agencies are well
aware of their responsibilities and also the procedure to be followed for getting
the work done. The Committee had also recommended that all legacy data (old


4

records) be digitized within a prescribed timeframe to enable easier access to the
same; officials concerned may be given regular training to make them aware/
keep them updated about the extant rules and regulations The Committee had
desired that suitable provisions be incorporated in contracts to make bidders pay
for estimates which deviate substantially so that they are doubly cautious while
submitting estimates of items of works. The Committee had desired to be
apprised of such cases of contracts wherein deviation was found and also the
extent or magnitude of such cases in the last three years. The Committee had
sought to know whether Ministry/CPWD had carried out any assessment of the
contract agreements of CPWD to ensure that such clauses, wherein confusion
arises in cost of items of work, are made foolproof, before including them in

future agreements.

5. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will now
deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which merit

comments.

6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs to
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations
contained in Chapter | within six months of the presentation of the Report

to the House.

Recommendation at Para No. 1

7. The Committee had noted that CPWD constructed 57 quarters for the
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) and made a payment of Rs.2.81 crore
for the same to the contractor. The Committee were disconcerted to note that,
the work, scheduled for completion in January 2005, could only be completed in


5

October 2009, and the completion-cum-occupancy certificate was received from
DDA in August 2018, after an extraordinary delay of almost 9 years. The
Committee had found that the CPWD in its action taken notes had stated that it
had to only assist the IMD in obtaining the completion certificate by providing the
necessary documents to IMD as desired or called for by the DDA. However, on
the contrary, the Secretary, in his deposition stated before the Committee that if
CPWD has completed a house, then after completion, it becomes its
responsibility to secure the Occupancy and Compliance Certificate within a
reasonable time. According to the Secretary, the DDA and the IMD were also
responsible as the allottees had already started taking occupation and were
residing in the houses but the Occupancy and Completion Certificate was not
issued. What the Committee had found all the more shocking is the fact that the
delay of 9 years was not taken seriously at any level and it was only after being
taken up by the Committee that the Ministry swung into action and the
Occupation-cum-completion certificate was finally issued on 3.8.18 i.e. within
three days of the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on the subject.
Further, a day before the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry was
to be taken i.e. on 11.3.2020, the CPWD issued an advisory to its offices for
ensuring that the completion-cum-occupancy certificate was obtained before the
handing over of a building to the client. The Committee had also noted from the
written submission of the Ministry that progress of projects was monitored at field
and head quarter levels by a hierarchy of officials by using a variety of
management tools including the Web Based Project Monitoring System
(WBPMS). The Committee had further observed from the reply of the Ministry
that CPWD was implementing Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) which would
lead to monitoring of projects and rectification measures on real time basis. The
Secretary, Housing and Urban Affairs during the oral evidence, submitted that
the occupancy and completion certificates are being issued online and within a
definite timeframe. The Committee were disappointed to note that despite such
monitoring system in place, the delay was not caught and the Ministry took action

only when it was taken up by the Committee. The Committee had, therefore,


6

recommended that the monitoring mechanism be strengthened to ensure that
any instance of delay/ deviation is escalated automatically for the attention of
senior officers for ensuring time bound resolution. The Committee while
emphasizing that implementation of the ERP system be done only after a
thorough process review and standardizing the processes across all areas of
operations had desired that the system may be implemented within a fixed
timeframe and the Committee be apprised thereof. The Committee desired to be
apprised of the impact of the WBPMS in terms of number of projects that have
been completed on time as well as the number of projects that were delayed or
are running behind schedule since the implementation of the web based
monitoring system. The Committee had also desired to be apprised whether any
action had been taken against those responsible in DDA and IMD for delayed
issue of occupation and completion certificate and allotments made without
obtaining the requisite certificate.

8. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Notes

have submitted as under:

“The ERP application being implemented in CPWD aims to bring all
manual processes online and integrate the same for dashboard Monitoring
and Control. The ERP system is being implemented after thorough study
and review of the existing processes and business processes re-
engineering, wherever required. The ERP application is likely to be fully
implemented by June 2022. WBPMS helps in monitoring the progress and
to take remedial measures wherever delay is taking place. Since the
inception of WBPMS, 2786 number of works have been completed in time
due to improved monitoring in last 10 years. IMD has no role in obtaining
OC. For delay in DDA, show-cause notice was issued to Director
(Building), DDA. After examining the matter, a warning letter was issued. ”

9. Audit in their vetting comments have stated the following:-

“The reply of the Ministry is silent on the strengthening of monitoring
mechanisms. Be that as it may, the reply of the Ministry shows complete
reliance for monitoring purposes on ERP application, which is yet to be


10.

7

implemented and hence not reasonable. Further, progress of
implementation of ERP application may be intimated to PAC.

During vetting, it was verified from the report on completed works
generated from WBPMS that 2786 works had been completed in time.
However, it was also noticed that 12378 works, being 81.6% of total works,
were not completed in time. Thus, only 18.4% works were completed in
time. Details of the delayed works, completed as of 31.03.2021, out of
12378 distinctly showing delays in completion from the initial scheduled
date of completion and reasons for works still not completed along with
details of the initial scheduled date of completion, should be intimated of
PAC.

Outcome of enquiry and disciplinary proceedings against Sh. S.K. Tripathi,
EE(C) and Sh. 5.8. Shukla, EE (E) may also be apprised to PAC.”

The Ministry have submitted the following in response to Audit

observations:-

11.

“Strengthening of monitoring mechanism have been made by amendments
introducing in the Web Based Project Monitoring System for monitoring of
completion certificate of projects. Development of ERP application is under
progress. Several modules of ERP applications e.g. Leave Management
module, e-tendering and e-auction module, model PE/DE module and
Leave management module have been completed. Other modules are in
various stages of progress. Details of the works are maintained in
WBPMS, data of delayed works are provided as soft copy. Broad reasons
for delays of projects are Covid-19, inadequate funds, local body approval,
site clearances, land issues, contractors’ failure and approval from clients
and natural factors etc.

The disciplinary proceedings instituted against Sh. Tripathi, EE(C) have
been finalised after following due process vide order dated 22.10.2020. In
the case of Shri Shashi Bhushan Shukla, EE(C), penalty has been
imposed upon him vide order dated 05.04.2022.”

Noting a delay of 9 years in issue of completion-cum-occupancy

certificate after construction of quarters for the Indian Meteorological

Department, the Committee had desired that the monitoring mechanism be

strengthened in CPWD to ensure that any instance of delay/ deviation is

escalated automatically for the attention of senior officers for ensuring time


8

bound resolution. Emphasizing that implementation of the ERP system be
done after a thorough process review and standardization of processes
across all areas of operations, the Committee had desired that the system
may be implemented within a fixed timeframe and the Committee be
apprised thereof. The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the
impact of the Web Based Project Monitoring System (WBPMS) in terms of
number of projects that have been completed on time as well as the
number of projects that were delayed or were running behind schedule
since the implementation of the web based monitoring system. The
Committee had further desired to be apprised whether any action had been
taken against those responsible in DDA and IMD for delayed issue of
occupation and completion certificate and allotments made without
obtaining the requisite certificate.

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that in line with the
Committee’s recommendation, the ERP application was to be fully
implemented by June 2022. However, as per the action taken notes
submitted by the Ministry in June 2022, the Committee find that the
development of ERP application is still under progress. The Committee
note that some modules of ERP applications e.g. Leave Management
module, e-tendering and e-auction module, model PE/DE module and Leave

management module have been completed. In view of the complete

reliance on ERP for monitoring of projects, the Committee enjoin upon the
Ministry to fully implement the ERP on priority and apprise the Committee

of the resultant impact thereof _in ensuring timely completion of the
projects. Further, the Committee note from the reply of the Ministry to

another recommendation that WBPMS has been reprogrammed to auto-
generate and forward a message to the next higher officer in case of delay
in completion of works. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
timelines stipulated for the next higher officer to take action in case of
delay in completion of works. The Committee also desire to be apprised of
the resultant impact on completion of projects since the modification.


9

As for the impact of WBPMS, the Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that since its inception, 2786 number of works were completed in
time due to improved monitoring in the last 10 years. However, the
Committee find from the Audit comments that a staggering 12378 works,
being 81.6% of total works, were not completed in time. Thus, the figure of
2786 works that were completed on time amounted to merely 18.4% of total
works. The Committee are chagrined at the selective and incomplete
information being provided to them. They further observe that with 81.6%
projects being delayed, the objective of reducing delay in the compietion of
projects is far from being achieved. The Committee, while reiterating their
earlier_recommendation that _monitoring mechanism be adequately
strengthened opine that the online system should invariably be backed by
timely manual intervention to ensure completion of projects in time.

Recommendation at Para No. 2

12. The Committee had noted that the CPWD was required to obtain the
Completion-cum-occupancy certificate from DDA. The Committee had also noted
that IMD repeatedly requested CPWD to obtain the same for 4 years i.e. from
2009 to 2013. The Committee had further noted that based on the requirements
of DDA, the CPWD submitted documents several times, however, due to various
shortcomings, the matter was tossed back and forth between the two
organisations for four years. The Committee observed that on being enquired by
the Audit in November 2015, the CPWD had intimated that the requirements as
desired by the DDA in June 2012 were yet to be complied with as it was a
cumbersome exercise to retrieve the old records pertaining to the project and the
concerned division was involved in other works as well. Further, the CPWD in
their action taken notes on the Audit observation had stated that the working of
DDA was neither transparent nor proactive; DDA did not accept the documents
submitted by CPWD by hand at their counters, because of which CPWD was

forced to submit the documents by post; DDA never communicated their


10

observations in one go and gave their observations in piecemeal manner and
that too after protracted correspondence from CPWD and various personal visits
by CPWD officials and that many a time, DDA apparently denied being in receipt
of documents submitted by CPWD. The Committee were shocked to note the
scathing remarks made by CPWD on DDA’s working and were not able to
comprehend why CPWD did not take up these issues with the Ministry for timely
resolution of the same. The Committee were astonished to find that the Ministry
had also absolved itself of any responsibility for lack of coordination between the
two agencies under its control by simply stating, in its reply to the query raised by
the Committee, that the replies on the Audit observations were given by the
concerned division of CPWD. The Committee disapproved of the indifferent and
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry as it did not take any steps to either ensure
coordination between the agencies concerned or streamline the process so that
such instances do not recur, until pointed out by the Public Accounts Committee.
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that clear guidelines alongwith
SOPs may be issued to all the agencies concerned regarding such ancillary
works so that the agencies are well aware of their responsibilities and also the
procedure to be followed for getting the work done. The Committee had also
desired that a nodal officer from each agency concerned be appointed so that the
differences, if any, were resolved without hampering the pace of the work. The
Committee while noting the submission of the CPWD that it was a cumbersome
exercise to retrieve the old records pertaining to the project desired that all such
documents/ legacy data (old records) be digitized within a prescribed timeframe
to enable easier access to the same. The Committee had further recommended
that the documents that were still needed to be submitted in physical form may
also be submitted in digital form so that there is no scope of misplacing the same

and would enable a digital trail.

13. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:
"SOP for obtaining completion cum occupancy certificate wherever
required from local bodies before handing over completed building has


11

been issued vide OM No. DG/MAN.Misc/ 44 dated 11.03.2020. In addition,
vide OM No.32/15/2021/WI/DG/166 dated 21.06.2021, the instructions for
regular review of pending occupancy certificate have been issued. Further
DDG (Works), CPWD has been declared Nodal Officer from Head Quarter
for monitoring of pending OCs. Modifications have been made in the Web
based project monitoring system (WBPMS) whereby it is now necessary to
indicate completion date and availability of completion certificate for the
works. Also WBPMS has been re-programmed to auto-generate and
forward message to next higher officer in case of delay in completion of
works. Provision has been made in WBPMS to upload documents related
to works, so that digital data is available easily.”

14. Audit have given the following observations:-

“Fact remains that CPWD is silent on issuance of clear guidelines along
with SOPs to all agencies concerned regarding such ancillary works. The
absence of SOPs may result in stalling of formalities related to declaration
of completion of projects. The efforts made to bring the other agencies on
a level platform, for quick disposal of such issues may be apprised to PAC.
under intimation to Audit.

The reply is silent on whether the directions of PAC on nomination of such
officers by other concerned agencies, have been conveyed to them. PAC.
may be apprised of the updated status in this regard.

In their reply, CPWD did not specify the timelines in which documents will
be digitized so that the old records can be easily accessed. The timeframe
for such exercise may be apprised to PAC under intimation to Audit.”

15. The Ministry have submitted the following in response to Audit
observations:-

“Responsibility for obtaining completion certificate lies with concerned
CPWD project units. CPWD has issued guidelines for obtaining completion
cum occupancy certificate wherever required from local bodies before
handing over the completed building vide OM dated 11.03.2020
(Annexure-1). Further, the concerned agencies related to issue of
completion certificate are fire department, Urban Local bodies etc. These
agencies are under the purview of respective State Governments. The
SoP followed by these agencies vary from State to State and are governed
by their own rules. Nodal Officer of local agencies (Local urban bodies, fire
department etc.) are appointed by themselves. DDG (Works), CPWD has


12

been declared Nodal Officer in CPWD Head Quarter for monitoring of

pending OCs. Digitisation is in progress and same is expected to be over

by June 2023.”
16. The Committee had observed the indifferent and lackadaisical
approach of the Ministry in not taking adequate measures to ensure
coordination between the agencies under their administrative control and
to streamline processes to obviate instances of delay as in the instant
case. The Committee had recommended that clear guidelines alongwith
SOPs may be issued to all the agencies concerned regarding such ancillary
works so that the agencies are well aware of their responsibilities and the
procedure to be followed for getting the work done. The Committee had
also desired that a nodal officer from each agency concerned be appointed
so that the differences, if any, may be resolved without hampering the pace
of the work. Further, the Committee had desired that all legacy data (old
records) be digitized within a prescribed timeframe to enable easier access
to the same. The Committee had further recommended that the documents
that were still needed to be submitted in physical form may also be
submitted in digital form so that there would be no scope of misplacing the
same and would also enable a digital trail.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that SOPs for obtaining
completion cum occupancy certificate wherever required from local bodies
before handing over a completed building and the instructions for regular
review of pending occupancy certificates have been issued. The Committee
desire_to_be apprised of the average time taken ६० issue occupancy

certificate and the impact of the regular review to reduce the same. The
Committee while noting that the SoP followed by the agencies vary from
State _to State _and_are governed by their own rules desire that the

requirements for the Occupancy Certificate should be communicated well
in advance to the agencies involved in ancillary works along with the

timelines within which the same are needed to be furnished. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that since other agencies are


13

under the purview of respective State Governments, they depute their own

nodal officers. Accordingly, the Committee desire that in case any agency
has_not_appointed nodal officers for _particular_projects, they may be

requested to depute nodal officers to iron out any coordination issues with
them. The Committee observe that provision has been made in WBPMS to

upload documents related to works, so that digital data is available easily.
The old records are being digitised for the purpose and the process is
likely to be completed by June 2023._The Committee hope that all efforts
will be made to complete the process of digitisation within the time frame
specified by them. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
status of the legacy data digitised till date.

Recommendation at Para No.5

17. The Committee had noted that Central Public Works Department awarded
the work of construction of a new building for the Ministry of Environment and
Forests at Aliganj, New Delhi to a contractor for Rs.86.97 crore. The Committee
had observed that though under the agreement, Rs.22.96 lakh was payable to
the contractor for a quantity of 22,960 cubic meters (cum) on account of “in or
under water and/or liquid mud, including pumping out water as required’,
ultimately Rs.79.25 lakh was paid to the contractor for dewatering quantity of
1,41,119.88 cum. The Committee were shocked to note that the variation
between the figures agreed to for payment as per the agreement as compared to
the quantity of wet soil actually excavated, which was to the extent of more than
3.5 times of the estimated cost. The Committee were surprised to note from the
reply of the Ministry that deviation in quantity was due to the change in ground
water level with respect to assessed water level and such a deviation was found
to be in order and payable as per the CPWD works manual provisions and after
scrutiny by the CSQ (Contract Specification and Quality Assurance) section of
CPWD. The Committee were apprehensive that if deviations of such magnitude

are allowed, it could leave scope for the contractor to be lackadaisical and for


14

collusion or fraudulent practices. The Committee had, therefore, desired that
suitable provisions be incorporated in contracts to make bidders pay for
estimates which deviate substantially so that they may be doubly cautious while
submitting estimates of items of works. The Committee also desired to be
apprised of such cases of contracts wherein deviation was found and also the

extent or magnitude of such cases in the last three years.

18. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Notes
have submitted as under:
“Now most of the contracts in CPWD are being taken up on EPC basis,
wherein the responsibility of investigations, designing, planning,
procurement, construction and safety lies with the contractor. In EPC the
cost of deviation lies with the contractor only. In view of EPC contracts,
now such types of cases are not occurring.”

19. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-

“No further comments on the action that most of the contracts in CPWD

are being taken up on EPC basis.

Although called for by Audit, CPWD did not intimate/furnish documents in

connection with deviation and also the extent or magnitude of such cases

in the last three years stating that the details have been requested from
regions and the same shall be furnished on receipt. The same may be
furnished to PAC now.

From their reply, it is gathered that not all contracts are awarded on EPC

basis. Regarding non-EPC contracts, CPWD stated, in response to audit

requisition during vetting of ATR, that:

° The estimates of items were not framed by bidders and deviations
were sanctioned by CPWD authorities as per requirement of work
and delegation of financial power. Since the estimates of items were
prepared by CPWD engineers, it was not desirable to restrict
quantity for payment in case of deviation as it might not stand in the
court of law.

e In such contracts, bidders were not required to submit quantities of
Items of work and they were only required to quote rates against the
estimated quantities prepared by CPWD.

This reply, read in conjunction with reply of CPWD to PAC

recommendation 6, shows that the CPWD should undertake detailed


20.

15

geotechnical investigation to determine type of soil, its technical
parameters and sub-soil water level. Records relating to detailed
geotechnical investigation report, in the instant case, were requested from
CPWD during verification of ATR. However, no documents in support of
the contention were furnished to audit. The same may be furnished to PAC
now.

PAC in their report has mentioned that in the instant case, CPWD had
allowed deviation to 3.5 times from the allowable estimate of the quantity
of the soil excavated. Since all contracts are not being awarded on EPC
basis, CPWD may intimate to the PAC, the mechanism planned/adopted to
plug such lacunas, for non-EPC contracts.”

The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have

further submitted as under:

21.

“Copies of details of deviation in works in last 3 years are enclosed
herewith for reference (Annexure-2). Copy of the detailed Geo-technical
investigation report of soil for instant case is enclosed (Annexure-3).
Mechanism adopted by CPWD to minimise such deviations in Non-EPC
contract is specified in CPWD Works Manual, 2019 para 3.1.16, it
mentions following points before according technical sanction. (i) Detailed
estimate, detailed architectural drawings and_ specifications, (ii)
Geotechnical investigation Report(iii) Structural drawings for the foundation
and preliminary structural drawings of the superstructure to calculate
quantities of the items, (iv) Preliminary Drawings for Internal and External
services.”

In view of the variation between the figures agreed to for payment as

per the agreement and the actual payment being more than 3.5 times of the

estimated cost in a particular case, the Committee had desired that suitable

provisions be incorporated in contracts to make bidders pay for estimates

which deviate substantially so that they may be doubly cautious while

submitting estimates of items of works. The Committee had also desired to

be apprised of such cases of contracts wherein deviation was found and

also the extent or magnitude of such cases in the last three years.

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that since most of the

contracts in CPWD are being taken up on Engineering, Procurement and


16

Construction (EPC) basis, the responsibility of investigations, designing,
planning, procurement, construction and safety lies with the contractor and
therefore such types of cases are not recurring. The Committee note that
for non-EPC contracts, the mechanism to plug such lacunae is specified in
CPWD Works Manual, 2019 para 3.1.16, wherein the following conditions
are mentioned for according technical sanction: (i) Detailed estimate,
detailed architectural drawings and specifications, (ii) Geotechnical
investigation Report, (iii) Structural drawings for the foundation and
preliminary structural drawings of the superstructure to calculate

quantities of the items, and (iv) Preliminary Drawings for Internal and

External services. The Committee desire that_efforts may be made to
ensure that the provisions of the aforesaid Works Manual are followed in
letter_and spirit. The Committee while noting that, in non-EPC contracts,
the estimates of items are not framed by bidders and deviations are
sanctioned by CPWD authorities as per requirement of work and delegation
of financial powers opine that a mechanism may be instituted to escalate
instances of each deviation to higher officers for enabling monitoring,
approval and review.

see


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that CPWD constructed 57 quarters for the Indian
Meteorological Department (IMD) and made a payment of 2.81 crore for the same
to the contractor. The Committee are disconcerted to note that, the work, scheduled
for completion in January 2005, could only be completed in October 2009, and the
completion-cum-occupancy certificate was received from DDA in August 2018, after
an extraordinary delay of almost 9 years. The Committee find that the CPWD in its
action taken notes had stated that it had to only assist the IMD in obtaining the
completion certificate by providing the necessary documents to IMD as desired or
called for by the DDA. However, on the contrary, the Secretary, in his deposition
stated before the Committee that if CPWD has completed a house, then after
completion, it becomes its responsibility to secure the Occupancy and Compliance
Certificate within a reasonable time. According to the Secretary, the DDA and the
IMD are also responsible as the allottees had already started taking occupation and
were residing in the houses but the Occupancy and Completion Certificate was not
issued. What the Committee find all the more shocking is the fact that the delay of 9
years was not taken seriously at any level and it was only after being taken up by
the Committee that the Ministry swung into action and the Occupation-cum-
completion certificate was finally issued on 3.8.18 i.e. within three days of the
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on the subject. Further, a day before
the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry was to be taken i.e. on
11.3.2020, the CPWD issued an advisory to its offices for ensuring that the
completion-cum-occupancy certificate was obtained before the handing over of a
building to the client. The Committee also note from the written submission of the
Ministry that progress of projects is monitored at field and head quarter levels by a
hierarchy of officials by using a variety of management tools including the Web
Based Project Monitoring System (WBPMS). The Committee further observe from
the reply of the Ministry that CPWD will be implementing Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) which will lead to monitoring of projects and rectification measures
on real time basis. The Secretary, Housing and Urban Affairs during the oral
evidence, submitted that the occupancy and completion certificates are being
issued online and within a definite timeframe. The Committee are disappointed to
note that despite such monitoring system in place, the delay was not caught and the
Ministry took action only when it was taken up by the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the monitoring mechanism be strengthened to ensure
that any instance of delay/ deviation is escalated automatically for the attention of
senior officers for ensuring time bound resolution. The Committee while
emphasizing that implementation of the ERP system be done only after a thorough
process review and standardizing the processes across all areas of operations
desire that the system may be implemented within a fixed timeframe and the
Committee be apprised thereof. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the impact of the WBPMS in terms of number of projects that have been completed
on time as well as the number of projects that were delayed or are running behind
schedule since the implementation of the web based monitoring system. The
Committee would also like to be apprised whether any action has been taken
against those responsible in DDA and IMD for delayed issue of occupation and

-1F-


completion certificate and allotments made without obtaining the requisite
certificate.

[Recommendation No. 1, Part-I of the 257 Report of the Public Accounts

Committee

(17th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

The ERP application being implemented in CPWD aims to bring all manual
processes online and integrate the same for dashboard Monitoring and Control. The
ERP system is being implemented after thorough study and review of the existing
processes and business processes re-engineering, wherever required. The ERP
application likely to be fully implemented by June 2022. WBPMS helps in monitoring the
progress and to take remedial measures wherever delay is taking place. Since the
inception of WBPMS, 2786 number of works have been completed in time due to
improved monitoring in last 10 years. IMD has no role in obtaining OC. For delay in
DDA, show-cause notice was issued to Director (Building), DDA. After examining the
matter, a warning letter was issued.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN

The reply of the Ministry is silent on the strengthening of monitoring mechanisms.
Be that as it may, the reply of the Ministry shows complete reliance for monitoring
purposes on ERP application, which is yet to be implemented and hence not
reasonable. Further, progress of implementation of ERP application may be intimated to
PAC.

During vetting, it was verified from the report on completed works generated from
WBP\MS that 2786 works had been completed in time. However, it was also noticed that
12378 works, being 81.6% of total works, were not completed in time. Thus, only 18.4%
works were completed in time. Details of the delayed works, completed as of
31.03.2021, out of 12378 distinctly showing delays in completion from the initial
scheduled date of completion and reasons for works still not completed along with
details of the initial scheduled date of completion, should be intimated of PAC.

Outcome of enquiry and disciplinary proceedings against Sh. S.K. Tripathi, EE(C)
and Sh. S.B. Shukla, EE (E) may also be apprised to PAC.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

Strengthening of monitoring mechanism have been made by amendments
introducing in the Web Based Project Monitoring System for monitoring of completion
certificate of projects. Development of ERP application is under progress. Several
modules of ERP applications e.g. Leave Management module, e-tendering and e-
auction module, model PE/DE module and Leave management module have been
completed. Other modules are in various stages of progress. Details of the works are
maintained in WBPMS, data of delayed works are provided as soft copy. Broad
reasons for delays of projects are Covid-19, inadequate funds, local body approval, site
clearances, land issues, contractors’ failure and approval from clients and natural
factors etc.

-198-


The disciplinary proceedings instituted against Sh. Tripathi, EE(C) have been
finalised after following due process vide order dated 22.10.2020. In the case of Shri
Shashi Bhushan Shukla, EE(C), penalty has been imposed upon him vide order dated
05.04.2022.

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the CPWD was required to obtain the Completion-cum-
occupancy certificate from DDA. The Committee also note that IMD repeatedly
requested CPWD to obtain the same for 4 years i.e. from 2009 to 2013. The Committee
further note that based on the requirements of DDA, the CPWD submitted documents
several times, however, due to various shortcomings, the matter was tossed back and
forth between the two organisations for four years. The Committee observe that on
being enquired by the Audit in November 2015, the CPWD intimated that the
requirements as desired by the DDA in June 2012 were yet to be complied with as it
was a cumbersome exercise to retrieve the old records pertaining to the project and the
concerned division was involved in other works as well. Further, the CPWD in their
action taken notes on the Audit observation has stated that the working of DDA was
neither transparent nor proactive; DDA did not accept the documents submitted by
CPWD by hand at their counters, because of which CPWD was forced to submit the
documents by post; DDA never communicated their observations in one go and gave
their observations in piecemeal manner and that too after protracted correspondence
from CPWD and various personal visits by CPWD officials and that many a time, DDA
apparently denied being in receipt of documents submitted by CPWD. The Committee
are shocked to note the scathing remarks made by CPWD on DDA’s working and are
not able to comprehend why CPWD did not take up these issues with the Ministry for
timely resolution of the same. The Committee are astonished to find that the Ministry
has also absolved itself of any responsibility for lack of coordination between the two
agencies under its control by simply stating, in its reply to the query raised by the
Committee, that the replies on the Audit observations were given by the concerned
division of CPWD. The Committee disapprove of the indifferent and lackadaisical
approach of the Ministry as it did not take any steps to either ensure coordination
between the agencies concerned or streamline the process so that such instances do
not recur, until pointed out by the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that clear guidelines alongwith SOPs may be issued to all the
agencies concerned regarding such ancillary works so that the agencies are well aware
of their responsibilities and also the procedure to be followed for getting the work done.
The Committee also desire that a nodal officer from each agency concerned be
appointed so that the differences, if any, are resolved without hampering the pace of the
work. The Committee while noting the submission of the CPWD that it was a
cumbersome exercise to retrieve the old records pertaining to the project desire that all
such documents/ legacy data (old records) be digitized within a prescribed timeframe to
enable easier access to the same. Further, the documents that are still needed to be
submitted in physical form should also be submitted in digital form so that there is no

scope of misplacing the same and would enable a digital trail.
[Recommendation No.2, Part-ll of the 25" Report of the Public Accounts
Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)]

“+1%--


Action Taken

SOP for obtaining completion cum occupancy certificate wherever required from
local bodies before handing over completed building has been issued vide OM No.
DG/MAN.Misc/ 44 dated 11.03.2020. In addition, vide OM No.32/15/2021WI/DG/166
dated 21.06.2021, the instructions for regular review of pending occupancy certificate
have been issued. Further DDG (Works), CPWD has been declared Nodal Officer from
Head Quarter for monitoring of pending OCs. Modifications have been made in the
Web based project monitoring system (WBPMS) whereby it is now necessary to
indicate completion date and availability of completion certificate for the works. Also
WBPMS has been re-programmed to auto-generate and forward message to next
higher officer in case of delay in completion of works. Provision has been made in
WBPMS to upload documents related to works, so that digital data is available easily.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN

Fact remains that CPWD is silent on issuance of clear guidelines along with
SOPs to all agencies concerned regarding such ancillary works. The absence of SOPs
may result in stalling of formalities related to declaration of completion of projects. The
efforts made to bring the other agencies on a level platform, for quick disposal of such
issues may be apprised to PAC under intimation to Audit.

The reply is silent on whether the directions of PAC on nomination of such
officers by other concerned agencies, have been conveyed to them. PAC may be
apprised of the updated status in this regard.

In their reply, CPWD did not specify the timelines in which documents will be
digitized so that the old records can be easily accessed. The timeframe for such
exercise may be apprised to PAC under intimation to Audit.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

Responsibility for obtaining completion certificate lies with concerned CPWD
project units. CPWD has issued guidelines for obtaining completion cum occupancy
certificate wherever required from local bodies before handing over the completed
building vide OM dated 11.03.2020 (Annexure-1). Further, the concerned agencies
related to issue of completion certificate are fire department, Urban Local bodies etc.
These agencies are under the purview of respective State Governments. The SoP
followed by these agencies vary from State to State and are governed by their own
rules. Nodal Officer of local agencies (Local urban bodies, fire department etc.) are
appointed by themselves. DDG (Works), CPWD has been declared Nodal Officer in
CPWD Head Quarter for monitoring of pending OCs. Digitisation is in progress and
same is expected to be over by June 2023.

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that CPWD did not forward to DDA all the documents required for
obtaining the completion-cum-occupancy certificate promptly as a result of which the
certificate was issued after a lapse of more than 8 years. The Committee note that for
delay, Charge Sheet has been issued under Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 against

+20+-


the officers concerned and that the inquiry is in progress. The Committee note from the
reply of the Ministry that now, the New CPWD Works Manual 2019 (Para 5.17.3)
specifies that the Engineer-in-charge and concerned Architect would be responsible for
obtaining OC/CC on behalf of client. While noting that the CPWD issued an advisory for
obtaining completion-cum-occupancy certificate before handing over the completed
building only one day before the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry was
to be taken i.e. on 11.3.2020, the Committee cannot also help expressing concern over
the fact that the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry/ CPWD resulted in loss of 1.53
crore to the exchequer besides keeping the property idle for 9 years. The Committee
desire that the aforesaid enquiry may be completed at the earliest and action be taken
against those found responsible and the Committee be apprised thereof. The
Committee also, while noting that Clause-2 of General Conditions of Contract specifies
the action to be taken in case of delay in completion of the projects, desire to be
apprised of the action taken by the Ministry/ CPWD in terms of the above clause in the
instant case as well as the number of cases in which action has been taken by invoking
this clause alongwith details thereof in the last five years.
[Recommendation No. 3, Part-ll of the 257 Report of the Public Accounts
Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
Disciplinary proceedings under rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules were initiated
against SH. S.K. Tripathi, EE (C) and S.B. Shukla, EE(C). Disciplinary proceedings
against Sh. S.K. Tripathi have been concluded. In case of Sh. 5.8. Shukla, same is
under consultation with UPSC. Present case does not attract action under Clause 2 of
the General Conditions of Contract (G.C.C.), In 315 nos. of cases, action has been
taken under clause 2 of G.C.C in the last five years.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN

Although called for by Audit, the CPWD did not intimate/ furnish information/
records pertaining to enquiry and action taken against those found responsible,
although called for by Audit. Outcome of enquiry and disciplinary proceedings against
Sh. S.K. Tripathi, EE (C) and Sh. Sh. S.B. Shukla, EE(E) may be apprised to PAC.

Comment, in the present case does not attract action under Clause 2 of the
General Conditions of Contract (G.C.C.)- No further comments.

Statement showing 97 cases pertaining to Bangalore Region, Guwahati Region
and Border was furnished to Audit. Details of the rest of the 218 cases should be
apprised to PAC

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

The disciplinary proceedings instituted against Sh. Tripathi, EE(C) have been
completed vide order dated 22.10.2020. In the case of Shri Shashi Bhushan Shukla,
EE(C), penalty has been imposed upon him vide order dated 05.04.2022.

Details of remaining 218 cases where action taken under Clause 2 of the
contract was taken is as follows: PR Mumbai- 4 cases, PR Chandigarh-3 cases, PR
Chennai-13 cases, Region Delhi-35 cases, PR Delhi-6 cases, Region Chandigarh-41
cases, Region Lucknow-37 cases, Region Chennai-18 cases, Region Hyderabad-35
cases, Region Mumbai-26 cases.

—2)~


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note from audit observation that CPWD failed to levy
departmental charges of 12 per cent (i.e. ‘0.59 crore) that were leviable on construction
works for the Currency Note Press(CNP) and India Security Press(ISP), Nasik resulting
in short collection of revenue of ‘0.59 crore. As per Audit, under the rules, only the
Central Government or autonomous bodies fully funded by the Central Government are
exempt from paying departmental charges, and ISP and CNP, which are part of
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL), a company
registered under the Indian Companies Act, are not exempt. The Committee are
shocked to note that the charges could not be levied due to lack of clarity or confusion
on the status of the Presses and it took CPWD one whole year to secure clarification on
their status. The Committee note from the submission of the representatives of the
Ministry during oral evidence that they would issue a Circular to the effect that each time
a project is taken up, the status of the organization should be clarified. The Committee
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard by the Ministry. The Committee take
exception to the lame excuse of ‘confusion’ by the Ministry. A mere or simple checking
of SPMCIL website would have cleared the confusion. The Committee, therefore, desire
that officials concerned may be given regular training to make them aware/ keep them
updated about the extant rules and regulations and any amendments made thereof to

ensure that such instances do not recur.
[Recommendation No. 4, Part-II of the 25" Report of the Public Accounts
Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

The Training Academy has already conducted series of training courses to
CPWD officers on related subjects. It is also to affirm that the academy will conduct
training on appropriate level in future as per recommendation of PAC. Further, vide OM
No. DG/MAN/401 dated 08.06.2020. CPWD has issued instruction for obtaining a
certificate from client department regarding funding of organisation i.e. whether it is fully
funded/partially funded by Central Government/State Government, private organisation,
local bodies, PSUs, autonomous bodies etc.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
No further comments.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

No action required.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that Central Public Works Department awarded the work of
construction of a new building for the Ministry of Environment and Forests at Aliganj,
New Delhi to a contractor for Rs.86.97 crore. The Committee observe that though under
the agreement, Rs. 22.96 lakh was payable to the contractor for a quantity of 22,960
cubic meters (cum) on account of “in or under water and/or liquid mud, including
pumping out water as required”, ultimately Rs. 79.25 lakh was paid to the contractor for
dewatering quantity of 1,41,119.88 cum. The Committee are shocked to note that the

-22-


variation between the figures agreed to for payment as per the agreement as compared
to the quantity of wet soil actually excavated, which was to the extent of more than 3.5
times of the estimated cost. The Committee are surprised to note from the reply of the
Ministry that deviation in quantity was due to the change in ground water level with
respect to assessed water level and such a deviation was found to be in order and
payable as per the CPWD works manual provisions and after scrutiny by the CSQ
(Contract Specification and Quality Assurance) section of CPWD. The Committee are
apprehensive that if deviations of such magnitude are allowed, it could leave scope for
the contractor to be lackadaisical and for collusion or fraudulent practices. The
Committee, therefore, desire that suitable provisions be incorporated in contracts to
make bidders pay for estimates which deviate substantially so that they are doubly
cautious while submitting estimates of items of works. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of such cases of contracts wherein deviation was found and also the extent
or magnitude of such cases in the last three years.

. [Recommendation No. 5, Part-ll of the 257 Report of the Public Accounts
Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
Now most of the contracts in CPWD are being taken up on EPC basis, wherein
the responsibility of investigations, designing, planning, procurement, construction and
safety lies with the contractor. In EPC the cost of deviation lies with the contractor only.
In view of EPC contracts, now such types of cases are not occurring.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

No further comments on the action that most of the contracts in CPWD are being
taken up on EPC basis.

Although called for by Audit, CPWD did not intimate/furnish documents in
connection with deviation and also the extent or magnitude of such cases in the last
three years stating that the details have been requested from regions and the same
shall be furnished on receipt. The same may be furnished to PAC now.

From their reply, it is gathered that not all contracts are awarded on EPC basis.
Regarding non-EPC contracts. CPWD stated, in response to audit requisition during
vetting of ATR, that: a

The estimates of items were not framed by bidders and deviations were
sanctioned by CPWD authorities as per requirement of work and delegation of financial
power. Since the estimates of items were prepared by CPWD engineers, it was not
desirable to restrict quantity for payment in case of deviation as it might not stand in the
court of law.

In such contracts, bidders were not required to submit quantities of items of work
and they were only required to quote rates against the estimated quantities prepared by
CPWD.

This reply, read in conjunction with reply of CPWD to PAC recommendation 6,
shows that the CPWD should undertake detailed geotechnical investigation to
determine type of soil, its technical parameters and sub-soil water level. Records

—22-


relating to detailed geotechnical investigation report, in the instant case, were requested
from CPWD during verification of ATR. However, no documents in support of the
contention were furnished to audit. The same may be furnished to PAC now.

PAC in their report has mentioned that in the instant case, CPWD had allowed
deviation to 3.5 times from the allowable estimate of the quantity of the soil excavated.
Since all contracts are not being awarded on EPC basis, CPWD may intimate to the
PAC, the mechanism planned/adopted to plug such lacunas, for non-EPC contracts

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

Copies of details of deviation in works in last 3 years are enclosed herewith for
reference (Annexure-2). Copy of the detailed Geo-technical investigation report of soil
for instant case is enclosed (Annexure-3). Mechanism adopted by CPWD to minimise
such deviations in Non-EPC contract is specified in CPWD Works Manual, 2019 para
3.1.16, it mentions following points before according technical sanction. (i) Detailed
estimate, detailed architectural drawings and specifications, (ii) Geotechnical
investigation Report(iii) Structural drawings for the foundation and preliminary structural
drawings of the superstructure to calculate quantities of the items, (iv) Preliminary
Drawings for Internal and External services.

Observation/Recommendation

As brought out above, according to Audit, as per Para 1.6.1 of the ‘Schedule of
Quantities' forming part of the agreement Rs. 22.96 lakh was agreed to be payable for a
quantity of 22,960 cubic meters (cum) for the purpose of “in or under water and/or liquid
mud, including pumping out water as required.” Further, as per the Audit observation,
Para 1.4 of the ‘Additional Specifications' forming part of the agreement stated, “the
contractor should inspect the site and make his own assessment about sub-soil water
level likely to be encountered at the time of execution and quote his rates accordingly.
Rate of all items were inclusive of pumping out or bailing out water, if required. Nothing
extra on this account whatsoever was to be paid to him.” However, Rs.79.25 lakh was
paid to the Contractor for dewatering quantity of 1,41,119.88 cum. In this regard, the
Committee note the reply of the Ministry that Clause 1.4 and item no 1.6.1 are
applicable to different stages of construction and were not related/overlapping to each
other. According to the Ministry, since the excavation (which is stage-1 of construction
of building) was carried out in wet soil (in or under water/liquid mud), payment under
item 1.6.1 was required to be made for excavation (extra rate of earth work) and that it
is for deviation in quantity of this item, that the amount was paid. According to the
Ministry, Clause 1.4 was only applicable at stage 2 of construction of building after
excavation was completed i.e. at the time of Concreting of basement slab/raft to reduce
water pressure on basement slab and no extra payment was paid for dewatering /
pumping out water under clause no 1.4 for maintaining water table at the time of
concreting/construction of basement. The Committee also note the reply of the Ministry
that the payment for deviation in quantity was made after scrutiny as per the laid down
procedure and by the CSQ (Contract Specification and Quality Assurance) section of
CPWD. The Committee are surprised to note the Ministry's response to the ambiguity in

-२५-


the clauses that sub-soil water level prediction was not feasible and was actually known
during the excavation of foundation. The Committee are of the considered opinion that,
being 166 years old, an organisation such as CPWD which has professional expertise in
disciplines including Architecture, Engineering, Project Management coupled with
comprehensive experience in building construction and maintenance, it is expected that
CPWD would be a repository of reliable and extensive data as well as technical know-
how on assessing and estimating sub-soil water level etc. which would enable it to
make its contract provisions even more foolproof and evaluate estimates better. The
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised if CPWD has/refers to any data/reports
on groundwater level wherever such projects are undertaken or consults technical or
engineering experts in the field. While observing that there was lack of clarity in the
_ applicability of clauses of contracts of work, the Committee would like to be apprised
whether Ministry/CPWD has carried out any assessment of the contract agreements of
CPWD to ensure that such clauses, wherein confusion arises in cost of items of work,
are made foolproof, before including them in future agreements.
[Recommendation No. 6, Part-II of the 257 Report of the Public Accounts
Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

CPWD undertakes detailed geo-technical investigation to determine type of soil,
its technical parameters and sub-soil water level. CPWD Works Manual SOP No.4/8
already contains provision that the NIT approving authority has to ensure that there are
no conflicting provisions in the NIT conditions. Further, now most of the contracts in
CPWD are on EPC basis, wherein the responsibility of investigations, designing,
planning, procurement, construction and safety lies with the contractor. Hence now the
cost of deviation lies with contractor only.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN

Although called for by Audit, CPWD did not furnish any specific
information/records regarding “any data/reports on groundwater level wherever such
projects are undertaken or consults technical or engineering in the field” pertaining
either to the instant case or to any other project, for verification in audit, stating that the
details had been requested from the regions and would be furnished on receipt. The
same may be apprised to PAC now.

Although called for by Audit, CPWD did not also furnish any specific
information/records regarding assessment of the contract agreements of CPWD ensure
such clauses wherein confusion arises in cost of items of work. The same may be
furnished to PAC now.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
In the instant case, records pertaining to Geo-technical investigation are enclosed
(Annexure-3). To address conflict between provisions of contract, a detailed procedure
is specified in Clause 8 of CPWD conditions of contract (Annexure-4).


CHAPTER Hl

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT

-Nil-

-26 -


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-Nil-

-24-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-Nil-

ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
Chairperson,

NEW DELHI: Public Accounts Committee

07 December, 2022
16 Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 06
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 10191: 06
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 100%

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Total : Nil
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0%
the reply of the Government:

Para No. Nil

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : Nil
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. Nil

(v) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : Nil

which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0%
ParaNos. - Nil

-29-