16

CREATION OF TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE IN
ANDAMANS AND NICOBAR ISLANDS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Fifth Report (160 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SIXTEENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

2204
सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT Tos,
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2197

SIXTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

CREATION OF TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE IN
ANDAMANS AND NICOBAR ISLANDS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Fifth Report (160 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

ja
सत्यमेब जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: IF- ०9 "०१९८०
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: /9- 569 - 220020

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2020 /Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER Il

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view o'
the replies received from the Governmen
Observations/Recommendations in respect o'
which replies of the Government have no
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect o'
which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on
28.08.2020

Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the |
Observations/Recommendations of thé Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha)

WW)

PAGE

(iii)

(iv)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)

COHNAARYWH

20.

21.
22.

ण की ४9! ४०:७०

किस
Oana

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury = - Ss Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant
Vacant

SECRETARIAT

1
2
3.
4

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary

Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary
Shri Ashikho Alemo - Assistant Executive Officer

in )


n


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Creation of Tourist
Infrastructure in Andaman and Nicobar Islands? relating to the Ministry of
Home Affairs.

2. The One Hundred and Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on
he Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 July, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 27
June, 2020. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and
hereafter adopted the Report at their sitting held on 28 August, 2020. Minutes
of the sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of
he Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the the Committee Secretariat and the office
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twelfth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
f September, 2020 - Chairperson
Af’ Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(०)


REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their One Hundred and Fifth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Creation of Tourist Infrastructure in Andaman and Nicobar Islands"based
on the C&AG Report No. 24 of 2016 relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

2. The One Hundred and Fifth Report qe" Lok Sabha), which was presented
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19" July, 2018 contained 9
Observations and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations and Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of
Home Affairs and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos.1,3, 5-9
Total: 7
Chapter - II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil - Total:
Nil
Chapter - III
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in tespect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos.2 & 4
Total: 2
. Chapter - IV
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which+ Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos.Nil Total: Nil
Chapter — ४


3. A detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed poor
management of implementation and execution of Projects, delays in finalisation of
DPR resulting in dropping of projects, unfruitful expenditure on uninitiated
projects, irresponsible procurement of outlived vessel without undertaking any
techno economic feasibility resulting in wasteful expenditure in manning the
vessel which had to be disposed off ultimately, wasteful expenditure towards
development of yacht marina and procurement of luxury boats, non-issue of work
order resulting in abandonment of work, violation of financial rules and norms in
releasing advance fund for implementation of projects, need for introducing a
holistic script for the sound and light show at the Cellular Jail etc. The Committee
had accordingly given the Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred
and Fifth Report.

4. ‘The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs in
respect of all the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have
been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and
Recommendations made in the Original Report which either need reiteration or
merit comments.

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

5. The Committee noted that the Tourism Department had engaged
in May, 2009 Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. (ITDC) as
consultant for preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) for development of the
tourist circuit, ‘Port Blair Neil Havelock Baratang’ “Project/Infrastructure
Development for Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC) under the scheme of
Ministry of Tourism”. The Ministry of Tourism sanctioned the work of
preparation of Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report in October, 2010.
The Department of Tourism, ANI awarded the work of preparaton of EIA study/
CRZ clearance to the NIOT in December 2011. The work of development of
tourist facilities at Baratang was, however, excluded, citing various
environment and tribal issues. The NIOT submitted the draft EIA reports for
Port Blair, Havelock and Neil Islands on 27 December, 2012, 31 May 2013
and 20 November 2013 respectively and requested A&NI Administration for
site-wise details such as project layout, technical justification, technical design,
etc., for inclusion in their final report. However, even after three years, the
Administration had not provided the requisite information. As a result, the
project was not approved by the Ministry of Tourism, but they had entatively

allocated an amount of “5.00 crore under the PIDDC scheme in 2014-15.
Thus, lack of follow up by ANI Administration rendered unfruitful expenditure of
“18.45 lakh on the preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) and EIA

reports. The Committee, therefore, desired to be apprised of the reasons
behind the delay of three years in providing the requisite detail$-for inclusion in
the final DPR and recommended that stringent disciplinary penalty may be
imposed against officials who were responsible for the delay. The Committee
also desired to be apprised of the present status of the project.



6.

The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-

“As intimated by A& NI Administration, the Tourism Department
had entered into an Agreement on 25th May, 2009 with India Tourism
Development Corporation (ITDC) as a Consultant for preparation of
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for development of tourist circuits, ‘Port

Blair-Neil-Havelock-Baratang’ at a total cost of 10.00 lakh plus taxes.

The ITDC submitted a DPR in November, 2009 and 11.83 lakh
was paid to ITDC. The DPR proposed for development of sites at Port
Blair (ITF Ground, Carbyn’s Cove), Baratang (Baludera beach, Middle
Strait jetty, Limestone Caves & Jirkatang), Neil Island (Neil Kendra,
Sitapur Beach, Laxmanpur Beach & Bharatpur Beach), Havelock
beach(Radhanagar beach and Elephant beach).The facilities proposed
to be developed included water harvesting, public conveniences, Kiosks
for tourist facilitation, interpretation centers, souvenir kiosks, facade
improvement, changing rooms, car parking, solid waste management,
viewing deck, wayside amenities and signage.

The DPR was forwarded to MoT in March, 2010 for sanction
under MoT scheme, ‘Product/Infrastructure Development for
Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC)’. However, MoT communicated that
the proposal could not be considered due to non-submission of
CRZ/environmental clearance vide letter dated 29/10/2010. The
department requested the National Institute of Ocean Technology
(NIOT) 10 take up work of preparation of Environment Impact
Assessment (EIA) Report for CRZ clearance. However, during the
same time, new Island Protection Zone Notification was notified in 2011
and the work of EIA for Port Blair, Havelock and Neil Island could only
be awarded in December, 2011. An amount of 6.62 lakh was released
to NIOT for preparation of EIA. The work of EIA for Baratang in the
aforesaid circuit was not assigned to any agency as development of
tourist facilities at Baratang had to be dropped due to various
environmental and tribal issues.

NIOT submitted the draft EIA reports for Port Blair (Carbyn’s
Cove), Havelock (Radhanagar beach and Elephant beach) and Neil
Island (Sitapur beach, Laxmanpur beach and Bharatpur Beach) on
27/12/2012, 31/05/2013 and 20/11/2013 respectively.and requested for
site- wise micro details such as technical justification of the project/
Work Plan for site clearance, Detailed technical drawings for the
proposed infrastructure, site plan with detailed map in scale, details of
construction namely BOQ, schedule, work plan for construction,
material procurement and transport details, topography, survey map of
the proposed site, project layout and technical design, quantity of
construction materials required etc for inclusion in their final report.

-3-


The NIOT submitted final EIA Reports in respect of Havelock &
Neil Island on 18/05/2016. The final EIA Report on Port Blair (Corbyn’s
Cove) was submitted by NIOT on 21/07/2016.

By this time, the old scheme namely ‘PIDDC’ (Product/
Infrastructure Development of Destination and Circuits under which the
DPR was prepared for availing Central Financial-Assistance) had since
been modified and MoT came up with new scheme titled “Swadesh
Darshan’.

As per ‘Swadesh Darshan’ scheme, fresh DPR consistent with
the new guidelines was required to be prepared. Also, there was
requirement of few new projects to be undertaken by the Administration
for promotion of tourism, like improvement of facilities at Cellular Jail,
development of infrastructure for Adventure Water Sports, Wayside
amenities, promotion of use of solar power, etc. Accordingly, the
existing DPR was revised and submitted in the new format under the
new Swadesh Darshan scheme in September 2016.

At this point, it would be appropriate to highlight the fact that the
portion of submitted DPR for setting up of beach facilities and Wayside
Amenities in North & Middle Andaman and South Andaman including
Neil Island, Havelock Island and Baratang under Swadesh Darshan
scheme were prepared largely based on the inputs extracted from the
earlier DPR prepared by ITDC without engaging any fresh consultant.
This DPR was approved by MoT under Swadesh Darshan Scheme on

18.11.2016 and an amount of 42.18 crore was sanctioned against

proposed amount of * 48.89 crore.

Secondly, the EIA Reports prepared earlier by NIOT have come
in handy while execution of projects under Swadesh Darshan and no
fresh EIA reports were prepared for projects envisaged under Swadesh
Darshan. है

Further, it needs to be mentioned that the DPR and EIA reports
were prepared under PIDDIC scheme for setting up of infrastructure at
selected sites in a very limited area viz. Neil/Shaheed Island (in 304 sq
meter) Havelock (in 202 Sq meter), and Corbyns Cove (in 83 Sq
meters). The components proposed to be set up at the identified
locations ranges as per the EIA Report were Public Convenience, sit
out, Souvenir Kiosks, Watch tower, signage viewing deck etc. The EIA
report also provided-the baseline study of site characteristics in each of
the location for assessing the air quality , water quality and land use ,
fauna and flora etc which are needed in getting CRZ clearances . The
data provided under EIA reports and the DPR prepared: by ITDC were
extensively utilized by the executing agencies viz. Forest Department
/ALHW/PBMC etc for setting up of eco —friendly amenities in locations
such as Corbyn’s Cove (Port Blair), Bharatpur beach, Laxmanpur

Hye


beach, Sitapurbeach (Neil Island), Radhanagar and Elephant beach
(Havelock Island).

The eco-friendly facilities developed at these sites includes
setting up of Viewing Deck, Change room, sitting benches, toilets,
fagade improvements etc. at Corbyn’s Cove beach by PBMC /Forest
departments, eco-friendly huts, toilets, change rooms, beach furniture,
Solid Waste disposal in Bharatpur, Laxmanpur and Sitapur beaches at
Neil/Shaheed Island by Forest Department, Solid Waste Disposal
bins, Beach Furniture, facade improvement, viewing decks, eco huts,
public convenience etc. in Radhanagar and Elephant beach at
Havelock Island by Forest Department. The infrastructure developed by
these departments during the period from 2012 to 2015 at these
locations well exceeded what was supposed to be achieved through
execution of the DPR prepared by the ITDC under Central Financial
Assistance.

The DPR submitted by the consultant was based on plinth area
and did not provide the actual exact quantities of construction materials
sought by NIOT. It was only after Ministry of Tourism approved the
proposed work, any of the executive agencies could have been directed
by the Administration to prepare the detail estimate based on site
conditions. It was only after the stage that further details which were
sought by the NIOT could be made available by relevant executive
agencies.

However, the required inputs for preparation of final EIA reports
could not be provided expeditiously to NIOT because the Tourism
Department (ANI) was not having technical expertise and is not an
executing agency by jtself. Since the extent of technical inputs required
were large and could only be obtained from executing /construction
agencies like Andaman Public Works Department (APWD) / Port Blair
Municipal Council (PBMC), the department coordinated with these
agencies for getting necessary inputs. Meetings at the level of Director /
Secretary were held with these agencies to expedite providing ०!
information and after much persuasion, required inputs were provided
to NIOT on 11/12/2015.

There is no wilful delay or negligence on the part o
Administration in executing the works. It may be appreciated that
multiple agencies are involved in execution of works in the Islands and
Tourism Department is not empowered to undertake ‘public. works. Due
to Island conditions especially long rainy seasons and frequen
cyclones, limited availability of appropriate resources, the working
season for civil works in the Island is very limited. There is no financial
loss or misappropriation of govt. ex-chequer in this case as the
DPR/EIA prepared by the Govt. agencies viz. ITDC/NIOT have been
fruitfully utilized by the Administration, though without availing Central
Financial Assistance for executing these works. The essence of DPR,
the design elements have been extensively utilized by various

—4H-


executing agencies like APWD, PBMC, ALHW, Forest departments etc
in placing tourist infrastructure facilities in other locations of the Islands
also and has contributed in enhancing institutional capacities of these
agencies.

Present status: As per the revised scheme of Swadesh
Darshan, tourist's facilities are being augmented in various places in
A&N Islands by availing Central Financial Assistance. Presently
following facilities are being executed under Swadesh Darshan
Schemes for which an amount of 42.18 crore has been sanctioned by
the Ministry of Tourism, GOI on 18.11.2016. For availing fund under the
scheme, no external agencies were engaged for preparation of DPR, as
Tourism Department has gained experience and knowledge in
preparation of DPR based on inputs/methods learnt out of DPR already
submitted by ITDC and NIOT. Therefore, the expenditure of ‘18.45 lakh

incurred by the Administration for preparation of DPR and EIA report
have been useful.

Further, the following facilities are proposed to be executed for
development of tourism in the Island under Swadesh Darshan scheme.

1. Upgradation of facilities in Cellular Jail

2. Improvement of seating capacity of sound & light show at
Cellular Jail

3. Enhancement of tourists facilities at Cellular Jail

4. Strengthening foundation of Cellular Jail

5. Facade improvement of National Memorial

6. Upgradation of Veer Savarkar Park

7. Improvement of facilities at beaches and safety measures in

Ross & Smith beach, Baludera, Ramnagar, Lalaji Bay,
Laxmanpur, Bharatpur, Elephant beach, Kalapathar

8. e-auto Rikshaws

9. Way side amenities

10. Scuba Diving Centers

11. Signages at various locations

12. Illumination of Andaman Club

The above works are progressing. Due to continuous
improvement of tourism products/facilities in A&N Islands, the tourists
arrivals have also been considerably increased as mentioned below:

TOURISTS' INFLOW (2011-2018)

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 | 2016} 2017| 2018

Domestic} 202221 | 238699 | 243703 | 285146 | 296684 | 384552] 471919] 498279
Foreign 15814 17538 | 14742 | 17235 | 14674 | 15466. 15313] 1524
Total 218035 | 256237 | 258445 | 302381 | 311358 | 400018] 487232] 513521

It may be seen from the above that the tourists arrival from 2011
to 2015 have been increased by 42% and from 2011 to 2018 by 135%

ना +


8.

and first time it has crossed * 5 lakh figure in 2018 which is a
remarkable achievement. This has been possible due to continuous
improvement of tourism products and facilities by the department and
all out efforts of officers concerned.

Therefore, it is reiterated that there is no unfruitful expenditure in
preparation of DPR and EIA reports for the projects as it has been
utilized for the benefit of tourism promotion in A&N ‘Islands, not just by
Tourism Department, but also by other agencies.

It is also evident that the DPR/EIA reports have been utilized for
preparation of DPR by departmental staff for availing Central Financial
Assistance under Swadesh Darshan scheme.” .

Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“(l) The Administration did not provide any suitable reply for the delay of
three years in providing the requisite details such as project layout,
technical justification, technical design etc. to NIOT for inclusion in the
final DPR.

(2)No Stringent disciplinary penalty as suggested by the PAC was
initiated by the Administration so far.

(3)The Administration provided the present status of works/projects
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme (erstwhile PIDDC), which are at
various stages of completion. This will be verified in subsequent audits.”

In reply to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry have stated as

under:-

“The matter has been re-examined and the following are
submitted:-

i. The Department placed work order for preparation of EIA
report on NIOT Port Blair on 01.12.2011 and payment was made
as per sanction order dated 27.12.2011, in January 2012.

ii. The draft EIA report in respect of Corbyn’s Cove (South
Andaman) was received from NIOT on 27.12.2012 and in
respect of Swaraj Dweep (Havelock) on 31.05.2013 and
Shaheed Dweep (Neil Island) on 20.11.2013. After getting the
draft EIA reports, the Department approached executing
agencies viz. APWD, PBMC, etc. to provide tequired technical
inputs like details of site wise construction materials as per
drawings, quantities of construction materials required, work plan
for construction, schedule etc. for providing to NIOT for inclusion
in the final EIA report with technical justification.

iii. The matter was followed up with the respective
departments/executing agencies for providing the required
inputs. Since no response was’ forthcoming, the Director
(Tourism) took a meeting with the representatives of executing

—}-


agencies on 19.01.2015. This was followed up with another letter
to APWD on 22.01.2015 and reminder dated 10.08.2015 to
provide inputs.
iv. Having still not received any inputs from the executing
Departments, the Director (Tourism) gathered the required
details from an engineer of APWD and forwarded the same to
the NIOT, Port Blair under his signature on 11.12.2015 for
submission of final EIA reports.
uM In this period of about 2 years (after the receipt of draft
EIA reports and furnishing of required inputs to NIOT) the
Department had made its best efforts to coordinate with
executing agencies to take the project forward. However, the
delay took place due to no response from these executing
agencies.

So there is no intentional delay in roviding the requisite
details by any officer of the Directorate of Tourism and has taken
place due to inter-departmental coordination issues.

Moreover, the DPR/EIA reports have been utilized for
preparation of DPR by departmental staff for availing Central
Financial Assistance under Swadesh Darshan scheme.”

9. The Committee note that the DPR was forwarded to Ministry of
Tourism in March, 2010 for sanction under PIDDC Scheme which could
not be considered due to non-submission of CRZ/environmental
clearance, and the same was intimated through a letter dated 29-10-2010,
after a gap of more than six months. Pointing out this deficiency at the
stage of submission of DPR is depictive of lack of clarity on the
requirements in the Terms of Reference / agreements signed between
the entities which resulted in the avoidable delay in the whole process
and showcases a lack of forethought and planning on the part of the
Ministry/Department concerned. Further, it is seen that the required
inputs for preparation of final Environment Impact Assessment (EIA)
reports could not be provided expeditiously to NIOT because the
Tourism Department of the Union Territory did not possess the technical
expertise and the various executing agencies in the Andaman & Nicobar
administration did not provide the required inputs in spite of repeated
requests from the Department. This, as per the Action Taken Note was
finally obtained not from the concerned agencies but from an engineer of
APWD. It’s a wonder that the required inputs that were expected from the
agencies concerned could be obtained from one single official which, in
unequivocal terms indicates that there is a possibility of assimilation of
all the required information at a single point. Further, it is obvious that
there is no effective supervision and control of these agencies by the
senior most officials of the Administration. Moreover, it was sheer
coincidence that despite the delay, the DPR, prepared by ‘the India
Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) and the EIA, prepared by the
NIOT could be utilized for projects under the revised scheme, ‘Swadesh
Darshan’ lest the fund utilized for the Preparation of DPR and EIA reports
would have been rendered as wasted. The Committee, therefore, impress
upon the Department to be more prudent in future, to consider all

नल *


variables in implementing a project including coordination with
executing agencies and make judicious decisions so as to ensure
fruition of projects without any hindrances.

(Recommendation Para No. 3)

10. The Committee found that the erstwhile Planning Commission
sanctioned 2 crore in 2006 under the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme
(TRP) for setting up of Canopy Walkway (CW) in Andaman & Nicobar Islands
(A&NI). Subsequently, the Forest Department suggested in September, 2008
Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet for CW. The Committee observed that though
the Forest Department suggested that the CW at Mount Harriet be taken up
after gaining experience from the CW at Chidiyatapu, the Chief Secretary
approved the proposal in December, 2008 and a Consultancy agreement
signed in May 2009 with a private firm for both the sites. The Committee were
unable to understand as to why the Chief Secretary approved consultancy
agreement for both sites and what were the reasons for ignoring the Forest

Department's suggestion in this regard which resulted in blockage of * 4.33

crore. The Committee, therefore, desired that responsibility may be fixed
against the Chief Secretary concerned for this injudicious decision.

The Committee were appalled to note that in violation of the GFR, the
Department of Tourism had transferred 1.60 crore to the Department of
Environment & Forests as 100% advance for timber for the canopy walkways
project at Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet despite latter expressing their
inability to supply the full requirement of 364.44 cum of Padauk timber. The
Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons behind releasing 100% fund
in advance for procurement of timber. The Committee further desired that the
Ministry of Home Affairs take immediate steps to penalize those personnel
responsible for release of 100% fund in advance.

The Committee further noted that the CW project was allotted to
Andaman Public Works Department (APWD) though the Department had not
executed any projects of this nature in the past leading to delay in the
implementation of the project. The ANI administration then roped in the
Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works (ALHW) to take the work forward.
However the project was dropped after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 5.62
crores on consultancy work, civil works & materials etc. The Committee were
dismayed at the nonehalant and noncommittal attitude of the A&NI
Administration in the implementation and completion of-the project. The
Committee recommended that a thorough enquiry may be conducted on the
planning and decision making process, assignment of the project to APWD,
delay in initiation of the project, engagement of ALHW and cancellation of the
project. The Committee desired that responsibility may be fixed and stringent
action taken against officials responsible for these lapses..

11, The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Notes have stated as

under:-
_ q —


“As intimated by A& NI Administration, in the aftermath of
Tsunami, it was incumbent upon the Tourism Department to come up
with new Tourism Projects to revive the tourism sector of the Islands, so
as to provide secure livelihood opportunities to the local population
dependent upon various tourism activities in the Islands. The Canopy
Walkway (CW) Project was one among such various projects identified
for implementation for developing Islands as unique Ecotourism
destination.

Though the Forest Department had suggested that the CW at
Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from the CW at
Chidiyatapu, however, it was felt by the Administration that since
Consultant is being appointed for the Canopy Walkway project, it would
be appropriate to get Consultancy report/DPR made for both the
projects in one go, even if they had to be taken up in a phased manner.
Subsequently, during finalization of the scope of work, it was decided
that the Consultant would also perform the role of an Independent
Engineer who would oversee the project till completion. It was felt that
it would be economical if both the projects were taken up
simultaneously, as the same Consultant as well as Contractor would be
taking up both the projects. It would not have been economical to
engage the Consultant as an Independent Engineer till completion of
both the projects in a phased manner which would have consumed
much longer time.

A letter dated 23.03.2010 was received from Forest Department,
wherein it had been pointed out that supply of such large quantity of
timber in a short period would be very difficult citing various reasons.
However, they also mentioned that in case the supply is to be effected
in a short spell, the make shift units functioning in the island may be
asked to supply a part of the quantity which will save time. They had
further mentioned that considering the specific demand for a very
specialized job of construction, Forest Department would make serious
efforts to supply the quantity spread over in two financial years with
corresponding reduction of the quantity for general public to a large
extent. Forest Department had also mentioned that the DCF(Mill.
Division) is being advised to accept the estimated cost for the supply of

Padauk sawn timber as an advance. Based on this, an amount of * 1.60

crore was transferred to Department of Environment & Forest by
Tourism Department as advance.

The project was not allotted to Andaman Public Works
Department but a Special Division was created in APWD only to
monitor the work and to cross check and verify the’ bills submitted by
the Contractor. The expertise and experience of the Consultant as well
as IIT,Bombay was taken for the project.

—\o-


12.

A meeting of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) was held under
the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, A&N Administration on 23.11.2017
to examine the proposal submitted by ALHW for development of
Canopy Walkway at Chidyatapu at an estimated cost of © 923.00 lakhs.
As per the minutes of the SFC meeting, the Committee had detailed
deliberations on all the pertinent aspects including project risk, cost
benefit, internal rate of return, changing tourism landscape, etc. and felt
that taking into account the current status of the project, the amount
already spent on the said project vis-a-vis the cost escalation that is
likely to take place by the time the said project gets completed and
making a cost benefit analysis of this project, it would be prudent for the
Administration not to go ahead with the same and altogether drop the
said project at this stage.

As regards * 1.6 crore released to Forest Department, as pointed

out by Forest Department, on account of procedural difficulties in inter
department transfer of funds, the Forest Department has agreed to
provide timber to Tourism Department as and when required for various

other projects against the funds available with them. Out of * 1.60 crore,

an amount of © 1.44 crore has been deposited in the Revenue Head ~

“0406_01_101_00_00_00” of Chatham Saw Mill under Forest
Department for timber.

Further, the materials procured for the project are proposed for
being used by various departments of A&N Administration. The Forest
Department has been requested to use the foundations constructed for
towers for the project at Chidiyatapu.

The review of project proposal midway is in itself a prudent act of
Administration to ensure apt utilisation of resources as well as
capability.”

Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“(a) As it was suggested by the Forest Department that the
Canopy Work (CW) at Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining
experience from the CW at Chidiyatapu, PAC had asked that why the
Chief Secretary approved consultancy agreement for both sites and
what were the reasons for ignoring the Forest Department's suggestion
in this regard. The Administration's reply stated: that it was felt that it
would be economical if both projects were taken up simultaneously.
However, the file notings of approval of the project does not show such
recorded justification.

(b) Despite the PAC recommendation for a thorough enquiry,
the ANI Administration neither conducted any enquiry nor,fix any
responsibility on any officials for lapse so far.”

हा) नई


43. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid Audit
observation stated as under:-

“The matter has been re-examined and following are submitted:-

i. The Canopy Walkway project was started in the aftermath
of Tsunami to secure livelihood and boost economic growth in
the Islands.

ii. Though the Forest Department had’ suggested that the
Canopy Walkway project at Mount Harriet to be taken after
gaining experience from the project at Chidyatapu, the
Administration felt that since process of appointment of
consultant was already in process, both the sites may be
included in the RFP document and get consultancy for both the
projects which can later on be implemented in a phased manner.
Subsequently, during finalisation of the scope of work the
consultant would also perform as an Independent Engineer who
would oversee the project till completion. Therefore, if the
engagement of the consultant is done separately, the projects
might have taken a longer time and may not be economical.

iii. The decision to drop the project was taken after due
deliberation in the meeting of the Standing Finance Committee
(SFC) which was held under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary, A&N Administration on 23.11.2017. The Committee
after taking into account the current status of the project, the
amount already spent on the said project vis-a-vis the cost
escalation that was likely to take place by the time the said
projects gets completed and making a cost analysis decided to
drop the project.”

44. The Committee note that in 2006, the Canopy Walkway (CW)
project was envisioned for implementation under the Tsunami
Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) for developing the Andaman & Nicobar
Islands (A&NI) as unique ecotourism destination and Chidiyatapu and
Mount Harriet were identified as project sites. The project was approved
in December, 2008 and consultancy agreement was signed in May 2009.
Despite the suggestion of the Forest Department to take up the CW at
Mount Harriet after gaining experience from the CW at Chidiyatapu, the
Administration had appointed a Consultant for both the projects, as it
was felt by the administration that it would be economical if both
projects were taken up simultaneously, and an amount of * 4.60 crore
was released to the Department of Environment & Forests as advance
for timber required for the Canopy walkways projects which is in
contravention of the provisions of GFR. However, after deliberating on
the status of the project in 23.11.2017, the amount spent and the likely
cost escalation of the projects on completion and making a cost
analysis, the Standing Finance Committee (SFC), under the

—\o-


Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, A&NI, the project was dropped. The
Committee observe that initially, despite the Forest Department’s
recommendation to the contrary, the administration went ahead with
appointing a Consultant for both of the projects, citing it as an economy
measure and then released the full amount of Rs.1.60 01018 35 advance
in contravention of the provisions of GFR and inspite of the Forest
Department expressing difficulties in supplying the raw material in the
particular time frame. Further, after a lapse of seven long years, the SFC
decided to scrap the whole project citing cost escalation etc, thereby
making the whole process a mockery. The Committee are of the view
that the Administration ought to have foreseen the possible cost
escalation of the projects and made necessary provisions to
accommodate any unforeseen expenses and eventualities to ensure
fruition of the projects. The Committee, therefore recommend that in
future, necessary provisions may be made for unforeseen contingencies
to ensure efficient implementation of projects within the targeted
timeframe. Further, no reply has been given on the issue of
contravention of the provisions of GFR. The Committee expect a specific
explanation on the issue of acting in contravention of the provisions of
the GFR.

(Recommendation Para No.4)

15. The Committee noted that the Tourism Department envisioned a
floating restaurant and procured an outlived vessel namely M.V. Ramanujan,

from the Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) at a cost of © 1 crore without

undertaking any techno economic feasibility survey of the project. However,
the project could not materialized as the Department were unable to attract
private bidders to undertake for designing, renovation, operation and
maintenance of the vessel. The Committee found that a technical Committee
opined in November, 2012 that the vessel required extensive repairs and fresh
certifications and instead recommended disposal of vessel. The Committee
were again constrained to observe that during the period April 2012 to 23
November, 2014, the Directorate of Shipping Services (DSS) incurred an

expenditure of Rs. 0.78 crore ( 2.45 lakh per month) for manning the vessel,

which could have been reduced by * 0.29 crore had the Administration acted

expeditiously on the 80618 recommendation on beaching the vessel. The
Committee thus observed that till May, 2016, the environment clearance for
ship breaking was pending and neither the vessel nor its contents had been
disposed of. The Committee were of the view that the Department of Tourism
ought to have undertaken a survey on the functional and the economic viability
of procuring a decommissioned passenger vessel before undertaking the
project. Moreover, the Committee were of the view that the Department ought
to have sought potential interested players prior to procurement of the vessel.
The Committee further opined that keeping in mind the deterioration of the
unused vessel, the Department ought to have beached the vessel at the
earliest so as to slow down the pace of deterioration and undertake repairs
and redesigning for use. Noting that lack of proper planning and hasty

-\3-


decision of the officials of the Department of Tourism without any techno
economic feasibility study, the Committee desired that responsibility may be
fixed and necessary action may be taken against the incompetent officials.
The Committee also recommended that in future necessary surveys and
researches may be undertaken by competent and _ experienced

officials/experts before undertaking any such project.

16.

under:-

The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken notes have stated as

“As intimated by A& NI Administration, in the year 2010,
operation of floating restaurant in these Islands was a new concept
which the Department wanted to showcase for emulation by the private
players of Tourism industry of the Islands. Since, procurement of a new
vessel for the purpose would involve a huge capital investment, it was
decided to seek transfer of a passenger vessel M.V. Ramanujam from
SC\(Shipping Corporation of India) to Tourism Department at a total
cost of | 1 crore. The Department had gone ahead with the project
(Operation of M.V. Ramanujam as a Floating Restaurant) with the
approval of Hon'ble Lt. Governor considering it to be procurement from
a Government of India Public Sector Enterprise and its operation as
Floating Restaurant would have added a new attraction to the visiting
tourists.
The Administration floated RFP for designing, renovation,
operation and maintenance of the vessel M.V. Ramanujam as a floating
restaurant on 20/04/2011 and last date of submission was extended till
07/08/2011. The RFP could not attract a single bidder. RFP was again
floated on 07/10/2011 and it attracted a single bidder only. Accordingly,
tender could not be finalised.

Further, due to non-operation of the vessel, the condition of the
vessel deteriorated requiring extensive refit, repairs etc. Under these
circumstances, it was not economically feasible to undertake the repair
and operate the vessel. As such, it was decided to dispose of the same.
Although, SCI made several attempts to dispose the vessel through
Metal Scrap Trade Corporation but it failed as the vessel was not in a
position to be towed to mainland.

Thereafter, on 11.12.2013, SCI suggested that A&N
Administration may take permission to beach the vessel at Port Blair
itself and then bids may be invited for breaking the vessel at Port Blair.
The suggestion of SCI was examined in the Administration during
discussions and meeting on various dates. On 23.12.2013, a
Committee was constituted to make an assessment of hazardous
materials onboard the said vessel. The Committee submitted its report
on 22.01.2014 and after detailed discussions, it was decided that the
vessel may be beached at Panighat. The procedure of removing
hazardous materials and old stores from the vessel was started which

—\y —


in itself was time consuming process. Formal approval of Hon’ble Lt.
Governor for shifting the vessel was obtained on 22.05.2014.

Shifting of the vessel to a new location was a very complicated
task which required high skilled, manpower & machinery, favourable
highest tide, wind speed and weather. The Port Management Board
and Directorate of Shipping Services were entrusted the responsibility
and various dates were planned for executing the job, however on
some occasions it had to be postponed either due to unfavourable wind
or weather conditions.

All the above factors led to the unavoidable delay in shifting of
the vessel and the vessel was finally. shifted on 23.12.2014.

Presently, the vessel MV Ramanujam has been taken for
condemnation and sale by the Directorate of Shipping Services, A&N
Administration.

It is humbly submitted that in future necessary surveys and
researches shall be undertaken’ by competent and experienced
officials/experts before undertaking any such project and keeping in
view response of service providers in the prevailing climatic and distant
geographical conditions & locations respectively in these islands.”

17. Audit in their vetted comments stated as under:

“(a) The Andaman and Nicobar Administration has not taken
any action to fix responsibilities against the incompetent officials
as desired by PAC.

(b) Further, as recommended by the PAC, the Ministry has
given its assurance that in future necessary surveys and
researches shall be undertaken by competent and experienced
Officials/experts before undertaking any such project and keeping
in view response of service providers in the prevailing climatic
and distant geographical conditions & locations respectively in
these islands. The same will be verified by audit in case of
similar projects are taken up by Administration in future.”

18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid Audit
observation stated as under:- -
‘.
“The matter was re-examined and following points are reiterated:
i. Operating of floating restaurant was completely a new
concept in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
ii. Instead of procuring a new vessel at huge capital
investment, a passenger vessel M.V.Ramanujam from SCI was
transferred to Tourism Department with the approval of Hon'ble
Lt. Governor.


iii. The RFP for designing, renovation, operation and
maintenance of the vessel could not be finalized despite it being
floated twice, only one bidder came. During this period, the
vessel condition deteriorated and it was not found economically
feasible to undertake repair and renovation.
iv. As such, it was decided to dispose off the same. SCI
made several attempts to dispose the vessel through Metal
Scrap Trade Corporation but it failed as the vessel was not in a
position to be towed to mainland.
v. Thereafter, on 11.12.2013, SCI suggested that A&N
’ Administration may take permission to beach the vessel at Port
Blair itself and then bids may be invited for breaking the vessel at
Port Blair.
vi. The suggestion of SCI was examined in the
Administration. Ori 23.12.2013, a Committee was constituted to
make an assessment of hazardous materials onboard the said
vessel. The Committee submitted its report on 22.01.2014 and
after detailed discussions, it was decided that the vessel may be
beached at Panighat.
vii. | The procedure of removing hazardous materials and old
stores from the vessel was started which in itself was time
consuming process.

viii. | Formal approval of Hon'ble Lt. Governor for shifting the
vessel was obtained on 22.05.2014.
ix. Shifting of the vessel to a new location was a very

complicated task which required high skilled manpower &
machinery, favourable highest tide, wind speed and weather.
The Port Management Board and Directorate of Shipping
Services were entrusted the responsibility however on some
occasions it had to be postponed either due to unfavourable
wind or weather conditions.

xX. The vessel was finally shifted on 23.12.2014 i.e., after one
year of the suggestion made by the SCI.
xi. Presently, the vessel has been taken for condemnation

and its disposal process is underway.

From the above, it is clear that the project was
conceptually a new project to attract tourism. The project could
not fructify due to various challenges such as condition of the
vessel, non interest by service providers etc. so it is difficult to
conclude that any particular official was responsible.

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply
submitted earlier, the Committee is requested to review the
recommendation and their observation made under-para (a) and
(b) of vetted audit comments of para no. 2.1.3.3.""

—-\6-


19. The Committee, observing that no techno economic feasibility
survey of the project was taken by the Tourism Department before
procuring the vessel, feel that the whole process of procuring the
outlived vessel was hastily done without a concrete and committed
vision by the Administration which ultimately resulted in scrapping of
the project and dismantling of the vessel after having incurred
significant expenses. The Committee are of the view that inputs of
competent experts and experienced officials ought to have been taken
before procuring the vessel. Further, noting that tender for designing,
renovation, operation and maintenance could not be finalized in 2011,
the Committee enquired as to why the decision to beach the vessel for
breaking was delayed till 22.05.2014. The Committee feel that lack of
vision and commitment on the part of the implementing agencies led to
the abandonment of the project and therefore reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that responsibility may be fixed and
appropriate action taken against the errant officials. The Committee also
recommend that in future the Administration should be more proactive
and committed towards implementation of such projects.

(Recommendation Para No.7)

20. The Committee noted that the Tourism Department paid an advance of
* 8.87 crore (March 2012) to Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and

Plantation Development Corporation Limited (ANIFPDCL), despite the poor
financial state of ANIFPDCL, without entering into any agreement for
development of one camp near Radha Nagar beach with 20 cottages in ANI to
provide amenities of international standards for high end tourists. The
Committee were constrained to find that ANIFPDCL submitted the projec
proposal after a delay of more than two years. In July 2014, however, the
Chief Secretary noted that ANIFPDL was on the verge of closure and the work
could not be executed by them, the project was transferred to the Fores’
Department with a revised concept though the Tourism Department requested
(July-August 2015) ANIFPDCL to refund the advance paid Rs. 8.60 crore had
already been diverted for payment of salary to its employees and Rs, 26.05
lakh was spent on consultancy and other charges, and consequently, the
advance remains un-refunded as on May, 2016 and the infrastructure has no
been created even after more than nine years. The Committee were again
perturbed to find that no specific approval had been accorded by the Tourism
Department, A&N Administration to the ANIFPDCL for expenditure towards
consultancy for the said project. The Committee took a seridus».view on the
advance payment made by the Tourism Department to ANIFPDCL withou
entering into any agreement. The Ministry of Home Affairs have also failed to
provide the reason as to why 100% advance payment was released to the
said Corporation without any agreement or an MOU. The Committee were o
the view that the inability of the Ministry to ascertain the reasons behind the
violation of financial rules indicates serious lack of monitoring and vigilance a
the central level. The Committee, therefore desired that the Ministry of Home
Affairs conduct an enquiry into the reasons for the blatant violation of the

Vy =


financial rules and penalize the officials responsible for the lapses. The
Committee also desired that a strong central monitoring committee may be set
up to oversee the financial flow and project implementation in the Andaman &
Nicobar Islands.

21. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken notes have stated as
under:-

“Ag intimated by A& NI Administration, a project for setting up of
eco-friendly cottages in Havelock to provide amenities of international
standards for high end tourist was taken up by the Tourism department.
The work was entrusted to Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL) - a Govt. of India
undertaking.

A departmental advance of ° 8.87 crore was sanctioned by
Administration in terms of Rule 75 of compendium on advances under
GER 2005 during March 2012 which was drawn and paid to ANIFPDCL
for setting up of the 20 eco-friendly cottages at Radha Nagar, Havelock.
The ANIFPDCL signed an agreement with the architect/ consultant on
20.06.2012 for preparation of structural design, drawing, supervision,
interior designing, landscaping, and selection materials for the project.
The architect submitted draft development plan for the project on
04.09.2012. The consolidated requirements of materials were submitted
on 05.10.2012. हु

Meantime, the financial condition of ANIFPDCL deteriorated and
it came on the verge of closure. Owing to the financial crunch,

ANIFPDCL had diverted the bulk of the amount ( 8.60 crore) for
payment of the salary of their staff in anticipation of receipt of funds

from Govt. of India in 2014 (with the concurrence of Finance
Department of Administration and approval of Administration).

The department thereafter tried to revive the project through
Environment and Forest department. The matter of return of the amount
of Rs.8.60 crore which was diverted for salary by ANIFPDCL was taken
up with them. ANIFPDCL vide letter dated 15.1 2.2015 intimated that the
budget proposal including additional amount of * 8.61 crore to recoup
the amount was submitted to the Ministry of Environment of Forest and
Climate Change during the year 2014-15, but it was not
considered/approved in the RE 2014-15 and BE 2015-16. The
Department of Environment & Forest was approached to take up the
matter with Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change for return
of the diverted amount to the Tourism Department. Ministry of
Environment; Forest and Climate change vide letter No. 2-5/2003-
SU(PT) dated 3.4.2017 addressed to the Chief Secretary, Andaman
and Nicobar Administration informed that, the Ministry is in the process
of preparing a draft cabinet note for closure of A & N Island Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation Limited and it was decided to seek

—\8 -


waiver of deposit amount of * 8.61 crore provided by A & N Tourism

Department to ANIFPDC
Havelock.

Another letter (no.
was received from Division:
Development Corporation
it is also mentioned thai
attached to MoEF&CC, Go'
extended by the Govt. of
salary and wages of emp
sent to DM (P&M), ANIFP

L during 2012-2013 for a de

FDC/Tech-ll/G-226(B)/30_ dtd.
al Manager (P&M), ANI Fores!
Ltd. addressed to Director (Tou
all the properties of their Co
vt. of India against the loan ass
India time to time for the dis!

loyees of their Corporation. A let

josit work at

24.04.2017)
& Plantation

rism) wherein

rporation are
istance being
bursement of
er has been

DC to directly approach MHA

or writing off

the above said amount. Nevertheless, the Administration
the possibility laying its claim on the properties of said
attached with MoEF&CC.

if exploring
corporation

Further, the amount of 26.05 lakh paid towards consultancy and
other charges cannot be entirely termed as unfruitful, as the
Environment and Forest department is vested with drawings and
designs which will be helpful for the other project of “Development of
Eco Cottages at Neil Island” which was been proposed in Annual Plan
2016-2017 of Tourism Department.

In the meanwhile, ANIFPDCL has refunded the un-utilized
amount of °2,20,94,692/- (Rupees Two crore Twenty lakh Ninety Four

Thousand six hundred ninety two only) from the advance of * 8.87

crores. For rest of the amount, it has been intimated by the ANIFPDCL
that the matter is being taken up with MoEFCC.

Present Status: It is humbly submitted that the Andaman and
Nicobar Administration have received an amount of ‘2, 20,94,692/- from
ANIFPDCL vide cheque no.383224 dated 01/01/2018 and the cheque,

Deposited into Government Account vide challan no.728 dated
08.01.18.

The Government of India, Ministry of Environment of Forest and
Climate Change, New Delhi vide letter No.F,No.2-6/2017-SU dated
24.8.2017 communicated that the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting dated 16.08.2017 has approved the
proposal of closure of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation, Port Blair. Accordingly,
ANIFPDCL has been closed and M/S. National Building Construction
Corporation Limited, New Delhi (NBCC) designated land management
authority for acquiring the assets of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Forest Plantation Development Corporation Limited located at Little
Andaman, Mayabunder and Port Blair.


22.

23.

The Administration has taken up the matter with the Ministry of
Environment & Forest and Climate Change, New Delhi for recovering
the balance amount of 6.60 crores and the progress will be informed.

Andaman and Nicobar Administration humbly submitted that, a
strong central monitoring committee will be set up to oversee the
financial flow and project implementation in the Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.”

Audit in their vetted comments stated as under:

“i) The untilized amount of > 2.21 crore, out of 8.87 crore

advanced to ANFPDCL, was refunded by the ANIFPDCL in January
2018 and the same was deposited in Government account vide Challan

No. 728 dated 8.1.2018. Regarding refund of the balance amount of *
6.60 crore, the matter was taken up with Hon'ble LG, A&N
Administration by the Government of India to write off the amount.
Further development is awaited.

ii) The PAC were of the view that the inability of the Ministry
to ascertain the reasons behind the violation of financial rules indicated
serious lack of monitoring and vigilance at the central level and desired
that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) conducts an enquiry into the
reasons for the blatant violation of the financial rules and penalize the
Officials responsible for the lapses. The Committee also desired that
strong monitoring committee may be set up to oversee the financial flow
and project implementation in the A&N Islands.

However, neither was any enquiry conducted nor was
responsibility fixed on officials responsible for blatant violation of
Financial Rules so far. Further, central monitoring committee was also
not set up till date.”

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid Audit

observation stated as under:-

“The matter has been re-examined and the following points are

reiterated:

i. A departmental advance of * 8.87 crore was sanctioned by the

Administration in terms of Rule 75 of Compendium on Advances under
GFR 2005 during March 2012 which was drawn and paid to ANIFPDCL
(a- Govt. of India undertaking) for setting up of the 20 eco-friendly
cottages at Radha Nagar, Havelock.

ii. Regarding the write off of the balance amount of * 6.60 Cr., the

matter is under process for seeking approval of the Hon'ble Lt.
Governor as per the request of MoEF&CC, Govt. of India. After
approval of Hon'ble Lt. Governor the matter will be sent to MHA for

0 +


seeking approval regarding write off of the balance amount of * 6.60
cr”

24. The Committee note that the departmental advance of 8.87 crore
was sanctioned by the Administration in terms of Rule 75 of
Compendium on Advances under GFR 2005 during March 2012 which
was drawn and paid to ANIFPDCL (a Govt. of India undertaking) for
setting up 20 eco-friendly cottages at Radha Nagar, Havelock. However,
since the projects could not be brought to fruition, the untilized amount
of 2.24 crore, out of “8.87 crore was refunded by the ANIFPDCL in
January 2018 and the same was deposited in Government account. On
the matter of refund of the balance amount of “6.60 crore, the Committee
note that the same has been taken up with LG, A&N Administration by
the Government of India for writing off the amount. The Committee also
note that the Ministry of Home Affairs has also not set up strong
monitoring committee. The Committee are of the view that it is
paramount to constitute a strong monitoring and vigilance committee to
oversee project implementation in A&NI and seek to be apprised of the
present position in regard to write off of the balance amount of “6.60
crore. Further, the Committee recommend that it may be made obligatory
to sign agreements for all future contracts, which include appropriate
provisions and all aspects of the projects, from conception till execution.
The agreements would also encompass non-diversion of funds by the
executing agency with severe penalty for contravention, if any. The
Committee also observe and wonder as to how the finance department
could give clearance when all the properties of ANIFPDC were attached
with Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Control and hence
consider it as a failure on the part of the Finance Department to evaluate
the financial health of the entity before giving approval. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation on setting up of a
strong monitoring and vigilance committee to oversee the financial flow
and project implementation in the A&N Islands without any further delay.
The Committee wish to be and apprised of the action taken in this
regard.


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation
NEED FOR BETTER EXECUTION OF PROJECTS

The committee note that out of the 26 major works identified by the
Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands under the Tsunami
Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) and various schemes of the Ministry of
Tourism, 18 projects were either dropped or not taken up at all and out
of the remaining 8 projects, 2 projects were further dropped at different
stages of implementation. The Committee also note that out of the 6
completed works, 3 were either not utilized or partially commissioned
The Committee are perturbed to find the dismal record of the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands Administration in execution of projects. The
Committee are of the view that lack of foresight and proper planning are
the reasons behind the delays in project implementation, non-fruition of
projects and the consequent loss and unfruitful expenditure. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that henceforth the Andaman &
Nicobar Islands Administration should follow a systemic planning and
effective decision making and take into consideration all variables like
availability of resources, credibility of implementing agency based. on
past performances, timeframe for completion of projects, maintenance
and economic viability of the project etc. at the planning stage of any
project.

[PARA NO. 1]
Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration
they have committed to follow a systemic planning and effective
decision making and take into consideration all variables like availability
of resources, credibility of implementing agency based on past
performances, timeframe for completion of projects, maintenance and
economic viability of the project etc. at the planning stage of any project
etc. This is noted for strict compliance.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may
kindly accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit

The recommendation of the PAC that ‘Andaman & Nicobar
Administration should follow a systemic planning and effective decision

1) -


making and take into consideration all variable like availability of
resources, credibility of implementing agency based on past
performances, timeframe for completion of projects, maintenance and
economic viability of the project etc. at the planning stage of any project’
has been accepted by the Administration, and has been noted for future
compliance.

The compliance will be verified in subsequent audits.

Updated action taken reply of Department

The Administration has already accepted the observation made by the
Committee and noted for future compliance.

(Observation/Recommendation)

ASSIGNMENT OF WORK WITHOUT ENSUIRNG ADEQUATE
RESOURCE AND VIOLATION OF GFR

The Committee find that the erstwhile Planning Commission
sanctioned Rs. 2 crore in 2006 under the Tsunami Rehabilitation
Programme (TRP) for setting up of Canopy Walkway (CW) in Andaman
& Nicobar Islands (A&NI). Subsequently, the Forest Department
suggested in September, 2008 Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet for CW.
The committee observe that though the Forest Department suggested
that the CW at Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from
the CW at Chidiyatapu, the Chief.Secretary approved the proposal in
December, .2008 and a Consultancy agreement signed in May 2009 with
a private firm for both the sites. The Committee are unable to
understand as to why the Chief Secretary’ approved consultancy
agreement for both sites and what were the reasons for ignoring the
Forest Department’s suggestion in this regard which resulted in
blockage of Rs. 4.33 crore. The Committee, therefore, desire that
responsibility may be fixed against the Chief Secretary concerned for
this injudicious decision and apprise the Committee of the action taken
in this regard within three months of the presentation of this Report to
Parliament.

The Committee are appalled to note that in violation .of, the GFR, the
Department of Tourism had transferred Rs. 1.60 crdre to the
Department of Environment & Forests as 100% advance for timber for
the canopy walkways project at Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet despite
latter expressed their inability to supply the full requirement of 364.44
cum of Padauk timber. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
reasons behind releasing 100% fund in advance for procurement of
timber. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Home Affairs

=I3-


take immediate steps to penalize those personnel responsible for
release of 100% fund in advance.

The Committee further note that the CW project was allotted to
Andaman Public Works Department (APWD) though the Department
had not executed any projects of this nature in the past leading to delay
in the implementation of the project. The ANI administration then roped
in the Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works (ALHW) to take the work
forward. However the project was dropped after incurring an expenditure
of Rs. 5.62 crores on consultancy work, civil works & materials etc. The
Committee are dismayed at the nonchalant and noncommittal attitude of
the A&NI Administration in the implementation and completion of the
project. The Committee recommend that a thorough enquiry may be
conducted on the planning and decision making process, assignment of
the project to APWD, delay in initiation of the project, engagement of
ALHW and cancellation of the project. The Committee desire that
responsibility may be fixed and stringent action taken against officials
responsible for these lapses

[PARA NO.3]
Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, in the aftermath of Tsunami,
it was incumbent upon the Tourism Department to come up with new
Tourism Projects to revive the tourism sector of the Islands, so as to
provide secure livelihood opportunities to the local population dependent
upon various tourism activities in the Islands. The Canopy Walkway
(CW) Project was one among such various projects identified for
implementation for developing Islands as unique Ecotourism destination.

Though the Forest Department had suggested that the CW at
Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from the CW at
Chidiyatapu, however, it was felt by the Administration that since
Consultant is being appointed for the Canopy Walkway project, it would
be appropriate to get Consultancy report/(DPR made for both the
projects in one go, even if they had to be taken up in a phased manner.
Subsequently, during finalization of the scope of work, it was decided
that the Consultant would also perform the role of an Independent
Engineer who would oversee the project till completion. It was felt that
it would be economical if both the projects were taken up
simultaneously, as the same Consultant as well as Contractor would be
taking up both the projects. It would not have been economical to
engage the Consultant as an Independent Engineer tillscompletion of
both the projects in a phased manner which would have consumed
much longer time.

-Ju—


A letter dated 23.03.2010 was received from Forest Department,
wherein it had been pointed out that supply of such large quantity of
timber in a short period would be very difficult citing various reasons.
However, they also mentioned that in case the supply is to be effected in
a short spell, the make shift units functioning in the island may be asked
0 supply a part of the quantity which will save time. They had further
mentioned that considering the specific demand for a very specialized
job of construction, Forest Department would make serious efforts to
supply the quantity spread over in two financial years with
corresponding reduction of the quantity for general public to a large
extent. Forest Department had also mentioned that the DCF(Mill
Division) is being advised to accept the estimated cost for the supply of
Padauk sawn timber as an advance. Based on this, an amount of Rs.
1.60 crore was transferred to Department of Environment & Forest by
Tourism Department as advance.

The project was not allotted to Andaman Public Works Department but a
Special Division was created in APWD only to monitor the work and to
cross check and verify the bills submitted by the Contractor. The
expertise and experience of the Consultant as well as IIT,Bombay was
taken for the project.

A meeting of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) was held under the
chairmanship of Chief Secretary, A&N Administration on 23.11.2017 to
examine the proposal submitted by ALHW for development of Canopy
Walkway at Chidyatapu at an estimated cost of Rs. 923.00 lakhs. As
per the minutes of the SFC meeting, the Committee had detailed
deliberations on all the pertinent aspects including project risk, cost
benefit, internal rate of return, changing tourism landscape, etc. and felt
that taking into account the current status of the project, the amount
already spent on the said project vis-a-vis the cost escalation that is
likely to take place by the time the said project gets completed and
making a cost benefit analysis of this project, it would be prudent for the
Administration not to go ahead with the same and altogether drop the
said project at this stage.

As regards Rs. 1.6 crore released to Forest Department, as pointed
out by Forest Department, on account of procedural difficulties in inter
department transfer of funds, the Forest Department hag agreed to
provide timber to Tourism Department as and when required for various
other projects against the funds available with them. Out of Rs.1.60
crore, an amount of Rs.1.44 crore has been deposited in the Revenue
Head - “0406_01_101_00_00_00” of Chatham Saw Mill under Forest
Department for timber.

Qo —


Further, the materials procured for the project are proposed for being
used by various departments of A&N Administration. The Forest
Department has been requested to use the foundations constructed for
towers for the project at Chidiyatapu.

The review of project Proposal midway is in itself a prudent act of
Administration to ensure apt utilisation of resources as well as capability.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly
accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit

(a)As it was suggested by the Forest Department that the Canopy Work
(CW) at Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from the
CW at Chidiyatapu, PAC had asked that why the Chief Secretary
approved consultancy agreement for both sites and what were the
reasons for ignoring the Forest Department’s suggestion in this
regard. The Administration’s reply stated that it was felt that it would
be economical if both projects were taken up simultaneously.
However, the file notings of approval of the project does not show
such recorded justification.

Despite the PAC recommendation for a thorough enquiry, the ANI
Administration neither conducted any enquiry nor fixing any
responsibility on any officials for lapse so far.

Updated action taken reply of Ministry
The matter has been re-examined and following are submitted:-

i. The Canopy Walkway project was started in the aftermath of
Tsunami to secure livelihood and boost economic growth in the Islands.

ii. Though the Forest Department had suggested that the Canopy
Walkway project at Mount Harriet to be taken after gaining experience
from the project at Chidyatapu, the Administration felt that since process
of appointment of consultant was already in process, both the sites may
be included in the RFP document and get consultancy for both the
projects which can later on be implemented in a phaged manner.
Subsequently, during finalisation of the scope of work the consultant
would also perform as an Independent Engineer who would oversee the
project till completion. Therefore, if the engagement of the consultant is

Ih -


done separately, the projects might have taken a longer time and may
not be economical.

iii. The decision to drop the project was taken after due deliberation
in the meeting of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) which was
held under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, A&N Administration
on 23.11.2017. The Committee after taking into account the current
status of the project, the amount already spent on the said project vis-a-
vis the cost escalation that was likely to take place by the time the said
projects gets completed and making a cost analysis decided to drop the
project.

iv. In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted
earlier, the Committee is requested to review the recommendation and
their observation made under para (a) and (b) of vetted audit comments

of para no. 2.1.3.2.

(Observation/Recommendation)

WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE OF Rs.39.80 LAKH TOWARDS YACHT
MARINA AND LUXURY BOATS

The Committee note that in 2006 the Planning Commission
allocated Rs. 26.50 crore under Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme
(TRP) for development of one 50 unit yacht marina and procurement of
a 35 room luxury boat and two mechanized luxury boats. The Tourism
Department engaged a private consultant in November, 2008 and paid
Rs. 23.12 lakh between March, 2009 and February, 2012. In June 2009
the Department obtained a No Objection Certificate from the Defence
authorities in ANI for site development of. marina at “Command Point
and Viper Island”. In the meantime a private party approached the
Circuit Bench of the Calcutta High Court against the project and the
local Defence Authorities, withdrew the clearance given earlier without
assigning any reasons. The contractor also failed to furnish the
performance guarantee, which in terms of the agreement was to be
furnished by November, 2012 which ultimately led to the failure of the
project to fructify after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 39.80 lakh in
consultancy and advertisement charges. The Tourism Department
stated (August 2015) that there was no possibility to undertake the work
of the Yacht Marina due to non-submission of performance guarantee
by the contractor and withdrawal of clearance by the Defence
authorities. However, Audit observed that the ANI administration had not
pursued with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Ministry of
Defence for securing clearances after May, 2013. Further ANI
Administration has not implemented the penalty clauses in the
agreement with the contractor. The Committee are extremely unhappy

a4


with the state of affairs in A&NI Administration and desire an enquiry
may be instituted to fix responsibility and eventually award strigent
punishment to the guilty officials. The Committee also recommend that
Department of Tourism take necessary steps in ensuring that requisite
clearances are obtained prior to awarding of work and explicit clause to
this effect may be incorporated in all future Request For Proposal (RFP).

[PARA NO. 5]

Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, the Yacht Marina Project was
taken up by the department in the best interest of the tourism sector of
the Islands. The Islands were slowly becoming a favourite destination
for high value tourist who used to visit the Islands with their foreign
Yachts.

Planning Commission had approved the Yacht Marina Project during
2006 and thereafter the department had engaged a private consultant
1.8. M/s Feedback Venture Pvt. Ltd. The site for development of marina
at Viper Island was selected based on the report of consultant and ‘No
objection Certificate (NOC) was also obtained (June, 2009) from the
Defence authorities.

The EFC under the chairmanship of Secretary Tourism Gol held
on 25/02/2010 cleared the proposal for inviting bids by issuing RFP for
the Yacht marina project. As per the cleared RFP, environment
clearance was to be obtained by the successful bidder which shall be
facilitated by the Andaman and Nicobar Administration. The first request
for proposal (RFP) under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode failed
to fructify, and fresh RFP was invited (September, 2010) based on
which successful bidder was selected namely M/s Pembinaan Megah
Mutiara Sdn. Bhd. and Reacon Engineers (1) Pvt. Ltd. Consortium. The
offer of the successful bidder was accepted by the Standing Finance
Committee (SFC) under the chairmanship of the Secretary Tourism Gol
on 17/01/2012.

The concession agreement was registered on 05/03/2013. As per
the agreement the successful bidder was required to submit the
performance guarantee within 480 days from this date. On 07.03.2013,
the Department had written to the successful bidder to submit the
performance guarantee. However, a PIL was filed against this project on
25.03.2013 and also the No Objection Certificate issued by Defence
was-withdrawn by Andaman & Nicobar Command on 09,05.2013. Owing
to these reasons the project could not be taken further. The feasibility
Report of Yacht Marina has already been forwarded to PMB for their
future projects and will help PMB to take the step forward.

ah -


As regards the recommendation of PAC to take necessary steps
for ensuring the all requisite clearances are obtained prior to awarding of
work it is humbly submitted that this aspect will be taken into
consideration for all future projects. Considering the above, it is
earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly accept the above
explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit

a) The PAC desired that an enquiry may be instituted to fix
responsibility and eventually award stringent punishment to the guilty
officials. However, the fact remained that neither any enquiry was
instituted by ANI Administration nor any stringent penalty was awarded
by fixing responsibility on any individual so far.

b) The PAC recommended that Department of Tourism should take
necessary steps in ensuring the requisite clearance are obtained prior to
awarding of work and explicit clause to this effect may be incorporated
in all future audits of the Department of Tourism.
Updated action taken reply of Ministry

The matter for wasteful expenditure ofRs. 39.80 lakhs was Yacht Marina
has been inquired into. In addition to the reply submitted earlier, the
following is reiterated:

i. The project was conceptualised for promotion of high value
tourism by inviting foreign yachts. Being a conceptually new project for
the Islands, a consultant was hired and based on the reports submitted
by the consultant Viper Island was selected.

ii. A No-Objection certificate was obtained from the Defence
Authorities in June, 2009 i.e, before inviting RFP.

iii. The EFC under the chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism) Govt. of
India held on 25/02/2010 cleared the proposal for inviting bids by issuing
RFP for the Yacht marina project. As per the RFP, environment
clearance was to be obtained by the successful bidder.

iv. Successful bidder was selected on the basis of RFP. The offer of
the successful bidder was accepted by the Standing Finance’Committee
(SFC) under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Tourism) Govt. of India
on 17/01/2012.

५. The concession agreement was registered on 05/03/2013. As per

the agreement the successful bidder was required to submit the
performance guarantee within 180 days from this date.

AIA —


vi. On 07.03.2013, the Department had written to the successful
bidder to submit the performance guarantee.

vii. | However, a PIL was filed against this project on 25.03.2013 and
also the No Objection Certificate issued by Defence was withdrawn by
Defence authorities on 09.05.2013.

viii, The feasibility Report of Yacht Marina has already been forwarded
to PMB (Port Management Board) for their future projects and will help
PMB to take the step forward.

From the above, it is clear that NOC from defence authorities was
obtained before issue of RFP. A successful bidder was also selected on
the basis of RFP.

The bidder could not deposit the Performance Guarantee as before the
due date, a PIL was filed and NOC issued by Defence was withdrawn.

So, it may be seen that no individual officer(s) can be held responsible
for non-finalisation of the project.

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted earlier, the
Committee is requested to review the recommendation and their
observation made under para (a) and (b) of vetted audit comments of
para no. 2.1.3.4.
(Observation/Recommendation)

NON-ISSUE OF WORK ORDER RESULTING IN ABANDONMENT OF
WORK

The Committee note that the Ministry of Tourism, Tourism
Department and a private firm (consultant) entered into a tripartite
agreement for developing two integrated tourism circuits during the 127
Five Year Plan. The Ministry of Tourism released an amount of Rs. 20
lakh as advance towards consultancy fee to the Tourism Department.
The Tourism Department, however failed to identify various components
of the project and no work order was issued to the consultant for
preparation of the DPR. The Ministry of Tourism then withdrew from the
agreement and the Tourism Department refunded the unutilized Rs. 20
lakh leading to the abandonment of the project. The Committee are
unable to comprehend the rationale behind signing a_ tripartite
agreement without identifying the components of the project. The
Tourism Department ought to have envisioned and identified project
components prior to entering into the tripartite agreement. The
Committee deplore the tardiness of the Tourism Department in
identifying various components of the project which ultimately led to the
abandonment of the project. Pointing out the non-committal attitude of

-Jo-


the Tourism Department towards completion of the project, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Home Affairs take necessary
measures to revamp the Department and penalize the officials
responsible for failure to identify project components. The Committee
further recommend that the Tourism Department take a more proactive
role in conceptualizing tourism projects identifying project components,
preparation of project proposals, implementation of projects etc. -in
future.

[PARA NO. 6]

Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, during 12" five year plan, Ministry
of Tourism had planned several initiatives for comprehensive tourism
development with the mission to increase countries share in world
arrivals from 0.6 % to 1 % and to maintain at 12.16% growth rate of the
domestic tourism.

As the part of this, MoT proposed three new initiatives in 2010.

1. Integrated development of tourist destinations/circuits.

2. Development of tourism parks.

3. Development of rural tourism clusters.

To assist the Ministry in this endeavour, IL&FS infrastructure
Development Corporation Ltd., Delhi was appointed as National Level
Consultant (NLC) by Ministry of Tourism. The NLC identified two circuits
for development in the Islands, namely, Port Blair-Neil-Havelock-Little
Andaman and Port Blair-Rangat-Mayabundur-Diglipur in their report
submitted in October, 2012.

Simultaneously, the Ministry of Tourism appointed M/s SREl
Infrastructure Finance Limited as State Level Project Management
Agency (SLPMA) on 12/10/12 and a tripartite agreement was signed
between MoT, SLPMA and A&N Administration. As per the agreement,
the SLPMA was entrusted with the responsibility of setting up a Project
Management Unit (PMU) in Port Blair with an expert each on Civil Work
and Finance for implementation of Tourism projects identified by NLC.
An advance of Rs 20.00 lakhs was released (in January 2013) by the
MoT for payment of consultancy fee stipulating that further installments
would be released on receipt of provisional Utilization Certificates (UCs).

The SLPMA submitted the cost estimate of preparation of DPR of
all the projects identified by the NLC. Accordingly, only 8 projects were
proposed for preparation of DPR by the SLPMA costing Rs. 50 Lakh.

As per tripartite agreement signed between SLPMA, MoT and A &
N Administration:

1. The maximum consultancy fee as per the agreement is Rs. 20 Lakh

for project costing more than Rs. 50 cfore.

—3\ —


2. As per payment schedule of DPR fee in the Agreement, SLPMA will
have to submit a Bank Guarantee to the state/UT for an amount
equivalent to the cost of PMU for 6 months plus interest of 10% for
one year by the State Govt. for rélease of first instalment of
mobilization advance @ of 10% of the cost of preparation of DPR.

The SLPMA did not submit the required Bank Guarantee stating
that they have already submitted Bank Guarantee to Govt. of West
Bengal as PMU constituted is common for Govt. of West Bengal and UT
of A & N Islands. This clarification was not acceptable to the Finance
Department of the Administration and advised to proceed further as per
provisions in the tripartite agreement. However, the PMU agreement
was signed by the SLPMA with Govt. of West Bengal. In the above
scenario, the Administration sought clarification from MoT vide letter
dated 21/02/2014 to confirm whether the Bank guarantee submitted by
the SLPMA to Govt. of West Bengal shall be valid for A&N Islands also
in view of the reasons cited by the SLPMA.

Thereafter, the MoT vide letter dated 13/06/2014 requested the
Administration to refund the amount released for the work related to
SLPMA along with the interest since no payment has been released to
the SLPMA.

In the light of above, Administration returned the amount of Rs.
20.00 lakhs received for preparation of DPR to the Ministry of
Tourism since no work order could be placed to the SLPMA for
preparation of DPR following the decision of MoT to withdraw from
the tripartite agreement. The amount was returned vide Demand Draft
No. 054896 dt. 29/7/2015.

The Committee had observed that it was unable to comprehend
the rationale behind signing the tripartite agreement without identifying
the components of the projects. It also says that the Tourism
Department ought to have envisioned and identified projects
components prior to entering into the tripartite agreement.

It is reiterated that there is no failure on the part of Administration
in Identification of the projects. In fact, the National Level Consultant -
Mis IL & FS had identified the projects components which could be
developed in A&N Islands for tourism promotion after due consultation
process with the tourism stakeholders/general public and the
Administration and a report was submitted in February 2013. Only after
this report, the MoT had appointed the State Level Project Management
Agency i.e. M/s. SREI Infrastructure Finance Limited for preparation of
DPR based on the tripartite agreement. Unfortunately, the SLPMA have
not submitted the required Bank Guarantee to Directorate of Tourism as
a prerequisite for issue of work order for preparation of DPR as per the
tripartite agreement. Proceeding with preparation of DPR ignoring

~ 3d -


the advice of Finance Department would have created major
problems and disputes with SLPMA later on and landed the
Administration in trouble and litigations etc.

॥ is submitted that the Tourism Department had identified 08
projects components to be set up as part of circuit development in a
meeting held in Sept. 2013, for which DPR were to be prepared by the
SLPMA. The tripartite agreement was executed detailing the
commitments from agencies involved in the agreement for execution of
identified projects. It is respectfully submitted that Department could not
have assigned the work of preparation of DPR to an agency without
collecting the required bank guarantee as per the Agreement.

The Ministry of Tourism also revised the scheme of Product/
Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits (PIDDIC) in
February 2014 and came up with scheme of SwadeshDarshan for
providing tourist infrastructure developments in States and UTs. As per
this scheme, the Administration has availed financial assistance of Rs.
42.18 Cr. and several projects have been executed /are being executed.
There is no tardiness on the part of Tourism Department in execution of
projects and no opportunities have been lost in development of tourism
in the Island by availing benefits under Central Financial Assistance.
The objective of 12.16% growth in annual tourists arrival as envisaged
under 12" Five Year Plan as per the relevant scheme at that time has
also been achieved in respect of A&N Islands.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may
kindly accept the above explanation.

(Vetting Comments of Audit)

a) The PAC recommended that Ministry of Home Affairs should take
necessary measures to revamp the Department and penalize the
officials responsible for failure to identify project components within the
timeframe. However, no action, in this regard, has been initiated so far.
b) The PAC recommended that the Tourism Department to take a
more proactive role in conceptualizing tourism projects, identifying
project components, preparation of project proposals, implementation of
projects etc in future. These aspects would be scrutinized in future
audits.
(Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry)
+

The matter has been re-examined and the following points are
reiterated for consideration:-
i. The Ministry of Tourism appointed M/S SREI_ Infrastructure
Finance Limited as State Level Project Management Agency (SLPMA)
on 12.10.2012 and a tripartite agreement was signed between MoT,
SLPMA and A&N Administration.

-435—-


ii. As per payment schedule of DPR fee in the agreement, the
SLPMA have to submit a Bank Guarantee to the UT for release of first
Instalment of mobilisation advance @ 10% of the cost of preparation of
DPR.

iii. It is a fact that the SLPMA has not furnished the required Bank
Guarantee to the Department without which work order to SLPMA could
not have been placed in time. Non furnishing of required Bank
Guarantee by the SLPMA was adversely viewed by the Finance
Department. In this situation, the Administration sought clarification from
the MoT vide letter dated 21.02.2014 to confirm whether the Bank
Guarantee submitted by SLPMA to Govt. of West Bengal will be
applicable to A&N Islands also. There is no response from the Ministry
and by the time, the Ministry had revised the PIDDIC scheme with
SwadeshDarshan Scheme in February, 2014 and MoT withdrew from
the tripartite agreement in June, 2014.

iv. The Administration returned the amount of Rs. 20 Lakhs received
for preparation of DPR to the Ministry of Tourism in July, 2015.

५. The Department could not have assigned the work of preparation
of DPR to an Agency without collecting the required Bank Guarantee.
There is no fault on the part of officials of the Department in identifying
project components/ not placing work order with the SLPMA.

vi. The Administration is committed to make visible improvements in
the functioning of Tourism Department and revamp the Department with
a view to achieve sustainable tourism development in the Island. The
Department will take proactive role in conceptualising Tourism projects
in future and in its implementation.

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted
earlier, the Committee is requested to review the recommendation and
their observation made under para (i) and (ii) of vetted audit comments
of para no. 2.1.4.2.

(Observation/Recommendation)

VIOLATION OF FINANCIAL RULES

The Committee note that the Tourism Department paid an
advance of Rs. 8.87 crore (March 2012) to Andaman & Nicobar Islands
Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited (ANIFPDCL),
despite the poor financial state of ANIFPDCL, without entering into any
agreement for development of two camps of 20 eco-friendly cottages
each in ANI to provide amenities of international standards for high end
tourists. The Committee are constrained to find that ANIFPDCL
submitted the project proposal after a delay of more than two years. In
July 2014, however, the Chief Secretary noted that ANIFPDL was on the
verge of closure and the work could not be executed by them, the
project was transferred to the Forest Department with a revised concept
though the Tourism Department requested (July-August 2015)
ANIFPDCL to refund the advance paid Rs. 8.60 crore had already been

Buy


diverted for payment of salary to its employees and Rs, 26.05 lakh was
spent on consultancy and other charges, and consequently, the
advance remains un-refunded as on May, 2016 and the infrastructure
has not been created even after more than nine years. The Committee
are again perturbed to find that no specific approval had been accorded
by the Tourism Department, A&N Administration to the ANIFPDCL for
expenditure towards consultancy for the said project. The Committee
take a serious view on the advance payment made by the Tourism
Department to ANIFPDCL without entering into any agreement. The
Ministry of Home Affairs have also failed to provide the reason as to why
100% advance payment was_ released 10 the _ said
Corporation without any agreement or an MOU. The Committee are of
the view that the inability of the Ministry to ascertain the reasons behind
the violation of financial rules indicates serious lack of monitoring and
vigilance at the central level. The Committee, therefore desire that the
Ministry of Home Affairs conduct an enquiry into the reasons for the
blatant violation of the financial rules and penalize the officials
responsible for the lapses. The Committee also desire that a strong
central monitoring committee may be set up to oversee the financial flow
and project implementation in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The
Committee have now been informed that the ANI administration is in the
process of recovering Rs. 2.21 crore from the ANIFPDCL, which has not
been diverted towards payment of salaries but is lying with the
Corporation. For recovery of the balance amount along with interest, the
Administration has already laid its claim/rights of first refusal on the
properties of the ANIFPDCL, in the event of disposal of any of its assets,
in view of the closure of the Corporation. The committee desire that the
administration fix a deadline to recover the amount of Rs. 2.21 crore and
apprise of the latest status on the recovery at the earliest.

[PARA NO. 7]

Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, a project for setting up of eco-
friendly cottages in Havelock to provide amenities of international
standards for high end tourist was taken up by the Tourism department.
The work was entrusted to Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL) - a Govt. of India
undertaking. : :
मै

A departmental advance of Rs. 8.87 crore was sanctioned by
Administration in terms of Rule 75 of compendium on advances under
GFR 2005 during March 2012 which was drawn and paid to ANIFPDCL
for setting up of the 20 eco-friendly cottages at Radha Nagar, Havelock.
The ANIFPDCL signed an agreement with the architect/ consultant on
20.06.2012 for preparation of structural design, drawing, supervision,
interior designing, landscaping, and selection materials for the project.


The architect submitted draft development plan for the project on
04.09.2012. The consolidated requirements of materials were submitted
on 05.10.2012.

Meantime, the financial condition of ANIFPDCL deteriorated and it
came on the verge of closure. Owing to the financial crunch, ANIFPDCL
had diverted the bulk of the amount (Rs. 8.60 crore) for payment of the
salary of their staff in anticipation of receipt of funds from Govt. of India
in 2014 (with the concurrence of Finance Department of Administration
and approval of Administration).

The department thereafter tried to revive the project through
Environment and Forest department. The matter of return of the amoun
of Rs. 8.60 crores which was diverted for salary by ANIFPDCL was
taken up with them. ANIFPDCL vide letter dated 15.12.2015 intimated
that the budget proposal including additional amount of Rs. 8.61 crores
to recoup the amount was submitted to the Ministry of Environment of
Forest and Climate Change during the year 2014-15, but it was no
considered/approved in the RE 2014-15 and BE 2015-16. The
Department of Environment & Forest was approached to take up the
matter with Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change for return
of the diverted amount to the Tourism Department. Ministry 0
Environment, Forest and Climate change vide letter No. 2-5/2003-
SU(PT) dated 3.4.2017 addressed to the Chief Secretary, Andaman
and Nicobar Administration informed that, the Ministry is in the process
of preparing a draft cabinet note for closure of A & N Island Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation Limited and it was decided to ‘seek
waiver of deposit amount of Rs. 8.61 crore provided by A & N Tourism
Department to ANIFPDCL during 2012-2013 for a deposit work at
Havelock.

Another letter (no.FDC/Tech-Il/G-226(B)/30 dtd. 24.04.2017) was
received from Divisional Manager (P&M), ANI Forest & Plantation
Development Corporation Ltd. addressed to Director (Tourism) wherein
it is also mentioned that all the properties of their Corporation are
attached to MoEF&CC, Govt. of India against the loan assistance being
extended by the Govt. of India time to time for the disbursement of
salary and wages of employees of their Corporation. A letter has been
sent to DM (P&M), ANIFPDC to directly approach MHA for writing off
the above said amount. Nevertheless, the Administration if exploring the
possibility laying its claim on the properties of said corporation attached
with MoEF&CC. Tos,

Further, the amount of Rs. 26.05 lakhs paid towards consultancy and

other charges cannot be entirely termed as unfruitful, as the
Environment and Forest department is vested with drawings and

-+36-


designs which will be helpful for the other project of “Development of
Eco Cottages at Neil Island” which was been proposed in Annual Plan
2016-2017 of Tourism Department.

In the meanwhile, ANIFPDCL has refunded the un-utilized amount of
Rs. 2, 20,94,692/- (Rupees Two crore Twenty lakhs. Ninety Four
Thousand six hundred ninety two only) from the advance of Rs.8.87
crores. For rest of the amount, it has been intimated by the ANIFPDCL
that the matter is being taken up with MoEFCC.

Present. Status: It is humbly submitted that the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration have received an amount of Rs.2, 20,94,692/- from
ANIFPDCL vide cheque no.383224 dated 01/01/2018 and the cheque,
Deposited into Government Account vide challan no.728 dated
08.01.18.

The Government of India, Ministry of Environment of Forest and
Climate Change, New Delhi vide letter No.F,No.2-6/2017-SU dated
24.8.2017 communicated that the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting dated 16.08.2017 has approved the
proposal of closure of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Forest and
Plantation Development Corporation, Port Blair. Accordingly,
ANIFPDCL has been closed and M/S. National Building Construction
Corporation Limited, New Delhi (NBCC) designated land management
authority for acquiring the assets of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Forest Plantation Development Corporation Limited located at Little
Andaman, Mayabunder and Port Blair. “+

The Administration has taken up the matter with the Ministry of
Environment & Forest and Climate Change, New Delhi for recovering
the balance amount of Rs.6.60 crores and the progress will be
informed.

Andaman and Nicobar Administration humbly submitted that, a
strong central monitoring committee will be set up to oversee the
financial flow and project implementation in the Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly
accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit
7

i) The untilized amount of Rs. 2.21 crore, out of Rs. 8.87 crore
advanced to ANFPDCL, was refunded by the ANIFPDCL in January
2018 and the same was deposited in Government account vide Challan
No. 728 dated 8.1.2018. Regarding refund of the balance amount of Rs.
6.60 crore, the matter was taken up with Hon’ble LG, A&N
Administration by the Government of India to write off the amount.
Further development is awaited.

—3F —


ii) The PAC were of the view that the inability of the Ministry to
ascertain the reasons behind the violation of financial rules indicated
serious lack of monitoring and vigilance at the central level and desired
that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) conducts an enquiry into the
reasons for the blatant violation of the financial rules and penalize the
officials responsible for the lapses. The committee also desired that
strong monitoring committee may be set up to oversee the financial flow
and project implementation in the A&N Islands.

However, neither was any enquiry conducted nor was
responsibility fixed on officials responsible for blatant violation of
financial Rules so far. Further, central monitoring committee was also
not set up till date.

(Updated Action Taken Replies of the Ministry)

The matter has been re-examined and the following points are
reiterated:

i. A departmental advance of Rs.8.87 crore was sanctioned by the
Administration in terms of Rule 75 of Compendium on Advances under
GFR 2005 during March 2012 which was drawn and paid to ANIFPDCL
(a Govt. of India undertaking) for setting up of the 20. eco-friendly
cottages at Radha Nagar, Havelock.

ii. Regarding the write off of the balance amount of Rs.6.60 Cr., the
matter is under process for seeking approval of the Hon'ble Lt.
Governor as per the request of MoEF&CC, Govt. of India. After
approval of Hon'ble Lt. Governor the matter will be sent to MHA for
seeking approval regarding write off of the balance amount of Rs.6.60
Cr.

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted
earlier, the Committee is requested to review the recommendation and
their observation made under para (i),(ii) and (iii) of vetted audit
comments of para no. 2.1.4.3.

(Observation/Recommendation)

VIOLATION OF NORMS OF FINANCIAL PROPRIETY

The Committee note that the Tourism Department engaged the
Indian Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) for up-gradation of the
Light and Sound (L&S) show at Cellular Jail at a total cost of Rs. one
crore without tender enquiry and despite the fact that the incumbent
annual maintenance contractor quoted a rate of Rs. 65.50 lakh for the
work in the preliminary assessment of the cost of upgradation. Without
initiating the work, and without providing cost break-up details, ITDC
proposed for additional scope of work at a cost of Rs. 85 lakh. Despite
the shortcomings of the ITDC proposal the Chief Secretary accepted
(August 2011) the revised cost which was paid to ITDC, as advance.

— 38 -


Such payment of full advance violated Rule 159 of the GFR which states
that advances to Public Sector Undertakings should not exceed forty per
cent of the contract value, except in consultation with the Financial
Advisor of the Central Government Ministry/Department. The Committee
also note that equipment valued at around Rs. 85 lakh purchased to
meet the requirements of the additional scope of work remained unused.
However, in May 2016, the Department stated that laser machine along
with screen and fog machine was utilized on two occasions. The
Committee cannot accept the reply of the Ministry since the sound and
light show where the equipment is to be used performs six days a week
| through year. Unable to comprehend the rationale behind the
procurement of equipments worth Rs. 85 lakh and keeping it unused,
the Committee desire to be apprise of the reasons behind the non-
utilization of equipments and recommend that the Tourism Department
undertake necessary measures to upgrade the sound and light show to
accommodate the unused equipments and fully utilize them without any
further delay.

9

The Committee also note that ITDC completed the upgradation
work on the sound and light show after a delay of 30 months. The
upgradation work cost Rs. 169.96 lakh out of the Rs. 185 lakh. While the
balance amount of Rs. 0.15 crore and an amount of Rs. 5 lakh have
been recovered from ITDC as liquidated damages for the delay, the
Tourism Department is yet to recover an amount of Rs. 2.92 lakh, as
interest on the balance amount from the ITDC. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the interest amount of Rs. 2.92 lakh may be
recovered from ITDC without any further delay and apprise the
Committee of the same. -

[PARA NO. 8]
Action Taken by the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, the Light & Sound show at
Cellular Jail has been an important attraction for tourist visiting the
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Considering the technological
advancements in the field, it was decided to upgrade it and make it more
attractive. Only for the purpose of preliminary assessment of the cost of
up ‘gradation of the show, an estimate was obtained from the AMC
Contractor M/s DD Electronics Pvt. Ltd., who had quoted an amount of
Rs. 65 Lakh for the said purpose

However, since originally ITDC had set up the project, it was
decided to award the up gradation work to ITDC on “Nomination Basis”
under the provisions of Rule 184 of GFR 2005 based on the following
justification:


1. During a meeting held in New Delhi on 4.8.2008, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Tourism, GOI, had informed that the SEL projects financed by
MoT are implemented/maintained by ITDC. It was also advised that the
A&N Administration may like to follow the same model for such projects
of Sound and Light show after taking the approval of the competent
authority.

2. ITDC is a public sector undertaking under Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India and also has vast experience in such sound and
light projects for Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, as well as for
various State Tourism Departments.

3. The Sound and Light show system at Cellular Jail was installed by
ITDC on turnkey basis in Oct.1990. .

However, ITDC in turn followed Rule 181 and selected the
executing agency through open tenders. As such, the contention of audit
that Rule 181 of GFR 2005 has not been followed appears to be
misunderstood as in this case the department had in fact followed Rule
184 (Outsourcing by Choice) with the approval of the competent
authority and in consultation with the Finance Department and then ITDC
followed Rule 181 which implies that the final price was discovered only
by GFR 181.

It is a fact that the additional laser machines, screen and projector
etc., which were procured with the aim to enhance the show, were later
remove since it was not generally appreciated within the existing show.
Tourism Department will utilise the equipments.

It is also humbly mentioned that all efforts will be made to recover
the amount of Rs. 2.92 lakh as interest on the balance amount from
ITDC from its future payments. _

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly
_ accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit

i) The PAC was unable to comprehend the rationale behind the
procurement of equipment worth Rs. 85 lakh and taking keeping it
unused, the Committee desire to be apprise of the reasons behind the
non utilization of equipment. However, no suitable reply has been
provided by the Administration in this regard.

ii) The PAC recommended that the Tourism Department should
undertake necessary measures to upgrade the sound and light show to
accommodate the unused equipment and fully utilize’ them without any
further delay. The Administration has invited tenders for up gradation of
Sound and Light show, but instead of accommodating the equipment,
these equipment have been stated to be included in the list of ‘Buy
Back’ materials to be taken by the successful bidder.

ho —


iii) | The interest amount of Rs. 2.92 lakh has not yet been recovered
from the ITDC. The Department stated that the interest amount of Rs.
2.29 lakh would be adjusted against the due payment of ITDC of Rs. 3
lakh at the time of final settlement of accounts.

Updated Action Taken Replies of the Ministry

The matter has been re-examined and in addition to the earlier
reply the following points are reiterated:
i. The cost obtained from AMC Contractor was only for the purpose
for preliminary assessment of the cost of upgradation of the show.
ii. The original project.had been designed by ITDC so it was decided
to award the work to ITDC on nomination basis under the provision of
Rule 184 of GFR 2005.

iii. That the additional laser machines, screen and projector etc.,
which were procured with the aim to enhance the show but were later
removed since it was not generally appreciated within the existing show.
iv. Tourism Department has taken up the project of upgradation of
sound and light show where these materials have been listed as a buy
back material to be taken by the successful bidder for accommodating
these equipments, as these equipment have become out dated and
obsolete and will not match the present day technology.

v. It is also mentioned that all efforts will be made to recover the
interest amount of Rs. 2.92 lakh from future payments to be made to
ITDC. .

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted earlier, the
Committee is requested to review the recommendation and their
observation made under para (i),(ii) and (iii) of vetted audit comments of
para no. 2.1.4.3.

(Observation/Recommendation)
HOLISTIC SCRIPT FOR THE SOUND AND LIGHT SHOW

The Committee note that the sound and light programme
continues to run as per the original script even after completion of
upgaradation of the light and sound show. The Committee feel. that the
script of the show does not display a complete picture of the nation’s
history and the struggle for independence. The Committee, therefore
desire that a research team may be constituted so as to collect patriotic
feats and contributions of different communities/personalities from all
corners of the country imprisoned there and incorporate the same in the
script of the show and present a holistic view on the history of the
country. The Committee also desire to be intimated of the action taken
in this regard.

- ५) _


[PARA NO. 9]
Action Taken by the Ministry

As informed by A& NI Administration, the suggestion of PAC is
noted for compliance. The interludes/music will be reduced. The
recommendation of PAC is noted for future.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly
accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit
No action has been taken in this regard, as yet.
Updated action taken reply of Department
The Administration has asked ITDC to upgrade the Light and Sound
Show and ITDC has invited the bids and selection of service provider is
in process.
The observation of the Committee regarding changing the script of the

light and sound show will be taken up at the appropriate forum for
consideration and decision. पु

Ws ८


CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT h

-NIL-

—YWa7


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

(Observation/Recommendation)

UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE OF Rs. 18.45 LAKH ON UNINITIATED
PROJECT

The Committee note that the Tourism Department had
engaged in May, 2009 Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd.
(ITDC) as consultant for preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) for
development of the tourist circuit, ‘Port Blair Neil Havelock Baratang’
“Project/Infrastructure Development for Destinations . and Circuits
(PIDDC) under the scheme of Ministry of Tourism”. The Ministry of
Tourism sanctioned and the work of preparation of Environment Impact
Assessment (EIA) report in October, 2010. Subsequently, CRZ
clearance was awarded in December 2011 to the National Institute of
Ocean Technology (NIOT). The Ministry of Tourism awarded the work of
preparation of EIA study/CRZ clearance to the NIOT in December,
2011. The work of development of tourist facilities at Baratang was,
however, excluded, citing various environment and tribal issues. The
NIOT submitted the draft EIA reports for Port Blair, Havelock and Neil
Islands on 27 December, 2012, 31 May 2013 and 20 November 2013
respectively and requested A&NI Administration for site-wise details
such as project layout, technical justification, technical design, etc., for
inclusion in their final report. However, even after three years, the
Administration had not provided the requisite information. As a result,
the project was not approved by the MoT, but they had tentatively
allocated an amount of Rs.5.00 crore under the PIDDC scheme in 2014-
15. Thus, lack of follow up by ANI Administration rendered unfruitful the
expenditure of Rs. 18.45 lakh on the preparation of DPR and EIA
reports. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprise of the reasons
behind the delay of three years in providing the requisite details for
inclusion in the final DPR and recommend that stringent disciplinary
penalty may be imposed against officials who were responsible for the
delay. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the present status of
the project.

[PARA NO. 2]
Action Taken by the Ministry ह

As intimated by A& NI Administration, the Tourism Department had
entered into an Agreement on 257 May, 2009 with India Tourism

ky =


Development Corporation (ITDC) as a Consultant for preparation of
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for development of tourist circuits, ‘Port
Blair-Neil-Havelock-Baratang’ at a total cost of Rs. 10.00 lakhs plus
‘axes, : :

The ITDC submitted a DPR in November, 2009 and Rs. 11.83 lakhs was
paid to ITDC. The DPR proposed for development of sites at Port Blair
(ITF Ground, Carbyn’s Cove), Baratang (Baludera beach, Middle Strait
jetty, Limestone Caves & Jirkatang), Neil Island (Neil Kendra, Sitapur
Beach, Laxmanpur Beach & Bharatpur Beach), Havelock
beach(Radhanagar beach and Elephant beach).The facilities proposed
‘© be developed included water harvesting, public conveniences, Kiosks
for tourist facilitation, interpretation centers, souvenir kiosks, Facade
improvement, changing rooms, car parking, Solid waste management,
Viewing deck, wayside amenities and signage.

The DPR was forwarded to MoT in March, 2010 for sanction under MoT
scheme, ‘Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and
Circuits (PIDDC)’. However, MoT communicated that the proposal could
not be considered due to non-submission of CR2Z/environmental
clearance vide letter dated 29/10/2010. The department requested the
National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) to take up work of
preparation of Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Report for CRZ
clearance. However, during the same time, new Island Protection Zone
Notification was notified in 2011 and the work of EIA for Port Blair,
Havelock and Neil Island could only be awarded in December, 2011. An
amount of Rs. 6.62 lakhs was released to NIOT for preparation of EIA.
The work of EIA for Baratang in the aforesaid circuit was not assigned to
any agency as development of tourist facilities at Baratang had to be
dropped due to various environmental and tribal issues.

NIOT submitted the draft EIA reports for Port Blair (Carbyn’s Cove),
Havelock (Radhanagar beach and Elephant beach) and Neil Island
(Sitapur beach, Laxmanpur beach and Bharatpur Beach) on 27/12/2012,
31/05/2013 and 20/11/2013 respectively and requested for site- wise
micro details such as technical justification of the project/ Work Plan for
site clearance, Detailed technical drawings for the proposed
infrastructure, site plan with detailed map in scale, details of construction
namely BOQ, schedule, work plan for constructiofi, material
procurement and transport details, topography, survey map of the
Proposed site, project layout and technical design, quantity of
construction materials required etc for inclusion in their final report.

The NIOT submitted final EIA Reports in respect of Havelock & Neil
Island on 18/05/2016. The final EIA Report on Port Blair (Corbyn’s
Cove) was submitted by NIOT on 21/07/2016.


By this time, the old scheme namely ‘PIDDC’ (Product/ Infrastructure
Development of Destination and Circuits under which the DPR was
prepared for availing Central Financial Assistance) had since been
modified and MoT came up with new scheme titled “Swadesh Darshan”.

As per ‘Swadesh Darshan’ scheme, fresh DPR consistent with the new
guidelines was required to be prepared. Also, there was requirement of
few new projects to be undertaken by the Administration for promotion
of tourism, like improvement of facilities at Cellular Jail, development of
infrastructure for Adventure Water Sports, Wayside amenities,
promotion of use of solar power, etc. Accordingly, the existing DPR was
revised and submitted in the new format under the new Swadesh
Darshan scheme in September 2016. :

At this point, it would be appropriate to highlight the fact that the portion
of submitted DPR for setting up of beach facilities and Wayside
Amenities in North & Middle Andaman and South Andaman including
Neil Island, Havelock Island and Baratang under Swadesh Darshan
scheme were prepared largely based on the inputs extracted from the
earlier DPR prepared by ITDC without engaging any fresh consultant.
This DPR was approved by MoT under Swadesh Darshan Scheme on
18.11.2016 and an amount of Rs 42.18 crore was sanctioned against
proposed amount of Rs. 48.89 cr.

Secondly, the EIA Reports prepared earlier by NIOT have come in
handy while execution of projects under Swadesh Darshan and no fresh
EIA reports were prepared for projects envisaged under Swadesh
Darshan.

Further, it needs to be mentioned that the DPR and EIA reports were
prepared under PIDDIC scheme for setting up of infrastructure at
selected sites in a very limited area viz. Neil/Shaheed Island (in 304 sq
meter) Havelock (in 202 Sq meter), and Corbyns Cove (in 83 Sq
meters). The components proposed to be set up at the identified
locations ranges as per the EIA Report were Public Convenience, sit
out, Souvenir Kiosks, Watch tower, signage viewing deck etc. The EIA
report also provided the baseline study of site characteristics in each of
the location for assessing the air quality , water quality and land use ,
fauna and flora etc which are needed in getting CRZ clearances . The
data provided under EIA reports and the DPR prepared by ITDC were
extensively utilized by the executing agencies viz. Porest Department
JALHW/PBNC etc for setting up of eco friendly amenities in locations
such as Corbyn’s Cove (Port Blair), Bharatpur beach, Laxmanpur
beach, Sitapurbeach (Neil Island), Radhanagar and Elephant beach
(Havelock Island).

+५ह-


The eco-friendly facilities developed at these sites includes setting up o'
Viewing Deck, Change room, sitting benches, toilets, facade
improvements etc. at Corbyn’s Cove beach by PBMC /Fores
departments, eco-friendly huts, toilets, change rooms, beach furniture,
Solid Waste disposal in Bharatpur, Laxmanpur and Sitapur beaches a
Neil/Shaheed Island by Forest Department, Solid Waste Disposal bins,
Beach Furniture, Fagade improvement, viewing decks, eco huts, public
convenience etc. in Radhanagar and Elephant beach at Havelock Island
by Forest Department. The infrastructure developed by these
departments during the period from 2012 to 2015 at these locations wel
exceeded what was supposed to be achieved through execution of the
DPR _ prepared by the ITDC under Central Financial Assistance.

The DPR submitted by the consultant was based on plinth area and did
not provide the actual exact quantities of construction materials sough
by NIOT. It was only after Ministry of Tourism approved the proposed
work, any of the executive agencies could have been directed by the
Administration to prepare the detail estimate based on site conditions. It
was only after the stage that further details which were sought by the
NIOT could be made available by relevant executive agencies.

However, the required inputs for preparation of final EIA reports could
not be provided expeditiously to NIOT because the Tourism Department
(ANI) was not having technical expertise and is not an executing agency
by itself. Since the extend of technical inputs required were large and
could only be obtained from executing /construction agencies like
Andaman Public Works Department (APWD) / Port Blair Municipal
Council (PBMC), the department coordinated with these agencies for
getting necessary inputs. Meetings at the level of Director / Secretary
were held with these agencies to expedite providing of information and
ter much persuasion, required inputs were provided to NIOT on
1/12/2015.

- 90

There is no willful delay or negligence on the part of Administration in
executing the works. It may be appreciated that multiple agencies are
involved in execution of works in the Islands and Tourism Department is
not empowered to undertake public works. Due to Island conditions
specially long rainy seasons and frequent cyclones, limited’ availability
appropriate resources, the working season for civil works in the Island
s very limited. There is no financial loss or misappropriation of govt. ex-
hequer in this case as the DPR/EIA prepared by the Govt. agencies
viz. ITDC/NIOT have been fruitfully utilized by the Administration,
though without availing Central Financial Assistance for executing these
works. The essence of DPR, the design elements have been extensively
ilized by various executing agencies like APWD, PBMC, ALHW, Forest

-५+ -

०6७6 ०%०3३>

c


departments etc in placing tourist infrastructure facilities in other
locations of the Islands also and has contributed in enhancing
institutional capacities of these agencies.

Present status: As per the revised scheme of Swadesh Darshan,
tourist’s facilities are being augmented in various places in A&N Islands
by availing Central Financial Assistance. Presently following facilities are
being executed under Swadesh Darshan Schemes for which an amount
of Rs. 42.18 crore has been sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism, GOI
on 18.11.2016. For availing fund under the scheme, no external
agencies were engaged for preparation of DPR, as Tourism Department
has gained experience and knowledge in preparation of DPR based on
inputs/methods learnt out of DPR already submitted by ITDC and NIOT.
Therefore, the expenditure of Rs. 18.45 Lakhs incurred by the
Administration for preparation of DPR and EIA report have been useful.

Further, the following facilities are proposed to be executed for
development of tourism in the Island under Swadesh Darshan scheme.

1. Upgradation of facilities in Cellular Jail

Improvement of seating capacity of sound & light show at Cellular
Jail

Enhancement of tourists facilities at Cellular Jail

Strengthening foundation of Cellular Jail

Facade improvement of National Memorial

Upgradation of Veer Savarkar Park

Improvement of facilities at beaches and safety measures in Ross
& Smith beach, Baludera, Ramnagar, Lalaji Bay, Laxmanpur,
Bharatpur, Elephant beach, Kalapathar

8. e-auto Rikshaws

9. Way side amenities

10. Scuba Diving Centers

N

NOahw

11. Signages at various locations
12. Illumination of Andaman Club

The above works are progressing. Due to continuous improvement of
tourism products/facilities in A&N Islands, the tourists arrivals have also
been considerably increased as mentioned below:

TOURISTS’ INFLOW (2011-2018)

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Domesticl 202221 | 238699 | 243703 | 285146 | 296684 | 384552) 471919) 498279

Foreign 15814 | 17538 14742 17235 14674 15466] 15313) 15242

Total 218035 | 256237 | 258445 | 302381 | 311358 | 400018] 487232] 513521)

WS r


It may be seen from the above that the tourists arrival from 2011
to 2015: have been increased by 42% and from 2011 to 2018 by 135%
and first time it has crossed Rs. 5 Lakhs figure in 2018 which is a
remarkable achievement. This has been possible due to continuous
improvement of tourism products and facilities by the department and all
out efforts of officers concerned.

Therefore, it is reiterated that there is no unfruitful expenditure in
preparation of DPR and EIA reports for the projects as it has been
utilized. for the benefit of tourism promotion in A&N Islands, not just by
Tourism Department, but also by other agencies.

It is also evident that the DPR/EIA reports have been utilized for
preparation of DPR by departmental staff for availing Central Financial
Assistance under Swadesh Darshan scheme.

Considering the above, itis earnestly requested that the PAC may kindly
accept the above explanation.

Vetting comments of Audit

(1) The Administration did not provide any suitable reply for the delay of
three years in providing the requisite details such as project layout,
technical justification, technical design etc. to NIOT for inclusion in the
final DPR.

(2)No Stringent disciplinary penalty as suggested by the PAC was
initiated by the Administration so far.

(3)The Administration provided the present status of works/projects
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme (erstwhile PIDDC), which are at
various stages of completion. This will be verified in subsequent audits.

Updated action taken note of Ministry

The matter has been re-examined and the following are submitted:-

i. The Department placed work order for preparation of EIA report
on NIOT Port Blair on 01.12.2011 and payment was ‘made as per
sanction order dated 27.12.2011, in January 2012.

ii, The draft EIA report in respect of Corbyn’s Cove (South
Andaman) was received from NIOT on 27.12.2012 and in respect of
Swaraj Dweep (Havelock) on 31.05.2013 and Shaheed Dweep (Neil
Island) on 20.11.2013. After getting the draft EIA reports, the
Department approached executing agencies viz. APWD, PBMC, etc. to
provide’ required technical inputs like details of site wise construction

_ Ug=


materials as per drawings, quantities of construction materials required,
work plan for construction, schedule etc. for providing to NIOT for
inclusion in the final EIA report with technical justification.
iti. The matter was followed up with the respective
departments/executing agencies for providing the required inputs. Since
no response was forthcoming, the Director (Tourism) took a meeting
with the representatives of executing agencies on 19.01.2015. This was
followed up with another letter to APWD on 22.01.2015 and reminder
dated 10.08.2015 to provide inputs.
iv. Having still not received any inputs from the executing
Departments, the Director (Tourism) gathered the required details from
an engineer of APWD and forwarded the same to the NIOT, Port Blair
under his signature on 11.12.2015 for submission of final EIA reports.
५. In this period of about 2 years (after the receipt of draft EIA
reports and furnishing of required inputs to NIOT) the Department had
made its best efforts to coordinate with executing agencies to take the
project forward. However, the delay took place due to no response from
these executing agencies.
So. there is no intentional delay in providing the requisite details by any
officer of the Directorate of Tourism and has taken place due to inter-
departmental coordination issues.
Moreover, the DPR/EIA reports have been utilized for preparation of
DPR by departmental staff for availing Central Financial Assistance
under Swadesh Darshan scheme.
In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted earlier, the
Committee is requested to review the recommendation and their
observation made under para (1) (2) and (3) of vetted audit comments of
para no. 2.1.3.1.

(Observation/Recommendation)
EXPENDITURE ON OUTLIVED VESSEL

The Committee note that the Tourism Department envisioned a
floating restaurant and procured an outlived vessel namely M.V.
Ramanujan, from the Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) at a cost of
Rs. 1 crore without undertaking any techno economic feasibility survey
of the project. However, the project could not materialized as the
Department were unable to attract private bidders to undertake for
designing, renovation, operation and maintenance of the vessel. The
Committee find that a technical committee opined in November, 2012
that the vessel required extensive repairs and fresh certifications and
instead recommended disposal of vessel. The Committee are again
constrained to observe that during the period April 2012 to 23
November, 2014, the Directorate of Shipping Services (DSS) incurred
an expenditure of Rs. 0.78 crore (Rs. 2.45 lakh per month) for manning

-- 506 >+


the vessel, which could have been reduced by Rs. 0.29 crore had the
Administration acted expeditiously on the SCI’s recommendation on
beaching the vessel. The Committee thus observed that till May, 2016,
the environment clearance for ship breaking was pending and neither
the vessel nor its contents had been disposed of. The Committee are of
the view that the Department of Tourism ought to have undertaken a
survey on the functional and the economic viability of procuring a
decommissioned passenger vessel before undertaking the project.
Moreover, the committee are of the view that the Department ought to
have sought potential interested players prior to procurement of the
vessel. The Committee further opine that keeping in mind the
deterioration of the unused vessel, the Department out to have beached
the vessel at the earliest so as to slow down the pace of deterioration
and undertake repairs and redesigning for use. Noting that lack of
proper planning and hasty decision of the officials of the Department of
Tourism without any techno economic feasibility study, the Committee
desire that responsibility may. be fixed and necessary action may be
taken against the incompetent officials. The Committee also recommend
that in future necessary surveys and researches may be undertaken by
competent and experienced officials/experts before undertaking any
such project.

Action Taken Replies of the Ministry

As intimated by A& NI Administration, in the year 2010,

operation of floating restaurant in these Islands was a new concept
which the Department wanted to showcase for emulation by the private
players of Tourism industry of the Islands. Since, procurement of a new
vessel for the purpose would involve a huge capital investment, it was
decided to seek transfer of a passenger vessel M.V. Ramanujam from
SCl\(Shipping Corporation of India) to Tourism Department at a total
cost of Rs. 1 crore. The Department had gone ahead with the project
(Operation of M.V. Ramanujam as a Floating Restaurant) with the
approval of Hon’ble Lt. Governor considering it to be procurement from
a Government of India Public 5866 Enterprise and its operation as
Floating Restaurant would have added a new attraction to the visiting
tourists.
The Administration floated RFP for designing, renovation, operation and
maintenance of the vessel M.V. Ramanujam as a floating restaurant on
20/04/2011 and last date of submission was extended till 07/08/2011.
The RFP could not attract a single bidder. RFP was again floated on
07/10/2011 and it attracted a single bidder only. Accordingly, tender
could not be finalised.

Further, due to non-operation of the vessel, the condition of the
vessel deteriorated requiring extensive refit, repairs etc. Under these
circumstances, it was not economically feasible to undertake the repair
and operate the vessel. As such, it was decided to dispose of the same.

—S\—


Although, 501 made several attempts to dispose the vessel through
Metal Scrap Trade Corporation but it failed as the vessel was not in a
position to be towed to mainland.

Thereafter, on 11.12.2013, SCl suggested that A&N
Administration may take permission to beach the vessel at Port Blair
itself and then bids may be invited for breaking the vessel at Port Blair.
The suggestion of SCI was examined in the Administration during
discussions and meeting on various dates. On 23.12.2013, a
Committee was constituted to make an assessment of hazardous
materials onboard the said vessel. The Committee submitted its report
on 22.01.2014 and after detailed discussions, it was decided that the
vessel may be beached at Panighat. The procedure of removing
hazardous materials and old stores from the vessel was started which
in itself was time consuming process. Formal approval of Hon’ble Lt.
Governor for shifting the vessel was obtained on 22.05.2014.

Shifting of the vessel to a new location was a very complicated
task which required high skilled, manpower & machinery, favourable
highest tide, wind speed and weather. The Port Management Board
and Directorate of Shipping Services were entrusted the responsibility
and various dates were planned for executing the job, however on
some occasions it had to be postponed either due to unfavourable wind
or weather conditions.

All the above factors led to the unavoidable delay in shifting of th
vessel and the vessel was finally shifted on 23.12.2014.

Presently, the vessel MV Ramanujam has been taken for
condemnation and sale by the Directorate of Shipping Services, A&N
Administration.

It is humbly submitted that in future necessary surveys and
researches shall be undertaken by competent and experienced
officials/experts before undertaking any such. project and keeping in
view response of service providers in the prevailing climatic and distant
geographical conditions & locations respectively in these islands.

Considering the above, it is earnestly requested that the PAC may
kindly accept the above explanation.

ie

Vetting Comments of Audit

(a) The Andaman and Nicobar Administration has not taken any action
to fix responsibilities against the incompetent officials as desired by
PAC.

Further, as recommended by the PAC, the Ministry-has given its’
assurance that in further necessary surveys and researches shall be
undertaken by competent and experienced officials/experts before
undertaking any such project and keeping in view response of service
providers in the prevailing climatic and distant geographical conditions &

-54A-


locations respectively in these islands. The same will be verified by audit
in case of similar projects are taken up by Administration in future.

Updated Action Taken Replies of the Ministry

The matter was re-examined and following points are reiterated:
i. Operating of floating restaurant was completely a new concept in
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
ii. Instead of procuring a new vessel at huge capital investment, a
passenger vessel M.V.Ramanujam from SCI was transferred to
Tourism Department with the approval of Hon’ble Lt. Governor.
iii. | The RFP for designing, renovation, operation and maintenance of
the vessel could not be finalized despite it being floated twice, only one
bidder came. During this period, the vessel condition deteriorated and it
was not found economically feasible to undertake repair and
renovation.
iv. As such, it was decided to dispose off the same. SCI made
several attempts to dispose the vessel through Metal Scrap Trade
Corporation but it failed as the vessel was not in a position to be towed
to mainland. :
Vv. Thereafter, on 11.12.2013, 501 suggested that A&N
Administration may take permission to beach the vessel at Port Blair
itself and then bids may be invited for breaking the vessel at Port Blair.
vi. The suggestion of SCI was examined in the Administration. On
23.12.2013, a Committee was constituted to make an assessment of
hazardous materials onboard the said vessel. The Committee
submitted its report on 22.01.2014 and after detailed discussions, it was
decided that the vessel may be beached at Panighat
vii. The procedure of removing hazardous materials and old stores
from the vessel was started which in itself was time consuming process.
viii. Formal approval of Hon'ble Lt. Governor for shifting the vessel
was obtained on 22.05.2014.
ix. Shifting of the vessel to a new location was a very complicated
task which required high skilled manpower & machinery, favourable
highest tide, wind speed and weather. The Port Management Board
and Directorate of Shipping Services were entrusted the responsibility
however on some occasions it had to be postponed either due to
unfavourable wind or weather conditions
x. The vessel was finally shifted on 23.12.2014 i.e., after’one year of
the suggestion made by the SCI
xi. Presently, the vessel has been taken for condemnation and its
disposal process is underway.

From the above, it is clear that the project was conceptually a new
project to attract tourism. The project could not fructify due to various
challenges such as condition of the vessel, non interest by service

पा


providers etc. so it is difficult to conclude that any particular official was
responsible.

In view of the facts mentioned above and the reply submitted earlier, the
Committee is requested to review the recommendation and_ their
observation made under para (a) and (b) of vetted audit comments of
para no. 2.1.3.3.


CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__ September, 2020 Chairperson,
Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

— Su -


CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21) HELD ON 28™ AUGUST, 2020.

The Public Accounts Committée sat on Friday, the 28" August, 2020
from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee. Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
Members
LOK SABHA

Shri T.R Baalu
Shri Subash Chandra Baheria
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Jayant Sinha
5
R.
5

80 9 74 90 एा + ०० ७

hri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

AJYA SABHA

hri Naresh Gujral
11. ShriC.M Ramesh
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G Chandrashekhar - Additional Secretary
. Shri MLK Raja - Director
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms.Shubha Kumar - Dy.CAG
2. Shri K. Srinivasan - DG
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar - DG
4. Ms.Ritika Bhatia - PD .
5... Shri S.V. Singh - PD os,
१९९९ XXXX XXXX XXXXX
—_ 5 s ना


PART-|

1. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson, welcomed the Officers of the
C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited
suggestions of the Members on the following Draft Reports:-

(a) Action Taken by the Government on __ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their 1057" Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject, “Creation of Tourist Infrastructure in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands”;

(b) Xxxx XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX}
(०) Xxxx XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX;
(५) Xxxx XXXXX XXXXX , XXXXX}
(७) Xxxx XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX}

2. After deliberations, the Draft Reports at (a), (b), (c) and (d) were
adopted by the Committee without any modifications/changes and authorized
the Chairperson to present the Reports to Parliament on behalf of the
Committee. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present the
Draft Report at (e) after minor modifications in the Report in light of updated
replies received from the Ministry.

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India for assisting the Committee in the
examination of the subjects.

PART II

XXXx XXXX XXXX XXXX

2000... 0010 pertain to this Report

-5(-


wy

(APPENDIX - I!)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

OF

THE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1,3, 5-9

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 2&4
Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which Government have furnished interim replies:
-Nil-

9

Total: 7
Percentage— 77.78%

Total: Nil
Percentage
- 0%

Total: 2
Percentage- 22 %

Total: Nil
Percentage — 0%


3