50

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2017-18)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the. Public Accounts Corrmittee contained in their 24" Report (17" Lok
Sabha)] i

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

FIFTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2278

FIFTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

excesses oy oven wore rans fw VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2017-18)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 24" Report (17" Lok
Sabha)]

जचते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: © s| oy l We

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 2६५५ [no hk

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2022 /Chaitra, 1944 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22)

INTRODUCTION .................. जन्नत
CHAPTER | रिक्कृणां ap
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................--- ०-००
CHAPTER Iil* Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Teiteration .................- ० >त््त्््ज्् >> erste eee cee nee
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES:

Minutes of the 11" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2021-22) held on 28" March, 2022.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Twenty-
fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2021-22)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2 Shri T. R. Baalu

3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta ‘

5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab '

6 Shri Jagdambika Pal

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi”
9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwarat
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi®

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T. 5. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary

2. Shri Surya Ranjan Mishra - Director

3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

1 Blected w.e.f, 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

+ Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
5 Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

(पे)


an

INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
“Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2017-18)” relating to
various Ministries/Departments.

2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 9"
February, 2021. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Fiftieth Report at their Sitting held on 28" March, 2022. Minutes of the Sitting
are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.

4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of india.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations: contained in the Twenty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-I/.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
79 March, 2022 Chairperson,
1७ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

av


1.

CHAPTER —1

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 24" Report (17" Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over
Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2017-18)”.

The 247 Report (17"" Lok Sabha) of PAC, which was presented to Lok
Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.02.2021 contained nine Observations and
Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the concerned
Ministries/Departments and are broadly categorised as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the

Government:

Para Nos. 1-9 Total — 9
Chapter — Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to

pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para No, — NIL Total — NIL
Chapter — Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

Para No. — NIL Total — NIL
ला Chapter - IV
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies:

Para No. — NIL Total — NIL
Chapter —V


The Action Taken Notes furnished by the concerned Ministries/Departments
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the
Report have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report.
In the succeeding Paragraphs, the Committee deal with the action
taken by the Government on some of their Recommendations.
. Incurring of Excess Expenditure/Recurring Excess Expenditure during
2017-18

(Recommendation Para Nos. 1 and 2)
The Committee found from the scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts relating to
Civil, Defence, Postal Services and Railways for the year 2017-18 that there
was an excess expenditure of = 99,610.31 crore incurred in five cases under
four Grants/Appropriations. The Committee noted that the bulk of excess
expenditure incurred was on the Civil side amounting to = 92,461.31 crore out
of which % 92,333.69 crore was under Grant No-38- ‘Repayment of Debt’
alone, operated by Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). Three
cases under two Grants operated by Ministry of Defence contributed to an
overall excess of %7149.00 crore, out of which Grant No.-20-'Defence
Services’ and Grant No.-21-‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services’ (Capital-
Voted) incurred excess expenditure of more than = 3000 crore.

While observing that the incidence of excess expenditure of such a
high magnitude is least justifiable given the provision for obtaining
Supplementary Grants three times in a financial year, the Committee in Para
1 of 24" Report (17" Lok Sabha) desired that such a failure arising out of
want of essential alacrity in the budget provisions, negligence on the part of
budget controlling authorities to monitor the flow of excess expenditure
throughout the year and failure on their part to observe the General Financial
Rules should be dealt with strictly, so as to ensure avoidance of excess
expenditure of such magnitude in future. From the Action Taken Notes
furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the
recommendations contained in previous Reports of PAC, the Committee
noted that the National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) have
submitted their Report on the study undertaken by them on the trend and
causes of excess expenditure, and recommendations made by the Institute
are being studied in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs).


3

The Committee, therefore, expected that the recommendations as given by

NIFM be implemented at the sarliest and ways and means suggested by them

to contain the excess expenditure are observed by all the

Ministries/Departments, so that incurring expenditure in excess of the

budgeted amounts is altogether eliminated in future.

(Recommendation Para No. 1)

Scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred during the last ten years revealed that

the Civil Ministries/Departments have been incurring large amount of Excess

Expenditures continuously during the last 10 fiscals. From the scrutiny of

Grants/Appropriations, the Committee were appalled to note that

Appropriation — Repayment of Debt operated by the Ministry of Finance

(Department of Economic Affairs) and Grant — Capital outlay on Defence

Services operated by Ministry of Defence recurringly incurred huge amount of

excess expenditure during the years 2016-17 and 2017-18. While observing

that no sincere efforts have been made by these Ministries towards
implementation of a strong mechanism to curb this recurring phenomenon,
the Committee in Para No. 2 had recommended that the Government should
earnestly undertake case studies of instances where excess expenditure had
persistently exceeded the budgetary allocations and strengthen the extant
mechanism of budgetary control so as to effectively check the unabated trend
of excess expenditure in future.

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action

Taken Notes on both the above said recommendations stated as under:

1. "National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) has submitted its
report on the study assigned to it. Excess expenditure incurred by
various Ministries/Departments during the period 2000-01 to 2017-18
has been analyzed in’ detail. The report has also brought out findings
from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i) Australia (ii) Canada (iii)
Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United Kingdom.

I. NIFM made the following 12 recommendations for an informed system
of Budgeting and Expenditure Control:

(i) Recommendation-1: Ensure that there exists a networked

System which 185 up-to-date information on budget allocation


(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

4

and re-appropriation, and does not permit passing of bills which
may lead to excess over budget provision.

Recommendation-2: Institute a new Centralised Monitoring
System for all Grants/Appropriations (Civil, Defence, Railways,
and Postal Services) which maintains data on budgetary
allocation and expenditure update on a monthly/fortnightly basis.
Recommendation-3: Reduce the number of Supplementary
Budgets to one, such that Departments give due seriousness to
estimating their budgetary requirement.

Recommendation-4: Increase accountability of Chief
Accounting Authority (CAA) for budgetary control beyond that
stipulated in Rule-70 of GFRs-2017 by imposing suitable cost on
CAA as well as on the Integrated Finance Division headed by
JS/AS(FA) and ‘Controller/Chief Controller of Accounts.
Recommendation-5: Redefine Unit of Appropriation to a level
higher than the current level of Object Head. The Unit of
Appropriation may be set at a level delinked from the current
Chart of Account, more closely aligned with the policy objective
governing the expenditure, and at a level even higher than the
Major Head as per need.

Recommendation-6: Demand for Grants may be prepared at
the revised ‘Unit of Appropriation’ level and not at Grant + Major
Head level as is currently being done. The revised Unit of
Appropriation may be set at a level such that there is greater
Parliamentary oversight, and at the same time, increased
flexibility in the hands of the executive in meeting the
programme objectives approved by the Parliament
Recommendation-7: Align the powers of Re-Appropriation with
the revised ‘Unit of Appropriation’ with additional conditions.
These conditions at a minimum to include the following: 1) No
movement of budgetary allocation between Revenue and
Capital 2) No movement of budgetary allocation between
Revenue and Charged, 3) No transfer of funds form
Programme/Scheme to Establishment expenditure.


5

(viii) Recommendation-8: Revise definition of ‘Services’, ‘New

(00

०0

Services' and 'New- Instruments of Services' such that there is
greater flexibility in Budget Re-Appropriation. Presently, the term
‘Service’ is understood to be operating at a very low (detailed)
level, which prevents flexibility in spending and reallocation
budget within the overall authorization given by the Parliament.
Recommendation-9: Medium Term Expenditure Framework
may be additionally used for setting multi-year spending limits
for certain categories of Department's expenditure. Different
Departments have different spending profiles in keeping with
their different mandates. Accordingly, the proportion of items of
expenditure which are within the Department's control may be
identified (Categorised as DEL or Departmental Expenditure
Limit) vis-a-vis items of expenditure which are demand-led and
volatile, and thus not amenable to long term forecast of
projection (Categorised as AME or Annually Managed
Expenditure). A hard, multi-year spending limit may thus be set
for each departnent at the level of Grant, for the ‘DEL' category
of expenditure. Only the AME portion of expenditure of the
Department may be annually debated and voted by the
Parliament, thereby providing greater time for Parliamentary
scrutiny, and at the same leading to better adherence to the
Fiscal Deficit taigets set by the Union Government.
Recommendation-10: Categorise charged Expenditure as
Standing Apprcpriations, with a separate long term (multi-year)
authorization from Parliament and not subject them to annual
authorization. By definition — Charged expenditure is not voted
by the Parliament. The Constitution specifies the types of
expenditure that would be Charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India. The approval of the Parliament for Charged expenditure
may be taken in a single multi-year or Standing/Permanent
Appropriation. The Budget would then include estimates of
Charged expenditure for the current year, shown against each

Department, but an excess above this amount would not call for


Ml.

6

a separate authorisation by the Parliament, as it would be
covered by the standing appropriation.

(xi) |Recommendation-11: Institute standing appropriations (multi-
year budget allocations) in keeping with natural expenditure
cycle of the project/scheme, initially for Capital projects. This
can later be extended to the larger schemes of Govt. of India.

(xii) | Recommendation-12: A simpler Chart of Accounts may be
devised (to replace LMMHA) modelled on international good
practices. The current chart of accounts— List of Major and
Minor Head ‘of Accounts and the associated 15-digit
classification, .s not easily linked to the various welfare
programme and activities undertaken by the Government. The
existing List of Major and Minor head of accounts may be
replaced by a simpler chart of Accounts which would lead to
greater transparency in budgeting and reporting of expenditure.

The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) further

mentioned that a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of

Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs on 14.7.2021 to discuss the

issues for control of excess expenditure with Ministry of Railways,

Ministry of Defence, Department of Posts where excess expenditure

was recurrently occurred. These Ministries/Departments were

impressed upon that endeavour should be made that there will be no
instance of excess expenditure in FY 2021-2022 and the efforts should
be a collective responsibility. It was also emphasized that Public

Financial Management System (PFMS) may be used wherever the

system has not been adopted for avoiding the excess expenditure.

The participating Ministries/Departments viz. Ministry of Defence,

Ministry of Railways, and Department of Posts have furnished their

feedback, as detailed below, subsequent to the said meeting:

Ministry of Defence —

(a)

One of the major reasons of excess expenditure has been payments

through Letters of Credit (LC) to meet foreign contractual obligation where

there is a time gap between the payments made by the banks and receipt and

adjustments of scrolls by the Services/Payment Controllers. Concurrent


7

monitoring of LC based payments is being done at each stage now towards
avoiding excess expenditure;
(b) All the budget holders have been advised to make realistic assessment
of Committed Liabilities/projected outgo and available resources for fresh
contracts;
(c) All the budget holders are regularly being sensitized on adhering to
monthly and quarterly expenditure plans;
(d) A decision was taken to introduce a customized Public Finance
Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of Defence. The Defence instance of
PFMS has been named PRABAL — PFMS Raksha Aaharan aur Lekhaankan.
Coding and Development work on the proposed modules of PRABAL has
started;
(e) In order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure, e-Pension
System named SPARSH has been introduced. The system entails creation of
an integrated data base giving the complete details of pensioner with a view
to disburse the pension payment, monitoring of pension budget and
accounting the disbursement of pension on real time basis;
Ministry of Railways -
(f) Railways use a robust IT platform Integrated Payroll and Accounting
System — IPAS for its accounting purpose, where budget and expenditure
against it is monitored on real time basis. The data is also updated in PFMS
through a web service on dai y basis;
(g) | With the merger of Rail Budget with General Budget and consequent
reduction of number of demands from 16 to 1 instances. of excess
expenditure have reduced.
Department of Posts —
(h) | The Postal Accounts Offices authorize postal pension/family pension
using a special software developed for this purpose wherein all the details of
pensions are available and the software is a central server based. Concurrent
audit of pension vouchers/payments is being done by Postal Audit on
prescribed intervals. Data is also updated as and when revision occurs.
Department is also in the pracess of rolling out Exit Management module of
ERP wherein end to end process of CCS (Pension) Rules are inbuilt.

V. The Department of Economic Affairs further stated that the following are the
steps/action taken on the recommendations made by National Institute of


8

Financial Management (NIFM) in its report on 'Study of Excess Expenditure
over Budget':

(i) Recommendations 1 end 2 are for establishing a networked system
and instituting a new Centralized Monitoring System. It may be mentioned that
Public Finance Management System (PFMS) is a well-defined networked
system, which has improved effectiveness, economy in public finance
management through better cash management, ensuring transparency in
public expenditure, real-time information on resource availability and
utilisation across schemes. PFMS checks expenditure against budget
provision. PFMS has been implemented in all Ministries/Departments except
Railways, Posts and Defence. In case of other Ministries/Departments which
are not covered under PFMS, the systems in operations under their control
are being integrated with PFMS for maintaining data on daily basis. Pending
adoption of PFMS, Department of Posts and Ministry of Railways have
automated the flow for monthly expenditure into PFMS and head-wise
summary figures are also incorporated in PFMS without manual intervention.
This was completed in 2019. Ministry of Railways is currently having the
Accounting Information Management System (AIMS) as_ centralised
monitoring system; !
(ii) Ministry of Defence currently has a computerised All India Compilation
System to capture receipts and expenditure and also for monitoring the same
as per budgetary allocation. Further, Ministry of Defence has successfully
consolidated the accounts on PFMS since mid 2019. There has also been a
development for adoption of PFMS by Ministry of Defence, which has been
modified to have a new parallel (PRABAL) and PFMS-integrated system
being developed for Ministry of Defence;

(ii) As for reduction of nurnber of supplementary budget (Recommendation
3), it may be stated that Article 115 of the Constitution provides for seeking
Supplementary Demands if the amount authorized by Parliament is found
insufficient or a need has arisen for new service. Number of Supplementary
Demands for Grants in a year have not been prescribed, though generally
three Supplementary Demands are laid before the Parliament during
Monsoon, Winter and Budget Sessions of Parliament;

(iv) While the provisions of Supplementary Demands as a tool for the
Government for meeting expenditure on urgent, unforeseen new services/new


9

instrument of services are necessary, restricting the number of
Supplementary Demands for Grants to one is not advisable. However,
considering the immediate requirement of funds for emergent situations,
Government has increased the corpus of the Contingency Fund of India from
% 500 crore to $30,000 crore in 2021-2022;

(v) As regards increasing the accountability of Chief Accounting Authority,
enabling provisions exists for Chief Accounting Authority to act on budgetary
control as stipulated in Rule 70 of General Financial Rules, 2017. Department
of Expenditure has also been impressing upon Grant controlling authorities to
take all measures to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure for
curtailment of excess expenditure;

(vi) Recommendation 5 to 8: It may be mentioned that new multi-
dimensional Chart of Account Is under consideration. A Committee
constituted for this purpose suggested seven mutually exclusive segments to
capture information relation’ to financial transactions. The seven mutually
exclusive segments are — (a) Administrative Unit (9) Function (c) Programme
and Scheme segment (d) Target segment (e) Recipient segment (f) Economic
Segment (g) Geographic segment. The proposed re-classification is expected
to provide financial reporting at both micro and macro levels for various
stakeholders and bring more transparency and accountability. Considering the
wide scope of the recommendations of the Committee, a feasibility group has
been constituted to study the system of revised Chart of Accounts vis-a-vis
the current system of accounting operative in Centre and States with a view to
(a) help develop common understanding regarding implementation of the
revised Chart of Accounts (b) examine the possibility of generating Annual
Financial Statement and Demands for Grants from the Statement of Budget
Estimates in the proposed revised classification structure (c) suggest solution
to the identification mechanism -in the existing system of classification, the
numeric code of the Major Head identifies the nature of receipts or
expenditure or the nature of expenditure as revenue or capital —which is
absent in the proposed system of classification. The last tier of classification
viz. object heads are proposed as determinant in the revised system of
classification for identification of expenditure as to whether they are revenue
or capital and (d) suggest roadmap for taking forward the process of
implementation of the revised Chart of Accounts. Thus, the recommendations


Vi.

10

of NIFM regarding redefining the Unit of Appropriation and aligning the
powers of re-appropriation, revision of ‘New Service'/‘New Instrument of
Service' are expected to be addressed when the new chart of accounts is
implemented;
(vi) Recommendation 9 is for using the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework for setting multi-year spending limits for certain categories of
Department's expenditure. Section 3 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 requires the Government to lay the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) Statement in both Houses of
Parliament. The MTEF Statement sets a three-year roiling target for the
expenditure indicators. It includes an estimate of expenditure commitments
with demand-wise sectional classification (Revenue and Capital), and
expenditure projections for certain schemes of the Government. The MTEF
projections for a department provide the fixed goal post in the medium term.
However, Article 114 of the Constitution provides that a separate
appropriation needs to be ob‘ained from the Parliament for expenditure;
(viii) Recommendations 10 and 11 are for categorising charged Expenditure
as Standing Appropriations, with a separate long term (multi-year)
authorization from Parliament and not subject them to annual authorization
require careful consideration. This recommendation is against the
constitutional provisions enshrined in Articles 113 and 114 of the Constitution
of India. The Statement laid before Parliament in terms of Article 112 ofthe
Constitution of Indiais Annual Financial Statement. Therefore, this
recommendation for mult~year appropriation is not as per the spirit of the
Constitution;
(ix) Recommendation 12 is for replacing the existing List of Major and
Minor head of accounts by a simpler chart of Accounts which would lead to
greater transparency in budgeting and reporting of expenditure. It may be
stated that a feasibility group has been constituted to study the revised
system of classification. This has been amplified in paragraph (i) above.
The course of ‘Action Taken’ has the approval of High Level Inter-
Ministerial Group, ' constituted under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary to examine the issues of excess expenditure by
Ministries/Departments as recommended by Public Accounts
Committee".


11

7. During the course of vetting of abovesaid Action Taken Notes, the Office of
C&AG of India made the following comments:

“(a) The integrated financial network like PFMS, PRABAL in Defence
and SPARSH for defence pensions may be integrated;
(b) | PFMS portal may be improved to arrest excess expenditure;
(c) On the payment of pensions/family pension in the Department of
Posts, mapping of expenditure and allocation may be made in such a
way that monitoring and reconciliation is done smoothly to avoid any
instance of excess expenditure;
(d) Timelines for implementation of PFMS for Railway, Defence and
Posts may be indicated,
(e) Due diligence rhay be exercised while framing budget estimates
to avoid requirements of supplementary in later stages;
(f) Regarding NIFM's recommendations on using the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework for using multi-year spending, Ministry may
submit revised reply to PAC; and
(g) | NIFM recommendations, suitable for implementation, may be
adopted on priority.”

8. In response to the vetting comments of Audit, the Ministry of Finance

(Department of Economic Affairs) stated as under:

“(a) The views/concerns expressed by Audit have already been
addressed adequately in this Ministry's response. For example, PFMS
like integrated and customised financial network are already in place in
Ministry of Defence (PFMS Raksha Aaharan aur Lekhaankan -
PRABAL), Ministry of Railways (Accounting Information Management
System), etc. Integration of department-specific customised financial
system with PFMS is a constant endeavour of the Government,

(b) While Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) can be
used for multi-year spending in a limited manner, the constraints and
practicality of this recommendation is already explained in paragraph
6 (vii) of the Note;

(c) Recommendations of NIFM, which are partly in practice and
are implementable and their constraints in implementation are brought
out in paragraph 6 of the Note.”


12

The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendations to
contain the excess expenditure, the National Institute of Financial
Management (NIFM) undertook a study on the trend and causes of
excess expenditure incurred by various Ministries/Departments during
the period 2000-01 to 2017-18. The Report as submitted by NIFM has
also brought out findings trom Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i)
Australia, (ii) Canada, (iii) Republic of Ireland, (iv) New Zealand and (v)
United Kingdom. The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) that NIFM made 12
recommendations for an informed system of Budgeting and Expenditure
Control. The recommendations of NIFM jnter-alia include viz (a) to
ensure existence of networked system having up-to-date information on
budget allocation and reappropriation and does not permit passing of
those bills which may lead to incurring of excess expenditure, (b) to
institute a Centralised Monitoring System for all Grants/Appropriations
having data of budgetary allocation and expenditure updated on a
monthly/fortnightly basis, (c) reduce the number of Supplementary
Budgets to one, such that Departments give due seriousness to
estimating their budgetary requirement (d) to increase accountability of
Chief Accounting Authority (CAA) and imposing of suitable cost on CAA
as well as on the Integrated Finance Division headed by JS/AS (FA) and
Controller/Chief Controller of Accounts, (e) to redefine Unit of
Appropriation to a level higher than the current level of Object-Head, (f)
DFGs may be prepared at the revised ‘Unit of Appropriation’ level and
not at Major Head level, (g) Powers of Re-appropriations may be aligned
with the revised ‘Unit of Appropriation’ with some additional conditions
vis-a-vis (i) No movement of budgetary allocation between Revenue and
Capital (ii) No movement of budgetary allocation between Revenue and
Charged (iii) No transfer of funds from Programme/Scheme to
establishment expenditure, (h) definition of ‘Services’, and New
Instruments of Services may be revised to attain the greater flexibility in
Budget Re-Appropriation, (i) Medium-Term Expenditure Framework may
be additionally used for setting multi-year spending limits for certain
categories of Department’s expenditure, (j) Charged Expenditure may be
categorised as standing Appropriations with a separate long term (multi-


13

year) authorisation from Parliament and not subject them to annual
authorisation, (k) to institute standing Appropriations (Multi-year budget
allocations) in keeping ‘with natural expenditure cycle of the
projectischeme, initially for Capital projects which can later be extended
to the larger schemes of Government of India and, (I) the existing List of
Major and Minor head of accounts may be replaced by a simpler Chart of
Accounts.

As regards the Action Taken on the recommendations of NIFM at
Para (i) & (ii) above, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) informed the Committee that Public Finance Management
System (PFMS) as constituted by them and followed by several
Ministries/Departments is a well-defined network system for keeping
check on expenditure against budget provision. According to the
Ministry, PFMS has been implemented in all Ministries/Departments
except Railways, Posts and Defence. In case of other Ministries/
Departments which are not covered under PFMS, the systems in
operation under their control are being integrated with PFMS for
maintaining data on daily basis. While appreciating the efforts of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for implementing
PFMS in various Ministries/Departments, which has improved
effectiveness, economy in Public Finance Management through better
cash management, ensuring transparency in Public expenditure, real-
time information on resource availability and utilisation across
schemes, the availability and utilisation across schemes, the Committee
would desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
to ensure that the system in operation in case of Ministries of Railways,
Posts as well as the other Ministries, Departments which are not
covered yet under PFMS are linked with PFMS at the earliest. A time-line
in this regard may be prescribed for the said Ministries/Departments so
as to complete the linking of their systems under PFMS within the
prescribed time-line. The Committee would like to be informed of action
taken on this within three months of the presentation of this Report to
Parliament.

Further with regard to Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) on Recommendation No. 3 of NIFM


14

regarding restricting the number of Supplementary Demands for Grants
in a year, the Committee have been informed that reduction in number of
Supplementary Grants is not advisable as the provision of
Supplementary Demands is a tool for the Government for meeting
urgent and unforeseen expenditure on New Services/New Instrument of
Services. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) are not in favour of only one Supplementary Grant
as this will restrict expenditure on New Services/New Instruments of
Services etc. The Committee are of the opinion that if
Ministries/Departments work with prudence and New Services or
Instruments can be planned and included in the
budgetary/Supplementary Grant provision, the need for three
Supplementary Grants in a year can be avoided. Ministries/Departments
should give due seriousness to estimating their realistic and pragmatic
budgetary requirements in ‘advance at the Budget/Supplementary Grants
stage and avoid the requirement of repeated Supplementary Grants.
Necessary instructions in this regard may be issued to all concerned at
the earliest. Further, the Committee also wish to point out that the
increase in the corpus of the Contingency Fund of India from & 500 crore
to 30,000 crore in 2021-22, for meeting immediate requirement of funds
for emergent situations will help in being of support in situations of
uncertainty. The Committee are dismayed that incurring excess
expenditure despite having recourse to Supplementary Grants on three
occasions has become a repetitive phenomenon and the Ministry of
Finance are unable to check its recurrence. The Committee are of the
opinion that only when realistic projections are made by the
Ministries/Departments in the budget as well as during the
Supplementary Grants stage, incurring excess expenditure can be
obviated and transparent financial practices can be established. The
Committee would, therefore, like to emphasize that the recommendation
made by NIFM in this regard should be taken in right spirit and due
seriousness and necessary arrangements made in this direction by
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in consultation
with C&AG and Controller General of Accounts.


10.

15

The Committee note that recommendation No. 4 of the NIFM is
regarding increasing the accountability of Chief Accounting Authority.
Yet, the Ministry of Finarice (Department of Economic Affairs) have
merely stated that necessary provisions already exist in Rule 70 of
General Financial Rules, 2017 and the Department of Expenditure has
also been impressing upon Grant Controlling authorities to take all
measures to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure for
curtailment of excess expenditure. The Committee are concerned that
despite having the Rules/F'rovisions in this regard and the oft repeated
measures taken by the Department of Expenditure the position of
incurring excess expenditure has only worsened in the last 10-15 years,
which is clearly indicative of the fact that extant rules are not fully
effective and no sincere efforts have been made by the Government
towards fixing accountability of Chief Accounting Authority. As
incurring large amount of excess expenditure is a regular feature by
various Ministries/Depariments despite issuance of elaborate
instructions by the Government in pursuance of the recommendations
of the PAC for containing the excess expenditure to the barest
minimum, the Committee strongly recommend that at least now, in
pursuance of NIFM recommendations, necessary steps be taken to
increase the accountability of Chief Accounting Authority with at view to
curbing the tendency of incurring excess expenditure to the barest
minimum, if not eliminating it altogether. The Committee, therefore,
desire to be apprised with the specific measures initiated by the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in this direction.

In their Action Taken Note on the Recommendation Para No. 1 of PAC given

above, the Ministry of Defence stated as follows:

11.

“The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted for
compliance. With regard to recommendation made by NIFM, it may be
mentioned that the said Report has not been shared with this Ministry. Also,
Ministry of Defence has not received any fresh instructions/guidelines based
on the recommendations made by NIFM from Ministry of Finance. On receipt
of fresh instructions from Ministry of Finance, necessary action will be taken
accordingly.” :

The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) that all Ministries/Departments have


12.

16

been sensitised often to avoid excess expenditure. In this context,
Committee feel perturbed to note that Ministry of Defence has not seen
the NIFM Report and the Ministry of Finance have not given any
instructions/guidelines based on the recommendations of NIFM and the
Ministry is awaiting issue of the instructions. The Committee had
emphasized on better coordination between Ministries. As incurring
excess expenditure is a regular feature under Grants/Appropriations
operated by Ministry of Defence, the Committee desire the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to immediately share the
Report of NIFM as well as the instructions issued for being followed in
pursuance of the recommendations of NIFM to all the
Ministries/Departments, particularly the Ministry of Defence, with a view
to ensuring action is taken by them in order to streamline and
strengthen their extant budgetary mechanism and thereby tighten the
budgetary control and effectively check the trend of excess expenditure.
Further, in regard to Recommendation Para No.2 above, the Ministry of
Defence in their Action Taken Notes stated as under:

“In this regard, it is submitted that in High Level Committee (8
Meeting), which was held on 10" March 2021, the recommendation of
the PAC was discussed with all the stakeholders. During the meeting, it
was also emphasized that a realistic assessment of the committed
liabilities and projected outgo during the year needs to be meticulously
undertaken in order to keep the expenditure within the budgetary
allocations. It was also decided that Army, Navy and Airforce will
undertake few case studies of the Head of Accounts, where the excess
expenditure had persistently been exceeded with respect to the
allocated budgetary allocations and furnish their Report to this Ministry.
The three Defence Services were also requested to ensure to bring
down the instance of excess expenditure figures to zero. The study
reports have been submitted by the services and is being examined by
this Ministry. It is observed that the services are taking remedial steps
to avoid the excess expenditure in future”.

13. The Committee further find that in pursuance of PAC’s recommendation,
the High-Level Committee constituted by Ministry of Defence held a
meeting on 107 March, 2021 wherein it was decided that Army, Navy and
Airforce will undertake case studies of the Head of Accounts where the
excess expenditure has persistently been witnessed. According to
Ministry of Defence, all the aforesaid services have submitted their
reports, which are under examination of the Ministry. The Committee


17

feel concerned to note from the scrutiny of excess expenditure during
the last ten years (2009-10 to 2018-19) the Ministry of Defence is
recurringly incurring huge amount of excess expenditure (except during
the year 2015-16). Further, in the Defence Sector there have been
instances where no excess expenditure has been witnessed under one
particular Grant during a year, yet an excess expenditure of huge
amount was witnessed under the Grant in the following year. The
Committee, thus conclude that Ministry of Defence is still in the process
of searching for ways and means to avoid recurring excess expenditure
in the Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry. Previous efforts
made in this direction have not yielded any desired results. The
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry of Defence to examine the
Reports submitted by the Services at the earliest and inform the
Committee of the Action Taken by these services to avoid excess
expenditure in future.

B. Excess Expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants
14. The Committee noted with concern that Supplementary Grant to the tune of

27,00,871.18 crore was allocated for the two excess registering
Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/Departments. In case
of defence services, Supplementary Grant of 3,148.03 crore was obtained in
three cases of two Grants cperated by Ministry of Defence. The Committee
were of the opinion that the instrument of obtaining Supplementary Grants
was not operated judiciously by the Ministries of Finance and Defence during
the year 2017-18. The Committee, therefore, expected that in future the
Ministries of Finance and Defence would make all out efforts in arresting the
surging trend of excess expenditure by proposing pragmatic figures of
expenditure at the stage of Supplementary Grants. The Committee felt it
imperative that the Ministry of Finance and Defence should devise an
effective monitoring mechanism to keep close watch over the trend of
expenditure throughout the year and when need for additional funds arises,
they should realistically assess their requirement and approach Parliament for
seeking Supplementary Grants in time.

(Recommendation Para No. 3)


16.

17.

18.

18

15.In their Action Taken Note on aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of

Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) inter-alia stated as under:

While

which

“Ministry of Finance has taken several steps to contain the recurring
excess expenditure in various Grants/Appropriations. A study has been
got conducted from National Institute of Financial Management on
recurring expenditure. In their Report NIFM made recommendations for
an informed system of budgeting and expenditure control. The Ministry
of Finance held discussions with Ministry of Railways, Ministry of
Defence and Department of Posts and impressed on the need to
contain the expenditure within the Appropriations approved by
Parliament. It was also emphasized that Public Financial Management
System (PFMS) may be used wherever the system has not been
adopted for avoiding the excess expenditure.”

vetting the Action Taken Notes, Audit has made further comments
are detailed below:

“(a) Excess expenditure in spite of Supplementary Grants reflects poor
budgetary control of the Ministry/Department. More effective measures
need to be institutionalised to curb the excess expenditure; and

(b) NIFM Recommendations, suitable for implementation, may be
adopted on priority.”

In response to the vetting comments of Audit, the Ministry of Finance

(Department of Economic Affairs) stated as under:

“All Ministries/Departments have been sensitized often to avoid
excess expenditure. Discussions were held with Ministries of Defence,
Railways and Department of Posts towards avoiding excess
expenditure. Government is sensitive to the phenomenon of recurring
excess expenditure.”

As regards the Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence on the aforesaid

recommendation, the Ministry stated as follows:

“Budgetary Allocations are made by the Services to various
lower units/formations which also include those in remote areas.
Towards more effective budgetary control, a decision was taken to
introduce a customized Public Finance Management System (PFMS)
in Ministry of Defence. Initially, it was decided that PFMS, which is in
operation in the Civil Ministries will be replicated for the Grants under
Ministry of Defence. Subsequently, Pilot Run of PFMS commenced for
Grant No 18: MoD Civil in 28 PAOs of MoD from 1.08.2020. During the
pilot run it was observed that there are significant differences in the
operation of Defence Grants and the Grant of other Civil Ministries due


19.

19

to which the present PFMS for Civil Ministries cannot be replicated for
Grants under MoD. Therefore, it was decided that a separate
instance/parallel chapter in PFMS, mirroring the PFMS for Civil Grants,
will be created for Defence Grants by Controller General of Defence
Accounts (CGDA) in consultation with Controller General of Accounts
(CGA). Accordingly, all the Departments / Organizations under
Defence Grants shall migrate to the proposed Defence Instance in
PFMS. Evolutionary mode of software Development and simultaneous
processing of Activities is being carried out with a view to expedite the
project.

Similarly, in order to monitor Defence Pensions related
expenditure, e-Pension System named SPARSH has been introduced.
The System entails creation of an integrated data base giving the
complete details of a pensioner beginning with personal and family
details, service history, pay particulars, pension sanction and
subsequent revision along with payments made (and deductions there
from, if any) and a computerized application for sanction, revision and
disbursement of pension by a single agency. The System has been
rolled out for Air Force, Navy and Defence Civilian Organizations viz.
Defence Accounts Department, JS (Trg) & CAO, DGDE, Coast Guard
and OFB. Software Development for migration of legacy pensioners is
under process. Test run for 7th CPC Legacy Pensioners of CPDS,
DPDOs and 7 banks is underway and pension for July 2021 of these
pensioners will be disbursed through SPARSH. This system will ensure
monitoring of Pension budget and bookings on a real time basis.”

The Committee are again concerned to note that in response to the
recommendation of NIFM, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) stated that they had impressed upon the Ministry of
Railways, Ministry of Defence and Department of Posts to use the Public
Financial Management System (PFMS) for avoiding excess expenditure.
In view of the steps taken in this regard, the Ministry of Defence
apprised the Committee that keeping in view the significant differences
in the operation of Defence Grants and the Grants operated by other
Civil Ministries, they had decided to create a separate instance/parallel
chapter in PFMS, mirroring the PFMS for Civil Grants by Controller
General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) in consultation with Controller
General of Accounts (CGA). Towards this end an evolutionary mode of
Software Development and simultaneous processing of activities is
being carried out with a view to expedite the project. Since, in view of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), the
introduction of PFMS has improved effectiveness, economy in public
finance management through better cash management, ensuring


20

transparency in public expenditure, it also checks expenditure against
budget provision, the Committee desire to be apprised of the present
status in developing the software to monitor Defence Grants and
impressed upon the Ministry of Defence to complete the project at the
earliest.

The Ministry of Defence had also informed the Committee that an
e-Pension System named SPARSH has been introduced to monitor
Defence Pensions related expenditure. The System has been rolled out
for Air Force, Navy and Defence Civilian Organizations viz. Defence
Accounts Department, JS (Trg.) & CAO, DGDE, Coast Guard and OFB.
The Committee note that Software Development for migration of legacy
pensioners was under process and Test run for 7th CPC Legacy
Pensioners of CPDS, DPDOs and 7 banks was underway and pension
for July 2021 of these pensioners was to be disbursed through SPARSH.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the present status of developing
and rolling out the software for migration of legacy pensioners and
exhort the Ministry to expedite the process of covering all Defence
Pensioners under SPARSH.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
March, 2022 Chairperson,
Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



21

CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find from the scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts relating to
Civil, Defence,-Postal Services and Railways for the year 2017-18 that there was an
excess expenditure of हैं 99610.31 crore incurred in five cases under four
Grants/Appropriations. The Committee note that as in the previous year, the bulk of
excess expenditure incurred was on the Civil side amounting to 92461.31 crore out
of the which %92333.69 crore was under Grant No.-28- 'Repayment of Debt' alone,
operated by Ministry of Finance, (Department of Economic Affairs), followed by
%127.62 crore under Grant No.39-'Pensions' which is again operated by Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure). Three cases under two Grants operated by
Ministry of Defence contributed to an overall excess of 7149.00 crore, out of which
Grant No.20- 'Defence Services’ and Grant No.-21- 'Capital Outlay on Defence
Services' (Capital-Voted) incurred excess expenditure of more than 23000 crore. The
Committee are however, pleased to note that no excess expenditure was incurred by
the Department of Posts and Ministry of Railways during the year under review. An
analysis of the reasons for excess expenditure during 2017-18 indicate that lack of
proper monitoring of the progress of expenditure, inadequate review and analysis of
the financial requirement and non-observance of the prescribed financial rules were
the main contributory factors towards excess expenditure of such a high magnitude
during the year under review. This only serves to reinforce the Committee's of
repeated observations that adequate and serious attention was not being paid by
these Ministries to the implementation of the Committee's recommendations. The
incidence of excess expenditure of such a huge magnitude is least justifiable given
the provision for obtaining Supplementary Grants three times in a financial year. The
Committee desire that such a failure arising out of want of essential alacrity in the
budget provisions, negligence on the part of budget controlling authorities to monitor
the flow of excess expenditure throughout the year and failure on their part to
observe the General Financial Rules should be dealt with strictly, so as to ensure
avoidance of excess expenditure of such magnitude in future. The Committee note
from the action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) on the recommendations contained in their previous Report that
the National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) have submitted their report on
the study undertaken by them on the trend and causes of excess expenditure, and
recommendations made by the Institute are being studied in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs). The Committee expect that the recommendations
as given by NIFM be implemented at the earliest and ways and means suggested by
them to contain the excess expenditure are observed by all the
Ministries/Departments, so that incurring expenditure in excess of the budgeted
amounts is altogether eliminated in future.
[Para No. 1]


22
Action taken by the Ministry of Defence

The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted for compliance.
With regard to recommendation made by NIFM, it may be mentioned that the said
report has not been shared with this Ministry. Also, Ministry of Defence has not
received any fresh instructions/guidelines based on the recommendations made by
NIFM from Ministry of Finance. On receipt of fresh instructions from Ministry of
Finance, necessary action will be taken accordingly.

Observation/ Recommendation

Scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred during the last ten years reveals that
the Civil Ministries/Departments have been incurring large amount of excess
expenditure continuously during the last ten fiscals. The Committee are concerned to
note that the excess expenditure by the Civil Ministries/Departments is highest
during the year 2016-17 i.e. 189154.26 crore in two Grants/Appropriations. However,
though the same has been reduced to some extent during the year under review but
it is still massive proportion amounting to more than 90,000 crore. In case of
Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Defence, the excess expenditure
has witnessed a steep rise during the year under review in comparison to that which
occurred in the previous year i.e. 2016-17 and it also touched the figure of 7149.00
during the fiscal 2017-18. From the scrutiny of Grants/Appropriations, the Committee
are appalled to note that Appropriation-Repayment of Debt operated by the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and Grant-Capital outlay of Defence
Service operated by Ministry of Defence recurringly incurred huge amount of excess
expenditure during the years 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Committee note with deep
concern that no sincere efforts have been made by the aforesaid Ministries towards
implementation of a strong mechanism to curb this recurring phenomenon in the
Grants/Appropriations operated by them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Government should earnestly undertake casestudies of instances where excess
expenditure had persistently exceeded the budgetary allocations and strengthen the
extant mechanism of budgetary control so as to effectively check the unabated trend
of excess expenditure in future.

[Para No.2]
Action taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)

A list of grants (copy enclosed) in which excess has happened in last 10 years has
been reviewed for Civil Ministries. The number of Grants in which excess
expenditure has occurred has come down to just one in 2018-19 and with a small
amount of % 22.43 lakhs under Charged category as compared to more than = 90,
000 crore in previous year. Therefore, excess expenditure has come down to
negligible amount due to better monitoring.

2. Excess expenditure had occurred in Defence Pension in all the years from
2009-10 to 2017-18, but the same has been obviated in 2018-19 due to
strengthening of monitoring and budgetary control. Also, Repayment of Debt which
had excess in last two years was also within the Appropriation provided in 2018-19.


23

Therefore, monitoring mechanism has helped in reducing the excess in
Appropriation provided by Parliament and has led to better financial discipline.

3. Further instructions to watch over the excess expenditure has been issued vide
OM NO. G.25018/CGA-AA/PAC/2020-21/794 dated 16.12.2021 (copy enclosed).

4. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their Letter No. WH-Ga/H1-323/ATN/ATR/EN/2020-21/419 dated 12.10.2021.

Action taken by the Ministry of Defence

In this regard, it is submitted that in High Level Committee (8th Meeting),
which was held on 10th March, 2021, the above observation and recommendation of
the PAC were discussed with all the stake holders. During the meeting it was also
emphasised that a realistic assessment of the Committed liabilities and projected
outgo during the year needs to be meticulously undertaken in order to keep the
expenditure within the budgetary allocations. As per deliberations held, it was also
decided that Army, Navy and Air Force will undertake few case studies of the Head
of accounts, where the excess expenditure had persistenly been exceeded with
respect to the allocated budgetary allocations and furnish their report to this Ministry.
The three Defence Services were also requested to ensure to bring down the
instance of excess expenditure figures to zero. The study reports have been
submitted by the Services and is being examined by this Ministry. It is observed that
the Services are taking remedial steps to avoid the excess expenditure in future.

Action Taken by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
on Recommendation Para Nos.1 & 2

The observations/recommendations of Public Accounts Committee have been
noted.

2 National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) has submitted its
report on the study assigned to it. Excess expenditure incurred by various
Ministries/Departments during the period 2000-01 to 2017-18 has been analyzed in
detail. The report has also brought out findings from Desk Study on excess
expenditure in (i) Australia (b) Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and
(v) United Kingdom. The Report also made recommendations for an informed
system of Budgeting and Expenditure Control.

3 NIFM made the following 12 recommendations for an informed system
of Budgeting and Expenditure Control

(i) Recommendation-1: Ensure that there exists a networked System
which has up-to-date information on budget allocation and re-
appropriation, and does not permit passing of bills which may lead to
excess over budget provision.

(ii) Recommendation-2: Institute a new Centralised Monitoring System for
all Grants/Appropriations (Civil, Defence, Railways, and Postal
Services) which maintains data on budgetary allocation and
expenditure update on a monthly/fortnightly basis.


(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

&)

24

Recommendation-3: Reduce the number of Supplementary Budgets
to one, such that Departments give due seriousness to estimating their
budgetary requirement. हे
Recommendation-4: Increase accountability of Chief Accounting
Authority (CAA) for budgetary control beyond that stipulated in Rule-70
of GFRs-2017 by imposing suitable cost on CAA as well as on the
Integrated Finance Division headed by JS/AS (FA) and Controller/Chief
Controller of Accounts.

Recommendation-5: Redefine Unit of Appropriation to a level higher
than the current level of Object Head. The Unit of Appropriation may
be set at a level delinked form the current Chart of Account, more
closely aligned with the policy objective governing the expenditure, and
at a level even higher than the Major Head as per need.
Recommendation-6: Demand for Grants may be prepared at the
revised 'Unit of Appropriation’ level and not at Grant + Major Head level
as is currently being done. The revised Unit of Appropriation may be
set at a level such that there is greater Parliamentary oversight, and at
the same time, increased flexibility in the hands of the executive in
meeting the programme objectives approved by the Parliament.
Recommendation-7: Align the powers of Re-Appropriation with the

- revised ‘Unit of Appropriation’ with additional conditions. These

conditions at a minimum to include the following: 1) No movement of
budgetary allocation between Revenue and Capital 2) No movement of
budgetary allocation between Revenue and Charged, 3) No transfer of
funds form Programme/Scheme to Establishment expenditure.
Recommendation-8: Revise definition of ‘Services’, 'New Services’
and 'New- Instruments of Services’ such that there is greater flexibility
in Budget Re-Appropriation. Presently , the term ‘Service’ is
understood to be operating at a very low (detailed) level, which
prevents flexibility in spending and reallocation budget within the overall
authorization given by the Parliament.

Recommendation-9: Medium Term Expenditure Framework may be
additionally used for setting multi-year spending limits for certain
categories of Department's expenditure. Different Departments have
different spending profiles in keeping with their different mandates.
Accordingly, the proportion of items of expenditure which are within the
Department’s control may be identified (Categorised as DEL or
Departmental Expenditure Limit) vis-a-vis items of expenditure which
are demand-led and volatile, and thus not amenable to long term
forecast of projection (Categorised as AME or Annually Managed
Expenditure). A hard, multi-year spending limit may thus be set for
each department at the level of Grant, for the 'DEL' category of
expenditure. Only the AME portion of expenditure of the Department
may be annually debated and voted by the Parliament, thereby
providing greater time for Parliamentary scrutiny, and at the same
leading to better adherence to the Fiscal Deficit targets set by the
Union Government.

Recommendation-10: Categorise charged Expenditure as Standing
Appropriations, with a separate long term (multi-year) authorization
from Parliament and not subject them to annual authorization. By
definition - Charged expenditure is not voted by the Parliament. The
Constitution specifies the types of expenditure that would be Charged


25

on the Consolidated fund of India. The approval of the Parliament for
Charged expenditure may be taken in a single multi-year or
Standing/Permanent Appropriation. The Budget would then include
estimates of Charged expenditure for the current year, shown against
each Department, but an excess above this amount would not call for a
separate authorisation by the Parliament, as it would be covered by the
standing appropriation.

(xi) Recommendation-11. Institute standing appropriations (Multi-year
budget allocations) in keeping with natural expenditure cycle of the
project/scheme, initially for Capital projects. This can later be extended
to the larger schemes of Govt. of India.

(xii) Recommendation-12. A simpler Chart of Accounts may be devised
(to replace LMMHA) modelled on international good practices. The
current chart of accounts - List of Major and Minor Head of Accounts
and the associated 15-digit classification, is not easily linked to the
various welfare programme and activities undertaken by the
Government. The existing List of Major and Minor head of accounts
may be replaced by a simpler chart of Accounts which would lead to
greater transparency in budgeting and reporting of expenditure.

4 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department
of Economic Affairs on 14.7.2021 to discuss the issues for control of excess
expenditure with Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence, Department of Posts
where excess expenditure was recurrently occurred. These Ministries/Departments
were impressed upon that endeavour should be made that there will be no instance
of excess expenditure in FY 2021-2022 and the efforts should be a collective
responsibility. It was also emphasized that Public Financial Management System
(PFMS) may be used wherever the system has not been adopted for avoiding the
excess expenditure.

5 The participating Ministries/Departments viz. Ministry of Railways
Ministry of Defence and Department of Posts have furnished their feedback, as
detailed below, subsequent to the said meeting

Ministry of Defence -

(a) One of the major reason of excess expenditure has been payments
through Letters of Credit (LC) to meet foreign contractual obligation
where there is a time gap between the payments made by the banks
and receipt and adjustments of scrolls by the Services/Payment
Controllers. Concurrent monitoring of LC based payments is being
done at each stage now towards avoiding excess expenditure;

(b) All the budget holders have been advised to make realistic assessment
of Committed Liabilities/projected outgo and available resources for
fresh contracts;

(c) All the budget holders are regularly being sensitized on adhering to
monthly and quarterly expenditure plans;

(d) A decision was taken to introduce a customized Public Finance
Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of Defence. The Defence
instance of PFMS has been named PRABAL — PFMS Raksha Aaharan
aur Lekhaankan. Coding and Development work on the proposed
modules of PRABAL has started;


(8)

26

In order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure, e-Pension
System named SPARSH has been introduced. The system entails
creation of an integrated data base giving the complete details of
pensioner with a view to disburse the pension payment, monitoring of
pension budget and accounting the disbursement of pension on real
time basis;

Ministry of Railways -

0)

(9)

(h)

Railways use a robust IT platform Integrated Payroll and Accounting
System — IPAS for its accounting purpose, where budget and
expenditure against it is monitored on real time basis. The data is also
updated in PFMS through a web service on daily basis;

With the merger of Rail Budget with General Budget and consequent
reduction of number of demands from 16 to 1, instances of excess
expenditure has reduced.

Department of Posts —

The Postal Accounts Offices authorize postal pension/family pension
using a special software developed for this purpose wherein all the
details of pensions are available and the software is a central server
based. Concurrent audit of pension vouchers/payments is being done
by Postal Audit on prescribed intervals. Data is also updated as and
when revision occurs. Department is also in the process of rolling out
Exit Management module of ERP wherein end to end process of
CCS(Pension) Rules are inbuilt.

6. The following are the steps/action taken on the recommendations made by
National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) in its report on ‘Study of Excess
Expenditure over Budget’

(i)

(ii)

Recommendations 1 and 2 are for establishing a networked system
and instituting a new Centralized Monitoring System. It may be
mentioned that Public Finance Management System (PFMS) is a well-
defined networked system, which has improved effectiveness,
economy in public finance management through better cash
management, ensuring transparency in public expenditure, real-time
information on resource availability and utilisation across schemes.
PFMS checks expenditure against budget provision. PFMS has been
implemented in all Ministries/Departments except Railways, Posts and
Defence. In case of other Ministries/Departments which are not
covered under PFMS, the systems in operations under their control
are being integrated with PFMS for maintaining data on daily basis.
Pending adoption of PFMS, Department of Posts and Ministry of
Railways have automated the flow for monthly into PFMS and head-
wise summary figures are incorporated in PFMS without manual
intervention. This was completed in 2019. Ministry of Railways is
currently having the Accounting Information Management System
(AIMS) as centralised monitoring system;

Ministry of Defence currently has a computerised All India Compilation
System to capture receipts and expenditure and also for monitoring
the same as per budgetary allocation. Further, Ministry of Defence
has successfully consolidated the accounts on PFMS since mid 2019.


(iii

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

27

There has also been a development for adoption of PFMS by Ministry
of Defence, which has been modified to have a new parallel
(PRABAL) and PFMS-integrated system being developed for Ministry
of Defence;

As for reduction of number of supplementary budget
(Recommendation 3), it may be stated that Article 115 of the
Constitution provides for seeking Supplementary Demands if the
amount authorized by Parliament is found insufficient or a need has
arisen for new service. Number of Supplementary Demands for
Grants in a year have not been prescribed, though generally three
Supplementary Demands are laid before the Parliament during
Monsoon, Winter and Budget Sessions of Parliament;

While the provisions of Supplementary Demands as a tool for the
Government for meeting expenditure on urgent, unforeseen new
services/new instrument of services are necessary, restricting the
number of Supplementary Demands for Grants to one is not
advisable. However, considering the immediate requirement of funds
for emergent situations, Government has increased the corpus of the
Contingency Fund of India from & 500 crore to = 30,000 crore in 2021-
2022;

As regards increasing the accountability of Chief Accounting
Authority, enabling provisions exists for Chief Accounting Authority to
act on budgetary control as stipulated in Rule 70 of General Financial
Rules, 2017. Department of Expenditure has also been impressing
upon Grant controlling authorities to take all measures to ensure
proper planning and monitoring of expenditure for curtailment of
excess expenditure;

Recommendation 5 to 8: It may be mentioned that new multi —
dimensional Chart of Account is under consideration. A committee
constituted for this purpose suggested seven mutually exclusive
segments to capture information relation to financial transactions. The
seven mutually exclusive segments are — (a) Administrative Unit (b)
Function (c) Programme and Scheme segment (d) Target segment (e)
Recipient segment (f) Economic Segment (g) Geographic segment.
The proposed re-classification is expected to provide financial
reporting at both micro and macro levels for various stakeholders and
bring more transparency and accountability. Considering the wide
scope of the recommendations of the Committee, a feasibility group
has been constituted to study the system of revised Chart of Accounts
vis-a-vis the current system of accounting operative in Centre and
States with a view to (a) help develop common understanding
regarding implementation of the revised Chart of Accounts (b)
examine the possibility of generating Annual Financial Statement and
Demands for Grants from the Statement of Budget Estimates in the
proposed revised classification structure (c) suggest solution to the
identification mechanism - in the existing system of classification, the
numeric code of the Major Head identifies the nature of receipts or
expenditure or the nature of expenditure as revenue or capital — which
is absent in the proposed system of classification. The last tier of
classification viz. object heads are proposed as determinant in the
revised system of classification for identification of expenditure as to
whether they are revenue or capital and (d) suggest roadmap for


(vii)

(viii)

(90

7.

28

taking forward the process of implementation of the revised Chart of
Accounts. Thus, the recommendations of NIFM regarding redefining
the Unit of Appropriation and aligning the powers of re-appropriation,
revision of 1३७७४ Service'/‘New Instrument of Service' are expected to
be addressed when the new chart of accounts is implemented;
Recommendation 9 is for using the Medium Term Expenditure
Framework for setting multi-year spending limits for certain categories
of Department's expenditure. Section 3 of the Fiscal Responsibility
and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 requires the Government
to lay the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) Statement in
both Houses of Parliament. The MTEF Statement sets a three-year
rolling target for the expenditure indicators. It includes an estimate of
expenditure commitments with demand-wise sectional classification
(Revenue and Capital), and expenditure projections for certain
schemes of the Government. The MTEF projections for a Department
provide the fixed goal post in the medium term. However, Article 114
of the Constitution provides that a separate appropriation need to be
obtained from the Parliament for expenditure;

Recommendations 10 and 11 are for categorising charged
Expenditure as Standing Appropriations, with a separate long term
(multi-year) authorization from Parliament and not subject them to
annual authorization require careful consideration. This
recommendation is against the constitutional provisions enshrined in
Articles 113 and 114 of the Constitution of India. The Statement laid
before Parliament in terms of Article 112 of the Constitution of India is
Annual Financial Statement. Therefore, this recommendation for
multi-year appropriation is not as per the spirit of the Constitution;
Recommendation 12 is for replacing the existing List of Major and
Minor head of accounts by a simpler chart of Accounts which would
lead to greater transparency in budgeting and reporting of
expenditure. It may be stated that a feasibility group has been
constituted to study the revised system of classification. This has
been amplified in paragraph (i) above.

The course of ‘Action Taken' has the approval of High Level Inter-

Ministerial Group, constituted under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to
examine the issues of excess expenditure by Ministries/Departments as
recommended by Public Accounts Committee.

8.

below:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Vetted comments of Audit

While vetting the ATNs, Audit has made further comments as detailed

The integrated financial network like PFMS, PRABAL in Defence and
SPARSH for defence pensions may be integrated;

PFMS portal may be improved to arrest excess expenditure;

On the payment of pensions/family pension in the Department of Posts,
mapping of expenditure and allocation may be made in such a way that
monitoring and reconciliation is done smoothly to avoid any instance of
excess expenditure;


29

(d) Timelines for implementation of PFMS for Railway, Defence and Posts
may be indicated;

(e) Due diligence may be exercised while framing budget estimates to
avoid requirements of supplementary in later stages;
(f) Regarding NIFM’s recommendations on using the Medium Term

Expenditure Framework for using multi-year spending, Ministry may
submit revised reply to PAC; and
(9) NIFM recommendations, suitable for implementation, may be adopted
on priority.
Further comments of Government

9. The following is stated in response to the vetting comments of Audit:

(a) The views/concerns expressed by Audit have already beenaddressed
adequately in this Ministry's response. For example, PFMS like
integrated and customised financial network are already in place in
Ministry of Defence (PFMS Raksha Aaharanaur Lekhaankan -
PRABAL), Ministry of Railways (Accounting Information Management
System), etc. Integration of department-specific customised financial
system with PFMS is a constant endeavour of the Government;

(b) While Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) can be used for
multi-year spending in a limited manner, the constraints and practicality
of this recommendation is already explained in paragraph 6(vii) of the
Note;

(c) Recommendations of NIFM, which are partly in practice and are

| implementable and their constraints in implementation are brought out
in paragraph 6 of the Note.

10. This has been vetted by Audit vide their Letter 1५०.समन्वय/फ़ा
-323/ATN/ATR/EN/Vol.II/2021-22/569 dated 17.12.2021

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note with concern that during the financial year 2017-18,
excess expenditure was incurred even after obtaining Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations in all the five cases by the respective Ministries/Departments
to meet their additional requirements. To illustrate, Supplementary Grant to the tune
of & 700871.18 crore was allocated for the two excess registering
Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/Departments but this too fell
short by हैं 92461.31 crore. In case of Defence Services, although Supplementary
Grant of = 3148.03 crore was obtained in three cases of two Grants operated by
Ministry of Defence, an excess expenditure of = 7149.00 crore was incurred. The
Committee are of the opinion that the instrument of obtaining Supplementary Grants
was not operated judicially by the Ministries of Finance and Defence during the year
under review. In this regard, the Committee note that despite their oft repeated
recommendation to arrest the trend of excess expenditure even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants, there has been a steep rise in excess expenditure in respect
of the Ministry of Defence. While the Ministry of Finance performed a little better in
restricting excess expenditure in comparison to the record of the previous year, the
excess expenditure incurred during 2017-18 is still significantly high. The Committee,
therefore, come to the inescapable conclusion that the Ministries concerned have
failed not only in making realistic and pragmatic Budget Estimates but even the


30

Supplementary Demands as provided could not prevent them from incurring excess
expenditure. The Committee expect that in future the Ministries of Finance and
Defence would make all out efforts in arresting the surging trend of excess
expenditure by proposing pragmatic figures of expenditure at the stage of
Supplementary Grants. It is imperative that the Ministry of Finance and Defence
should devise an effective monitoring mechanism to keep close watch over the trend
of expenditure throughout the year and when need for additional funds arises they
should realistically assess their requirement and approach Parliament for seeking
Supplementary Grants in time. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendations in this regard and urge the Ministries/Departments to review their
existing system of computerization and networking so that the progress of
expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to ensure that the
expenditure does not overshoot its limits despite obtaining Supplementary Grants.

[Para No.3]
Action taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)

The expenditure of Central Civil Ministries is predominantly being done
through PFMS system and accounts compilation is being done on e-lekha. The
expenditure reports have been made available to the Ministries for monitoring
expenditure on a real time basis. Along with regular accounting data dissemination
on monthly basis, the frequency of financial reporting through MIS reports to Ministry
of Finance has been increased to weekly basis from the first quarter of 2020-21 to
monitor the expenditure more closely.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their Letter No. WA-d4/H1-323/ATN/ATR/EN/2020-21/419 dated 12.10.2021.

Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence

Budgetary allocations are made by the Services to various lower
units/formations which also include those in remote areas. Towards more effective
budgetary control, a decision was taken to introduce a customized Public Finance
Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of Defence. Initially, it was decided that
PFMS, which is in operation in the Civil Ministries will be replicated for the Grants
under Ministry of Defence. Subsequently, Pilot Run of PFMS commenced for Grant
No 18: MoD Civil in 28 PAOs of MoD from 1.08.2020. During the pilot run it was
observed that there are significant differences in the operation of Defence Grants
and the Grant of other Civil Ministries due to which the present PFMS for Civil
Ministries cannot be replicated for Grants under MoD. Therefore, it was decided that
a separate instance/parallel chapter in PFMS, mirroring the PFMS for Civil Grants,
will be created for Defence Grants by Controller General of Defence Accounts
(CGDA) in consultation with Controller General of Accounts (CGA). Accordingly all
the Departments / Organizations under Defence Grants shall migrate to the
proposed Defence Instance in PFMS. Evolutionary mode of software Development
and simultaneous processing of Activities is being carried out with a view to expedite
the project.

2. Similarly, in order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure, e-
Pension System named SPARSH has been introduced. The System entails creation


31

of an integrated data base giving the complete details of a pensioner beginning with
personal and family details, service history, pay particulars, pension sanction and
subsequent revision along with payments made (and deductions there from, if any)
and a computerized application for sanction, revision and disbursement of pension
by a single agency. The System has been rolled out for Air Force, Navy and Defence
Civilian Organizations viz Defence Accounts Department, JS (Trg) & CAO, DGDE,
Coast Guard and OFB. Software Development for migration of legacy pensioners is
under process. Test run for 7th CPC Legacy Pensioners of CPDS, DPDOs and 7
banks is underway and pension for July 2021 of these pensioners will be disbursed
through SPARSH. This system will ensure monitoring of Pension budget and
bookings on a real time basis.

Observation/Recommendation

From the scrutiny of select cases of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations, the Committee find that under Capital-Charged
section of Appropriation No.-38-Repayment of Debt, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) had incurred an expenditure of
92,333.69 crore over and above the total sanctioned provisions of
%57,80,270.94crore which included Supplementary Appropriation of
%6,94,966.18 crore. Excess expenditure under this Appropriation was the
net result of total savings of %36,985.14 crore and total excess of
%1,29,318.83 crore under various sub-heads of this Appropriation. The
scrutiny of Explanatory Notes reveals that the excess expenditure under this
Appropriation was incurred mainly due to higher amount withdrawn by the
State Governments in the last days of the financial year to meet their
financial obligations. According to the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economics Affairs) it is difficult to precisely estimate these repayments as
these are influenced by the market conditions, lodgement of the claims by
the investors/State Governments in the case of investment in 14 days
Treasury Bills and schedule of payments set by the International Financial
Institutions. The Committee express their displeasure on incurring a huge
amount of excess expenditure recurringly for the year 2016-17
(%1,86,954.42 crore) and 2017-18 (%92,333.69 crore) under this
Appropriation with the contributory reasons being the same. The Committee
further observe that the department resorted to Supplementary
Appropriation of %6,94,966.18 crore in July, 2017 and March, 2018. No
Supplementary Appropriation was taken in between by the Department to
enhance their budgetary requirement and the Department have not
adequately assessed their actual requirement of funds even till the fag end
of the year. The Committee are of the view that a precise assessment of
funds required to cover the impending excess expenditure could have been
made and adequate Supplementary provisions sought from Parliament.
Unfortunately, the Supplementary provisions of = 6,94,966.18 crore could
not meet the additional requirement of funds under this Appropriation
leaving the balance for Parliament to regularize. It is not expected of any
Ministry/Department to cross their Financial limits even after making such a
huge supplementary provision as has happened in this case. The
Committee take a serious view of the casual approach of the Ministry of
Finance which is expected to be a role model for others to emulate in the
matter of framing budget/supplementary provisions. The Committee desire
that the reasons for failure to make realistic assessment of funds


32

requirement be analysed so as to take timely action for ensuring adequate
provision of funds under this Appropriation. The Committee note that the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has made certain
efforts to avoid the excess expenditure in this Appropriation by putting in
place the statistical data of investment/disinvestment by State Governments
on regular basis so that the funds required to repay at the end of the year
are adequately provided for. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
results of these efforts in containing the excess expenditure under this
Appropriation in future.

[Para No.4]

Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on
Recommendation Para Nos.3 & 4

The observations/recommendations of Public Accounts Committee have been
noted.

2. Ministry of Finance has taken several steps to contain the recurring excess
expenditure in various Grants and Appropriations. A study has been got conducted
from National Institute of Financial Management on recurring excess expenditure,
including the findings from Desk Study on excess expenditure in (i) Australia (b)
Canada (iii) Republic of Ireland (iv) New Zealand and (v) United Kingdom. The
Report also made recommendations for an informed system of Budgeting and
Expenditure Control. The process of action taken on the recommendations of NIFM
are detailed in the Action Taken Note submitted against paragraphs 1 and 2 of 24th
Report of Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) (17th Lok Sabha) on Excess over
voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2017-2018.

3. With the continuous monitoring and constant review of the progress of
expenditure, the excess expenditure occurred in Appropriation — Repayment of Debt
has been arrested and there was no excess expenditure registered in this
Appropriation for the years 2018-2019 and 2019-2020, after obtaining suitable
Supplementary Appropriations.

4. Ministry of Finance held discussions with Ministry of Railways, Ministry of
Defence and Department of Posts and impressed on these Ministries/Departments
the need to contain the expenditure within the appropriations approved by
Parliament. It was also emphasized that Public Financial Management System
(PFMS) may be used wherever the system has not been adopted for avoiding the
excess expenditure.

5. With the study conducted from NIFM on recurring expenditure and the review
undertaken by the High Level Inter-Ministerial Group, constituted under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to examine the issues of excess expenditure by
Ministries/Departments as recommended by Public Accounts Committee, the issues
relating to recurring excess expenditure are expected to be addressed.

Vetted comments of Audit

6. While vetting the ATNs, Audit has made further comments as detailed below:


33

(a) Excess expenditure in spite of supplementary grants reflects poor budgetary
control of the Ministry/Department. More effective measures need to be
institutionalized to curb the excess expenditure; and

(b) NIFM recommendations, suitable for implementation, may be adopted on
priority.

Further comments of Government
7. The following is stated in response to the vetting comments of Audit:

(a) All Ministries/Departments have been sensitized often to avoid excess
expenditure. Discussions were held with Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways
and Department of Posts towards achieving excess expenditure. Government is
sensitive to the phenomenon of recurring excess expenditure;

(b) Recommendations of NIFM, which are partly in practice and are
implementable and their constraints in implementation are brought out in paragraph
6 of Action Taken Note in response to paragraph 1 and 2 of 24th Report of Public
Accounts Committee (2020-21) (17th Lok Sabha) on Excess over voted Grants and
Charged Appropriations for 2017-2018.

8. This has been vetted by Audit vide their Letter ४०.समन्वय/फ़ा-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/Vol.I1/2021-22/569 dated 17.12.2021

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that during the financial year 2017-18, the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) incurred an excess expenditure of = 127.62
crore under Revenue (Voted) Section of Grant No.39 — Pensions. Explaining the
reasons that contributed to excess expenditure, the Department of Expenditure has
cited higher expenditure than estimated and the payment made by different
accounting circles, receipt of more scrolls from the authorized banks due to 7th CPC,
clearance of outstanding scrolls pertaining to previous year, unpredictable nature in
the number of voluntary retirement cases and contingency arising due to sudden
demise of Government servants. The Committee are not convinced with the reasons
attributed by the Ministry since these can be avoided by better planning and
monitoring of expenditure at the budget estimate as well as Supplementary Grant
stage. The Committee are again appalled to note that the excess expenditure under
this Grant was incurred despite obtaining Supplementary Grant of = 5905.00 crore in
December, 2017. Had the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) done due
diligence effectively at the Supplementary Grant stage, the excess could have been
avoided. The Committee have been apprised that Central Pension Accounting Office
(CPAO) has adopted e-governance model and utilized Information Technology
services/tools throughout the pension processing & payment process and maintains
the complete data base of all the pensioners. CPAOs internal functioning has been
fully computerized through PARAS' (Pension Authorization & Retrieval Accounting
System) software. An e-PPO project has also been launched wherein complete PPO
booklet would be digitized. A separate pension module has been created/launched in
PFMS. Since year 2012, e-scroll is coming from all the Banks to CPAO in electronic
form online which provides the details of the pension payments made by the
authorized banks and is being used for various functions like analyzing the pension


34

expenditure, booking of the expenditure in Government accounts and internal audit
of Central Pension Processing Cells (CPPCs) of the Banks etc. The Ministry have
further informed that PAOs across the country are also using e-lekha& "PFMS"
(Public Financial Management System) to monitor the budget/expenditure related to
the pension grant and for overall public financial management. The Committee are
dismayed to note that despite putting in place an e-platform to maintain complete
data base of pensioners and monitor the budget/expenditure related to pension
grant, there has been excess expenditure in budgetary allocation for pension during
the year under review. This clearly indicates that there are still some loopholes in the
existing online accounting system. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department of Expenditure and CPAO take immediate necessary measures to
identify the loopholes and flaws in their electronic system for rectification and create
a robust accounting system to ensure realistic budgetary estimates and allocation in
future under this Grant. ‘

[Para No 5]
Action taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)

During the financial year 2017- 18, original grant of Revenue Section (Voted)
was %34,990.00 crores which was augmented to %40,895.00 crores by obtaining
Supplementary Grant of हैं 5905.00 crores. Against this, the expenditure of
241,022.62 crores was incurred resulting in excess of = 127.62 crores which was
only 0.31% of the final budget provision. Excess in Pension Grant was only due to
Ministry of Home Affairs as they booked enormous amount in March, 2018 against
the budget provision 2017-18 which not only exhausted the reserve fund of = 900
crores, but also exceeded the entire Grant. Pension & other retirement benefits are
committed liability of Government and of inevitable nature, so, these payments
cannot be restricted.

2. Further, for better expenditure and to avoid excess expenditure the CPAO has
taken several steps since the financial year 2017-18:

i. To avoid excess expenditure CPAO has made efforts to prepare realistic as
well as Supplementary Grant by obtaining sub head wise detailed budget
requirements with justifications of specific increase/decrease in demand from all the
concerned Ministries/Departments.

ii. CPAO has regularly organised meetings and issued directions to Central
Pension Processing Centre (CPPCs) of all banks regarding furnishing of e-scrolls on
real time basis.

iii. For strengthening of e-platform for maintaining complete data base of all
pensioners and monitor the expenditure related to pension O/o the Controller
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure issued direction to all concerned
Ministries/Departments vide letter dated 08.06.2021 regarding discontinuation of
physical PPO to ensure that 100% e-PPO should take place.

iv. CPAO has closely examined monthly/quarterly expenditure made by the
Ministries/Departments and has pointed out excess or without budget booking and
immediately intimated to the concerned Ministries/Departments for regularisation by
obtaining appropriate budget.


35

Vv. CPAO also issued time to time directions to all the Ministries/Departments for
timely booking of expenditure to avoid rush of expenditure in the last month of the
financial year or booking of expenditure through TE/JE in the end of the financial
year.

3. By putting all the efforts mentioned above, CPAO was able to prepare realistic
budget estimates as well as Supplementary Grants and ensure-the expenditure may
not cross the final budget allocation. CPAO was able to control the expenditure
within the approved budgetary limits in the financial years 2018-19, 2019-20 and
2020-21.

4. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their Letter No. SA-da/pl-323/ATN/ATR/EN/2020-21/419 dated 12.10.2021.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that under Revenue section (Voted) of Grant No.20-
Defence Services for the year 2017-18, there was an excess expenditure of =
3391.93 crore which was the net effect of total excesses of $6793.72 crore and
savings of 1127.69 crore as well as surrender of = 2274.09 crore. The Committee
note that mechanism for operation of this Grant by the Ministry of Defence is totally
in a bad shape. The Committee are again dismayed to note that this huge amount of
excess expenditure was incurred under this Grant despite obtaining Supplementary
Grant of ¥2954.71 crore which proved inadequate to meet the demands and resulted
into excess expenditure. According to the Ministry of Defence, the excess
expenditure occurred due to implementation of 7th Central Pay Commission
recommendations during mid Financial Year; accretion due to Capability
Development along Northern Boarders; hike in prices of Ration-Fuel, Oil and
Lubricants products; Medical Equipment; Medical Store; Emergency Procurement for
which contract were already executed in Financial Year 2016-17; settlement of long
pending dues of Kendriya Sainik Board; payment to Sainik School on implementation
of 7th Central Pay Commission recommendations; essential repairs of ageing ships,
aircrafts, submarines and equipments; procurement of critical ammunition and
stores; statutory Customs Duties on imported stores and equipment; increase in
expenditure on unit allowance, sport activities and other miscellaneous expenditure;
price hike of crude oil prices in International Market; early achievement of Milestone
payments and inclusion of emergency power cases; variation in exchange rate;
replenishment/procurement of airborne and ground bases weapon armament;
procurement of additional clothing; obtaining lease of 205.27 acres of land at
Dimapur District; revision of Schedule Travel Rents; increase in Rent rate and Taxes
segment, etc. The Committee do not consider these as compelling reasons for
incurring excess expenditure as many of these could have been anticipated well in
advance and factored into at the time of finalization of Budget
Estimates/Supplementary Grants. Noting that the Ministry had only issued
instructions to concerned budget controlling authorities to ensure avoidance of
excess expenditure, the Committee recommend that there is an urgent need to
establish a concrete and robust mechanism to facilitate better foresight during
budget estimates stage and invariably ensure a sustained monitoring of expenditure
throughout the financial year. Only last year the Committee had desired the Ministry
of Defence to devise concrete and innovative ways and means in consultation with


36

the Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline their budgeting mechanism so
that excess expenditure is avoided altogether under the Grants operated by them. In
response thereto, the Ministry of Defence have submitted that in pursuance of the
recommendation of the PAC, a High Level Committee was constituted in the year
2017 to identify the loopholes in the budgeting procedures of the Ministry of Defence.
The Committee are perturbed to find that despite the important recommendation of
the High Level of Committee on reviewing the pace of expenditure and monitoring
the booking and compilation of status to avoid excess expenditure, it warding off
excess expenditure under the Grants operated by the Ministry of Defence remains a
distant goal. The Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation
contained in Para 5 of 4th Report (17th Lok Sabha) desire the Ministry of Defence to
implement the recommendations of the High Level Committee at the earliest so as to
ensure avoidance of excess expenditure, altogether under the Grants operated by
them in future.

[Para No.6]
Action taken by the Ministry of Defence

Based on the recommendation of the PAC, a High Level Committee (HLC)
was constituted with the approval of Defence Secretary in 2017, to identify loopholes
in the budgeting procedure and to obviate the same in order to avoid recurring
incidents of excess expenditure under Grants. The HLC is chaired by AS & FA (Acq)
and has representatives from MoD (Finance), Financial Planning Directorates of the
Services, Department of Economic Affairs and Controller General Accounts. Nine
meetings of this Committee have been held as on date. The last meeting of the
Committee was held on 25th March, 2021. The gist of decisions taken in the last
meeting are as under:

(a) Zero excess expenditure to,be ensured by all concerned in FY 2020-
21.

(b) Each Service to take up 2-3 case studies of instances where the
expenditure booking exceeded budgetary allocations and make suggestions on how
to avoid recurrence in future. LC payment case, if any, may preferably be included
as a case study. है

(०). Reprioritization exercise may be continuously undertaken during the
course of the year to avoid any excess expenditure over allocations.

(d) | Concurrent monitoring of LC based payments may be done at each
stage to keep check on expenditure vis-a-vis allocations.

(e) Monthly and quarterly expenditure plans should be adhered to and
monitored on regular basis. A report on deviation, if any, from monthly/quarterly
report needs to be sent to Budget Division by 10th of following month alongwith
specific reasons for excess/ saving from targets fixed in advance.

2. Further, due to adoption of large number of measures to reduce
instances of excess expenditure, of which some are stated above, and focused
efforts made by all the stakeholders, no excess expenditure has incurred in FY 2020-
21 as per provisional March (Final) figures.


37

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that under the Capital Section (Voted) of Grant No.21-
Capital Outlay on Defence Services, there was an excess expenditure of % 3552.72
crore which was the net effect of total excesses of 3917.05 crore and total savings
of 8171.01 crore as well as surrender of = 193.32 crore. The Ministry of Defence also
took Supplementary Grants of = One lakh under this Grant. The Committee consider
this an another instance of unrealistic assessment of additional funds on the part of
the Ministry of Defence. The huge gap between the Supplementary Grants and
excess expenditure only reveals the utter failure of the Ministry of Defence to
anticipate and plan out expenditure on a systematic basis. According to the Ministry
of Defence excess expenditure under Capital-Voted Section of Grant No.21 occurred
due to Foreign Payment through Letter of Credit of existing contract of two Troops
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Heron as well as re-imbursement of CD in the
existing contracts of M/s HAL; settlement of Foreign payments through Letter of
Credit; procurement of Micro lights; other Committed Liabilities; progress of Rohtang
Tunnel and CSG Roads; Land acquisition in Viharabad for classified project;
payment of Customs Duty on imported equipment; procurement of critical Weapon
and Security related equipment; substantial increase in expenditure under Annual
Maintenance work Plan, Married Accommodation Projects; progressing Strategic
Project; obligatory contractual payments to Foreign Vendors for which Letter of
Credit was already opened with the Banks; Interim Maintenance Services etc. The
Committee are perturbed to note that incurring of excess expenditure by the Ministry
of Defence under this Grants is a recurring phenomenon despite the repeated
recommendations of the Committee and instructions issued by the Ministry of
Finance, the Ministry also incurred excess expenditure of 104.55 crore under this
Grant during the year 2016-17. Most of the reasons attributed by the Ministry were of
such nature that timely action to obtain additional funds could have been taken at the
Supplementary stage and the excess expenditure clearly avoided. The Committee is
concerned to note that instead of taking concrete and effective measures towards
improving the budgetary process, the Ministry merely issued instructions to monitor
the flow of expenditure to avoid excess expenditure. The Committee observe that a
large portion of the excess expenditure could have been avoided had the Ministry
been more prudent and sensitive towards the actual budgetary need during the
financial year. The Committee, therefore recommend that instead of repetitively
issuing instructions to control excess expenditure, the Ministry should introduce
progressive and effective methods of budgetary control. The Ministry of Defence
should adopt good practices of other Ministries/Departments and stride towards
reporting a 'nil' report on excess expenditure in future.

[Para No.7]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence

This Ministry is taking various steps towards avoidance of excess
expenditure. Some of the remedial measures taken by this Ministry are as under:

a) One of the major reason of excess has been payments through Letters
of Credit to meet foreign contractual obligation where there is a time gap between
the payments made by the banks and receipt and adjustment of scrolls by the


38

Services/Payment Controllers. To check this, concurrent monitoring of LC based
payments is being done at each stage.

b) Allocation of lesser funds than projections has also been flagged as
one of the reason for excess expenditure by the Services as payment due towards
outstanding committed liabilities are required to be made to avoid legal
complications. Accordingly, all budget holders have been advised to make realistic
assessment of Committed Liabilities/projected outgo and available resources for
fresh contracts.

०) Further, all the budget holders are regularly being sensitized on
adhering to monthly and quarterly expenditure plans.

d) Budgetary allocations are made by Services to various lower
units/formations which also include those in remote areas. Towards more effective
budgetary control, a decision was taken to introduce a customized Public Finance
Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of Defence. Initially, it was decided that
PFMS, which is in operation in the Civil Ministries will be replicated for the Grants
under Ministry of Defence. Subsequently, Pilot Run of PFMS commenced for Grant
No 18: MoD Civil in 28 PAOs of MoD from 1.08.2020. During the pilot run it was
observed that there are significant differences in the operation of Defence Grants
and the Grant of other Civil Ministries due to which the present PFMS for Civil
Ministries cannot be replicated for Grants under MoD. Therefore, it was decided that
a separate instance/parallel chapter in PFMS, mirroring the PFMS for Civil Grants,
will be created for Defence Grants by Controller General of Defence Accounts
(CGDA) in consultation with Controller General of Accounts (CGA). Accordingly all
the Departments / Organizations under Defence Grants shall migrate to the
proposed Defence Instance in PFMS. Evolutionary mode of software Development
and simultaneous processing of Activities is being carried out with a view to expedite
the project.

e) In order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure, e-Pension
System named SPARSH has been introduced. The System entails creation of an
integrated data base giving the complete details of a pensioner beginning with
personal and family details, service history, pay particulars, pension sanction and
subsequent revision along with payments made (and deductions there from, if any)
and a computerized application for sanction, revision and disbursement of pension
by a single agency. The System has been rolled out for Air Force, Navy and Defence
Civilian Organizations viz Defence Accounts Department, JS (Trg) & CAO, DGDE,
Coast Guard and OFB. Software Development for migration of legacy pensioners is
under process. Test run for 7th CPC Legacy Pensioners of CPDS, DPDOs and 7
banks is underway and pension for July 2021 of these pensioners will be disbursed
through SPARSH. This system will ensure monitoring of Pension budget and
bookings on a real time basis.

2. Due to adoption of large number of measures including the one stated
above, and focused efforts made by all the stakeholders, no excess expenditure has
incurred in FY 2020-21 as per provisional March (Final) figures.

Observation/Recommendation


39

The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence have surrendered the
funds despite incurring excess expenditure under the Grant No.-20-Defence
Services and Grant No.-21-Capital Outlay on Defence Services during the financial
year 2017-18. In case of Grant No.20- Defence Services in Revenue-Voted Section
the Ministry of Defence surrendered हैं 2274.09 crore and incurred excess
expenditure of = 3391.93 crore. While in Capital-voted Section of Grant No.21-
Capital Outlay on Defence Services, the Ministry surrendered = 193.22 crore and
incurred excess expenditure of %3552.72 crore. The Committee are also concerned
to note that in both the cases, huge amount of Supplementary Grants were also
obtained. This clearly indicate that Ministry of Defence totally failed in operation of
these Grants during the year 2017-18. To the utter dismay, this phenomenon has
occurred despite Constitution of High Level Committee to identify the loopholes in
the budgeting procedure of the Ministry of Defence. The Committee, therefore,
expect the Ministry of Defence to introspect the inadequacies of their extant
arrangements and devise some concrete ways and means in consultation with the
High Level Committee as well as the Ministry of Finance to overhaul their budgeting
mechanism and evolve an effective mechanism to bring continual and progressive
improvement in operation of the Grants operated by them in future.

[Para No.8]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence

As has been mentioned in response to above paragraphs, this Ministry is
taking large number of measures to reduce instances of excess expenditure. This is
evident from the excess expenditure figures indicated below:

= In Crore}

पु Defence Services - Capital Outlay on Defence Pensions
Financial | Revenue Defence Services
Y
ear Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged
[2015-16 | -- | _ po | — | — | 0.5
2016-17 | -- | >> 104.55 41.76 2199.56 0.28
2017-18 3391.93 = 3552.72 20435 | — | — |
2018-19 3841.33 —- 1257.29 | -- | -— | — |
2019-20 | -- | — 701.31 | — [ -- | 200
2. It is also highlighted that the amount of Excess expenditure for 2019-20 has

shown a decline compared to the previous years. Further, due to focused efforts
made by all the stakeholders, no excess expenditure has incurred in FY 2020-21 as
per March (Final) figures.

Observation/Recommendation

Subject to the observations/recommendations made in the preceding
paragraphs, the Committee recommend that the expenditure referred to in para 12 of
Part-I of this Report be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115 (1) (b) of
the Constitution of India.

[Para No. 9]

Action taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)


40

Regularisation of excess expenditure is done by Budget Division, Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and does not come within the purview of
Department of Expenditure/ O/o Controller General of Accounts.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their Letter No. WA-d4/HT-323/ATN/ATR/EN/2020-21/419 dated 12.10.2021.

Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence

Based on the replies given by the Ministry of Defence on the
observations/recommendations made by the PAC in the Report, it is proposed that
the excess expenditure of 27,149.00 crores, referred to in para 14 of the Report, in
respect of Ministry of Defence, may be regularized in the manner prescribed in
Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of India.

Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs)

As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for
Excess Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government relating to 2017-2018 was
submitted to Parliament in the Monsoon Session, 2021. The Parliament has passed
the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularizing the
money drawn in excess of the amounts authorized by the Parliament for the year
2017-2018, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the
Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part Il, Section 1 dated 19th August, 2021 as Act
No.35 of 2021, after obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess
amount drawn in 2017-2018 stands regularized. Action taken in this regard is,
therefore, completed.

This Note’ has been vetted by Audit, vide their letter no. Coordination/F-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/2020-2 1/481 dated 10.11.2021.


Al

CHAPTER Ill
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


42
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF

GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-


43
CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
34 March, 2022 Chairperson,

10 Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


44

(APPENDIX - Il)
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY FORTH REPORT (SEVENTEETH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-9
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

09

Total: 09
Percentage — 100%

Total: Nil

Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil

Percentage- 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%


45

CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22) HELD ON 28" MARCH, 2022.

& ean oan kw DN

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

The Committee sat on Monday the 28" March, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in
Committee Room “B”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T.R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Dr. C.M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar

Shri Tirthankar Das

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

- Chairperson

- Joint Secretary
- Director
- Additional Director


46

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

SI.No. Name Designation

1. Ms. Sangita Choure Dy. CAG

2. Shri Rakesh Mohan Dy. CAG

3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Dircctor General
4. Shri Manish Kumar Director General
5. Ms. Monika Verma Director General
6. Shri S.V. Singh Director General

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to the Sitting of
the Committee, convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Jal
Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the
subject “Ground Water Management and Regulation” based on C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 and
to consider the following three draft Reports:-

(i) XXXXXXXX -
(ii) = XXXXXXXX
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their 24th Report (17 Lok Sabha) on “Excesses
Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2017-18)”.
3. Following some deliberations, the Committee adopted the afore-mentioned draft Reports
without any modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
aforesaid Reports on the basis of factual verification and present the same to Parliament.

XXXX

XXXXXXXX

4. XXX XXX XXX
5. XXX XXX XXX
6. XXX XXX XXX
7. XXX XXX XXX
8. XXX XXX XXX
9. XXX XXX XXX
10. XXX XXX XXX

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.