 
 
135 
 
Failure to Implement Ministry of Railway’s 
Orders resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: 
South Eastern Railway and West Central 
Railway 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 70th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
 PAC NO. 2365   O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  F I F T H  R E P O R T   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)   (SEVENTEENTH LO K S ABH A)                                         
    MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 70th Report (17th Lok Sabha)]                                                                                           Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 23.02.2024                                Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ……………….             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………  L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I  February 2024/ Phalguna 1945 (Saka) 
Failure to Implement Ministry of Railway’s Orders resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: South Eastern Railway and West Central Railway 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                  (iii) 
COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................     (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..............................................................       1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    replies of the Government have not been accepted  
    by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I*   Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023- 24) held on 
  09 February 2024 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Seventieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri  Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Brijendra Singh 
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13. Shri Jayant Sinha 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien* 
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja           -   Director 
3. 
 
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi      -   Deputy Secretary 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 
18.08.2023. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this 135th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained 
in their 70th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Failure to Implement Ministry 
of Railway’s Orders resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: South Eastern 
Railway and West Central Railway.  
 
2. The Seventieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 10th August, 2023. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The 
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
Sitting held on 9th February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix 
I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of 
the Report. 
 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and 
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
 9   February, 2024              Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1945 (Saka)       Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Seventieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Failure to Implement 
Ministry of Railway's orders resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: South 
Eastern Railway and West Central Railway". 
2. The Seventieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
10.08.2023. The report contained eleven Observations/Recommendations. The 
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Para Nos.  1-3,5,7-11       
          
 Total: 9 
         Chapter - II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         NIL     
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total: NIL 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. 4,6     
           
           
         Total: 2 
         Chapter -  V

 
 
 
 
3.  During the detailed examination of the subject "Failure to Implement 
Ministry of Railway's orders resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: 
South Eastern Railway and West Central Railway", the Committee had 
identified certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of 
Railways, whichinter-aliaincluded lapses in adhering to Joint Procedure 
Orders (JPO) by South Eastern Railway and West Central Railway, need 
for improved coordination, provision of cable route plans, and effective 
resource allocation to address staff shortages for safeguarding railway 
cables etc. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the 
relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the 
Action Taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which require 
reiteration/merit comments.  
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action 
Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I and Chapter V within six months of the presentation of 
the Report to the House. 
6. Recommendation at Para No. 9 
The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 
In light of the potential accidents that could arise due to cable cuts, 
the Committee emphatically urge the Ministry to prioritize the protection 
and maintenance of the OFC communication system. As an example, the 
recent derailment of Train No. 12841, Coromandal Express, the Committee 
feel, serve as a stark reminder of the serious consequences such incidents 

 
 
 
may have. The Committee observe that to mitigate such risks, the Ministry 
must take immediate action and invest in advanced technology for 
proactive fault detection. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should invest in upgrading and replacing damaged cables to ensure 
seamless functioning of the communication system. The Ministry of 
Railways should also provide clear guidelines and parameters for replacing 
cables that have been repaired with joints but still result in degraded 
performance of the communication system. By establishing specific criteria 
for replacement, the Ministry can ensure optimal performance and prevent 
further degradation of the communication infrastructure.  
 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply has furnished as 
under: 
“Clear guidelines for replacement of cable, in case of deterioration of 
performance of cables, exist in various manuals issued by 
Telecom/Signal Dtes”. 
8. In light of the potential accidents that could arise due to cable 
cuts, the Committee had urged the Ministry to prioritize the protection 
and maintenance of the OFC communication system and 
recommended that the Ministry should invest in upgrading and 
replacing damaged cables to ensure seamless functioning of the 
communication system. Further, to ensure optimal performance and 
prevent degradation of the communication infrastructure, the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry of Railways to provide 
clear guidelines and parameters for replacing cables that have been 
repaired with joints but contribute to degraded performance of the 
communication system. The Committee note from the reply of the 

 
 
 
Ministry that clear guidelines for replacement of cables, in case of 
deterioration of performance exist in various manuals issued by 
Telecom/Signal Departments. The Committee while noting that the 
wrong labeling of wires and ignoring past red flags can lead to wrong 
signaling that may result in serious accidents, desire that the existing 
guidelines  be reviewed  and updated to rule out such a possibility in 
future. The Committee, further, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that Ministry should invest in upgrading and replacing damaged 
cables to ensure seamless functioning of the communication system. 
9. Recommendation at Para No. 10 
The Committee in their original report had recommended  as under: 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should provide an update on 
the recovery of penalties in the 85 cases that have already been initiated. It 
is crucial that the penalties are imposed and the Ministry takes appropriate 
action to recover the same. Further, the Committee feel that the Ministry 
should clarify the level at which the cause of cable cuts has been 
ascertained during the review process in the 113 cases. It is essential to 
have a well-defined and transparent procedure for reviewing cable cut 
incidents to identify the parties responsible and take appropriate actions to 
prevent future occurrences. In light of the recent Audit Report No. 25 of 
2022, which once again highlights the non-adherence to JPO guidelines 
resulting in significant financial losses, the Committee strongly recommend 
a complete review of similar cases by the Ministry in all railway zones. It is 
crucial for the Ministry to analyze the root causes of these issues and 
implement corrective actions to ensure strict compliance with guidelines 
across the entire railway network. The recurring audit reports pointing to 

 
 
 
similar findings from other Railway Zones, serve as a clear indication that 
immediate action and fundamental changes are necessary. The 
Committee, therefore, stress the importance of conducting a thorough 
review and implementing robust measures to address these longstanding 
concerns. 
10. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply has furnished as 
under: 
“The Zonal Railway concerned is actively pursuing the case for 
recovery of penalties in the 85 cases. However, the cases being old 
and contracts having been closed, prospects of recovery have been 
reported to be bleak. Ascertaining of the causes for cable cuts in the 
113 cases mentioned by Audit have been done at the level of 
Sr.DSTE during the review process in the 113 cases.  
As mentioned in the foregoing paras, various measures have been 
taken to prevent cases of cable cuts which includes framing of local 
guidelines, monitoring of cable cut cases at the appropriate level in 
the Zone for remedial actions as preventive measures”. 
11. While opining that it was essential to have a well-defined and 
transparent procedure for reviewing cable cut incidents to identify the 
parties responsible and take appropriate actions to prevent future 
occurrences the Committee had recommended that Ministry should 
clarify the level at which the cause of cable cuts was ascertained 
during the review process in the 113 cases pointed by the Audit. The 
Committee had desired the Ministry to provide an update on the 
recovery of penalties in the 85 cases that had already been initiated. 

 
 
 
The Committee had also recommended that a complete review of 
similar cases by the Ministry in all railway zones be undertaken to 
analyze the root causes of these issues and implement corrective 
actions to ensure strict compliance with guidelines across the entire 
railway network. Further, the Committee note that ascertaining the 
causes for cable cuts in the 113 cases mentioned by Audit has been 
done at the level of Sr.DSTE and various measures have been taken 
to prevent cases of cable cuts which include,  framing of local 
guidelines, and monitoring of cable cut cases at the appropriate level 
in the Zone for remedial actions . The Committee note from the reply 
of the Ministry that the Zonal Railway concerned is actively pursuing 
the case for recovery of penalties in the 85 cases.  However, the cases 
being old and contracts having been closed, prospects of recovery 
have been reported to be bleak. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
henceforth, adequate penal provisions in the contract may invariably 
be made and financial procedures strengthened to ensure that 
payment to the contractor is made only after deduction of any 
penalties etc from the payable amount and receipt of no dues 
certificate from all the agencies concerned . Further, bank guarantees 
may invariably be taken and retained for a prescribed period to 
ensure that penalties, if any, are recovered even after the work is 
completed. 
 
12. Recommendation at Para No. 11 
The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 

 
 
 
The Committee note that zonal railways failed to impose penalties 
totalling to ₹ 6.7 crore in 263 cases of cable cuts between March 2017 and 
March 2020. The Committee, therefore, recommend that these cases be 
investigated so as to find shortcomings in enforcing the conditions 
stipulated in the JPO on account of which penalties could not be levied. 
Lessons learnt should be utilized to prevent similar cases in the future. 
13. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply has furnished as 
under: 
“In addition to the tasks proposed against item Nos. 7 & 10, meetings 
at Board level with concerned officers in the Railway Zones are 
regularly being held to effectively monitor cases of cable cuts. As 
already stated in previous Para, a committee of SAG formed to 
deliberate on the issue of cable cuts found that shortcuts were 
resorted to which resulted in instances of cable cuts. The committee 
thereafter recommended revision of JPO”. 
14. The Committee while noting that zonal railways failed to impose 
penalties totalling to ₹ 6.7 crore in 263 cases of cable cuts between 
March 2017 and March 2020 had recommended that these cases be 
investigated so as to identify shortcomings in enforcing the 
conditions stipulated in the JPO on account of which penalties could 
not be levied. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that 
meetings at Board level with officers concerned in the Railway Zones 
are regularly being held to effectively monitor cases of cable cuts. 
The Committee while expressing shock to note the findings of the 
committee of SAG that shortcuts were resorted to which resulted in 

 
 
 
instances of cable cuts,  opine that the monitoring mechanism be 
strengthened and inspections carried out at regular intervals. The 
details of inspections carried out, the shortcomings noticed and the 
remedial action taken thereon may be recorded. For this, the 
Committee desire that a portal accessible by the highest authorities 
may be developed to ensure immediate action by the officers 
concerned. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 9   February, 2024              Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1945 (Saka)       Public Accounts Committee 
 