 
 
       134 
 
 
INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON 
CREATION OF MID -LIFE REHABILITATION 
FACILITIES AT PAREL WORKSHOP: 
CENTRAL RAILWAY 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
PAC NO. 2364 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  
F O U R T H R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(20 23-24) 
 
(SEVEN T EENT H  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
                                       
   
         P re sente d to Hon’ ble  S peak er, Lok S a bha on 23 .02 .2 024                                                                                
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:     
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)  
 
INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON 
CREATION OF MID-LIFE 
REHABILITATION FACILITIES AT PAREL 
WORKSHOP: CENTRAL RAILWAY 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II Infructuous expenditure on creation of mid -life rehabilitation facilities 
at Parel Workshop: Central Railway 
1 
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  09-12 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 21st November, 2023. 
 
II Minutes of th e sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 19th February, 2024. 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023 -24) 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
3.  Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
8.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9.  Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
10.  Shri Brijendra Singh 
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12.  Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
13.  Shri Jayant Sinha 
14.  Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
15.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.  Dr. K. Laxman 
18.  Shri Derek O’ Brien* 
19.  Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma    -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. Partha Goswami   -   Director 
3. Shri. Girdhari Lal    -   Under Secretary 
3. Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand  -   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 
18.08.2023. 
 
(ii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty -Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on “Infructuous expenditure on creation of 
Mid-Life Rehabilitation facilities at Parel Workshop: Central Railway ” based on 
Para 3.3 of C&AG Report No.  25 of 2022, relating to the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) 
 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 was  laid on the Table of the House 
on 21.12.2022 
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (2023 -2024), selected the aforesaid 
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject m atter on 21 
November, 2023. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the 
Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
4. Public Accounts Committee (2023 -2024) considered and adopted the 
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 19.02.2024. 
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form 
Part- II of the Report. 
 
7.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them 
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with 
the examination of the subject. 
 
8.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and 
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 February, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
  
 
(iii) 

 
 
PART-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
  
 This Report of the Committee is based on Para 3.3 of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 
on the subject, “Infructuous expenditure on creation of Mid -Life Rehabilitation facilities 
at Parel Workshop: Central Railway”. 
  
INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON CREATION OF MID -LIFE REHABILITATION 
FACILITIES AT PAREL WORKSHOP: CENTRAL RAILWAY 
2. The Committee have learnt that Ministry of Railways (MoR) issued instructions 
(August 1980 and February 1985) to all the Zonal Railways that before calling tenders, 
it may be ensured that the Railway is in a position to handover the site of  work and 
supply plan etc. to the contractor.  Mid-Life Rehabilitation (MLR) is an essential 
mainstream activity  required for improvement of quality and reliability of the residual 
service life including rejuvenation of interiors of the coaches.  The work for setting up 
MLR facilities of 25 Broad Gauge  coaches per  month at Parel Workshop/ Central 
Railway was sanctioned  in 2007-08 at an anticipated cost of ₹ 30.24 crore. Detailed 
Estimate of the Project  was sanctioned at a cost of Rs  27.37 crore in July 2009.  
Contract for civil work of the MLR Project was  awarded to M/s Unity  
Construction/Mumbai in February 2010  at a cost of Rs  6.89 crore with  completion 
period of 18 months. The work could not be completed due to  reasons attributable to 
the Railway such as non -availability of funds,  non-providing of site, change in the 
location of steel yard shed etc. The  contract was foreclosed in March 2014 after 
incurring an expenditure of  Rs. 4.58 crore. For the leftover civil work, another contract 
was awarded (January 2015) to M/s Pruthivi Construction/Mumbai for Rs. 5.94 crore 
with completion period of 12 months. However, the contractor could not  complete the 
work due to reasons viz, non -availability of clear site for  truck unloading and Grit 
blasting shed and site change, non-shifting of electrical office, non-handing over of site 
etc. Central Railway  Administration granted extensions on Railway’s accounts to the  
contractor for completion of the work till March 2018.  Meanwhile, Principal Chief 
Mechanical Engineer (PCME)/Central  Railway instructed (02 February 2018) th e 
Deputy Chief  Engineer/Construction/Dadar to foreclose the contract as well as the  
entire MLR Project as MoR decided (October 2017) to develop  Passenger Terminal 
facility by closing the Parel Workshop. Thus, this  contract was also foreclosed 
(February 201 8) after making a payment  of Rs.  3.74 crore to the contractor. 
Subsequently, the MLR Project was  dropped from the Annual Works Programme 
(2018-19). Chief Workshop Manager (CWM)/Parel Workshop stated (28 February  
2018) that since Parel Workshop carries out various activities, closure of Workshop for 
provision of passenger facilities would be possible only  when the infrastructure for 
these activities is set up at other  Workshops/Work centres. Hence, minimum required 
level of facilities for  desired/targeted outturn need to continue. CWM/Parel Workshop 
also requested Chief Administrative Officer/Construction to provide  
connectivity/extension of the Permanent -Way works required to  increase the Coach 
holding capacity and easy movement of Coaches.  Thus, Central Rai lway 
Administration incurred expenditure of ₹ 22.07  crore (Mechanical Works- ₹ 9.87 crore, 
Civil Works - ₹ 11.28 crore,  Electrical Works- ₹ 0.92 crore) on this Project till March 
2020. 
 

 
 
 The Committee also learnt that the d etailed Project Report (DPR) for t he 
Passenger Terminal facility at Parel  Workshop, sent to MoR on 24 February 2020, 
was pending for approval. Audit noted that the contracts awarded (February 2010 and 
January 2015) could not be completed on the target dates and later foreclosed  after 
incurring an expenditure of Rs.  8.32 crore. Further, MLR activities were being carried 
out at Parel Workshop since  2010-11 with the existing Periodical Overhauling (POH) 
facility available in the Workshop. During 2017-18 and 2018-19, 156 and 150 coaches 
respectively (13 Coaches per month as against the target of 25  Coaches) were turned 
out. As the work of MLR project was not  completed and later dropped, target of MLR 
of 25 Coaches per month  could not be achieved.  Thus, non-adherence to the Ministry 
of Railways’ instructions for  providing clear site of work before calling for tenders, 
rendered the  expenditure of  Rs. 22.07 crore incurred on the creation of MLR, as  
infructuous. Besides, the proposal of GM/ Central Railway for creation of  passenger 
terminal by closin g Parel Workshop despite incurring  expenditure of ₹ 22.07 crore on 
MLR indicated poor planning and imprudence. 
 
The matter was taken up with MoR in May 2022. In the reply (July  2022), they 
stated that that the subject work was a Brownfield project  and all the issues that arose 
due to the execution of such projects were  tackled at the appropriate level. Due to the 
requirement of coaches for  running of trains, the maintenance of the Rolling Stocks 
was also being carried out simultaneously while the project work was under execution. 
The subject work was not completely affected and some alternate sites  were made 
available to continue the work. The availability of funds was  not under the control of 
the Parel Workshop or the Construction  organization as that depen ds on a lot of 
factors like priority of different  sanctioned works and their stage of completion, 
Government policies,  Railway earnings, Budgetary support for the Government of 
India, economic conditions in the country etc. 
 
In view of the Railway Board’s decision (October 2017) to develop a Passenger 
Terminal facility by closing the Parel Workshop and to avoid  any infructuous 
expenditure, it was decided to foreclose the ongoing Civil  work. There was no physical 
progress of the Passenger Terminal facility  for a long time and meanwhile the 
maintenance of the Rolling Stocks  was under progress at Parel Workshop within the 
existing constraints in view of lack of any suitable alternative. It may also be noted that 
there has been no major expenditure on infrastruc ture creation or even  maintenance 
in the Parel Workshop since the project of the Passenger  Terminal facility and closure 
of Parel Workshop was announced. Thus,  all the maintenance of the Rolling Stocks is 
being carried out utilizing the  earlier created ass ets and facilities only.  It was further 
stated that the creation of the additional facilities served  the purpose very well and the 
total amount of Rs. 22.07 crore incurred for  the entire project of turning out of MLR of 
25 coaches per month was not  infructuous, as the Parel Workshop continued to carry 
out maintenance  of different types of rolling stock with the outturn continuously 
increasing. Had the maintenance not been carried out in Parel Workshop, the  coaches 
would have been sent to other Workshops out side the Central Railway and that would 
have entailed additional expenditure in long  distance transport of the coaches and 
revenue loss due to subsequent  non-availability of the coaches for train operations. 
Thus, the expenditure incurred had been fruitfully utilized and the outturn of the Rolling 
Stock also increased and reached the level of  approximately 27 coaches (taking all 
type of coaches) per month, with  the maintenance of the different types of bogies also 
being done. 
 

 
 
The Committee have found that MoR’s reply was not tenable. The civil works 
which were to be  completed in 18 months, were not completed even after eight years 
of commencement due to non -fulfillment of pre -requisites, viz, non - availability of 
funds, non -providing of site, changes in the  location of steel  yard shed etc., prior to 
awarding of contracts. Further, the MLR activities  were already being carried out at 
Parel Workshop since 2010 -11 with the  earlier existing POH facility available there 
and were continuously turning  out the coaches with MLR till 2018 -19. Also, the Parel 
Workshop was already providing outturn of coaches per month that includes IOH and  
POH etc. of coaches. The creation of additional facilities has not served  any purpose 
as the MLR project was abandoned midway and ta rgeted outturn of MLR of 25 BG 
coaches per month was never achieved. 
 
        Thus, the expenditure (₹ 22.07 crore) incurred on creation of MLR  facility for 
targeted outturn of 25 coaches per month was infructuous due  to abandonment of 
project, as the MoR has decided to close the Parel  Workshop for provision of 
Passenger Terminal facility there. The Civil work done under MLR Project will have to 
be demolished and other assets created for MLR work such as Machinery and Plants, 
Furniture, Office equipment etc. shall be transferred to other units or scrapped. 
 
 3. When asked to explain why the Ministry did not adhere to its own 
instructions issued in August 1980 and February 1985, which required ensuring 
the availability of the site before calling tenders and what steps have been taken 
to prevent such non -compliance in the future, the Mi nistry stated as under:  
“All major requisites before starting the work were considered. As already highlighted, 
the subject work was a Brownfield project and all the issues that arose due the 
execution of such projects were tackled at the appropriate level.” 
4. On being asked why the Ministry initiated the MLR project at Parel Workshop 
in 2007 -08 if it could not provide a clear site for the work and adequate resources, 
as mentioned in the report and the rationale behind changing the location of the 
steel ya rd shed, the Ministry stated as under:  
“The subject work was a Brownfield project.  The maintenance could never be 
completely stopped and hence occasionally the sites could not be made available to 
the contractor for carrying out the work. However, even th en the subject work was not 
completely affected and some alternate sites were made available to continue the 
work. Some modifications in the site layout were inevitable and actually required for 
the successful outcome of the subject project. The location o f the steel yard shed was 
inside Parel workshop itself.  Project was delayed mainly due to non availability of 
funds.” 
5. As regards reasons for the delay in completing the MLR project, leading to 
contract foreclosures and involving the expenditure of Rs. 28.32 crore ,  and also 
the Ministry’s plan to manage contracts more effectively in the future to avoid 
incurring unnecessary costs,  the Ministry stated as under:  
“1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was awarded in Feb -2010 for 6.89 Cr, 60% 
work was completed and it was foreclosed in Mar -2014 due to constraints of funds in 
the succeeding year. Before calling of tenders, funds requirements will be assessed in 
advance and made available during the execution of work to avoid delay in projects.” 
6. To a q uery as to  why the contract for the remaining civil work of the 
MLR Project was  reassigned to a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi Construction) in 
January 2015, considering there was no fault on the part of the initial contractor (M/s 

 
 
Unity/ Construction), lea ding to additional expenditure in the process, the Ministry 
stated as under:   
“1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was awarded in Feb -2010 for 6.89 Cr, 60% 
work was completed and it was foreclosed in Mar -2014 due to constraints of funds in 
the succ eeding year.For balance work, 2nd Civil contract [M/s. Pruthivi Construction] 
was awarded in Jan-2015 for Rs.5.94 cr on arrival of budget grant.” 
7. Explaining why the decision was made to award the contract for the completion 
of the remaining civil work t o a new contractor without ensuring the provision of a 
clear site for truck unloading, a grit blasting shed, and the relocation of the electrical 
office, among other necessary preparations, the Ministry stated as under:   
“All major requisites before starti ng the work were considered. As already highlighted, 
the subject work was a Brownfield project and all the issues that arose due t he 
execution of such projects were tackled at the appropriate level. However, Parel 
Workshop did not show any unpreparedness and no correspondence was made with 
Engg Deptt. in this regard.” 
8. Given to the fact that the MLR project was not completed as planned, 
the Committee wanted to know as to how the Ministry managed the 
maintenance of rolling stock in the  absence of the expe cted facilities and 
evaluated the cost implications of sending coaches to other workshops outside 
the Central Railway for maintenance,  the Ministry stated as under:   
“Maximum possible Coaches i.e. 10 - 15 Coaches were being rehabilitated in midlife 
period with available facilities to avoid transporting Coaches to CRWS Bhopal, WCR for 
saving time and transportation cost. Further MLR of ICF coaches were discontinued as 
per Railway Board Instructions.” 
9. When asked to throw light on the grounds of the decisio n to develop a 
Passenger Terminal facility at Parel Workshop, including the factors 
considered and the timeline for this decision and how the closure of Parel Workshop 
will impact the existing maintenance and rolling stock operations, the Ministry 
stated a s under:  
“MOR had decided to develop the Passenger Terminal Facility by closing the Parel 
workshop in October 2017. However, presently, Parel workshop is functional & 
continuously engaged in the maintenance of rolling stocks.” 
10.   In the  light of the pro posal for closure of Parel Workshop and development 
of a Passenger Terminal facility at that site, asked how and where the Ministry plan 
to manage maintenance work,  the Ministry stated as under:   
“Presently, Parel workshop is functional & continuously enga ged in the maintenance of 
rolling stocks.” 
11. The Committee have been given to understand that t he Ministry contends 
that the expenditure incurred was not infructuous. When asked to give the  
breakdown that in what manner Rs.  122.07 crore was utilized and  how it benefited 
the railway operations  and also w hat steps are being taken to ensure that funds 
allocated for projects are utilized effectively and efficiently in the future, the Ministry 
stated as under:  
 “Department-wise Breakup cost is as given below- 
 
S.N. Deptt. Expenditure 
(in Rs) 
1. Civil 11,28,21,677 
2. Mechanical 9,86,60,685 

 
 
3. Electrical 92,19,365 
 Total Exp.(Rs.) 22,07,01,727 
 
MLR has been carried by Parel Workshop of 899 Coaches from year -2013 to 2021 
with available facilities created fo r MLR (Civil, Mech. & Electrical).The above funds 
have been fully utilised in maintenance of different rolling stock. 
After stoppage of MLR activities at Parel Workshop, this workshop has undertaken the 
work of carrying out SS2/SS3 schedules of LHB coaches  and NMGH/S conversion 
work. Hence, facilities created at this Workshop are being gainfully utilised. The 
infrastructure was being created for only 25 BG MLR Coaches. However, this 
Workshop is giving an average outturn of 27 Nos. (in 2020 -21) to 40 Nos.(in  2022-23) 
SS2/SS3 LHB Coaches per month and 06 NMGH/S Conversion of ICF Coaches per 
month with the same infrastructure.” 
12. When enquired why the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Passenger 
Terminal facility at Parel Workshop was pending approval, and  how long would its  
approval  take, the Ministry stated as under:  
“The DPR for the Passenger Terminal Facility at Parel workshop is under consideration 
at  Railway Board for sanction of Phase -I. Once DPR is sanctioned by the Railway 
Board, further plannin g and execution of the work in a phased manner will be planned 
with least disturbing to the existing activities of the Parel workshop.” 
13. When asked about the measures being taken to improve planning and 
prudence in the Ministry's project decisions to av oid situations where substantial 
funds are expended with no tangible results and Ministry's strategy for aligning 
future projects with its available resources and long -term goals, the Ministry stated 
as under:  
“Projects are being planned with a view to enh ance capacity to cater to traffic 
requirements & customer needs. Due diligence & prudence is exercise at the various 
stages from the very inception of the project to its implementation. Moreover, regular 
reviews of the projects are undertaken at various le vels to ensure proper planning & 
execution.” 
14. The Committee desired to know as to  h ow does the Ministry plan s to 
mitigate situations where expenditure becomes infructuous due to project 
abandonment or changes in direction  and the lessons have been lear ned from the 
MLR project and how these lessons will  be applied to future projects, the Ministry 
stated as under:  
“It is clarified that, the total amount of Rs. 22.07 crores incurred for the entire project of 
turning out of MLR of 25 coaches per month wasn’ t infructuous and the assets created 
were essential for undertaking maintenance of different types of rolling stocks &the 
same is being fully utilized.” 
15.   Based on the Ministry's responses, when asked to clarify the initial purpose 
and rationale behind  setting up MLR facilities at Parel Workshop, given the 
challenges with transit times and the subsequent decision to develop a 
Passenger Terminal facility and the key factors that led to the decision to 
allocate funds for this project, the Ministry stated as under:  
“Initially, Central Railway transported Coaches to CRWS Bhopal, WCR which involved 
high transit time and less availability of Coaches for traffic. To save time and 

 
 
transportation costs, Central Railway planned to set up its own MLR facilities for  
Coaches at Parel Workshop. 
The key factors that led to the decision to allocate funds for this project is safe running 
of trains along with better passenger amenities.” 
 
 
16. Asked the reasons for not achieving the targeted out turn of 25 MLR 
coaches per month despite the creation of facilities and the steps being taken to 
ensure that future projects with specific targets are completed as planned, the 
Ministry stated as under:  
“As per evolving needs of the railway system, demand for MLR of ICF coaches had 
decreased due to gradual introduction of LHB coaches. Therefore, the arisings of MLR 
had decreased accordingly, however, facilities were gainfully utilized for maintenance of 
LHB/ICF/NMGH/NMGHS coaches.” 
17. The Ministry mentioned  that new technologies and  the replacement of old 
assets have been introduced . Asked to elaborate  on these technological 
advancements and their impact on services and safety, the Ministry stated as 
under:  
“ICF coaches are being replaced with LHB coaches which are safer and requires  less 
maintenance.” 
18.  On being enquired whether the Ministry can provide a timeline for the 
phased transfer of staff, machinery, and facilities to other workshops and 
locations, the Ministry stated as under:  
“Presently, Parel workshop is functional & con tinuously engaged in the maintenance of 
rolling stocks.” 
19. Regarding the assets created for the MLR project when asked about the 
Ministry's plans for assets that may need to be scrapped or transferred to o ther 
units and criteria used to determine whether  assets should be scrapped or 
transferred, the Ministry stated as under:  
“Presently, Parel workshop is functional & continuously engaged in the maintenance of 
rolling stocks. Accordingly, facilities at Parel workshop are being continuously utilized to 
cater to available workload.” 
20. On the specific query as to how the Ministry ensures that staff and facilities 
are continually updated and aligned with the evolving needs of the railway system , 
the Ministry stated as under:   
“Following timeline is an example  in ensuring that staff and facilities are continually 
updated and aligned with the evolving needs of the railway system. 
● During 2007 -08, the demand for Cast Iron brake blocks has 
diminished due to evaluation of composite brake blocks in the Indian Railway . This led 
to closure of Iron Foundry which led to a manpower surplus at Parel workshop. At the 
same time, the need for Heavy Corrosion Repair of ICF NAC coaches has arisen. 
Foundry Staff were re -deployed in the Corrosion Repair shop after providing due 
training by way of multi skilling.  
● In 2013 -14, the need of Railway was more MLR of ICF coaches. 
Therefore, the said project was initiated to upgrade the facilities and simultaneously 
staffs were trained accordingly. 
● In 2016-17, due to rapid proliferation of  LHB rolling stock in C.R, the 
need for SS1 of these stock arose and the demand was fulfilled by the multi -skilled 
Parel workshop staff. 

 
 
In 2018 -19, similar requirements of SS2/SS3 of LHB coaches were met by the Parel 
workshop in the same infrastructure de veloped for MLR of ICF Coaches along with the 
same staff.” 
**** 
 

 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Introductory 
 Gleaning through all the information and facts available with the Committee they 
note that the Ministry of Railways (MoR)  issued clear instructions to ensure 
readiness before calling tenders, emphasizing the importance of providing the 
work site and supply plan to contractors. However, the Mid -Life Rehabilitation 
(MLR) project at Parel Workshop/Central Railway encountered si gnificant 
setbacks due to non -compliance with these directives, leading to substantial 
financial implications. 
Infructuous expenditure on creation of Mid -Life Rehabilitation facilities at Parel 
Workshop: 
2. The Committee note  from Audit observation  that th e Ministry did not 
adhere to its own instructions issued in August 1980 and February 1985, 
which required ensuring the availability of the site before calling tenders 
and awarded the contracts (February 2010 and January 2015) for setting up MLR 
facilities of 25 Broad Gauge coaches per month at Parel Workshop/Cen tral 
Railway by sanctioning at an anticipated cost of ₹ 30.24 crore in 2007 -08 which  
could not be completed on the target dates due to reasons viz, non -availability of 
clear site for truck unloading and Grit blasting shed and site change, non-shifting 
of e lectrical office, non -handing over of site etc.   The project was later 
foreclosed after incurring an expenditure of ₹22.07 crore. In this regard, the 
Ministry contended that t he project being a Brownfield project, the maintenance 
could never be completely stopped and hence occasionally the sites could not be 
made available to the contractor for carrying out the work. However, even then 
the subject work was not completely affected and some alternate sites were 
made available to continue the work. Some modif ications in the site layout were 
inevitable and actually required for the successful outcome of the subject 
project. The Committee further note that MLR activities were being carried out at 
Parel Workshop since 2010 -11 with the existing Periodical Overhaul ing (POH) 
facility available in the Workshop. During 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, 156 and 150 
coaches respectively (13 Coaches per month as against the target of 25 Coaches) 
were turned out. In this regard, the Ministry stated that a ll major requisites 
before star ting the work were considered. As already highlighted, the subject 

 
 
work was a Brownfield project and all the issues that arose due to the execution 
of such projects were tackled at th e appropriate level.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, a s the work of MLR project was not completed and later dropped, 
target of MLR of 25 Coaches per month could not be achieved. The Committee 
are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry  that all the issues that arose due 
to the execution of such projects were tackled at th e appropriate level  as the 
Ministry did not ensure the availability of the site before calling tenders . The 
Committee are of the considered view that had the Ministry ensured strict 
compliance of their own instruction issued in August 1980 and February 
1985, which required ensuring the availability of the site before calling 
tenders , target of MLR of 25 Coaches per month could have been achieved as 
per schedule of the contract without incurring foreclosure penalty of the 
contracts awarded for completion of the work of MLR project.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should invariably 
undertake due diligence to  strengthen their compliance mechanism to 
prevent such lapses  in the future . 
2. As regards reasons for the delay in completing the MLR project, 
leading to contract foreclosures and an expenditure of 28.32 crore , the 
Ministry stated that 1 st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was awarded in 
Feb-2010 for Rs. 6.89 Crore, 60% work was completed and it was foreclosed in 
Mar-2014 due t o constraints of funds in the succeeding year.  For balance work, 
2nd Civil contract [M/s. Pruthivi Construction] was awarded in Jan -2015 for 
Rs.5.94 cr on arrival of budget grant. The Ministry added that b efore calling of 
tenders, funds requirements will b e assessed in advance and made available 
during the execution of work to avoid delay in projects.  Having taken note of the 
fact that while in the first contract, 40% of the work remained to be completed,  
constraints of funds in the succeeding year  were en countered, the Committee 
feel that besides assessment mechanism of fund requirements, efforts should 
also be made to review the fund utilisation mechanism as without exercising 
financial prudence, funds were released and the issue of fund requirements not 
brought to the notice of the Ministry in time leading to foreclosure of the 
contract. The Committee fail to fathom as to why  the contract for the 
remaining civil work of the MLR Project was  reassigned to a new contractor 
(M/s Pruthivi Construction) in Janu ary 2015, considering there was no fault on 

 
 
the part of the initial contractor (M/s Unity / Construction), leading to 
additional expenditure in the process . In view of the above, the Committee  
while emphasising upon initiatives to be taken to tone up their fund 
requirement assessment and utilisation mechanism with a view to manage  
contracts more effectively  and to avoid incurring unnecessary costs  in 
future , would also like to be apprised of  the rationale of awarding of the 
remaining civil work of the MLR Pr oject  to a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi 
Construction) in January 2015  leading to additional expenditure in the 
process . 
3. As regards  the measures being taken to improve planning and 
prudence in the Ministry's project decisions to avoid situations where 
substantial funds are expended with no tangible results and Ministry's 
strategy for aligning future projects with its available resources and long -
term goals, the Ministry stated that p rojects are being planned with a view to 
enhance capacity to cater to tra ffic requirements and customer needs. Due 
diligence and prudence is exercised at the various stages from the very inception 
of the project to its implementation. Moreover, regular reviews of the projects are 
undertaken at various levels to ensure proper pl anning and execution. The 
Committee hope that concerted initiatives will be taken in future  to duly address 
the flaws noticed in the planning and implementation process.  In addition, the 
issue of indecision as learnt  by the Ministry from the instant cas e of MRL project 
should appropriately be addressed to avoid such lapses.  
4.    The Committee also note from the submission of the Ministry that 
Central Railway (CR) had planned to set up its own MLR facilities for Coaches at 
Parel Workshop with the target ed outturn of 25 MLR coaches per month  to 
save time and transportation costs  enabling safe running of trains along with 
better passenger amenities as  initially, CR were transporting Coaches to CRWS 
Bhopal, WCR, which involved high transit time and less ava ilability of Coaches 
for traffic. The Committee further note that the Ministry had accordingly awarded 
the contracts for creating the facilities . However, the contracts were 
subsequently foreclosed as MoR decided in October 2017  to develop Passenger 
Terminal Facility (PTF) by closing the Parel Workshop.  The Committee further 
note that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Passenger Terminal 
facility at Parel Workshop is under consideration at  Railway Board for sanction 

 
 
of Phase-I.       According to the Ministry, once DPR is sanctioned by the Railway 
Board, further planning and execution of the work in a phased manner will be 
planned with least disturbance to the existing activities of the Parel workshop. As 
regards expenditure becoming  infructuous due to project abandonment or 
changes in direction , the Ministry stated that the total amount of Rs. 22.07 
crores incurred for the entire project of turning out of MLR of 25 coaches per 
month wasn’t infructuous and the assets created were esse ntial for undertaking 
maintenance of different types of rolling stocks and the same is being fully 
utilized. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry  that 
expenditure of Rs. 22.07 crores incurred for the MLR project at Parel Workshop 
was no t infructuous  mainly on account of the fact  DPR for PTF is still at the 
consideration stage in the Railway Board even after expiry of  more than six 
years since MoR’s decision in October 2017 for developing Passenger Terminal 
Facility by closing the  Parel Workshop and the facility created is being utilised 
for undertaking maintenance of different types of rolling stocks . The Committee, 
therefore, while emphasising upon expeditious finalisation of the DPR for 
developing Passenger Terminal Facility at Parel Workshop would also desire that 
they be apprised of the reasons for inordinate delay in the matter. The Committee 
would like to be intimated of the concrete action being taken in this regard for 
taking the issue to a logical conclusion.  
**** 
NEW DELHI:                            ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 February, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
 