IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
.NEW DELHI

!

54


PAC NO. 2283

FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC FINANCIAL

MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

जयते

- /2-_2022-
Presented to Lok Sabha on: [922 (20

LaidinRajyaSabhaon: LIAS

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20) (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) (vi)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
REPORT
PART- 1
1. INTRODUCTORY 1
2. AUDIT FINDINGS 2
a) Financial Planning 2
b) Technology Development 5
c) Human Resources and Project Organization Structure 7
d) Infrastructure and Office 9
e) Training and capacity building 1
f) Project Implementation Committee (PIC) 12
g) Technology Strategic Control Group 14
h) Status of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Schemes by PFMS 16
i) Cost-Benefit Analysis 21
PART -॥
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 25
Abbreviations 42

APPENDICES

1. Minutes of the Twenty-Fifth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2018-19)
held on 31-01-2019.

I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2020-21)
held on 27-10-2020.

lll. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)
held on 05-12-2022.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

SP NOAA # ७ ७

©

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

18. Dr. Amar Patnaik
19. Shri C.M. Ramesh
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
22. Vacant"
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Addl. Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer

* Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya
Sabha on 21st june, 2022.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi’

9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara?
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

ON AARON

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi*

' Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

? Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
07.07.2021.

+ Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

iii


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

छ” 3 92 छा # ०० ७

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

(2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

* Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021.


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri P. Bhattacharya '

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from
Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2018-19)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank
Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shwait Malik

Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

vi


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Implementation of Public Financial Management System” based on
Para 8.1 of Chapter VIII of C&AG Report No.4 of 2018 (Union Government-Civil-
Compliance Audit) relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 04 August 2018.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report as part of the unfinished work of the previous term of the
Committee. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 30 January, 2019 and 27 October, 2020.
The Committee (2022-23) obtained updated information in connection with the
examination of the subject. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at
their sitting held on 05 December, 2022. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee
are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence
and obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__December, 2022 Chairperson,
Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

vii


PART-I
1. INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report is based on Para 8.1 of the C&AG's Report No. 4 of 2018 on the
subject “Implementation of Public Financial Management System” of the Ministry of
Finance which contained significant results of the compliance audit of financial
transactions of the Ministry of Finance.

1.2. Public Financial Management System (PFMS) was conceived as a web based
integrated system for processing payments and for tracking, monitoring, accounting,
reconciliation and reporting of all receipts and expenditure of the Government of
India. PFMS was intended to replace separate accounting Management Information
System/Decision Support Systems (MIS/DSS) of various departments of
Government and subsume the independent systems of tax/non-tax receipts. This
system evolved in December 2013 from the erstwhile Central Plan Scheme
Management System (CPSMS) which was being implemented on pilot basis in four
States to monitor fund flow of four planned schemes by the Controller General of
Accounts (CGA) since 2008.

1.3. Further, an external consultancy firm was engaged in 2011 to develop the
roadmap for the development of PFMS. The Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared
by the firm was deliberated in the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in
September 2012 and presented to Government in December 2013 for approval. The
Government approved a total outlay of 21080 crore for implementation of PFMS in
the 12" Five Year Plan (2012-17). A four tier organisational structure was set up to
implement PFMS with the Project Implementation Committee (PIC) as the apex body
and Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) at Central Level and State Project
Management Unit (SPMU) and District Project Management Unit (DPMU) at State
level.

1.4. An expenditure of % 267.63 crore had been incurred as of December 2016 on
PFMS against the approved outlay of % 1,080 crore during the 12th Five year plan
period (2012-17). In December 2016, Ministry of Finance sought approval of EFC to
extend the project beyond March 2017 citing significant expansion in the scope and
additional responsibilities entrusted on PFMS. EFC extended the scheme to
31%March 2020 with total outlay of हैं 839 crore after taking into account the
expenditure already incurred.

1.5 Keeping in view the progress made by PFMS against its stated objectives, it
was proposed by Department of Expenditure (DoE) to make PFMS a regular function
of the Controller General of Accounts before the EFC in August 2019. The EFC while
appraising the proposal recommended the following:

(i) PFMS would cease to be a scheme and all earlier activities of PEMS
along with output/ deliverables would be regular function of CGA.


(ii) Currently approved manpower would form part of CGA’s organization,
except NIC posts.

(iii) PFMS to integrate all process and functions of O/o CGA into one
unique system.

(iv) Budget for PFMS to be merged in CGA’s budget.

(v) DPMUs to be supported by State Governments.

(vi) DBT monitoring cell to be created.

1.6 The proposal has since been approved by the Hon'ble Finance Minister in
Sept 2019 and as such, PFMS is now a regular function of the CGA.

1.7 Audit of PFMS was undertaken to assess the effectiveness of the
implementation strategy during the period 2014-17 and identify factors that led to
deviations from planned course of action approved by the Government.

2. AUDIT FINDINGS
(a) Financial Planning

2.1 The Government had approved year to year phasing of the expenditure of
% 1,080 crore on identified components of implementation, out of which 2308.27
crore was for training and capacity building, 293.71 crore for infrastructure and
office and 2169.20 crore and %308.82 crore were for manpower and technology
components respectively. The year to year phasing of the expenditure of % 1,080
crore on identified components during the period (2014-2017) was approved as
under:

Year to Year phasing of Expenditure on identified componentsduring 2014-2017

(Qin crore)

2.2 With regard to the financial planning aspect, during the period 2014-17, Audit
observed that the actual budgeting and year to year phasing of expenditure was not
in conformity with the plan approved by the Government and there were large
savings against budget provisions in all the years. The year wise outlay, budget
provision and expenditure incurred during the period were as under:


Year wise outlay, budget provision and expenditure incurred

2.3 Audit scrutiny revealed that all the expenditure was being booked under
normal establishment heads and there was no framework for mapping the
expenditure made with components of Technology, Human Resources,
Infrastructure and Office and Training and Capacity Building in line with the approval
of Government. Consequently, it was not possible to map figures of expenditure with
the identified components of expenditure. Nevertheless, component wise outlay
under the scheme during the period 2013-17 was reported to EFC in December
2016 at the time of seeking extension of the scheme.

Component wise outlay under the scheme

(QU in crore)

Manpower __ 16920 | 7.5 26.55

nfrastructure and | 293. |. 53.48 | 133.64

Office _
| Training and
Capacity Building

2.4. Audit also observed that the financial planning of the scheme was not in sync
with the plan prepared for the rollout of PFMS. Budget provisions for cost
components of Technology, Manpower and Training were very low against the
approved outlay of 64 per cent, 43 per cent and 0.17 per cent of approved outlay
respectively whereas provision for infrastructure and office component was
inordinately high against approved outlay viz. by 175 per cent. Expenditure against
budget provision was very low on all the components resulting in savings ranging
from 45 per cent to 75per cent of the budget provision.


Details of outlay, budget provision, expenditure and savings for identified components of
expenditure

(in crore)

Budget Available 7 हि 7 - 48)

Expenditure (Reported to पे . 64 | पु 267.63
| EFC) es | 4 _ ee oe

S हि | 0.38 | 55.66 |

Yage of Savings 45. a 13. 74.51% “65.83% |
| Budget available i |

2.5. According to Audit, while the PFMS Unit did not provide any specific response
on the system of budgeting, it attributed the slow progress of expenditure and
Savings to administrative reasons, non-availability of space, un-realistic projections
of expenditure and delays in procurement of machinery/equipment and
hardware/software. It added that no specific instructions had been issued by any
authority for budgetary planning for the Project and no oversight mechanism was
available for monitoring expenditure in accordance with budget and plans. In
response to a query from the EFC in December 2016 while discussing the extension
of the scheme, Ministry had cited delays in setting up of SPMU and DPMU and
under-staffing of CPMU as the main reasons for savings.

2.6 Ona query regarding how the change in administrative set up of the Scheme
helped in its implementation, the Ministry in a written reply Stated as under:

“PFMS is the payment, receipt, accounting, and the bank reconciliation
system for the Central Government. The payments include payments to
Suppliers, vendors, employees, autonomous bodies, corporations, DBT
payments by Ministries / Departments and transfers to and repayments by
StateGovernments. Since the payments, receipts and accounting are the
core functions of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA), the change in
the administrative set up aligns the mandate of PFMS to the functions of
CGA. With the integration of PFMS as a regular function of the CGA’s
organization, a unified and cohesive organizational structure has been
created under the CGA. This has provided the desired unification of
command, control, monitoring in all areas including budget execution. This
has also generated the required synergy and close coordination required for
the development of Government Integrated Financial Management
Information System (GIFMIS) built on the alignment of the software system
with the rules/procedures and Government banking arrangements - all within
the mandate of CGA. This has resulted in faster synergy in process flow



27

development and business process re-engineering for bringing in faster
reforms in the Government’s processes. Quick implementation of Treasury
Single Account (TSA) in the identified Autonomous bodies to facilitate Just-
in-Time payments is an example of this improved synergy. The integration
has also harmonised and brought together the Procurement, Administration,
Human Resources and Banking arrangements which were earlier working in
separate silos. This has resulted in better manpower planning and improved
budget execution as evident for the last financial year.

The budget utilisation trends i.r.o. PFMS for last three years are given below:

IS. No. [Financial |BE RE Expenditure — |Percentage

| Year utilisation (of BE)
4 2017-18 {300 140 165.47 21.8%

2 2018-19 240 155.8 108.5 45.2%

3 2019-20 [210 263 234.40 111.6%

These trends indicate that PFMS is now fully geared up for better utilization

of resources.”

As regards the monitoring mechanism devised by the Ministry to ensure

adherence with budget provisions and improving expenditure efficiency, the
Ministry Stated as under:

(b)
2.8

“In order to review all the issues relating to the activities of Public Financial
Management System, including financial overview of PFMS, a Senior Level
Review Committee (SLRC) has been constituted. Since, the constitution of
Senior Level Review Committee, four meetings have been held (first meeting
was held 0n14.10.2019, second meeting was held on 19.02.2020, third
meeting was held on 21.07.2020 and fourth meeting on 23.9.2020).A
Procurement Review Committee (PRC) has been set up on 13.12.2019 for
the purpose of review of the major procurement proposals crucial for
enhancement and increasing the effectiveness of PFMS. The PRC also
oversees completion of procurement process within the stipulated timeframe
and the utilization of the allocated budget to avoid lapse of funds. Secretary
(Expenditure) also reviews the progress of expenditure monthly with the result
utilization of funds, has become more efficient and effective.”

Technology Development

As per the Audit observation, the technology solution framework of PEMS was

to be designed to meet the requirements of a nationwide rollout by enhancing the
existing information, communication and technology infrastructure. The aim was to

5


provide a scalable and distributed architecture for addressing the three important
business requirements of transactions, teporting and data warehousing with
contingency arrangement. The DPR proposed setting up of two data centres (Data
Centre 1 for transactions and Data Centre 2 for reporting) and one Disaster
Recovery (DR) site with ancillary IT infrastructure. The proposed infrastructure
factored in integration with external systems such as treasuries and offices of
Accountants General, integration with other MIS and integration with Interactive
Voice Response (IVR) System and mobile devices.

2.9 An amount of % 308.82 crore was projected for this component. Of this, only
% 107.31 crore had been spent during the period 2013-17. Required Data Centres
and DR site have been established at NIC owned facility instead of own facility as
envisaged in the DPR.

2.10 Audit observed that complete functionality could be built only for three
accounting modules by October 2017 viz. OCEANS, Government e-payment
gateway (GePG) and Non-Tax Receipt portal. Module-wise status of implementation
is given in Annexe-IV. Work on integration of all the required 31 treasuries (29 States
and 2 UTs having legislature) was completed albeit with a delay of one/two months
against Stated timelines. Although non-tax receipt portal of PFMS was
operationalised, only 153 Civil Pay and Account Offices (PAOs) out of 550 PAOs
were registered for this purpose.

2.11 On a query whether any constraints have been faced for remaining
DDOs to be included in the ambit of PFMS, the Ministry in a written reply Stated as
under:

“About 283 Cheque Drawing DDOs (CDDOs) remain outside the ambit of
PFMS. This includes 198 CDDOs of Ministry of External Affairs, 14 CDDOs of
Ministry of Tourism and 1 CDDO of Ministry of Jal Shakti — all located outside
India. A specific module is under design to take into account the specific
requirements of payments/ receipts in Foreign Currency, Payments/ Receipts
in Foreign Banks and remittances to India. Indian Missions abroad are
currently using IMAS software and it is envisaged that all of these Missions
would be brought on board PFMS, in consultation with MEA, in a timeframe of
about three years. Poor/ non- existent network connectivity of the CDDOs
located in remote areas of UT of Lakshadweep, UT of Andaman & Nicobar
Islands, and those in remote North Eastern areas under Assam Rifles is the
reason for not bringing the 70 CDDOs in PFMS. CDDOs with no/poor
connectivity furnish their List of Payments to the respective PAOs who bring
their accounts on to PFMS. To overcome issue of low & intermittent internet
connectivity, basic version of the PFMS (PFMS Lite) is being developed. A
proposal for technical support for development of PFMS - Lite is under
consideration.”


2.12 As per Ministry's updated reply status of inclusion of various
modules/functionalities as mandated by EFC in PFMS as on July 2020 is as under:

Civil

Defence

(c) Human Resources and Project Organization Structure

2.13 On issues related to Human Resources and Project Organization Structure,
Audit observed that while Project Implementation Committee (PIC) was conceived as
the apex level body for providing policy advice and strategic guidance taking all key
decisions, the DPR listed the human resource requirement, infrastructure needs and
activities to be performed at CPMU, SPMU and DPMU levels. Although relatively
minor decisions related to human resource deployment such as engagement and
continuation of consultants and outsourced technical team were taken by PIC, no
Human Resource Policy defining roles/responsibilities as recommended in the DPR
or guidelines for benchmarking of performance of functionaries and performance
appraisal mechanism for continuation in assigned role(s)/responsibilities had been
framed. As a result, necessary framework for ensuring engagement and continuation
of people with desired skill sets could not be created.

2.14 The status of human resource deployment as on October 2017 at various
levels of project implementation hierarchy was as follows:

a. Central Project Management Unit (CPMU): There was shortage at
senior/middle level management positions of Dy.CGA and Asst.CGA level.
Further, no field/domain experts from external agencies having knowledge
and experience in different fields as envisaged in DPR were engaged in
CPMU.

b. State Project Management Unit (SPMU): SPMU was visualised as an
extension of CPMU in States with the responsibility of customisation of
implementation plan to synergise it with regional variations in requirements of
system design, training, monitoring and evaluation needs. Although Ministry
Stated that SPMU had been set up in all States, Audit observed that separate
office infrastructure for SPMU had not been created in any of the States.
There were only six officers of Dy. CGA/Jt. CGA level against sanctioned
strength of 55 as on 30 September 2017. In the absence of dedicated


infrastructure and decision making officers to coordinate and synergise
PFMS with regional variations, effective functioning of SPMUs could not be
ensured. Further, no duty list of functionaries of SPMUs had been prepared
nor was there any oversight mechanism to monitor the activities of SPMUs.

c. District Project Management Unit (DPMU): DPMU _ level organisation
structure was to be created for training, coordination and technical support at
block and village Panchayat level and implementation at grass root level. EFC
recognised that this structure would not be required for full duration of the
scheme and recommended exploring possibilities of setting up adequately
staffed call centres instead of full-fledged DPMUs. Audit observed that no
DPMU had been created and the process of creation of DPMU was started as
late as in October 2017.In the absence of DPMUs, the objective of tracking
financial payments under various schemes up to the village and block level
would be difficult to achieve.

2.15 On a query with respect to the filling up of the vacancies in the SPMU cadre,
the Ministry explained that:

“The restructuring proposal for PFMS is under progress with Dept. of
Expenditure. However, to ensure smooth functioning of the various PFMS
related activities vis-a-vis the States/UTs, ICAS officers have been assigned
the duties as State Nodal Officer (SNO) and Assistant State Nodal Officer
(ASNO) for ॥॥ 36  States/UTs for coordinating with the State/UT
authorities for implementation of PublicFinancial Management System
(PFMS) as additional charge in addition to their regular duties. This has
resulted in smooth functioning of the SPMUs.”

2.16 Further, in reply to the Audit observations that Ministry does not address
issues such as framing of HR policy, guidelines for benchmarking performance and
performance appraisal mechanism, the Ministry responded as under:

“Consequent upon the recommendations of the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure)
held on 29.07.2019 and the approval of Hon'ble Finance Minister on
06.09.2019, an Office Memorandum dated 16.09.2019 has been issued by
the Office of Controller General of Accounts with regard to merger of Public
Financial Management System (PFMS) into the CGA organization as a part of
the regular function of the Controller General of Accounts.”

2.17 On being asked about the status of deployment of
manpower to execute new functions of CGA, the Ministry furnished the following
details:


(५)

“A. Status of deployment of officers/staff in PFMS Headquarter as on

date
SI Name of post Sanctioned ‘| Persons in position
No Strength
1. Addl. CGA (HAG)} 1 1
2. Jt_CGA(SAG) | 2 2
3. Dy. CGA(JAG) 12 1
4. | ACGA (STS) 14 2+2(Sr. AO)
Total 29

B. Status of deployment of officers/staff in PFMS State Directorate as

on date
SI. Name of post Sanctioned Persons in position*
No. Strength
1. Jt. CGA(SAG) 19 1
2. Dy. CGA(JAG) [ 36 6(STS)
Total 55

*Additional charges have been given to Jt. CGA, Dy. CGA to ensure that all
SPMuUs are fully functional.

After recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure) held on
29.07.2019 and the approval of Hon'ble Finance Minister on 06.09.2019, an
Office Memorandum dated 16.09.2019 has been issued by the Office of
Controller General of Accounts with regard to merger of Public Financial
Management System (PFMS) into the CGA organization as a part of the
regular function of the Controller General of Accounts.

A proposal for restructuring of manpower in the office of the Controller
General of Accounts is under consideration in the Department of Expenditure.
Additional inputs on the proposal as sought by the Department of Expenditure
have also been sent. Department of Expenditure will take a comprehensive
view on the proposal shortly.”

Infrastructure and Office

2.18 The DPR projected Infrastructure and Office costs at = 511.10 crore for offices
to be set up at the central, State and district levels. These costs were re-worked as
% 293.71 crore in the light of recommendations of the 11 EFC regarding outsourcing

9


10

of work related to DPMUs. Ministry reported that the budgetary provision and
expenditure for this component during period 2013-17 was % 513.48 crore and
= 133.64 crore respectively.

2.19 Audit observed that CPMU is functioning at rented premises and creation of
infrastructure is at initial stage. Besides, no infrastructure was created at
SPMU/DPMU levels.

2.20 Ona pointed query regarding specific reasons for not forming the DPMUs as
yet, the Ministry stated that:

“The DPMUs are being set up in phased manner as per the guidelines
issued by DoE on 27.02.2019. 400 DPMUs have been notified and 9 DPMUs
have been _ set up. The list is annexed (Annexure-A). Presently it has been
reported that in J & K 8 DPMUs and in Odisha 1 DPMU have been made
functional. Further, 19 more DPMUs in Bihar State are expected to be
functional by 311 Dec, 2020.”

2.21 Further, in their subsequent reply the Ministry submitted as under:

“The number of 07909 established till date stands at 10 while 211
DPMUs have been notified by State Governments (Annexure). It is expected
that the remaining DPMUs which have been notified but not established — will
be set up soon.”

2.22 When asked about the role that was envisaged for the DPMUs and who would
be discharging the planned functions of the DPMUs in their absence, the Ministry in
a written reply stated that:

“Guidelines for setting up of DPMUs in States & UTs have been issued to all
State Directorates by 00 CGA vide 0.0४. No. C-
13015(777)/MFCGA/PFMS/2018-19/18324-18430 dated 27.02.2019. As per
these guidelines, the role and responsibilities of the DPMUs includes viz;
Training and hand-holding of master trainers and users of implementing
agencies in districts for the schemes on PFMS, providing support for
operational issues related to Agency Registration, User Registration, handling
digital signature, Expenditure Advance and Transfer (EAT), Direct Benefit
Transfer(DBT) and other modules etc. for implementing agencies and other
users, escalating technical issues to SPMU, to keep handy the necessary
reports and status of implementation of PFMS in Districts allocated. DPMUs
were proposed to provide training, support in trouble shooting for the
Implementing Agencies located at the Blocks, Panchayats and villages levels
of the concerned districts.”

10


11

2.23 Further on the issue of the District Project Management Units, the Secretary
during the oral evidence of Ministry taken on 27.10.2020 had mentioned as follows:

“...The conceptualisation of DPMU was made when the scheme was
formulated around 2012-13. It has not taken off for a variety of reasons. But,
perhaps today with the spread of information technology throughout the
country, we also need to re-examine whether DPMUs are necessary in every
district because it is quite an expensive proposition, fundamentally, because
today the backbone is available to every Panchayat. There are common
service centres. The States have also progressed much further than they
were in 2012. This was supposed to hand hold the State Government to
make the payment system reach the last nook and corner. But today many
States have developed their own accounting system...”

(e) . Training and capacity building

2.24 DPR projected training and capacity building as an instrument of change
management for acceptance by stakeholders to ensure successful implementation of
the project. The costs projected in the DPR on this component was %332.31 crore
which included sub-components like setting up of training labs, trainers cost,
‘information, education and communication,’ training material, travel etc. These costs
were re-worked to% 308.27crore in the light of the recommendations of the 1%‘ EFC
regarding outsourcing of work related to DPMUs. Ministry made budgetary provision
of only 20.51croreduring period 2013-17 and incurred expenditure of% 0.13crore on
training and capacity building component of costs.

2.25 When asked what were the reasons for low expenditure on areas such as
training and capacity building and whether impact ofthe low spending on
effectiveness of the project been assessed, the Ministry replied as under:

“During the current financial year 2020-21, due to outbreak of Covid19
pandemic, and lockdowns imposed during March onwards, physical trainings
were not possible as per DoPT guidelines. However, online trainings through
available e-platforms were conducted so that the training is not hampered.

Master trainers for training of PFMS is a continuous process and they are
selected from different States on the basis of written and skill test
examinations. 104 Master Trainers have been trained from 2018-19 to till
date, thereby relieving dependency on the existing limited resources at
PFMS.”

11


12

Budget and expenditure on Training and Capacity building from 2017-18 to

2020-21

(% In crores)

Financial Year Budget Estimate(TraininglExpenditure (Training and
land Capacity) Capacity)

2017-18 30.3 0.86
2018-19 16 0.88
2019-20 1.4 10.65
2020-21 1.68 0.0164 |
(upto 31.07.2020)

The details of trai

nings conducted are as under:

Period No. of Trainings Participants Trained
2018-19 2,350 50,194
2019-20 3,961 47,659
2020-21 1,375 4,073
(Til
31.07.2020)

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR PROJECT

(f)

Project Implementation Committee (PIC)

2.26 In order to ensure independence of the PIC, its composition, financial powers,
powers to engage human resources from within Government and outside
Government were envisaged in the DPR. Audit observed the following:

¢ Despite need for quarterly meetings to provide necessary guidance and timely

decisions, PIC met only five times during the crucial period of implementation
from December 2013 to March 2017. There was gap of about one year
between two meetings in the initial two years after approval of project. Due to
the low frequency of meetings, the project was deprived of policy guidance
and strategic control and necessary institutional framework for implementation
could not be built.

Initially, PIC included representatives of Planning Commission and the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. Considering the importance of an
independent project implementation team with representation of different
wings of Government, DPR recommended continuation of this structure under
chairmanship of the Controller General of Accounts with two members from
Planning Commission and a member from Office of Comptroller and Auditor

12


13

General of India besides members from Ministry of Finance. However,
composition of PIC was changed in January 2016 to include only members
from the Ministry of Finance (Implementing agency) and Director General
(NIC), the technology implementation partner. The change in composition
prevented the PIC from having the benefit of inputs from experts in related
fields to guide various aspects of implementation of project of this scale and
expanse.

* PIC had the full powers of competent financial authority and proposals of
expenditure in excess of the powers delegated to HoD were required to be
submitted to PIC for approval. However, these powers were re-delegated
(June 2014) and proposals required to be routed through Financial Resources
division of Planning Commission for approval of Additional CGA (PFMS)
without any mention of role of PIC. This function is now being directly
performed by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.

2.27 The role of PIC as an independent authority responsible for effective and
timely implementation of PFMS in project mode is thus neither clearly laid out nor
made functional.

2.28 When asked about provisions for real time monitoring of the implementation of
PFMS, the Ministry's response has been as under:

“PFMS was being regularly monitored through the Project Implementation
Committee (PIC) initially constituted as per Planning Commission’s OM no.
21/1/2008-FR dated 25.07.2008. After the transfer of the scheme from NITI
Aayog to Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure the PIC was
reconstituted vide Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) OM No.
A12034/2/2015-Ad.| (Pt.) dated 13th January 2016. The composition of the
PIC was such that it takes experts from Department of Banking, NIC, JS & FA
for financial guidelines, JS (Pers.) for HRD issues, JS (PF) for overall
planning, representatives from PFMS, JS (DBT) for DBT related issues etc.
The PIC meetings were held under the chairmanship of the Controller General
of Accounts.

With the PFMS becoming a part of the regular functions of CGA, the PIC
ceased to function after the 19th meeting of the PIC held on 26.6.2019. In
order to review all the issues relating to the activities of Public Financial
Management System, a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC) has been
constituted and which includes DG NIC and JS (DBT), Cabinet Secretariat as
Members. Since the constitution of Senior Level Review Committee, four
meetings have been held (First meeting was held 0n14.10.2019, second
meeting was held on 19.02.2020 and third meeting was held on 21.07.2020
and fourth meeting on 23.9.2020) to review to all issues relating to the
activities of PFMS including financial overview of the progress of PFMS.”

13


14

(g) | Technology Strategic Control Group

2.29 The Audit Report observed that a Technology Strategic Control Group was
envisaged in the DPR as a sub-group of CPMU to enable control over the outcome,
make changes and provide the capability of exit management related to technology
component of PFMS. The Group was to be tasked with ensuring that the
Government has complete control over the strategic assets like software application,
database and core infrastructure, achievement of outcomes, adherence to standards
for database management and security, proper change management hierarchy,
controls over intellectual property and regular monitoring. Audit noted that the
Strategic Group on Technology was not formed for PFMS in the manner envisaged
in DPR. As such, the system is functioning without the necessary technology
framework to address the above tasks and associated risks.

2.30 Ministry stated that a Core Technology Group (CTG) with external experts
was created in November 2016 to support existing technical team of PFMS in setting
up robust, reliable and sustainable software application and database. Members of
CTG included members from the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India and
technical experts from Microsoft besides senior officers from CGA and NIC. Audit
observed that the terms of reference, objectives, composition and tasks of the CTG
differed considerably from the recommendations contained in the 02२ for
Technology Strategy Control Group. Besides, only one meeting of CTG had been
organised till December 2016.

2.31 It was also noted in Audit Report that no standard contract templates for
vendors of services and equipment for PFMS were available for hardware/software
contracts nor were there any policies/standards/guidelines for prescribing minimum
hardware capability, recommended operating software or database solutions for
systems being deployed for PFMS. There were also no specific guidelines for access
management or change management for functionaries having access/rights to
authorise access to stafffofficers/ individual contractors/ consultants/outsourced
service providers. Hence, risks of unauthorised access, acquisition of components
not having required capability, purchase of non-compatible software and difficulties
in completion of work due to vendor exit exist that remained unaddressed.

2.32 When asked about the formation of Strategic
Group on Technology for PFMS in the manner envisaged in the Detailed Project
Report, the Ministry Stated as under:-

“Strategic Group on Technology as mentioned in Detailed Project Report of
2011 could not be formed due to reasons

14


15

“Audit has observation on non-constitution to Technology Strategic Control
Group. Technology Strategic Control Group as advised by DPR included one
Pr. CCA as chief Technology Officer separately which was not approved
Posts at Jt. CGA and Dy. CGA otherwise are also not filled completely,
therefore no one could be spared for these activities. Therefore, Technology
Strategic Control Group in the Lines of DPR could not be formed.”

Strategic issues are addressed in SLRC also in which DG, NIC is also a
member.

However, after PFMS became regular function of CGA, Technical Evaluation
Committee (Headed by DDG-NIC) has been formed. As NIC is technology
partner of PFMS and responsible for advising PFMS on technological matters.
All technological enhancements proposals, hardware, software requirements
are analyzed and vetted by Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) of NIC
which includes Sr. Technical Directors/ Technical. Due diligence with
reference to technological enhancement & strategies is being ensured
through Technical Evaluation Committee. After thorough examination by TEC,
proposals are submitted to PFMS Domain. In case of any new technology
introductions, references were made to Subject matter experts in NIC
HQ/MeitY to ensure specifications of products are matching with requirement.
In case of any new technology, Proof of Concepts (POC) is a standard pre-
requisite. All the products, Hardware, Software are being procured through
GeM only.”

2.33 As regards formulation of alternate strategy for mitigating risks arising out of
standardization in Technology Contracts and Solutions, the Ministry, further added
as under:

“As mentioned earlier, NIC is the technology partner of PFMS and all
Technological enhancements proposals, hardware, software requirements are
analysed and vetted by Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) of NIC which
includes Sr. Technical Director/ Technical Directors and is chaired by DDG
(NIC). After due examination, proposals are submitted to PFMS Domain. In
case of any new technology introductions, references were made to Subject
matter experts in NIC HQ/ MeitY to ensure specifications of products are
matching with the requirement. In case of any new technology, Proof of
Concepts (POC) is a standard pre-requisite. All the products, Hardware
/Software are being procured through GeM.

In addition, Cyber &lnformation Security of PFMS applications is very crucial
for PFMS and recommendations of Cert-In & NIC-Cyber security Divisions
have been complied with due diligence. In addition, PFMS have carried out
two Cyber security audits, Comprehensive Security Audit & STQC WASP

15


16

Cyber security Audit in last one year and all the observations were compiled
with.

A Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC), headed by DDG, NIC and
comprising of Sr. TDs and TDs has been constituted to regularly assess and
analyse the present as well as future technology stack of PFMS. All
technological enhancement proposals, along with hardware/software
requirements are analysed by TEC.

In addition, O/o CGA has moved proposals to engage three types of
consultants to take forward the vision of PFMS.

a) Strategic Advisory and Consulting services

b) Technology consulting services

c) Consulting services for specific domain areas (such as Data
Analytics, 190 270001 certifications, etc.)

These consultants would form part of the high-level support to the Domain
and Technology teams of PFMS. It is again to bring to the kind notice of PAC
that as per the EFC & the Finance Minister's approval, PFMS as a scheme
ceased to exist since August, 2019 and has become a part of regular function
of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA).”

EFFECTIVENESS OF PFMS AS A MIS/DSS IN IMPLEMENTED SCHEMES
(h) Status of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) schemes by PFMS

2.34 As per the Audit Report observation regarding the status of coverage of DBT
Schemes by PFMS, the DBT Mission lists a total 323 DBT eligible schemes of 51
Ministries involving cash transfer. Out of these, 140 schemes were on-board DBT
method of benefit transfer for the year 2016-17. Audit scrutiny till October 2017 of
DBT related schemes in PFMS revealed that transactions of only 89 DBT schemes
were covered by PFMS in 2016-17. DBT mission lists LPG subsidy scheme PAHAL
which involves payment of about = 52,076.85 crore (31March 2017) and accounts for
about 53 percent of all DBT beneficiaries and 28 percent of total DBT payments.
Audit observed that this system is not yet linked to PFMS for daily update of
information. Hence, PFMS could not be used for providing MIS information related
to this scheme. Audit noted that in the absence of full coverage of all the DBT
schemes by PFMS, the stated objectives of PFMS for monitoring fund flow enabling
timely and tacit transfer of funds and ensuring transparent reporting in these
schemes could not be ensured

16


17

2.35 When asked specifically as to what is the extent to which the Stated
objectives of PFMS has been achieved till date enabling complete coverage
and capture of receipt and payments of the Central Government in digital format
affecting all DBT schemes payments to target beneficiaries etc., the Ministry replied
that:

“For Government of India Payments for Civil Ministries, there are 741 PAOs
on board PFMS, out of which 546 PAOs are making payments and performing
other functions directly through PFMS while 195 PAOs including Revenue
PAOs of CBDT & CBIC, Department of Posts, Atomic Energy are using
other systems but are onboarded on PFMS through integration protocols.
Overall, in Civil Ministries/Departments more than 99.5% of total payments
are being done through digital mode through PFMS. Onreceipts side the
Non-Tax Receipt Portal (NTRP) has been developed to collect
Government receipts through online mode. All Ministries and
Departments are gradually coming on board on NTRP. For the year 2019-20
& 1,17,725.41 crores of Non Tax Receipts were collected through NTRP
against the total budget of % 3,13,179.12 crores. For Direct Tax receipts,
the legacy system of Revenue Accounts Management System (RAMS) is
being used for receipt accounting. For the Indirect Tax Receipta Portal -
Accounting and Reconciliation Portal of Indirect Taxes (ARPIT) has
been used for reporting Indirect Tax data. ARPIT is integrated with Goods and
Services Tax Network (GSTN) and PFMS for reporting of the indirect
taxes. Some residual indirect tax receipts are being accounted for through the
Receipt Accounts Management System (REVACT) system. For Direct
taxes, a module of PFMS, namely, Pratyakshya Kar Lekha  Pranali
(PRAKALP) is being developed.

So far 510 DBT Schemes have been covered. The break up is as under:

Central sector scheme: 45
Centrally Sponsored: 29
State Linked Scheme: 171
State and UT owned Schemes: 257
(Other Central Expenditure / others: | 585 |

The number of DBT schemes at the end of FY 2019-20 was (includes Central
Sector, Centrally Sponsored, State owned & UT Schemes): 510. The amount
of cash transfer done in these schemes was % 2,67,092.98 crore.”

17



18

2.36 The Ministry, when asked about the number of DBT schemes being covered
by PFMS (October, 2020), further informed as under:

“So far 510 DBT Schemes have been covered. The break up is as under:

Central sector scheme: 45 |
Centrally Sponsored: 29 |
State Linked Scheme: 171 |
State and UT owned Schemes: 257 |
Other central expenditure / others: |

Total | 510 _ |

The number of DBT schemes at the end of FY 2019-20 was (includes Central
sector, Centrally Sponsored, State owned & UT Schemes): 510. The amount
of cash transfer done in these schemes was & 2,67,092.98 crore.

The annual growth in term of amount disbursed based on the data of last
seven Financial Years is as under:

FY Number | Transactions Amount % Increase

of Schemes (in = crore) (Amount)

2014-15 56 21,943,733 6,967.17

2015-16 [| 90 | 67,450,640 22,138.47 217.75%

2016-17 162 101,148,847 31,393.53 41.81%

2017-18 297 165,473,305 90,754.95 189.09%

2018-19 416 509,725,682 154,748.87 70.51%

2019-20 510 1,023,764,443} 267,092.98 72.60%

2020-21 466 81,96,85,740 | 1,62,676.08

(till October)

Financial Year No. of Amount Disbursed

Increase in disbursement as of October, 2020 with the data of Corresponding
Schemes (in Crore of %)
2019-20 440 1,39,113.24

month of last Financial Year
Percent
Increase
(upto October)

2020-21 466 1,62,676.08 14.48 %
(upto October)

| Ne]

2.37 When asked what timeline has been fixed byPFMS for linking of
PAHAL/DBT with PFMS for comprehensive Management Information System
(MIS), the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

18


19

“The on-boarding process of PAHAL Scheme on PFMS involves various
process like Agency registration, DSC enrollment, beneficiaries’ registration
after due validation & Payment processing of almost 27 Crores beneficiaries.
It is proposed that PAHAL would be onboard on PFMS by March 2021.Since
the amount of data in the scheme is voluminous, the existing storage
capacity in PFMS will not be sufficient. Process for procurement of additional
data storage has already been initiated. The complete beneficiary
registration of all three OMCs and other activities will be completed once the
necessary hardware is acquired.”

2.38 Considering its major share in overall DBT beneficiaries and fund
disbursement, data of PFMS related to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) was examined to assess coverage in this
scheme and utility of information gathered in PFMS as MIS/DSS. It was observed
that website dbtbharat.gov.in of DBT mission is regularly publishing data of DBT
beneficiaries, transactions and funds transferred under DBT schemes including
MGNREGA. Moreover, Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) publishes MIS data
related to this scheme on its website http:/www.nrega.nic.in. The objectives of
information disclosure and key parameters of reporting viz. beneficiaries,
transactions and funds transferred are the same for PFMS and these sources.

2.39 However, there is no mechanism of data exchange between these sources
and PFMS for transparent mapping of all beneficiaries and coverage under PFMS.
Besides, financial information in accounts being reported by PFMS and MIS figures
being reported in DBT Mission and MoRD could not be compared to get a
transparent picture of progress of these schemes in PFMS. On specific query about
extent of integration of NREGA Soft (Software for MGNREGA) and PFMS to ensure
accuracy of data disclosure in public domain, Ministry stated that data of successful
payments is pushed back to NREGA Soft for reconciliation of payments at the end of
Ministry administering the schemes. However, no method for transparent mapping of
all reports was available.

2.40 As per the Ministry's background note, the data mismatch between PFMS and
DBT missionis mainly because of “onetomany scheme’ concept i.e.
PFMS considers it as one scheme even if DBT is happening in multiple components
of the scheme whereas DBT Mission considers these components as separate
scheme. When asked to clarify as to how many schemes have actually been linked
to PFMS by choosing a uniform method the Ministry replied as under:

“A scheme in PFMS can have both DBT components and Fund Transfer
components. At present the mapping is done between PFMS scheme codes
with DBT Mission Scheme codes. Against one PFMS scheme code, there can
be multiple DBT Mission Scheme codes and vice versa. DBT Mission scheme

19


20

is mapped only with the DBT component of the PFMS scheme. Hence, there
is chance of difference in expenditure figures between PFMS schemes and
DBT Mission schemes. In order to rectify this reconciliation, changes in the
PFMS DBT configuration are being made to map the DBT Mission Scheme
code at the activity level instead of PFMS Scheme Level. This exercise will be
completed by March 2021, after which all the schemes of DBT mission will be
linked to PFMS in the uniform manner.”

2.41 As regards the extent of integration of NREGASoft, software for
MGNREGA and PFMS to ensure accuracy of data disclosure in public domain, the
Ministry in a written reply Stated as under:

“PFMS and NREGA-Soft of Ministry of Rural Development is integrated for
making payment under MGNREGS. The payments of wages are happening
through PFMS and the responses received from the sponsor banks are being
shared with NREGA-Soft. All the reports are available to the stakeholders.
Ministries are enabled to interface the data with beneficiaries and others. A
specialized end to end protocol developed for MGNREGS has enabled real
time monitoring of payments. The Dashboard which tracks transactions under
MGNREGS and ensures excellent monitoring is enabling all the stake holders
to ensure prompt and Just in Time payments of wages.”

2.42 When asked about the creation of DBT monitoring cell and its details, the
Ministry responded that:-

“DBT Mission under the Cabinet Secretariat is a Policy Level Authority which
decides on DBT Policy issues, Guidelines for the stakeholders,
implementation of these policies with the Ministries/ Departments/ State
Governments, allotment of DBT Codes, and reporting of DBT data of
schemes and beneficiaries. DBT Monitoring Cell of PFMS on the other hand is
purely operational in nature to handle such activities viz. Fund Transfer Order
(FTO) reconciliation with external system, FTO reconciliation with banks,
response reconciliation with banks, failure reconciliation, scroll reconciliation,
updating Deemed Success/ Failure status received from NPCI, development
of new protocols and functionalities like alert systems, Monitor the Debit
pendency, Credit Pendency, Success, resolution of receipt of Non-standard
rejection codes from banks, Credit failure with inadmissible reasons, receipt of
incorrect IIN in Aadhaar based payment, non-receipt of credit bank details in
Aadhaar based payment, Aadhaar based payments in wrong bank accounts,
delays and non-validation of bank accounts by banks/India Post, false
response from bank, delayed response from banks results in delayed
communication to the external systems. Due to the increase in DBT
disbursements under various Governments’ schemes to farmers, MGNREGA
workers, and workers of unorganized sectors, the day to day monitoring has
become very essential. Moreover, a large number of technical issues like

20


21

DSC enrollment, file sharing response, system malfunctioning, non-credit of
money in the beneficiaries account due to server issues, delay in credit, non-
receipt of responses from bank, etc needs to be monitored and resolved on a
regular basis. Further, the on-boarding of PAHAL on PFMS is in progress and
under this scheme approx. 27 crore beneficiaries are to be paid subsidy on a
regular basis and naturally the load on the system and grievances of the
beneficiaries will be much more. Hence, it is essential to monitor these
schemes to ensure timely payment to beneficiaries. The creation of
Monitoring Cell within PFMS is intended to monitor the above activities.”

(i) Cost-Benefit Analysis

2.43 Audit observed that while projecting the usefulness of PFMS regarding its
cost-benefit analysis, it was mentioned that prevention of float of funds in the
scheme implementation hierarchy could result in savings of interest costs to the tune
of 8,363 crore. Ministry had reiterated in the EFC note presented for extension of
PFMS beyond 2017(December 2016) that approximately ₹ 10,000 crore savings on
interest could be achieved through implementation of PFMS.

2.44 Audit noticed that no study to assess actual fund flow, funds remaining idle in
hierarchy, actual float of fund prevented and interest savings considering period of
float and prevailing rates of interest was conducted for any of the schemes where
PFMS is being implemented. Hence, it was not possible to assess the effectiveness
of PFMS in respect of its objective of preventing fund float and reducing interest
burden.

2.45 To a query on how the effectiveness of PFMS is assessed in respect of its
objective of preventing fund float and reducing interest burden, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as under:

“PFMS as a platform facilitates making ‘Just in Time’ payment’. Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has issued instructions to all Ministries/
Departments to ensure Just-in Time release of funds using data available in
PFMS on the utilization of funds by the agencies. Some of the schemes
namely, MGNREGA of Ministry of Rural Development, PM KISAN of Ministry
of Agriculture, are using PFMS and doing the just in time transfer of fund to
the implementing agencies and the money is transferred to beneficiary's
account immediately. The beneficiaries receive the money without any delay.
Consequent upon Government's decision to bring Autonomous Bodies (ABs)
under the ambit of Treasury Single Account (TSA), a system for the same
through PFMS and RBI has been implemented. Just in Time (JiT) releases to
the specific ABs is being ensured through the TSA system wherein funds are
being released to the ABs when the payments are actually made by them to
the beneficiaries (vendors/ suppliers/ third parties). The system eliminates the

21


22

float with the ABs to a large extent. At present, 15 ABs have been on-
boarded in the TSA system.”

2.46 PFMS was envisaged as SAS (Software as Service) expected to reduce
requirement of hardware/software/maintenance to run various independent systems
at different offices and for schemes specific MIS. It was projected that savings of
about हैं 1,900 crore could be achieved after doing away with needs of scheme-
specific MIS for physical and financial monitoring.

2.47 Audit noted that no study had been conducted to identify areas of work at
different offices that would be rendered redundant after implementation of PFMS. No
work-study to reassess staff requirements and costs rationalization after
implementation of PFMS had been conducted. This may lead to duplication of work
in accounting offices and scheme related MIS/DSS where functionality has been
taken over by PFMS. For this the response of Ministry is as under:

8) DBT through PFMS have led to removal of duplicate/ fake beneficiaries
and plugging of leakages etc., as a result of which the Government has been
able to target the genuine and deserving beneficiaries. e.g. Deletion of
duplicate, fake/ non-existent, ineligible beneficiaries in Department of Rural
Development and Deletion of 2.98 crore duplicate and fake/ non-existent
Ration Cards (including some due to migration, death etc.) in Department of
Food and Public Distribution are some of the reported non beneficiary data
weeding out of data in DBT process.

Thus huge efficiency and financial discipline improvement achieved in 509
schemes of DBT through PFMS.

b) PFMS has helped in huge saving in expenditure of the schemes and
thus reduction in the interest burden of GOI. The data sought regarding
invalid accounts returned by PFMS scheme wise across all the schemes for
account validation requests by agencies/Ministries it is observed that
over the years for UID based account validation by PEMS the total number of
beneficiaries rejected in validation is 1,33,23,705 and successful validations
52,68,87,431, or Bank A/c based account validations in PFMS. The total
number of beneficiaries rejected in validation is 2,52,84,483 and
successful validations is 1,04,46,72,665.

The beneficiary numbers are high because beneficiaries are common across
schemes

PFMS has potentially saved about Rs 90,000 crores for account based
payments and Rs 12,000 crores for Aadhaar based payments, only on the
basis of account and Aadhaar validations. (Some of the beneficiaries may
have possibly been finally paid, after correction of errors in bank account/

22


23

Aadhaar numbers details received from concerned Ministries/agencies etc.).
Chief Secretary of UP State has communicated to Office of CGA that = 540
crore could be saved in Scholarship scheme of UP Government in one year
itself due to implementation of PFMS.

०) Effective MIS/DSS of PFMS has improved transparency and efficient
fund tracking system resulting in effectively zero float in system due to
digital tracking of Bank Accounts of Last level of fund flow across all the
schemes.

The ACK/ACK protocol and PFMS dashboard as well as the various Reports
available are extremely useful to all the stakeholders, and are widely used by
decision makers e.g., PMKISAN has disbursed ₹ 17000 crore to 8.5 crore
beneficiaries across all the States on 9"August 2020, without any float in the
fund transfer on Just In Time basis.

d) Improved Financial and Fiscal Planning and Financial Management
DOE has instructed all the Ministries and State Governments that Unspent
Balances as mapped by PFMS will be the basis for further release of funds,
thereby validating the enormous contribution of PFMS in fiscal planning and
financial Management of GOI.”

2.48 On a specific query as to how much progress has been made towards
development of Public Information Portal for grievance redressal and whether any
feedback been sought from the stakeholders and general public on the same, the
Ministry replied that:

“In order to serve citizens of India in transparent & efficient manner, it was
envisaged as an online platform to provide information regarding welfare
scheme disbursement. It was also envisaged to provide a dedicated
grievance redressal mechanism through the online portal. Accordingly, PFMS
public information portal (proposed to be named as Janhit Portal) has been
designed. Once made accessible to public, the portal will enable
citizens/beneficiaries to know the real time status of their entitlement/DBT
payments (through three functionalities, Know Your Payment, Know Your
Scholarship and Know Your Account Validation) as well as option to lodge
complaint) feedback. It also proposed to include MIS reports on funds
transferred to State Governments. On obtaining necessary approvals, the
domain registration & security audit for the portal will be conducted. Once the
portal is launched, feedback from the stakeholders will be received and
examined for incorporation. PFMS has been linked to UMANG App to
facilitate Know Your Payments as well as for Scholarship Payments through
the National Scholarship Portal.”

23


24

2.49 When asked whether there is any road map for penetration of PFMS into the
financial management system of Central Government and State Government, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Vision of PFMS is to become a centralized pivot system for financial
management of Government where complete lifecycle of financial
management including Budget Control, payment, receipts, accounting and
Financial reporting will be managed in an integrated manner. Further, PEMS
shall provide platform for Just in Time release and Real time monitoring of
implementation of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes in all
central ministries / departments and States / Union Territories. In addition, in
order to enable inter-operability, all the modules of PFMS are designed with
ready to plug in option for ministries to integrate their stand-alone applications
with PFMS. More than 50 Ministry/ State Govt. applications like NREGASOFT
(M/o Rural Development), PM-KISAN (M/o Agriculture), E-Vitta-Pravah (Govt.
of Madhya Pradesh) are integrated with PFMS. In order to support State
Governments in Public financial management, State directorate of PFMS
have been established in all the States & Union Territories. All the State
treasuries have been integrated with PFMS for Data exchange with reference
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes & their linked State schemes. Further
considering the fact that majority of the Program Implementation Agencies are
located at District or below level, District offices for PFMS are being set up in
400 districts.”

tk

24


25

PART -ll

Introductory

The Public Financial Management System (PFMS) is a web-based online
software application developed and implemented by the Controller General of
Accounts (CGA), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government
of India. PFMS evolved from the erstwhile Central Plan Scheme Management
System (CPSMS) which was being implemented on pilot basis in four States
i.e.Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, and Mizoram to monitor fund flow of four
planned schemes viz. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, National Rural Health Mission, Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan and Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sarak Yojna by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA). Since 17 April
2015, scope of PFMS has been expanded to cover direct payment to
beneficiaries (DBT) under all Schemes with the objective of tracking funds
released under all Plan schemes of Government of India, and real time

reporting of expenditure at all levels of programme implementation.

The scheme was shifted to Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of
Finance in 2014. However, in August 2019, it was proposed by DoE to make
PFMS a regular function of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA). The
proposal was approved by the Hon'ble FM in Sept 2019 making PFMS a regular
function of the CGA.

The primary function of PFMS today is to facilitate sound Public
Financial Management System for Government of India by establishing an
efficient fund flow system as well as a payment cum accounting network.
PFMS provides a real time, reliable and meaningful management information
system (MIS) to various stake holders and an effective decision support
system (DSS), as part of the Digital India initiative of Government of India.

Audit of PFMS was undertaken to assess the effectiveness of the
implementation strategy during the period 2014-17 and identify factors that led
to deviations from planned course of action approved by Government. Audit
observed that an outlay of 1,080 crore was approved for full rollout of PFMS
in 12" Five year Plan (2012-17) during which period, only ₹ 267.63 crore were

25


26

spent on tasks related to implementation of PFMS. The Committee further
note, from audit observations, various shortcomings in the implementation
strategy of PFMS viz Financial Planning, Technology development, Human
resources and Project organization structure, Institutional framework for
project and effectiveness of PFMS as a MIS/DSS in implemented schemes. The
Committee’s examination of the subject and their observations/
recommendations on the issues relating to PFMS as brought out in the Audit
Report and updated information received from the Ministry are detailed in the
succeeding paragraphs.

FINANCIAL PLANNING
1. Financial planning.

The Committee note that the Government had approved year-to-year
phasing of the expenditure of %1,080 crore (for the period 2014-17) on
identified components of implementation, out of which % 308.27 crore was for
training and capacity building, = 293.71 crore for infrastructure and office and
& 169.20 crore and % 308.82 crore were for manpower and technology
components respectively. During the period 2014-17, Audit observed that the
actual budgeting and year to year phasing of expenditure varied from the plan
approved by the Government. All the expenditure was being booked under
normal establishment heads and there was no framework for mapping the
expenditure made under various components viz. Technology; Human
Resources; Infrastructure and office; and Training and Capacity Building in
consonance with the approved proposal of Government. Consequently, it was
not possible to map figures of expenditure with the identified components of
expenditure. Component-wise outlay under the scheme during the period
2013-17 was reported to EFC only in December 2016 at the time of seeking
extension of the scheme. Budget provisions for cost components of
Technology, Manpower and Training were very low against the approved
outlay (64 per cent, 43 per cent and 0.17 per cent respectively) whereas
provision for infrastructure and office component was inordinately high (i.e.
175 per cent.) Further, expenditure against budget provision was very low on
all the components thereby resulting in savings ranging from 45 per cent to 75

26


27

per cent of the budget provision. As regards the budgetary planning
undertaken and the oversight mechanism put in place for monitoring
expenditure in accordance with budget and plans for the project, the
Committee note with concern from audit revelation that the PFMS did not
provide any specific response on the system of budgeting and attributed the
slow progress of expenditure and savings to administrative reasons, non-
availability of space, un-realistic projections of expenditure and delays in
procurement of machinery/equipment and hardware/software. It was also
added that no specific instructions had been issued by any authority for
budgetary planning for the Project and no oversight mechanism was available
for monitoring expenditure in accordance with budget and plans. In view of
unrealistic budget provisions made against the approved plan, unscientific
projections of expenditure, absence of any monitoring mechanism and the
resultant savings of huge magnitude, the Committee are constrained to
observe that the tasks related to implementation of PFMS appear to have been
dealt with a casual approach and there was no proper financial planning of the
process. The Committee are of the considered view that incorporating
scientific methods into budgeting, projecting and utilization of funds would

have ensured maintenance of fiscal prudence.

With regard to the endeavours being made for monitoring expenditure in
accordance with budget and plans, the Committee have been informed of the
measures initiated viz. constituting a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC)
for financial overview of PFMS and a Procurement Review Committee (PRC)
which was set up on 13.12.2019 for the purpose of review of the major
procurement proposals and to oversee completion of procurement process
within the stipulated timeframe, and the utilization of the allocated budget to
avoid lapse of funds. Further, it has been informed that Secretary
(Expenditure) also reviews the progress of expenditure on monthly basis. The
Committee have also been apprised that percentage utilization of budgetary
provisions has increased substantially from 21.8 per cent in 2017-18 to 111.6
per cent in 2019-20. While trusting that the initiatives taken by the Ministry
would duly address the issues pointed out by Audit, the Committee also
express hope that the current trend of budget utilization will be continued with

27


28

by the Ministry. The Committee desire that the Ministry may take into
cognizance the areas requiring further attention such as, infrastructure
development, HR Policy etc. and consider enhancing the budgetary

provisioning and expenditure in these areas.

HUMAN RESOURCES AND PROJECT ORGANISATION STRUCTURE

2. Human resources capabilities.

The Committee note that Project Implementation Committee(PIC), the
apex level body for providing policy advice, strategic guidance and taking all
key decisions, was mainly involved in deciding on relatively less important
issues pertaining to human resource deployment such as engagement and
continuation of consultants and outsourced technical team. Notably, no
Human Resource Policy defining roles/responsibilities as recommended in the
DPR or guidelines for benchmarking of performance of functionaries and
performance appraisal mechanism for continuation in assigned
role(s)/responsibilities were framed. Regarding HR policy and steps taken to
attract field/domain experts from external agencies the Ministry has only
indicated that PFMS has been merged into CGA organization and is a part of
the regular activities of the office of Controller General of Accounts. The
Committee feel that given the scale and expansion of PFMS, a technically
qualified workforce is required to not only address the various challenges
being faced in the implementation of the system and integration of various
schemes into the system but also to fix accountability. Further, in wake of
rising cases of cyber attacks on banking and financial systems, the Committee
are concerned that in the absence of a dedicated workforce, a key strategic
system like PFMS can possibly encounter new threats every now and then
owing to advancements in technology. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry may not rely solely on the CGA organization but take concrete
initiatives to attract field/domain technical experts for strengthening the PFMS.

3. SPMUs

28


29

The Committee note that State Project Management Unit (SPMU) was
visualised with the responsibility of customisation of implementation plan to
synergise it with regional variations in requirements of system design,
training, monitoring and evaluation needs. As per audit observation, in the
absence of dedicated infrastructure and decision making officers to
coordinate and synergise PFMS with regional variations, effective functioning
of SPMUs could not be ensured. Further, no duty list of functionaries of
SPMUs had been prepared nor was there any oversight mechanism to monitor
the activities of SPMUs. On the issue of shortage of manpower at all levels,
leading to delays in approval for technology solution framework for PFMS, the
Ministry furnished details of status of deployment of officers/ Staff in PFMS
State Directorate as 1 Jt. CGA (SAG) against the sanctioned strength of 19 and
6 Dy. CGA (JAG) against a sanctioned strength of 36. They further stated that
additional charges have been given to Jt. CGA, and Dy. CGA to ensure that all
SPMUs are fully functional. From the Ministry’s response it is evident that the
SPMUs are yet to achieve their sanctioned strength. Ministry’s response
regarding restructuring of manpower also remains unsatisfactory as they have
only assigned additional charge to some officersover their regular duties. The
Committee feel that in the absence of dedicated services, infrastructural
issues are not being highlighted sufficiently owing to which, many SPMUs are
housed in temporary spaces and the progress in regard to hiring of office
space is moving at snail’s pace. The Committee recommend that issues
plaguing the SPMUs as regards infrastructure and Manpower must be dealt
with promptly so as to ensure effective functioning of SPMUs. The Committee
may be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction.

4. DPMUs
The Committee have been apprised that District Project Management

Unit (DPMU) level organisation structure was to be created for training,
coordination and providing technical support at block and village Panchayat
level and implementation of the project at grass root level. Besides, role and
responsibilities of DPMUs include Training and hand-holding of master
trainers and users of implementing agencies in districts for the schemes on
PFMS, providing support for operational issues related to Agency

29


30

Registration, User Registration, handling digital signature, EAT, DBT and other
modules etc. However, Audit observed inter-alia that the process of creating
DPMUs was started as late as in October 2017. From the Ministry’s response it
is evident that only 10 DPMUs as on 26.10.2020 have been set up as against
sanctioned strength of 400. Moreover, the Ministry have not provided
information regarding the agencies that are carrying out the functions of
DPMUs in their absence. The Secretary had, in his deposition mentioned that
perhaps, today, with the spread of information technology throughout the
country, the necessity of DPMUs in every district might need to be re-
examined as it is quite an expensive proposition, and Common Service
Centres are available in every Panchayat today which can serve as the
backbone. The DPMU was supposed to hand hold the State Governments to
make the payment system reach every nook and corner. But, as on date many
States having progressed much further from where they were in 2012, and
have developed their own accounting systems. The Committee are of the view
that DPMUs can help in achieving inclusion of implementing agencies (IAs)
under various schemes up to the village and block level in PFMS. The
Committee while taking note of the submission of the Secretary, opine that the
requirement of DPMUs to be constituted be re-examined inter alia by taking
into account State-wise requirement based on the accounting systems and
training needs. Further, in light of rapid developments in information and
technology since the conceptualization of PFMS, the Committee feel that there
is a necessity on the part of the Ministry to re-examine the role envisaged for
DPMUs in the matter of covering every DBT beneficiary within the PFMS
framework and achieving last-mile connectivity of PFMS. The Committee also
recommend re-evaluation of role of SPMUs viz a viz DPMUs for better
penetration and implementation of PFMS.

INFRASTRUCTURE AND OFFICE
5. Infrastructure and office

Audit had observed that the CPMU is functioning from rented premises
and creation of the required infrastructure is in initial stages. The Committee
note that separate office infrastructure for SPMUs had not been created in any
State and in most cases temporary space has been allotted by State

30


31

Governments. Besides, no infrastructure was created at SPMU/DPMU levels.
Additionally, the Committee have been apprised that on-boarding process of
PAHAL scheme had been delayed due to the amount of data in the scheme
being voluminous, for which the existing storage capacity in PFMS was not
sufficient due to absenceof necessary hardware.The Committee opine that
dearth of requisite infrastructure not only creates hurdles in effective
implementation of the scheme but also puts critical information regarding
financial transactions in jeopardy. Highlighting the critical nature of PFMS and
concerns over data security, the Committee stress on the need for a thorough
assessment of physical and technical infrastructure along with back-up
arrangements required in PFMS scheme and take necessary action to remedy
the lacunae so identified, expeditiously.

TRAINING AND CAPACITY BUILDING

6. Training and Capacity Building
The Committee note that PFMS being a new platform requires

considerable effort in navigating the website and its various modules viz PAO
Module, EIS, CDDO Module, REAT etc. However, the Committee note that the
expenditure has been low in areas such as training and capacity building. In
this regard, the Ministry have stated that during the financial year 2020-21, due
to outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic, and lockdowns imposed from March, 2020
onwards, conducting physical trainingwasnot possible as per DoPT
guidelines. However, online training through available e-platformswasbeing
regularly conducted. It has further been mentioned that Master Trainers for
training on PFMS is a continuing necessity. The Trainers are selected from
different States on the basis of written and skill test examinations.104 Master
Trainers have been trained since 2018-19, thereby relieving dependency on the
existing limited resources at PFMS. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the details of training so provided by the Master Trainers since 2018-19.The
Committee, while being fullyaware of the numerous challenges faced by IAs
such as lack of functional computers and the digital divide, desire that for
facilitating efficient handling of the PFMS website and its modules, and
modifications in the software due to inclusion of new schemes/modules,
physical training may be encouraged in normal course. Further, to cover up for

31


32

the slowdown in training exercises and to enable remote learning, the
Committee recommend that Open Online Courses (MOOCs) format and usage
of recorded videos readily available on the PFMS website may be resorted to
as an option for imparting training to Implementing Agencies. The Committee
further desire that the budgeting and expenditure for training and capacity
building be suitably raised.

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR PROJECT
7. Project Implementation Committee

The Committee note that the Project Implementation Committee (PIC)
was conceived as the apex level body for providing policy advice and strategic
guidance for taking all key decisions and for regular monitoring. The
composition of the PIC was such that it took experts from Department of
Banking, NIC, JS & FA for financial guidelines, JS (Pers.) for HRD issues, JS
(PF) for overall planning, representatives from PFMS, JS (DBT) for DBT related
issues etc. The PIC meetings were held under the Chairmanship of the
Controller General of Accounts. The Committee have been apprised that with
the PFMS becoming a part of the regular functions of CGA, the PIC ceased to
function after the 19th meeting and in order to review all the issues relating to
the activities of PFMS, a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC) was
constituted which included DG NIC and JS (DBT), Cabinet Secretariat as
Members. Since the constitution of Senior Level Review Committee in
2019,only four meetings were held till 23.9.2020 to review all issues relating to
the activities of PFMS including financial overview of the progress of PFMS.
The Committee feel that since PFMS is still evolving, regular monitoring and
guidance becomes essential. The Committee, therefore,recommend that in
order to make regular review a part of decision making process at the apex
level and for effective monitoring of implementation of PFMS, SLRC should
meet not only more frequently but also at fixed intervals. Further, owing to the
changed composition of apex level body for PFMS, the Committee apprehend
whether, owing to the altered composition of SLRC various issues plaguing
PFMS such as coordination, HR Policy, Infrastructure etc., could be
addressed. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the detailed
composition of the present SLRC. The Committee would also like the Ministry

32


33

to ensure that SLRC is sufficiently empowered to address issues of overall
planning and representation of domain experts.

8. Technology Strategic Control Group

The Committee note that a Technology Strategic Control Group (TSCG)
was envisaged as a sub-group of CPMU to ensure that the Government has
complete control over the strategic assets like software application, database
and core infrastructure, achievement of outcomes, adherence to standards for
database management and security, proper change management hierarchy,
controls over intellectual property and regular monitoring etc. The Committee
note that the TSCG was not formed in the manner envisaged in DPR. Instead,
the Committee were apprised, that NIC being the technological Partner of
PFMS, all Technological enhancement proposals, hardwareand software
requirements are analysed and vetted by Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC) of NIC which includes Sr. Technical Director! Technical Directors and is
chaired by DDG(NIC). They were further apprised that in case of introduction
of any new technology, references were made to Subject matter experts in NIC
HQ/ MeitY to ensurethat the specifications of productsmatched with the
requirement. Further, in case of any new technology, Proof of Concepts (POC)
is a standard pre-requisite. All the products, Hardware /Software are being
procured through GeM. In addition, Cyber & Information Security of PFMS
applications which is very crucial for PFMS and recommendations of Cert-In &
NIC-Cyber security Divisions have been complied with due diligence. In
addition, PFMS have carried out two Cyber security audits, Comprehensive
Security Audit & STQC WASP Cyber security Audit in last one year and all the
observations were complied with. A Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC),
headed by DDG, NIC and comprising of Sr. TDs and TDs has been constituted
to regularly assess and analyse the present as well as future technology stack
of PFMS. In addition, O/o CGA has moved proposals to engage three types of
consultants to take forward the vision of PFMS : a) Strategic Advisory and
Consulting services b) Technology Consulting services c) Consulting services
for specific domain areas (such as Data Analytics, ISO-270001 certifications,
etc.) Since PFMS has been designed to cover financial transactions of all the
agencies pertinent to public finance in India, high importance needs to be

33


34

given to technical security measures. Highlighting the absence of a dedicated
TSCG, the Committee recommend that guidelines/SOPs to ensure proper
management of strategic assets like software application, database and core
infrastructure and systemic issues such as server being down due to heavy
data trafficmay be issued so that the absence of TSCG may not affect
implementation of PFMS adversely. Further, owing to rise in Cyber crimes and
cyber attacks, the Committeewould pay emphasis on proactively monitoring
the emerging threats and engaging the consultants as suggested by O/o CGA
at the earliest so that PFMS is well equipped to tackle not only current issues

but issues arising due to technological advances also.

EFFECTIVENESS OF PFMS AS A MIS/DSS IN IMPLEMENTED SCHEMES
9. Status of coverage of DBT schemes by PFMS

The Committee are aware that Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) ensures
transfer of subsidies and distribution of funds sponsored by Government of
India directly to the people through their bank accounts. The Committee have
also been apprised of fund float i.e. budget which remain idle with
implementing agencies until final expenditure is made. While projecting the
usefulness of PFMS, it was envisaged that prevention of float of funds in the
scheme implementation hierarchy could result in savings of interest costs to
the tune of = 8,363 crore. Ministry had reiterated in the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) note presented for extension of PFMS beyond 2017
(December 2016) that approximately ₹ 10,000 crore savings on interest could
be achieved through implementation of PFMS. Audit noted that in the absence
of full coverage of all the DBT schemes by PFMS, the stated objectives of
PFMS for monitoring fund flow, enabling timely and tacit transfer of funds and
ensuring transparent reporting in these schemes could not be ensured. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may pursue for swift
inclusion of all Implementing agencies(IAs) and integration of payment
transfers software/program used by them within fixed timelines so as to

ensure transparency, accountability and also revenue saving.

10. Inclusion of PAHAL Scheme in PFMS

34


35

Audit scrutiny (October 2017) of DBT related schemes in PFMS revealed
that transactions of only 89 DBT schemes were covered by PFMS in 2016-
17.The Committee note that, as of Financial Year 2019-20, 509 schemes were
included, however, LPG subsidy scheme PAHAL which involves payment of
about & 52,076.85 crore (31 March 2017) and accounts for about 53 percent of
all DBT beneficiaries and 28 percent of total DBT payments was not linked to
PFMS.As per the Ministry’s response regarding integration of PAHAL in PFMS,
the process was to be completed by March 2021. The Committee note in this
regard that although PAHAL scheme now appears on PFMS official website
under ‘Scheme Listing’ as Direct Benefit Transfer-LPG (PAHAL) with scheme
code 9773,the fact remains that while Audit pertains to the year 2017,
integration of PAHAL scheme took at least four years. Owing to the delay
observed in inclusion of a scheme of significant importance like PAHAL in
PFMS, the Committee recommend that reasons/roadblocks responsible for the
delay may be assessed, analysed and remedial measures taken. The
Committee recommend that the feedback so gained may be utilized to achieve
complete integration of future DBT schemes with PFMS with minimum delay

so that such instances do not recur.

11. PEMS LITE

PFMS being the payment, receipt, accounting, and the bank
reconciliation system for the Central Government includes payments to
suppliers, vendors, employees, autonomous bodies, corporations, DBT
payments by Ministries / Departments and transfers to and repayments by
State Governments which requires 100% inclusion of both IAs (Implementing
Agencies) and Beneficiaries. However, the Committee note that coverage of
Drawing and Disbursing Offices (CDDOs) as on July 2020 hovers around 95
percent. Further, about 283 Cheque Drawing DDOs (CDDOs) located outside
India, remained outside the ambit of PFMS including 198 CDDOs of Ministry of
External Affairs, 14 CDDOs of Ministry of Tourism and 1 CDDO of Ministry of
Jal Shakti. The Ministry in their reply indicated that a specific module is under
design to take into account the specific requirements of payments/ receipts in
Foreign Currency, Payments/ Receipts in Foreign Banks and remittances to
India. Moreover, Indian Missions abroad are currently using IMAS software and

35


36

it is envisaged that all of these Missions would be brought on board PFMS, in
consultation with MEA, in a timeframe of about three years. The Committee
hope that integration of afore-mentioned module with PFMS is being carried
out in accordance with the prescribed timelines. The Committee have also
been apprised that Poor/ non-existent network connectivity of the CDDOs
located in remote areas of UT of Lakshadweep, UT of Andaman & Nicobar
Islands, and those in remote North Eastern areas under Assam Rifles is the
reason for not bringing them into the ambit of PFMS. CDDOs with no/poor
connectivity furnish their List of Payments to the respective PAOs who bring
their accounts on to PFMS. To overcome issue of low & intermittent internet
connectivity, basic version of the PFMS (PFMS Lite) is being developed. While
appreciating efforts taken in this regard, the Committee desire that related
work for development of PFMS - Lite be expedited and completed in a time
bound manner so that 100 percent inclusion of both IAs and beneficiaries into
PFMS is achieved.

12. Data mismatch between DBT Mission and PEMS
As per Audit, the financial information in accounts being reported by

PFMS and MIS figures being reported in DBT Mission and Ministry of Rural
Development could not be compared to get a transparent picture of progress
of these schemes in PFMS. The response given by the Ministry in this regard
indicates that data mismatch is mainly because of “one too many scheme”
concept i.e. in a scheme, even if DBT happens in multiple components of the
scheme, PFMS considers the same as one scheme whereas DBT Mission
considers these components as separate schemes. At present, the mapping is
done between PFMS scheme codes with DBT Mission Scheme codes. Against
one PFMS scheme code, there can be multiple DBT Mission Scheme codes
and vice versa. The Committee have been further apprised that DBT Mission
scheme is mapped only with the DBT component of the PFMS scheme. Hence,
there is chance of variance in expenditure figures between PFMS schemes and
DBT Mission schemes. In order to rectify the problem, changes in the PFMS
DBT configuration are being made to map the DBT Mission Scheme code at
the activity level instead of PFMS Scheme Level. The Committee would like to
be apprised of status of completion of the rectification exercise and hope that

36


37

the reconciliation has been achieved across all the on-board schemes. The
Committee recommend that in order to provide comprehensive, transparent,
and objectively oriented information as envisaged by the Government, the
CGA may thoroughly assess the nature of the DBT scheme and its
components and also include feedback of all stakeholders prior to its
integration in PFMS. Further, with a view to spur integration process in PFMS,
CGA may also enable sufficient linkages in the software to ensure that
attached/subsidiary offices are linked to their head offices without resorting to
the data mapping techniques followed while integration of DBT Schemes.

13. Cross platform comparison of scheme
Audit scrutiny revealed that to ascertain the effectiveness of PFMS as a

meaningful tool for scheme related MIS/DSS, data related to the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) was examined
and it was observed that mapping of all beneficiaries and coverage under
PFMS could not be done when cross checked with data of MGNREGA DBT
beneficiaries, transactions and funds transferred on the website
dbtbharat.gov.in and Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) website
http:/www.nrega.nic.in. Further, as also mentioned in the preceding para,
financial information in accounts being reported by PFMS and MIS figures
being reported in DBT Mission and MoRD could not be compared. On specific
query about extent of integration of NREGA Soft (Software for MGNREGA) and
PFMS to ensure accuracy of data disclosure in public domain, Ministry stated
that data of successful payments is pushed back to NREGA Soft for
reconciliation of payments at the end of Ministry administering the schemes.
However, no method for complete mapping of all payment reports was
available in PFMS. Thus, the Committee observe that PFMS could not provide
an independent cross platform comparison of schemes reported under PFMS
and scheme MIS of Ministries (October 2017) which is reflective of lack of
sufficient linkages and data sharing between multiple platforms of the
Government. The Committee feel that cross platform comparison of data of a
scheme is necessary to achieve the objective of PFMS becoming an all-
encompassing system to provide MIS/DSS information related to all schemes
in a transparent manner. Further, the Committee opine that real-time

37


38

publishing of non-personal data related to disbursement of funds under
various schemes may not only aid as DSS but also in social audit of schemes
on PFMS. The Committee, therefore, recommend for creation of an interactive
platform on the PFMS website that integrates data from various Central
Government schemes and presents them in a user-friendly form so as to
ensure transparency and accountability as well as ease of accessibility to the
said data. The Committee also recommend that while doing so, data sharing
norms may be laid so that personal data regarding beneficiaries may not be

compromised.

14. DBT Monitoring Cell
The Committee note that DBT Monitoring Cell of PFMS was to be created

to handle activities such as Fund Transfer Order (FTO) reconciliation with
external system and banks; response reconciliation with banks; failure
reconciliation, updating Deemed Success/Failure status received from
National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI), development of new protocols
and functionalities like alert systems etc. The Committee have also been
apprised that due to the increase in DBT disbursements under various
Governments’ schemes to farmers, MGNREGA workers, and workers of
unorganized sectors, the day to day monitoring has become very essential.
Additionally, a large number of technical issues like Digital Signature
Certificates (DSC) enrollment, file sharing response, system malfunctioning,
non credit of money in the beneficiaries account due to server issues, delay in
credit, non-receipt of responses from bank, etc. needs to be monitored and
resolved on a regular basis. Further, as per Ministry’s response, after on-
boarding of PAHAL and other schemes on PFMS, the load on the system and
grievances of the beneficiaries will be much more. Considering these factors,
the role of Ministry in effective monitoring of these schemes to ensure timely
payment to beneficiaries cannot be denied. However, the Committee note that
no steps have been taken to create Monitoring Cell as envisaged by
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its proposal. Keeping in view the
substantial increase in load on PFMS due to inclusion of various schemes for
disbursement of funds, the Committee recommend that the Monitoring cell
may be created at the earliest. Further, the Ministry may ensure that a regular

38


39

feedback mechanism is developed within the Monitoring Cell to instantly bring
to the notice the issues that are being encountered at the grass-root level by
IAs so that they be addressed and modifications carried out, if needed, well
within the prescribed time frame. The Committee also recommend that
Ministry may also try to make PFMS more citizen-centric by enabling alerts
providing estimated time of credit of money into the beneficiary’s accounts to
citizens via SMS and enabling a grievance redressal link to report delay/non-
payment of the same.

COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
15. Study to ascertain overlapping functions

The Committee note that PFMS may provide projected savings of about
% 1,900 crore after doing away with needs of various independent systems
(hardware/software/maintenance) at different offices and for schemes specific
MIS for physical and financial monitoring.Audit noticed that no study to
assess actual fund flow, fundsremaining idle in hierarchy, actual float of fund
prevented and interest savings considering period of float and prevailing rates
of interest was conducted for any of the schemes where PFMS is being
implemented. Hence it was not possible to assess the effectiveness of PFMS
in respect of its objective of preventing fund float and reducing interest
burden. The Ministry’s response regarding this states inter-alia that 0815
through PFMS have led to removal of duplicate/ fake beneficiaries and
plugging of leakages etc., as a result of which the Government has been able
to target the genuine and deserving beneficiaries. e.g. Deletion of duplicate,
fake/ non-existent, ineligible beneficiaries in Department of Rural Development
and Deletion of 2.98 crore duplicate and fake/ non-existent Ration Cards
(including some due to migration, death etc.) in Department of Food and Public
Distribution.

Audit had further pointed out that no study had been conducted to
identify areas of work at different offices that would be rendered redundant
after implementation of PFMS. Further no work-study to reassess staff
requirements and rationalization of costs after implementation of PFMS had
been conducted. As per audit this could lead to duplication of work in

39


40

accounting offices and scheme related MIS/DSS where functionality has been
taken over by PFMS. The Committee have not been made aware of any such
study conducted by the Ministry. The Committee opine that while the
Ministry’s response provides a list of achievements of PFMS, yet, no scientific
study has been conducted to ascertain the cost incurred viz-a-viz benefit
accrued of PFMS. Further Ministry’s response is not indicative of any effort
being made to identify duplication of work in accounting offices.The
Committee appreciate some of the visible and likely achievements of PFMS
viz. enabling just in time payments, timely and tacit transfer of funds,
Preventing interest costs, transparent reporting etc. The Committee are
however, of the considered view that duplication of work in accounting offices
and scheme related MIS/DSS where functionality has been taken over by PFMS
remains to be identified and addressed. The Committee thus recommend that
a study may be conducted to ascertain areas of duplication in the systems
where PFMS has been adopted partially/ not been integrated completely so
that duplication of effort, if prevalent, may be avoided.

16. Way Forward
The Committee note that vision of PFMS is to become a centralized pivot

system for financial management of Government where complete lifecycle of
financial management including Budget Control, payment, receipts,
accounting and Financial reporting will be managed in an integrated manner.
However, the Committee observe that PFMS suffered from major systemic
fallacies viz. slow progress of expenditure and under utilization of funds, non-
availability of space, unrealistic projections of expenditure and delays in
procurement of machinery/equipment and hardware/software. The Committee,
thus are constrained to observe that while the grand vision of PFMS requires
timely inclusion of all DBT schemes, the implementation of PFMS suffered
from indecisiveness. Be it the requirement of infrastructure and human
resource capabilities or finally subsuming PFMS into the Office of CGA, the
evolution of physical and financial progress of PFMS remained sluggish and
the process of implementation of the scheme lacked necessary consistency
with a planned course. Keeping in view the fact that planning and

40


41

implementation need to go hand in hand, the Committee recommend that
Ministry may identify the reasons for delay and roadblocks faced during
implementation of PFMS and further take up a bottom-up approach while
formulating the future action plan for PFMS. Further, the Committee
recommend that Ministry may identify potential uses/ users of PFMS in
budgeting activities in Government Departments for efficiency and

transparency.

TE

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

___December, 2022 Chairperson,
__Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

41


Abbreviation used

i.

ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.

xi.

xii.
xiii.
xiv.
xv.
XVi.
XVii.
XViii.
xix.
XX.
xxi.
Xxii.
xxiii.
Xxiv.
XXV.
XXVi.
XXVii.
XXViii.
XXiX.
XXX.
XXxXi.
XXxii.
XxXxiil.
XXxiv.
XXXV.
XXXVi.
XXXVii.
XXXViii.
XXxix.

ABPS-
CGA-
CS/CSS-
CSIS-
DBT-
DDO-
DPMU-
EAT-
EFC-
EIS-
FTO-
GePG-
GIFMIS-
HAG-
IIN-

TAs-
IFMIS-
JAG-
JTS-
MIS-
MGNREGS-
NACH-
NRHM-
NEFT-
NIC-
NSAP-
NPCI-
OMCs-
OMMAS-
PMAY-G-
PAHAL-
PAO-
PMGSY-
PMMVY-
RTGS-
SAG-
SSA-
SPMU-
STS-

42

Aadhar Payment Bridge System

Controller General of Accounts

Central Sector/ Centrally Sponsored Scheme

Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme

Direct Benefit Transfer

Drawing & Disbursing Officer

District Project Management Unit

Expenditure Advance and Transfer

Expenditure Finance Committee

Employee Information System

Fund Transfer Order

Government electronic Payment Gateway
Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
Higher Administrative Grade

Issuer Identification Number

Implementing Agencies

Integrated Financial Management Information System
Junior Administrative Grade

Junior Time Scale

Mangement Information System

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarentee Scheme
National Automated Clearing House

National Rural Health Mission

National Electronic Fund Transfer

National information Centre

National Social Assistance Programme

National Payment Corporation of India

Oil Marketing Companies

On-Line Management, Monitoring and Accounting System
Pradhan Mantri AwaasYojna- Gramin
PratyakshHastantaritLabh

Pay Accounts Office

Pradhanmantri Gram Sadak Yojna
PradhanmantriMatru Vandana Yojna

Real Time Gross Settlement

Senior Administrative Grade

Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan

State Project Management Unit

Senior Time Scale

42


43

xl. Sr.AO/AO/AAO-Senior Accounts Officer/Accounts Officer/Assistant Accounts Officer
xli. TSA- Treasury Single Account
xii, UMANG- Unified Mobile Application for New-age Governance

43


44
CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2018-19) HELD ON 30 JANUARY, 2019.

The Committee sat on Wednesday the 30 January 2019 from 1145 hrs. to
1300 hrs. in Room No. “53", Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

Shri Gopal Shetty

2.
3.
4.
5. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
6. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
7. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

8. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
9. Shri C.M. Ramesh
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director

4. Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri V. Ravindran - Dy. CAG
2. Smt. Mamta Kundra - ADAI (CE)
3. Shri Deepak Anurag - DG

44


45

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE)

1. Shri Ajay Narayan Jha Finance Secretary & Secretary
(Expenditure)

2. Shri Pramod Kumar Das Additional Secretary

3. Ms. Annie George Mathew Joint Secretary (Pers.)

4. Ms. Meera Swaroop Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor

5. Shri Chittaranjan Dash Director (PF 1), DOE

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members and the

representatives of the Office of C&AG of India and apprised them that the meeting
was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure (DoE) on the subject ‘Implementation of Public Financial
Management System (PFMS)' based on Para No. 8.1 of Chapter VIII of the C&AG
Report No. 4 of 2018. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry were called in.

3. In his introductory remarks, the Hon'ble Chairperson raised various issues
including non- conformance of actual budgeting for the PFMS and year-to-year
phasing of expenditure with the plan approved by the Government; non adherence to
the line items prescribed in the proposal while booking expenditure by the Ministry of
Finance itself as all the expenditure was being booked under Normal Establishment
Heads; absence of framework for mapping the expenditure in respect of different
components viz. technology, human resources, infrastructure and office and training
etc, violation of the GFR Rules 8.1.3.1 of the Audit paras by not providing records
pertaining to the year-wise break up of expenditure which was presented to
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC); under-utilization or non-utilization of the
allotted funds leading to escalation of cost and cost overrun; non synchronization of
financial planning of the scheme with the plan prepared for the rollout of PFMS; low
expenditure against budget provision on all the components resulting in savings
ranging from 45 per cent to 75 per cent of the budget provision; slow progress in
development of own infrastructure for the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU);
non creation of infrastructure for either State Project Management Units (SPMUS) or

45


46

District Project Management Units (DPMUS); SPMUS functioning without necessary
supervisory level officers and technical support personnel and the process of staffing
related to DPMUs yet to commence; low frequency of Project Implementation
Committee(PIC) meetings depriving the project of policy guidance, strategic control
and necessary institutional framework ; trimming of PIC leading to lack of inputs from
experts in related fields; the role of PIC has neither been clearly laid out nor made
functional; PFMS did not provide an independent cross platform comparison of
related schemes reported under PFMS and Management Information System of
ministries; PFMS data could not provide comprehensive, transparent, objective
oriented information as envisaged by the Government and it could not subsume
scheme specific Management Information System (MIS); absence of any study to
identify areas of work at different offices that would be rendered redundant after
implementation of PFMS; no work-study to reassess staff requirements and costs
rationalization after implementation of PFMS which could lead to duplication of work
in accounting offices; and huge vacancies in the senior and middle level positions.

4. Hon'ble Chairperson felt that the present state of affairs indicated that the
Ministry was consistently ignoring follow-up of the progress of the project thereby
defeating the purpose of PFMS and, therefore, desired the Cabinet Secretary to look
into the implementation aspect to ensure optimal utilization of resources and the
achievement of intended purpose. Further, Hon'ble Chairperson desired the
Secretary, DoE to specifically, explain;

Absence of framework for mapping the expenditure made with components of
project;

i. Non-utilization and underutilization of allotted funds;

ii. Poor development of own infrastructure resulting in CPMU functioning from

iii. rental premises;

iv. Ineffective functioning of Project Implementation Committee;

v. Provision of inadequate staff resulting in Senior and Middle Level
positions remaining vacant;

vi. Review of direct benefit transfer payment and MGNREGA payments; and

vii.

Cost rationalisation and reassessment of staff requirement.

46


47

5. Thereafter, the representatives of Department of Expenditure (DoE)
introduced themselves. The Secretary, DoE briefed the Committee about the PFMS
and the improvements effected to achieve the objectives and make it into a real time
public finance information management system for bringing transparency and
accountability across different segments and tiers of Government. Subsequently,
representatives of Department of Expenditure made a Power Point presentation on
the subject to brief the Committee about the latest status of the follow-up remedial
action taken on the Audit findings by them.

6. Afterwards, Members sought clarifications on pertinent issues i.e. the extent
and manner in which Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) data has been integrated with
PFMS; latest status of the Central Direct Benefit Transfer enabled schemes ; number
of schemes covered under PFMS; whether PAHAL data linked to PFMS;: state wise
disbursal of amount under MGNREGA,; state wise percentage of synchronisation of
job cards and AADHAR with the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana; whether data
mapping between scheme administrating Ministries and PFMS has been done;
impact of the dissolution of the Planning Commission and constitution of NITI Aayog;
whether objective of preventing fund float and reducing interest burden achieved;
reach of DBT schemes in the Eastern part of our country vis-a-vis the Southern
States and vis a-vis the developed States and in the most backward Zillas and most
backward States; role of District Level Monitoring Units; details of additional tasks
added to the original system which necessitated extending the time period for
implementation of the PFMS; current status of bringing all the functionaries like
Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs), Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officers
(CDDOs) and Pay and Account Officers (PAOs) on PFMS platform; reasons for
delay in integrating all functionaries on the PFMS platform studied and remedial
actions taken; details of the monitoring mechanism devised by Ministry to ensure
adherence with budget provisions and improving expenditure efficiency on identified
components to ensure timely completion of the projects within the revised time
schedule, whether the Ministry has identified any specific areas where engagement
of domain experts from external source would be necessary to implement the PFMS:
steps taken for recruitment of permanent staff; efforts made to put in a robust
institutional framework in place to plan and monitor the Government expenditure;

47


48

efforts made to curb delays ; whether any training need analysis been done for
PFMS staff and PAO offices; whether training modules and schedules developed:
whether the effect of change in the role of the project implementation committees on
the implementation of projects analysed by the Ministry; whether the project
implementation committee have a clear term of reference; whether periodicity of
meetings of project implementation committees fixed; whether the PFMS would be
implemented fully by 2020; whether any external monitoring mechanism instituted to
ensure adherence to budgetary provision as well as compliance to right standards of
human resource allocation and technology development; whether any pre-budgetary
study conducted to rightly assess optimal budgetary allocation in the future; need to
set up a technology-strategic control group as envisaged in the DPR; reasons for not
setting up separate office infrastructure for SPMUs; whether any scientific method or
procedure adopted to assess the funds required to implement the project completely;
analysis of technological upgradation required for better monitoring and effective
implementation.

7. The Secretary, Department of Expenditure admitted that there were several
challenges relating to technology and governance being confronted from time to
time. He submitted that PFMS is presently integrated not only to Aadhar to the
maximum extent possible but also with the entire core banking structure of the
Reserve Bank of India, Public Sector Banks, Private Sector Banks, and Post Offices
and the State Governments. He stated that a system was in place to track funds right
down to the treasury level and the department was working on reaching the lowest
levels. Further, the PIC has been reconstituted and is headed by the Controller
General of Accounts and members are drawn from the related branches.

8. The Hon'ble Chairperson, in his closing remarks sought specific information
related to the MGNREGA Scheme. He desired to be apprised of the amount
released, so-far the state wise utilisation of the funds, pending bills of each State and
additional money required in accordance with the demand from the States, the
overall performance of the scheme and the hindrances in generating more
employment opportunities. He then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry for

48


49

appearing before the Committee and furnishing replies/information in connection with
the examination of the subject. He also asked them to furnish replies to queries
made and detailed information as sought by the Committee.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

49


50

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-
21) HELD ON 27TH OCTOBER, 2020.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27th October, 2020 from
1030 hrs. to 1240 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
. Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

N OO + WD

RAJYA SABHA

8. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

oO

. Shri Naresh Gujral
10. Shri C.M. Ramesh

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
1. Shri TG Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri MLK Raja - Director

3. Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja Additional Director

50


51

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri Girish Chander Murmu

2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani
3. Smt. Meenakshi Gupta
4. Smt. Shubha Kumar

5. Smt. Mahalakshmy Menon

6. Shri Deepak Anurag

1. XXXXX XXXXX
2. XXXXX XXXXX
3. XXXXX XXXXX
4. XXXXX XXXXX
REPRESENTATIVES FROM
OF EXPENDITURE)
1. Dr. T.V. Somanathan
2. Ms. Soma Roy Burman
3. Sh. Subodh Kumar Mathur
4. Ms. Annie George Mathew
5. Ms. Meera Swarup

6. S

h. Sajjan Singh Yadav

- CAG of India

- Dy.CAG (DefRail)

- Dy. CAG (CRA)

- Dy. CAG (Commercial)
- Dy.CAG (RC)

- DG (Coord.)

PART-1

XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

PART-II

THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPT.

- Secretary

- Controller General of Accounts

- Addl. CGA

- Addl. Secretary (Pers.)

- Addl. Secretary & Financial Adviser
(Finance)

- Joint Secretary (PF-States)

51


52

5. Hon'ble Chairperson, thereafter, apprised the Members of the Committee about
the next item on the agenda i.e. the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) (MOF-DoE) on the subject "Implementation of
Public Financial Management System (PFMS)" based on Chapter VIII (Para 8.1) of
C&AG Report No. 4 of 2018, and asked the officers of the C&AG of India to brief the
Committee on the subject. The Audit officers briefed the Committee on the observations
of the Audit on the subject and the specific areas that still remain unaddressed.

6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure)
(MOF--DoE)) were called in. In his introductory remarks, Hon'ble Chairperson asked the
representatives to brief the Committee on the steps taken by the Ministry to streamline
the Public Financial Management System (PFMS), details of the funds spent, adherence
to timelines, delivery of stated objectives as well as constraints being faced by the
Ministry in implementation of the system. He further drew attention of the witnesses for
maintaining confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.

7. The Secretary, MoF-DoE, briefed the Committee about the significant initiatives
taken by the Department to strengthen the Public Financial Management System
(PFMS). He further apprised the Committee that PFMS has been made an integral part
of Controller General of Accounts office with the approval of Finance Minister on 6th
September, 2019.

8. Hon'ble Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised certain issues viz.,
efforts made for linking of PAHAL, DBTL with PFMS; extent to which the objectives of
PFMS have been achieved till date; current status of integrating all processes and
functions of PFMS; time frame for designing and developing enhanced version of PEMS;
timeline for completion of integration of remaining DDOs with PFMS; measures taken to
address the issue of shortage of manpower; inclusion of Ministry of Law and Justice on
PFMS, CBIC and CBDT; status of constitution of District Project Monitoring Units
(DPMUS),; observed benefits of PFMS; functions that remain outside the purview of
PFMS; plan for integration of GSTIN and other IT information networks into PFMS;
roadmap for PEMS and its penetration into Central Government and State Governments;
design and evolution of PFMS; details of any audit done to ascertain the percentage of
the servers/hardware remaining functional at all times and after-sales contract with the

52


53

vendors, details of SPMUS functioning under PFMS and creation of DBT Monitoring
Cell.

9. The representatives of the Ministry replied to various queries raised by the
Members including efforts made for integration of PAHAL with PFMS; continuous
functioning of Pay and Accounts Offices during the Covid-19 pandemic; non-delivery of
38 servers worth Rs.10 crore during the lockdown (Covid-19 pandemic) as the major
teason for savings; all States and Union Territories with legislatures integrating their
treasuries with the PFMS; payments through PFMS for Covid-19 welfare programmes;
cash transfers made for the mid-day meal scheme through PFMS in lieu of meals being
provided by the States; effective and efficient utilization of the budget
allocations including speeding-up of procurement of hardware and software; role of
PFMS in plugging frauds and leakages; Receipts, Expenditure, Advances and
Transactions (REAT) module being used to trace the money released by a Ministry, etc.

10. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairperson, while directing the representatives of the
Ministry to submit written replies to unanswered queries within 15 days, thanked
them for expressing their views in a free and frank manner on the subject and the
Officials of the C&AG for assisting the Committee in their deliberations.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting
has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

53