92

FUNCTIONING OF RAILWAY MAIL
SERVICE AND ROAD TRANSPORT
NETWORK IN DEPARTMENT OF POST

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

NINETY- SECOND

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2322

NINETY SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

FUNCTIONING OF RAILWAY MAIL
SERVICE AND ROAD TRANSPORT
NETWORK IN DEPARTMENT OF POST

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (i)
INTRODUCTION (ii)
REPORT
PART- I
| 1 | Introductory 01
pu | RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE 01
na Audit Finding | ०७ |
A Excess payment of haulage charges due to improper | |
verification/inaction on claims raised by Railways
| B | Payment for sanctioned berths without verifying actual allotment 04
c Short allotment of berths as against sanctioned position | 05 |
कविता Payment made for full sections even after closure of part of the | |
sections
[ = | Excess Debit of haulage charges by RBI | 98 |
F Excess payment of Rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways 10
| ० | Payment of avoidable rent on vacant/ unutilized building 1
|! | Irregular payment of Service Tax/ GST on Rent paid to Ministry of 13
Railways
| 1! | Non Utilization of Dimensional Weighing System (DWS) 14
1४ MAIL SERVICES THROUGH ROAD TRANSPORT NETWORK (RTN) | 4 |
J Non-achievement of projected scheme objectives | 8 |
Non-setting up of Quality Monitoring Cell 18
PART - Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE | 20-32 |

APPENDICES

Minutes. of -the . Sitting -of Public: Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
18.07.2022

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
17.01.2024



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

© PM NOAAA YD

10.
. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

. Shri Jayant Sinha

14.

a a च
on =

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

ही ७ ७ =

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury -
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Dr. K. Laxman

Shri Derek 0' Brien*

Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT

Dr.Sanjeev Sharma -
Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja -
Shri Girdhari Lal -
Shri. Prakhar Prakash Anand” -

Chairperson

Joint Secretary

Director

Deputy Secretary

Assistant Committee Officer

* — Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.

(i)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety Second Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Railway Mail Service and Road
Transport Network in Department of Post’ based on Para No.3.2 of C&AG
Report 15 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of
Posts).

2. The C&AG Report No. 15 of 2022 was laid on the Table of the House
on 08.08.2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) on the subject matter
on 18" July, 2023.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted
the Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on
17.01.2024. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part- Il of the Report.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information in connection
with the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the

assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
477 January, 2024 Chairperson,
27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(ii)


1. INTRODUCTORY

This Report is based on Para 3.2 of C&AG Report No.15 of 2022 on the
subject, “Functioning of Railway Mail Service and Road Transport Network in

Department of Post”.

I. RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE

2. Railway Mail Service (RMS) constitutes the primary conduit employed by the
Department of Posts (DoP) for the conveyance and transmission of postal items
across the entire nation. As of March 2020, the DoP possessed 66 Departmental
RMS Vans and secured accommodations in 144 Trains to facilitate the transportation
of mail through the RMS. Among the 269 RMS sections, 39 sections operate within
Departmental RMS Vans, with the remaining 230 sections utilizing hired train
accommodations. In addition to leveraging the services of the Indian Railways, the
RMS wing has incorporated the Road Transport Network (RTN) since its introduction
in June 2013. The implementation of the Plan Scheme ‘Development of Road
Transport Network,’ sanctioned by the Postal Directorate, aimed to ensure the
secure transportation of parcels, particularly those related to e-commerce.
Furthermore, the DoP decided to utilize spare capacity within the RTN vans for
transporting speed post articles until the parcel business expanded.

3. The mail traffic volume handled by the Department from 2017 to 2020
indicates a notable decrease in un-registered mail, while registered mail and
premium products of the Postal Department maintained consistent business.
However, the overall business witnessed a decline from %634.61 crore in 2017-18 to
510.27 crore in 2019-20. Despite an overall reduction in expenditure on Mail
Services during this period, there was an increase in expenditure on RMS from %116

crore to 183 crore.
AUDIT FINDINGS
4. The RMS employs railway bogies, including both departmentally procured

postal .vans..and. hired. non-postal vans, for-its.mail-operations. The full-bogie postal
vans are attached to trains operating on specific routes. The Department of Posts


2

(DoP) compensates the Railways for haulage charges for both postal and non-postal
vans based on the actual services rendered by the Railways.

5. The Committee have also found that in January 2007, DoP issued instructions
to all Heads of Circles regarding the payment of haulage charges under the revised
system of berth displacement. These instructions outlined the shift from the seat
displacement system to the berth displacement system for calculating haulage
charges. Full bogies were to be treated as 72 berths in Broad Gauge (BG) and 64
berths in Meter Gauge (MG). Additionally, Railways continued to provide a rebate of

two percent on Capital Investment by DoP for postal vans.

6. In February 2007, DoP clarified the classes of mail vans for haulage charges,
categorizing payments into four slabs of berths: (i) 1-18, (ii) 19-36, (iii) 37-54, and (iv)
55-72. According to this categorization, DoP had to pay for the maximum number of
berths in a slab, even if the actual utilization was the minimum number of berths in
that slab. To reduce costs, DoP instructed the Circles to reassess the
accommodation requirements for all sections. Despite observations on excess
haulage charges in Para No. 2.4 of Report No. 21 of 2017, the Ministry, in their
Action Taken Note (ATN) in October 2017, stated that suitable instructions had been
issued to all concerned. However, audit findings reveal that the instructions issued

by DoP were not being adhered to, and deficiencies persist.

A. Excess __ payment __of haulage __ charges __due__to__ improper

verification/inaction on claims raised by Railways

7. Ministry in their background note stated that in order to streamline the process
of haulage payment in future, proposal for procedure of direct payment system after
validation of haulage bills by Department of Posts was sent to Railways vide letter
no. 03-01/2012-D Vol.II dated 17.11.2020 followed by repeated communications and
also Inter Ministerial meeting on 03.02.2022. After having received no reply, Railway
Board has been requested to direct the zonal railways to forward the haulage bills to
RBI after validation from DoP. All Postal Circles have also been instructed to send a
statement of.sectional.accommodation provided by the Railways,.to concerned zonal
railway to avoid instances of excess debit of haulage charges (Annexure 57).


3

Recently, another communication has been sent to Chairman Railway Board vide
D.O. letter no. 03-01/2012-D Vol. ॥ dated 10.07.2023.

8. When desired to know what decision was arrived at the Inter-Ministerial
meeting held on 03.02.2022 as regards the proposal for procedure of direct payment
system after validation of haulage bills by Department of Posts, the Ministry replied

as under:

“the said meeting was held on 24.08.2021 and no decision was arrived at in
this meeting.”

9. About the response of the Ministry of Railways to the request of the
Department of Post for directing the zonal railways to forward the haulage bills to
RBI after validation from DoP, the Ministry reply was as below:

“In its reply dated 06.10.2022 & 17.07.2023, Ministry of Railways had
communicated that the zonal railways have been directed to settle the excess
debits and a copy of the same was sent to Department of Posts. Railway has
further requested to DoP to advise postal Circles to re-verify the disputed
payments and coordinate with the zonal railways to resolve the disputes.
Instructions in this regard, have already been issued to Circles vide letter dated
20.07.2023 and are reiterated from time to time”.

10. Further, when enquired about the reasons for not pursuing the matter since
17.11.2020 by the Department and for taking it up again with the Railway Ministry
only after the meeting on the subject was fixed by the Public Accounts Committee,
the Department stated as under:

“The matter was consistently pursued with Railways vide communications
dated 23.02.2021, 01.04.2021, 19.05.2021, 29.09.2021, 17.11.2021,
05.01.2022, 07.02.2022, 23.06.2022, 31.08.2022 & 04.10.2022 & 10.07.2023.”

11. | Despite assurance in 2017 by the Department of Posts that they will validate
the haulage charges before paying the same to the Ministry of Railways, when
desired to know why there has been no visible progress with regard to the same, the

Ministry intimated as under:

“After assurance, all Circles were directed vide letter dated 22.09.2017 to take
up the issues of excess debited amounts with RBI(CAS) Nagpur for
adjustment. Later it was also decided to propose a direct payment system,
which was proposed to Railways vide Department's letter dated 17.11.2020
and followed up as mentioned in reply to para above.”


B. Payment for sanctioned berths without verifying actual allotment

12. Scrutiny of records of 22 Circles revealed that Railways had raised bills for
berths sanctioned instead of actual berths allotted in three Circles and the Circles
made the payments without verification of the claims, resulting in excess payment of
haulage charges of 12.15 crore. Ministry while accepting the audit observation
stated that (June 2021) the matter has been taken up by the Circles with Zonal
Railways concerned for recovery of excess payment. The fact is that the Postal units
made payments for the bills raised by Railways without verifying the berths actually

allotted, resulting in excess payment of haulage charges.

13. Ministry reported that out of three Circles, two Circles of Gujarat and
Telangana have adjusted the extra amount debited from their account except the
Odisha Circle. As per Ministry’s background note, Odisha Circle has submitted after
reconciliation that the actual excess debited amount is Rs. 8.4 Cr against reported
amount of Rs. 10.61 Cr. The excess debited amount has not been sanctioned by the

Circle and matter is being pursued with railways for adjustment of the same.

14. — In the line of further questioning, the Committee desired to be apprised as to
what was the current status of the adjustment of excess payment debited from
Odisha Circle after the matter was brought to the attention of respective zonal
railway. In this regard, the Committee were apprised as under:

“Odisha Circle has submitted after reconciliation that the actual excess
debited amount is Rs. 8.4 Cr against reported amount of Rs. 10.61 Cr. for the
period 04/17 to 02/2020). This amount of Rs. 8.4 Cr includes Rs. 4.26 Cr
pertaining to period 04/17 to 01/19, which has also been mentioned in audit
Para 3.2.3.5 and explained in detail in its reply. Calculation sheet provided by
the Circle is attached as Annexure C. The excess debited amount has not
been sanctioned by the Circle and matter is being pursued with Ministry of
Railways for adjustment of the same.”

15. While analysing the details on haulage charges, the Committee asked the
Ministry whether the zonal railways forward the details of actual railway berths
allotted/used while raising claims for Rail Mail Services (RMS). In this regard, the

Ministry stated as below:

“No. Sanctioned number of berths is mentioned in the bills. Requirement of
reconciliation arises when the actual number of berths allotted does not match
with the sanctioned number of berths mentioned in the bills also due to short
accommodation/ non-functioning of section/train. However, after reconciliation


by Postal Circles, some Zonal Railways get it adjusted, but not all of them.”

16. On being asked as to whether the excess payments were solely attributed to
the Railways raising bills for sanctioned berths, or whether there were other factors
contributing to the excess payment of haulage charges, the Ministry replied as under:

“Besides this, the excess debits may be attributed to other factors also such
as claims raised for closed/ non-functional sections/ trains, claims being made
by two zonal railways separately to two different postal Circles.”

17. | Further, upon the enquiry about the measures that are being implemented to
ensure that Postal Units verify the berths actually allotted/used before making
payments in the future, the Ministry stated as under:

“All Nodal postal Circles had been directed to share statement of sectional
‘accommodation every month with the concerned zonal Railway so that the
same may be considered before raising bills. As per their reply, the Railway
Board had also been requested to direct zonal Railways accordingly.”

18. On being asked as to whether the Ministry ascertained reasons for making
payments without verifying the actual berths allotted, the Ministry stated:

“In case of Odisha and Telangana Circles, the sanctions were issued only
after verifying the bills with actual records. In case of Gujarat Circle, the
excess payment was made due to oversight for the period from Apr’18 to
Dec'19. The excess paid amount has been recovered after identification of the
issue. From Jan’20, sanctions were issued for actual allotment only.”

Cc. Short allotment of berths as against sanctioned position

19. The Committee learnt that the sanction of berths for RMS by Railways is
based on the requirements projected by DoP. However, there were many instances
of short allotment of berths as against those sanctioned by Railways. In three out of
22 Circles, Audit observed that the short allotment for the period 2017-2020,
adversely affected the quality of service provided due to inadequate space. Ministry
stated (June 2021) that the cases of short accommodation provided have been
addressed to the Railways from time to time and requests have been made to Zonal
Railways by the Circles as well as by Directorate to Railway Board. However, the
fact remains that the short allotment adversely affected the quality of service

provided by the Department.

20. Ministry in its reply to audit finding that the short allotment adversely affected
the quality of service provided by the DoP, has said that sanctioned accommodation


6

is now being provided in the aforementioned circles/sections barring occasional

exceptions and no major instance of detention of mail has been reported.

21. Upon being further enquired whether the sanctioned accommodation is being
provided by the Railways in all the Circles across the country, the Ministry clarified
as under:

“They are provided with the sanctioned accommodation by the Railways in all
the circles across the country barring occasional exceptions.”

22. On being further asked how the DoP ensures quality of service in case of
short allotment of berths, the Ministry replied as under:

“Matter has been taken up with Railways for providing sanctioned
accommodation. It is further submitted that the sanctioned accommodation is
based on an average workload. The mail volume is affected by other factors
also such as a particular event, season (festival etc.) and may vary from time
to time. Hence, it may not always be the case that whenever the actual
accommodation deviates from sanctioned, the service is affected. At present,
the DoP has a well-developed Road Transport Network (RTN). To overcome
the instances of short accommodation in RMS sections, the left-over mail, if
any, is despatched through next immediate available mode i.e., RTN/Section,
as an immediate remedial action.”

D. Payment made for full sections even after closure of part of the sections

23. Audit scrutiny of records of Bihar Circle revealed that in two sections,
payments were made for full sections even though part of the sections were closed.
In RN-32 Section (Nagar Untari- Daltonganj-Gomo 460 KM) a portion of the section
viz., Daltonganj-Nagar Untari route was abolished with effect from 01 June 2015.
After abolition of said routes, the distance to and fro Gomo to Daltonganj came down
to 286 KMs. Despite this reduction in length of route, Railways continued to prefer
haulage charge bills based on the length of the earlier route. No action for
rectification was taken by the Postal Circle which ultimately resulted in excess debit
(up to March 2020) of haulage charges to the Department by RBI of %54.82 lakh.
The Circle operated two RMS sections H-26 (Sealdah to Sahibganj - 347 Km) and
DH-3 (Sahebganj to Mugalsarai/ Varanasi - 512/ 528 Km) which were in operation
for carrying of mails between Sealdah to Mughalsarai/ Varanasi. Section H-26 was
abolished/ discontinued by West Bengal Circle, Kolkata with effect from 01 July 2014
under intimation to Bihar Postal Circle. However, Railways continued to claim


7

haulage charges for Sealdah to Mughalsarai/ Varanasi despite discontinuation of
Section H-26 and the bills were paid by Bihar Postal Circle without taking into
consideration the reduction in length of the route. This also resulted in excess

payment of haulage charges by the Posts to the tune of 43.19 lakh.

24. Ministry replied that (June 2021) the matter is being taken up by Bihar Circle
with the Zonal Railways concerned for adjustment of excess amount paid in
subsequent bills or by crediting back through Director of Accounts (Postal).

25. Audit observed that the above instances are only based on test check and
more such cases cannot be ruled out. This indicates that the Department's internal
verification of the bills raised by Railways was inadequate and DoP needed to be
more alert to the claims raised by Railways by introducing internal checks and

internal audit on the claims raised.

26. Ministry reported that the Bihar Circle was the Nodal Circle for payment of
haulage charges in respect of section RN-32 and H-26. The amount of Rs.54.82 lakh
in respect of section RN-32 & Rs. 43.12 lakh in respect of section H-26 have been
adjusted through credit advice no. 7 & 8 dated 06.07.2023 by DA(P) Patna.

27, When asked why payments for haulage charges were made for full sections
(Nagar-Untari-Daltonganj-Gomo 460km) even though part of the sections (a portion
of the section viz., Daltonganj-Nagar Untari route) was closed with effect from
01.06.2015, the Ministry replied as under:

“The payment was made erroneously as the zonal railway continued raising
the bill for this section. However, the excess paid amount had been
recovered.”

28. On being asked as to whether the Ministry has issued directions to the Postal
Circles to rectify the excess debit of haulage charges after the reduction in length of
the route, the Ministry replied that directions had been issued vide DoP's letter no. 7-
1/2012-D (Pt) dated 17.08.2020.

29. Further when asked why the Bihar Circle continued to pay haulage charges
for the Sealdah to Mughalsarai/Varanasi route despite the discontinuation of Section
H-26, the Ministry stated as under:

“The payment was made erroneously as the zonal railway continued raising
~~ the bill for this section. HoWever, the excéss paid amount had been recovered.

30. On being asked what action has been taken by the Department of Posts to


8

improve its alertness and internal checks regarding the claims raised by Railways, it

replied as under:

“All operating Circles have been directed to share statement of sectional
accommodation every month with the concerned nodal payment Circle and all
Nodal postal Circles have been directed to share statement of sectional
accommodation every month with the concerned zonal railway so that the
same may be considered before raising bills. Railway Board has also been
requested to direct zonal Railways to raise debit advice only after verifying the
bills raised from the statement of sectional accommodation shared by Postal
Payment Circles.”

31. Since Audit is a test check, when asked whether the DoP has taken steps to
ensure that the excess haulage charges are not being paid for discontinued routes,
the Ministry in reply stated:
“With the resumption of trains since June’20 (unlock1.0), a limited number of
sections have been resumed and with the resumptions, all Circles were
directed to keep proper record of sections to ensure correctness of haulage
payments. Besides this, instructions were also issued to all Circles to seek

approval of Directorate for resumption of RMS sections, besides issuing
instructions to Circles as detailed in reply to Para above.”

E. Excess Debit of haulage charges by RBI

32. Audit observed that despite specific directions (September 2017), the practice
of RBI directly debiting DoP for Railway bills continued without validation of the bills
by DoP resulting in excess debit of 17.85 crore in five Circles alone. In Odisha and
UP Circle, it was also observed that monthly reconciliation meetings were not being
held regularly to discuss and reconcile the bills raised by the Railways.

33. On being asked why the reconciliation meetings between concerned
authorities of DoP and Railways were not held regularly in Odisha and UP Circles for
ironing out shortcomings noticed in bills raised by Railways, the Ministry replied as
under:
“Reconciliation meetings could not be held even after taking up the matter
with the Zonal Railways concerned on several occasions.”
34. Upon further enquiry whether reconciliation meetings were being held
tegularly to discuss and reconcile the bills raised by the Railways in all other Circles,

the Ministry replied.as under:


9

“Purpose of reconciliation meetings is to rectify the disputes/differences in
claimed and actual bills. Circles approach respective zonal Railways for
reconciliation/adjustments as and when required. Some zonal Railways
accept the adjustments in subsequent bills/ through contra debit to DoP
without any reconciliation meeting. However, reconciliation meetings could not
be held in several zones in spite of taking up the matter with the respective
zones.”

35. The Committee have found that the Ministry stated (June 2021) that in the
present system of payment of haulage charges, there was no provision of pre-
validation from the nodal payment circle concerned of the DoP and despite request
to RBI (CAS) Nagpur, the amount mentioned in the haulage bills raised by the Zonal
Railways were debited to the DoP. In respect of Bihar, Haryana and Gujrat Circles,
the excess amount debited by RBI Nagpur has since been credited back to the
Circle; while in case of Gujarat Circle, though the amount was credited back, it was
re-debited by Railways. In respect of Odisha Circle, =1.98 lakh has since been
adjusted and in respect of UP Circle, matter was being pursued with the Zonal
Railways. Ministry further stated that in order to avoid these circumstances and
streamline the process of haulage payment in future, proposal for adopting the
procedure of direct payment to Railways after validation of haulage bills by the
Department of Posts has been sent to Railways in November 2020 and added that
the matter was being pursued further.

36. About the present status on the proposal for adopting the procedure of direct
payment to Railways after validation of haulage bills by the Department of Posts, the

Ministry's response was as under:

“Acceptance of the proposal is still awaited from Railways. (Follow up
communications in this regard have been sent to Railways on dated
23.02.2021, 01.04.2021, 19.05.2021, 29.09.2021, 17.11.2021, 05.01.2022,
07.02.2022, 23.06.2022, 31.08.2022 & 04.10.2022 & 10.07.2023). However,
in its reply dated 06.10.2022 &17.07.2023, Railways had communicated that
the zonal Railways have been directed to settle the excess debits and a copy
of the same was sent to this Department. Railway has further requested this
Department to advise postal Circles to re-verify the disputed payments and
coordinate with the zonal railways to resolve the disputes. Instructions in this
regard, have been issued to Circles. “

37. The Audit observed that the DoPs instructions (September 2017) were
endorsed to RBI without any consultation with them on the pre-validation
requirement. This has not only ‘resulted in non-implementation of the assurance
given by DoP, but continuation of excess direct debits by RBI. Until the payment


10

system is changed as proposed by DoP, they need to ensure regular reconciliation
of the claims made by the Railways and raised on RBI directly, for adjustment of any

excess billing."

38. On being asked why DoP’s instructions (September 2017) were endorsed to
RBI without consultation, the Ministry replied as under:
“The instructions were issued to avoid/ recover excess debits for DoP through
RBI. Further it was submitted that RBI never objected to these instructions,

Moreover, instances had been experienced where the excess debited
amounts had been adjusted through RBI by issuing credit advice.”

39. About the steps DoP took to ensure regular reconciliation of claims made by
Railways for adjustment of any excess billing, the Ministry replied as under:

“Circles had been sensitized to regularly approach Railways to schedule
reconciliation meetings.”

F. Excess payment of Rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways

40. Audit scrutiny revealed that the DoP issued (May 2010) instruction for
calculation/ payment of license fee in respect of RMS buildings constructed under
deposit scheme as @ 6 per cent of market value of land annually to be revised every
five years. For RMS buildings owned by Railways, following were the revised rates of

interest charges
(i) @ 6 per cent on Capital invested after 01 April 1964
(ii) @ 4.5 per cent on Capital invested prior to 01 April 1964.

Railways, while re-iterating the rate of interest stated (January 2018) that the land
value, as prescribed by the Revenue Department of concerned state, can be taken
for fixation of rent annually and to be revised every five years. However, audit
noticed instances of incorrect computation of arrears of rent, untimely revision of rent
and wrong application of interest rates leading to excess payment of 21.53 crore.
The above are only illustrative cases and the DoP needs to internally audit all such
charges being billed by Railways and payments made by DoP on account of
buildings hired for RMS.

41. On further enquiry about the action been taken by the 007 to ensure that all
claims are checked before making payment, the Ministry stated:


11

“007 vide 0.0. dated 21.05.2021 and 0.0. dated 14.06.2023 had issued the
instructions to all the Circles to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS
buildings owned by Railways.”

42. On being asked whether the Department of Posts has conducted a
comprehensive internal audit of all charges billed by Railways and payments made
on account of buildings hired for RMS, the Department replied as below:
“All the Circles have been instructed vide D.O. dated 24.07.2023 to carry out
comprehensive internal audit of all charges billed by Railways and payments
made on account of buildings hired for RMS. Tamil Nadu Circle has started

comprehensive internal audit of all charges billed by Railways and payments
made on account of buildings hired for RMS.”

43. In the Background Note, the Ministry stated that in respect of Tamil Nadu
Circle, with regard to excess payment of Rs. 1.31 Cr, Railways has informed that
revision of rent is under review in Railway Board and the outcome will be intimated.
Concerned RMS Divisions are liasoning with the Railway Authority to update the
status of the same for further necessary action and to adjust the excess amount paid
in future bills.
44, When desired to ascertain since when the issue of rent revision is under
review in Railway Board and efforts made to settle it, the Ministry replied as under:
“Chennai Division Southern Railway intimated on 08.12.2021 that revision of

Licence fee was under review in the Headquarters and Railway was last
reminded on 24.08.2023 in this regard.”

45. It is noted that in respect of Punjab Circle, Circle has informed that matter has
been taken up with Railways authority for recovery/refund of excess payment made
and in case, the refund is not made by the railways in due course then it will be
adjusted in the next bills generated and submitted by Railways.

46. On being further asked whether the excess amount has been refunded by the
Railways to the Punjab Circle, the Ministry stated as under:

“Punjab Circle had informed that the excess amount would be recovered/
adjusted in the next bills that will be issued by Railway authorities.”

G. Payment of avoidable rent on vacant/ unutilized building

47. The Committee have learnt that Audit pointed out that to ensure economy, it is
prudent to surrender a rented building/ excess space occupied than justified, when


12

not in use. However, instances of delays in surrender of rented building/ excess
space than justified were noticed due to lack of due diligence, which resulted in
payment of avoidable rent of %72.17 lakhs for vacant/ unutilised buildings in six
Circles. Ministry accepted (June 2021) the issues raised by Audit except for UP and
Kerala Circles. Regarding Uttar Pradesh Circle, Ministry replied that the old building
of O/o Senior Record Officer, Agra was in possession of the Department since the
building was required for operational purpose. The reply is not acceptable, as the
building was vacated in 2015 itself but no effective action was taken immediately to
surrender the building thereafter. Regarding Kerala Circle, Ministry added that the
carpet area of Kollam RMS office was 3,314 sqft. and the same area was required
for the proper functioning of the office. The reply is not acceptable as the justified
area as per SSRM record was 2,182 sqft whereas 3,969 sqft area was being billed

for the building.

48. In respect of Tamil Nadu Circle, with respect to avoidable payment of Rs.
24.29 lakh, Tamil Nadu Circle has reported the dispute raised by Railways for

payment of licence fee is under settlement.

49. Furnishing the details of the dispute raised by Railways for the payment of

Licence fee, the Ministry submitted:

“Charging of the additional 3% for the First floor is not applicable for the
building constructed by DoP on Railway land under deposit scheme.
However, Railways billed the department for the first floor also in respect of
Tambaram RMS building constructed under deposit scheme. Excess payment
made in this regard till 2018-19 has been adjusted. As regards paying rent for
vacant space is concerned, Railways intimated on 16.10.2019 that Tambaram
RMS building is in dilapidated condition and hence unfit for further use and
therefore earmarked for condemnation. As per Railway Board letter. No. 73/W
2 13/8 dated 02.02.1979, Railways has the option to acquire the building at
any time by payment of the depreciated cost of the building in accordance
with the Railways rules allowing for depreciation @ 1/65. Railways was
requested to intimate the depreciation value and consent to take over the
building vide Circle Office letter No. BDG/16-3/TBM/16/pt dated 17th Aug &
11th Sep, 20th Nov 2020 & O8th Jan’21. Railways vide letter
No.M/W.93/Bldgs/Rent/RMS/ ४०1.॥॥ dated 090 Nov 2020 has intimated that
Railways Board letter NO.73/W 2/3/8 dated 02nd Feb 1979 will not be
applicable’ in this case, since Railways is not in need to acquire the building.
Keys were not accepted by the Railways. Then RMS building keys was sent
to Assistant Divisional Engineer by Airmail sorting Division through registered
post. .with Acknowledgement Due on 25.10.2022. The keys were.
acknowledged by ADEN Tambaram vide letter dated 09.11.2022.”


13

50. As regards the reasons for delays in surrendering the rented buildings/excess

space when not in use, the Ministry replied as below:

“After introduction of IT Modernization Project, the nature of mail processing
work has changed and more space was required for different activities
envisaged as part of Parcel Network Optimization Project. In one of the
Circles, the extra time was taken to shift/utilize the serviceable items and to
auction the unserviceable items. Notwithstanding this, instructions have been
issued to all the Circles by the Postal Directorate vide letter dated 30.9.2022
to review space requirement in Railways properties occupied by Postal
department and ensure timely vacation of vacant/extra space to ensure
economy in RMS operations.”

H. Irreqular_payment_of Service Tax/ GST on Rent paid to Ministry of

Railways
51. The Committee have learnt that MoF instructions (December 2016) stipulate

that the services provided by Indian Railways to DoP are not leviable to service tax,
as both the departments are arms of Central Government. Further, MoF instructions
(June 2017) stipulates that the services provided by the Central Government, State
Government, Union territory or local authority to another Central Government, State
Government, Union territory or local authority are exempted from payment of Goods
and Service Tax (GST). DoP also clarified (March 2019) the position to its Circles
that GST is not applicable on licence fee to be paid to Ministry of Railways for the
properties rented for RMS Office. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that in seven
Circles, Railways billed GST along with rent and DoP paid %3.46 crore without

verification of claims.

52. The Committee are aware that Ministry accepted the facts and stated (June
2021) that the concerned Circles had been instructed in May 2021 to take remedial
steps to ensure that payment of GST/ Service Tax are not made in future. However,
the Ministry remained silent regarding refund/ adjustment of GST already paid.

53. When enquired about the steps that may have been taken to ensure that

payment of GST/ Service Tax are not made in future without verification of claims,
the Ministry replied as under:

“DoP vide D.O. dated 21.05.2021 and D.O. dated 14.06.2023 had issued the

ae instructions-to all-the-Gircles that: Circles-should:device 8 proper- procedure to

avoid recurrence of cases of irregular payment of Service Tax/GST on rent
paid to Ministry of Railways.”


14

54, | Upon enquiry about the stance of the Ministry on the refund or adjustment of
the GST already paid by DoP, the Ministry stated as under:

“The amount of taxes paid by the DoP should preferably be refunded by
Railways failing which it should be adjusted in future bills by the Railways.”

1. Non Utilization of Dimensional Weighing System (DWS)

55. Audit pointed out that the Dimensional Weighing System (DWS) procured by
DoP, was not found integrated with the CSI software and hence could not be utilised
in five Circles resulting in infructuous expenditure of %4.44 crore. Similarly,
procurement of Mail Hardware without assessing the required specifications resulted

in wasteful expenditure of 76.39 lakh.

56. On being asked why the DWS was not integrated with the CSI software in five

Circles, the response of the Ministry was as under:

“Dimensional weighment system (DWS) installed at Vijayawada, Hyderabad,
Lucknow and Jaipur Parcel Hub had been integrated with Core Systems
Integration (CSI) and DWS installed at e-Commerce centre, Kolkata had since
been repaired and integration with Core Systems Integration (CSI) will be
completed shortly.”

57. On being asked about the reasons for procuring Mail Hardware without proper

assessment of required specifications, the Ministry replied as below:
“Mail Operations Hardware (MOH) a part of IT Modernization Project of
Department of Posts, assessed the requirement of Tag Printer/Barcode
Printers/Barcode Scanners according to the requirements for the introduction
of functionality. The functionality of Tag Printer/Barcode Printers/Barcode
Scanners got delayed due to delay in the development of
software. Functionality for generation of redesigned bag labels through
system has now been made available and all Tag Printer/Barcode

Printers/Barcode Scanners procured for the purpose are fully utilized by the
circles.”

IV. MAIL SERVICES THROUGH ROAD TRANSPORT NETWORK (RTN)

58. The Committee learnt that the Department of Posts (007) devised a proposal
during the 12th Plan (2012-2017) titled "Development of Road Transport Network"
aimed at facilitating the. carriage-of. parcels. along designated routes..The sanctioned .
budget for the scheme was %35 crore, approved in June 2013. Additionally, the plan



15

was extended for the subsequent period from 2017-18 to 2019-20, post the 12th
Plan.

The objectives of the Road Transport Network (RTN) Scheme were threefold:

i) Establishing a secure and reliable system for parcel transportation to tap

into the opportunities arising from the growth of e-commerce in India.

ii) Developing a dependable and expeditious road transport mechanism for
parcel delivery on intercity routes situated in the outskirts of metropolitan and

other cities.

iii) Enhancing service quality by ensuring time-definite delivery of parcels to

customers.

59. Further they learnt that upon approval of the scheme in June 2013, it was
anticipated that its implementation would result in additional parcel traffic and
revenue for DoP. The projected growth rate for new parcel traffic was set at 25
percent annually from 2012 to 2017. To leverage spare capacity in the proposed
RTN vehicles, DoP opted to transport speed post articles until the parcel business
expanded. The Department chose to adopt an outsourced model for road
transportation, selecting service providers/vendors through the standard tender
process in accordance with relevant Department rules. It was also stipulated that
service providers must equip their vehicles with a Global Positioning System (GPS)
to enable effective supervision by DoP over vehicle movements.

60. The project envisioned the establishment of a Quality Monitoring Cell (QMC)
at the Directorate level within DoP. This cell, staffed by hired personnel, would be
responsible for daily monitoring, the development and maintenance of new
applications if necessary, and the creation of Management Information Systems

(MIS) and monitoring systems.

J. Non-achievement of projected scheme objectives

61. . Audit noticed that DoP approved 54 RTN routes in 18 Circles during the
period from 2013-14 to 2016-17 and: of this, 43 routes in 16 Circles were made
operational between 2014-15 and 2016-17. Out of the 43 routes, six routes were
closed during the original scheme period (up to March 2017) due to various reasons”

such as non-improvement in service quality by providing time definite delivery of


16

parcels and speed post articles and poor growth in e-commerce parcels. Further 19
new RTN routes were approved by DoP, during the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20
(post-12th Plan) and out of these, eleven routes were made operational, however,

one route was closed during this period.

62.

The Committee found that in the Audit report, it is mentioned that between

2018-20, the traffic of RTN routes was less than a crore while the expenditure on the
same was in excess of Rs.10 crore every year. In the view of the above fact, the
Committee desired to know why the DoP had commissioned RTN vehicles on routes

which were not feasible and resulted in a net outgo. The Ministry replied as follow:

63.

“RTN is one of the modes of transport utilized by the Department of Posts for
transmission of mail and parcels and therefore has no direct connection with
generation of revenue. The objective of the RTN scheme is to provide
necessary infrastructure for safe and secure transmission of parcels and to
handle expected parcel volume to ensure higher growth in parcel revenue.
RTN are being utilized to the maximum extent possible and have ensured to
ensure safety and security of parcels. Some of the routes have also been
discontinued after review by the Circles concerned. Parcel revenue of the
Department grew by 47% in 2022-23 on account of improved operational
efficiency and security. “

On being enquired whether any financial losses were incurred by the Circles

due to closure of total seven routes out of 73 RTN routes approved, during the
period 2014-20, the Ministry responded as under:

64.

“Department is following a multimodal approach for transmission of mail and
parcel through air, railways and road transport depending on the suitability of
the connectivity in terms of delivery advantage.Further, deployment of RTNs
is an operational necessity. Wherever there was shortage of space in RMS
sections and timings were not suitable for expedited delivery of mail and
parcel at the destination, Road Transport Network was made operational on
those routes.The impact of operationalization of RTNs and infrastructure
created can be seen in the parcel traffic figures of the last three financial
years. An increase of 57% in parcel traffic has been noted from 2020-21 to
2022-23. (344.33 lakhs parcels in 2020-21 to 540.71 lakhs parcels in 2022-23)
Presently the RTN comprises 74 routes (to and fro, 37*2=74) which are
utilized efficiently, to the extent of 80% capacity average load on a daily basis
and on certain routes it is 100%.”

Audit scrutiny of parcel traffic handled through Express Parcel/ Business

Parcel during the years 2014-15 to 2019-20 revealed that the expected growth in
parcel traffic was not achieved by the DoP as against the expected growth of 25 per


7

cent per annum and in fact; it reduced considerably in terms of volume during the
period 2016-17 to 2019-20.

65.

On being asked about the reasons for the reported dismal performance of

parcel traffic handling as against the expected 25 percent growth rate per annum,

the Ministry's response is as below:

66.

“In the period 2016-17 to 2019-20, Department was in the process of setting
up separate infrastructure i.e. Parcel Processing hubs, Nodal Delivery centres
and RTNs to capture a sizable business of the Courier Express and Parcel
market. Before 2016-17, parcel was being handled in the same facility as that
of mails and therefore exclusive focus could not be given to parcel business
which was growing exponentially in the domestic market. Ever since April
2018, when Parcel Directorate was set up, 190 Processing hubs and 198
Nodal delivery centres have been set up across the country for exclusive
handling and delivery of parcels. 74 RTNs have been operationalized for safe
and secure transmission of parcels. As a result, parcel traffic in the last three
years has shown a healthy increase of 57% (344.33 lakhs parcels in 2020-21
to 540.71 lakhs parcels in 2022-23)”

Further, the Ministry was asked what actions have they taken to ascertain the

reasons for the considerable reduction in parcel traffic volume from 2016-17 to 2019-

20 to which the reply furnished, is as under:

“... lack of infrastructure to handle huge volume of parcels and non-availability
of dedicated RTN were the main reasons for parcel traffic not picking up.
However, as explained earlier, with the setting up of separate infrastructure for
parcel processing and delivery and operationalization of dedicated RTNs,
parcel traffic has shown a steady growth during the past few years.

Parcel traffic figures from 2018-19 are detailed as under:

Financial year Parcel traffic Percentage growth
(fig. in lakhs)

2018-19 270.51 | |

2019-20 309.06 14.25

2020-21 344.33 11.41

2021-22 368.65 7.06

2022-23 540.71 46.67



18

67. Audit observed that though expenditure on RTN was exhausted in full during
the years up to 2017-18 and 007 incurred total expenditure of 57.72 crore at the
end of FY 20, the expected growth of 25 per cent per annum in the parcel traffic as
projected in the plan scheme, did not materialise. On the contrary there was a
considerable declining trend in parcel traffic over the last three years. DoP needs to
explore alternate means of transportation to reduce the operating expenses, in cases
of non-availability of sufficient parcel mail instead of hiring full vehicles for RTN

services.

68. When sought to know about the measures including exploration of alternate
means of transportation, that have been taken by the Ministry to reduce operating
expenses in cases of non-availability of sufficient parcel mail instead of hiring full

vehicles for RTN services, the Ministry's response is as below:

“The RTNs were introduced in the Department on limited routes in addition to
the other modes of transmission of mails such as Railways and Air. At present
Department has deployed RTN on 74 routes with carrying capacity of 447
tonnes and covering around 56000 kms on a daily basis. These RTN routes
are utilized to the extent of 80% capacity load on a daily basis average and
also to an extent of 100% on some routes. The impact of this all-India network
is visible in parcel traffic and revenue figures.

Financial Parcel Parcel
year traffic revenue (in
(fig. in} Cr.)
lakhs)
2020-21 344,33 416.52
2021-22 368.65 500.98
2022-23 540.71 620.01

K. Non-setting up of Quality Monitoring Cell

69. Audit scrutiny of records revealed that DoP did not set up QMC centrally at
Directorate level and also did not ensure the setting up of these Centres in the Hub
cities. In the absence of QMC, day-to-day monitoring, development and maintenance
of new applications where required, development and maintenance of MIS and

monitoring systems were not achieved.


19

70. On being asked why DoP failed to set up the QMC centrally at the Directorate
level as well as in Hub cities as enshrined in the scheme proposal submitted by the
DoP, the Ministry replied as under: ह
“Since there were only few RTN routes in various Circles, the magnitude of
monitoring did not warrant setting up a dedicated QMC at that stage. But,
monitoring of RTNs was duly done by mails division of the Postal Directorate,
Circle office, Regional office and Postal Division.”
71. About the steps taken/ proposed to be taken for ensuring setting up of the
QWC at the required levels, the Ministry stated as follows:

“A Mail Monitoring Unit had been set up at the Postal Directorate, Circle,
Region and Division level by an order issued dated 21.06.2023. The said unit
will monitor among other thing, the efficiency of RTN network. A web-based
dashboard had also been created to monitor capacity utilization, time
schedule and discrepancy, if any, on each RTN route.”

72. Ministry while agreeing with the audit contention, replied (June 2021) that the
setting up of QMC was not a mandatory component and was contingent upon the

emerging operational requirement with respect to the project.

73. — In this regard when asked how the day-to-day monitoring, development and
maintenance of new applications was ensured in circles, the reply of the Ministry was

as under:

“Since there were only few RTN routes in various Circles, monitoring of these
RTNs was duly done by mails division of Postal Directorate, Circle office,
Regional office and Postal Division. Not only RTN but development and
maintenance of all the other applications of the Department was ensured by
mails division team at Postal Directorate, Circle office, Regional office and
Postal Division.”

74. As regard the justification of leaving the review of operations of RTN to the
Circles instead of acknowledging the benefits of setting up of a Quality Monitoring
Cell (QMC) for the project at the Directorate / Hub level, the Ministry's comment was

as below:

“Department acknowledges the benefit of a dedicated monitoring unit and acc
ordingly has set up a Mail Monitoring Unit (MMU) at Postal Directorate, Circle
office, Regional office and Postal Division level by an order issued dated 21.0
6.2023. MMUs will monitor issues pertaining to Mail and Parcel operations
in first mile (booking of parcels), second mile (processing and transmissio
n)-and last mile (delivery of parcels). Task of MMU’is also to monitor‘amon’:
g other thing, the efficiency of RTN network.”


20
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTORY

Consequent to the sifting of all the material and information — mainly
from the written depositions - available before the Committee, they have come
to certain observations and recommendations which are contained in the

succeeding paragraphs of this part of the Report.

The Committee find that the Railway Mail Service (RMS) constitutes the
primary conduit employed by the Department of Posts (DoP) for the
conveyance and transmission of postal items across the country. As of March
2020, the DoP possessed 66 Departmental RMS Vans and secured
accommodation in 144 Trains to facilitate the transportation of mail through
the RMS. Among the 269 RMS sections, 39 sections operate within
Departmental RMS Vans, with the remaining 230 sections utilizing hired train
accommodation. In addition to leveraging the services of the Indian Railways,
the RMS wing has incorporated the Road Transport Network (RTN) since June
2013. The Committee note that the mail traffic volume handled by the
Department from 2017 to 2020 indicated a notable decrease in un-registered
mail, while registered mail and premium products of the Postal Department
maintained consistent business. However, the overall business witnessed a
decline from %634.61 crore in 2017-18 to 510.27 crore in 2019-20. Despite an
overall reduction in expenditure on Mail Services during this period, there was
an increase in expenditure on RMS from 2116 crore to €183 crore. The issues
contained in the Audit Report have been examined in-depth by the Committee

and commented upon suitably.

1. RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE

1. Payment for sanctioned berths without verifying actual allotment

According to Audit, scrutiny of records revealed that Railways had
raised bills for berths sanctioned instead of actual berths allotted in three
Circles and that the payments were made without verification of the claims,

resulting in excess payment of haulage charges of %12.15 crore. The


21

Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that two Circles of Gujarat and
Telangana have adjusted the extra amount debited from their account and
Odisha Circle has submitted, after reconciliation, that the actual excess
debited amount is Rs. 8.4 Cr against reported amount of Rs. 10.61 Cr. The
excess debited amount has not been sanctioned by the Circle and matter is
being pursued with railways for adjustment of the same. Explaining reasons
for making payments without verifying the actual berths allotted, the Ministry
stated that in case of Gujarat Circle, the excess payment was made due to
oversight for the period from Apr’18 to Dec’19. The excess paid amount has
since been recovered after identification of the issue and from Jan’20, and
sanctions were issued for actual allotment only. To ensure that Postal Units
verify the berths actually allotted/used before making payments in the future,
the Ministry stated that all Nodal postal Circles have been directed to share
statement of sectional accommodation every month with the concerned zonal
Railway so that the same may be considered before raising bills. The Railway
Board has also been requested to direct zonal Railways accordingly. While
noting that all the three circles have either adjusted the extra amount or
initiated action for recovery of excess amount debited from their account, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of amounts debited and
recoveries made by each of the three circles. The Committee desire that
appropriate checks may be put in place to ensure that before raising bills,
statement of sectional accommodation is invariably shared every month with
the concerned zonal Railway and verified scrupulously. The Committee while
taking note of instances of claims raised for closed/ non-functional sections/
trains, have also observed that there have been occasions of claims being
made by two zonal railways separately to two different postal Circles. The
Committee recommend that appropriate mechanism should also be devised to
address such issues by introducing inbuilt verification processes to avoid

future discrepancies in billing and payment.

2. Short allotment of berths as against sanctioned position

The Committee note that the sanction of berths for RMS by Railways is
“based on the requirements projected by DoP. However, there have been
several instances of short allotment of berths as against those sanctioned by


22

Railways. In three Circles, Audit observed that the short allotment for the
period 2017-2020, adversely affected the quality of service provided due to
inadequate space. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the cases of
short accommodation provided have been addressed to the Railways from
time to time and requests made in this regard to Zonal Railways by the Circles
as well as by Directorate to Railway Board. Further, the Ministry updated that
they are provided with the sanctioned accommodation by the Railways in all
the circles across the country barring occasional exceptions. The mail volume
is affected by other factors also such as a particular event, season (festival
etc.) and may vary from time to time. Hence, it may not always be the case that
whenever the actual accommodation deviates from sanctioned position, the
service is affected as the DoP has a well-developed Road Transport Network
(RTN). The Committee while noting that to overcome the instances of short
accommodation in RMS sections, the left-over mail, if any, is despatched
through next immediate available mode i.e., RTN/Section desire to be apprised
of the quantum of the left over mail sent through RTN/ Section in each of the
circles during last three years and the resultant additional expenditure
incurred in each of these circles. Further, the Committee also desire to be
apprised of the mechanism put in place for according priority to the mail to be
sent/ treated as leftover mail in case of short accommodation provided by the
Railways and delays, if any, that may have occurred in delivering mail due to

inadequate space.

3. -Payment_made_for full sections even after closure of part of the

sections

The Committee find that the scrutiny of records of Bihar Circle, as test
checked by Audit revealed that in two sections, payments were made for full
sections even though part of the sections were closed. After abolition of RN-32
Section (Nagar Untari-Daltonganj-Gomo 460 KM) a portion of the section viz.,
Daltonganj-Nagar Untari route was abolished with effect from 01 June 2015.
Consequently, the to and fro distance from Gomo to Daltonganj came down to
286 KMs. However, Railways continued to prefer haulage charge bills based on
the length of the earlier routé. No action for réctification was taken by the
Postal Circle resulting in excess payment of $54.82 lakh. Further, Section H-26


23

(Sealdah to Sahibganj - 347 Km) was abolished/ discontinued by West Bengal
Circle, Kolkata with effect from 01 July 2014 under intimation to Bihar Postal
Circle. However, Railways continued to claim haulage charges for Sealdah to
Mughalsarai/ Varanasi and the bills were paid by Bihar Postal Circle without
taking into consideration the reduction in length of the route resulting in
excess payment of haulage charges by the Posts to the tune of %43.19 lakh.
The Ministry in their reply have stated that the payment was made erroneously
as the zonal railway continued raising the bills for this section. As a remedial
measure, the Ministry reported that the amount of Rs.54.82 lakh in respect of
section RN-32 & Rs. 43.12 lakh in respect of section H-26 have since been
adjusted through credit advice. In the light of the fact that the audit
observation was based on a test check and also to ensure that the excess
haulage charges are not being paid for discontinued routes, all Circles were
directed to keep proper record of sections to ensure correctness of haulage
payments. In addition, instructions have also been issued to all Circles to seek
approval of Directorate for resumption of RMS sections. Here, the Committee
opine that due to inadequate internal checks, the significant lapses in the
verification and payment processes related to haulage charges in Bihar Circle
resulted in excess payments. Therefore, the Committee in no uncertain words
recommend that the Ministry should put in place a stronger internal
verification mechanism within the Department of Posts to ensure accurate and
timely identification of changes in operational routes, their discontinuation, or
closure. The Committee also recommend that the internal audit team
responsible for regularly reviewing and verifying payment records should also
be duly sensitized to be more careful with a view to ensuring non-recurrence

of instances of erroneous haulage charge payments in future.

4, -Excess Debit of haulage charges

The Committee note that despite DOP’s specific directions (September
2017), the practice of RBI directly debiting DoP for Railway bills continued
without validation of the bills by DoP resulting in excess debit of 17.85 crore
in five Circles namely Bihar, Haryana, Gujarat, Odisha, and UP alone. In this
“regard, the Ministry stated (June 2021) that in the’present system of payment
of haulage charges, there was no provision of pre-validation from the nodal


24

payment circle concerned of the DoP and despite the request made to RBI
(CAS) Nagpur, the amount mentioned in the haulage bills raised by the Zonal
Railways was debited to the DoP. The Ministry added that in respect of Bihar,
Haryana and Gujarat Circles, the excess amount debited by RBI Nagpur has
since been credited back to the Circle; while in case of Gujarat Circle, though
the amount was credited back, it was re-debited by Railways. In respect of
Odisha Circle, 1.98 lakh has since been adjusted and in respect of UP Circle,
matter was being pursued with the Zonal Railways. The Ministry further stated
that in order to avoid such notable circumstances and streamline the process
of haulage payment in future, a proposal for adopting the procedure of direct
payment to Railways after validation of haulage bills by the Department of
Posts has been sent to Railways in November 2020 and the matter was being
pursued further. The Committee note that despite the request made to RBI
(CAS) Nagpur, the amount mentioned in the haulage bills raised by the Zonal
Railways was debited to the DoP. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the further action taken by the DOP to take up the matter of excess debit in
respect of Gujarat and UP Circle and details of amount credited to each of the

circles by the RBI.

5. Excess payment __of _haulage__ charges __due__to__ improper
verification/inaction on claims raised by Railways:

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that in order to
streamline the process of haulage payment in future, proposal for procedure
of direct payment system after validation of haulage bills by Department of
Posts was sent to Railways on 17.11.2020 and the matter was consistently
pursued with Railways besides being taken up during Inter Ministerial meeting
on 03.02.2022. Further, another communication has been sent to Chairman,
Railway Board on 10.07.2023 in this regard. The Committee note from the reply
of DoP that the Ministry of Railways, in response, has directed zonal railways
to settle the excess debits and has further requested DoP to advise postal
Circles to re-verify the disputed payments and coordinate with the zonal
railways to resolve the disputes. The DoP added that instructions in this
-regard have already been issued to Circles and. are reiterated from time to. .
time. Nevertheless, the Committee find that the instructions issued by DoP are

not being adhered to, and deficiencies continue to persist. Issues of excess


25

debits by Railways being continuing since 2017, the Committee are
disappointed that no concrete action has been taken in the matter by DoP. The
Committee also note that the Ministry of Railways has been silent over the
proposal on direct payment system, sent by the DoP on 17.11.2020. In light of
the long pending issues of settlement of excess debits of haulage charges
between the Ministry of Railways and Department of Posts, the Committee are
of the considered view that the proposed direct payment system should be
considered and finalized urgently to ensure that the process of haulage
payment gets streamlined, The Committee, therefore, while seeking a status
note on the outcome of the action taken by the Railways to resolve the dispute
of excess debits, recommend that both Departments should take earnest
efforts to resolve the issues so that the system of charging correct amount of
haulage after validation by DOP may be ensured. In light of audit revelation
that the instructions issued by DoP are not being adhered to, and deficiencies
persist, the Committee in no unequivocal terms recommend that the 007
should conduct a thorough review of its internal compliance mechanism with a
view to ensuring that instructions issued are implemented across all Circles in
letter and spirit.

6. The Committee note that in Odisha and UP Circle, monthly reconciliation
meetings are not being held regularly to discuss and reconcile the bills raised
by the Railways. In this regard, the Ministry have inter alia replied that purpose
of reconciliation meetings is to rectify the disputes/differences in claimed and
actual bills. Circles approach respective zonal Railways for
reconciliation/adjustments as and when required. Some zonal Railways accept
the adjustments in subsequent bills/ through contra debit to DoP without any
reconciliation meeting. However, reconciliation meetings could not be held in
several zones in spite of the matter being taken up with the respective zones.
To ensure regular reconciliation of claims made by Railways for adjustment of
any excess billing, the Ministry have, in reply, stated that the Circles have been
sensitized to regularly approach Railways to schedule reconciliation meetings.
The Committee while noting that the reconciliation meetings could not be held
in several zones in spite of the matter being taken up with the respective zones

...recammend.the DOP to be proactive in its approach. The matter of reconciling -

the bills of haulage charges raised by the Railways should be vigorously


26

pursued and reconciliation meetings with the Ministry of Railways/ Zonal
Railways invariably held on monthly basis. The steps initiated in this regard be

intimated to the Committee at the earliest.

7. Excess payment of Rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the DoP issued (May 2010) instruction for
calculation/ payment of license fee in respect of RMS buildings constructed
under deposit scheme @ 6 per cent of market value of land annually to be
revised every five years. For RMS buildings owned by Railways, the revised
rates of interest charges were @ 6 per cent on Capital invested after 01 April
1964 and @ 4.5 per cent on Capital invested prior to 01 April 1964. Railways,
while re-iterating the rate of interest stated (January 2018) that the land value,
as prescribed by the Revenue Department of concerned state, can be taken for
fixation of rent annually and to be revised every five years. However, audit
noticed instances of incorrect computation of arrears of rent, untimely revision
of rent and wrong application of interest rates leading to excess payment of
%1.53 crore. To ensure that all claims are checked before making payment, the
Ministry in their reply have stated that DoP had issued instructions to all the
Circles to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways.
The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that all the Circles
have been instructed to conduct a comprehensive internal audit of all charges
billed by Railways and payments made on account of buildings hired for RMS,
and that the Tamil Nadu Circle has started the same. In respect of Tamil Nadu
Circle, the Ministry stated that with regard to excess payment of Rs. 1.31 Cr,
Railways have informed that revision of rent is under review in Railway Board
and the outcome will be intimated. Concerned RMS Divisions are liasioning
with the Railway Authorities to update the status of the same for further
necessary action and to adjust the excess amount paid in future bills. The
Ministry further stated that Punjab Circle had informed that the excess amount

" would be recovered/ adjusted in the next bills that will be issued by Railway
authorities. The Committee also note that Punjab Circle is yet to take action for
recovering/ adjusting the excess amount in the next bills issued by Railway
authorities. The Committee while expressing their displeasure over the
injudicious utilization of the public funds by not ensuring that all claims are

based on correct computation of arrears of rent, timely revisions and


27

application of interest rates to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings
owned by Railways, recommend that the responsibility should be fixed against
the officials concerned for the lapses. Further, the Committee desire that the
process of comprehensive internal audit of other charges should be expedited
and completed within a stipulated timeframe and they be apprised thereof

accordingly.

8. Payment of avoidable rent on vacant/ unutilized building

Audit scrutiny revealed that instances of delays in surrender of rented
building/ excess space than justified were noticed resulting in payment of
avoidable rent of 72.17 lakhs for vacant/ unutilized buildings in six Circles
namely Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and
Punjab. The Ministry accepted (June 2021) the issues raised by Audit except
for UP and Kerala Circles. Regarding Uttar Pradesh Circle, the Ministry
contended that the old building of 00 Senior Record Officer, Agra was in
possession of the Department since the building was required for operational
purpose. In respect of Kerala Circle, the Ministry have stated that the carpet
area of Kollam RMS office was 3,314 sqft. and the same area was required for
the proper functioning of the office. As regard the reasons for delays in
surrendering the rented buildings/excess space when not in use, the Ministry
have, in their reply stated that after introduction of IT Modernization Project,
the nature of mail processing work has changed and more space was required
for different activities envisaged as part of Parcel Network Optimization
Project. In one of the Circles, the extra time was taken to shift/utilize the
serviceable items and to auction the unserviceable items. Notwithstanding the
fact, instructions have been issued to all the Circles by the Postal Directorate
to review space requirement in Railway properties occupied by Postal
department and ensure timely vacation of vacant/extra space to’ ensure
economy in RMS operations. The Committee, while emphasizing the need for
devising a strict compliance mechanism of the instructions issued for conduct
of regular reviews of space requirements in Railway properties occupied by
the Postal department ensuring that space is efficiently utilized, and any
excess or vacant space is identified and surrendered in a timely manner,

desire that the Ministry must also. periodically review and update guidelines


28

related to the surrender of rented buildings and excess space and make sure

that guidelines are aligned with operational needs and industry best practices.
9. Jrreqular_payment_of Service Tax/ GST on Rent paid to Ministry of

Railways

Audit noticed that MoF instructions (December 2016) stipulate that the
services provided by Indian Railways to DoP are not subject to service tax, as
both the departments are arms of Central Government. Further, MoF
instructions (June 2017) stipulate that the services provided by the Central
Government, State Government, Union territory or local authority to another
Central Government, State Government, Union territory or local authority are
exempted from payment of Goods and Service Tax (GST). DoP also clarified
(March 2019) the position to its Circles that GST is not applicable on licence
fee to be paid to Ministry of Railways for the properties rented for RMS Office.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that in seven Circles, Railways billed GST
along with rent and DoP paid %3.46 crore without verification of claims. On
being pointed out by Audit, Ministry accepted the facts and stated (June 2021)
that the concerned Circles had been instructed in May 2021 to take remedial
steps to ensure that payment of GST/ Service Tax are not made in future.
However, Audit pointed out that the Ministry remained silent regarding refund/
adjustment of GST already paid. To ensure that payment of GST/ Service Tax
are not made in future without verification of claims, the Ministry in reply,
stated that DoP vide D.O. dated 21.05.2021 and D.O. dated 14.06.2023 issued
instructions to all the Circles informing that they should device a proper
procedure to avoid recurrence of cases of irregular payment of Service
Tax/GST on rent paid to Ministry of Railways. About the stance of the Ministry
on the refund or adjustment of the GST already paid by DoP, the Ministry
stated that the amount of taxes paid by the DoP should preferably be refunded
by Railways failing which it should be adjusted in future bills by the Railways.
The Committee, in this regard recommend that the Ministry should actively
pursue the matter of the refund of the incorrectly paid GST and settle the same
in a time bound manner. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the

concrete steps taken in this regard.


29

10. Non-Utilization of Dimensional Weighing System (DWS)

Audit pointed out that the Dimensional Weighing System (DWS)
procured by DoP, was not found integrated with the CSI software and hence
could not be utilised in five Circles resulting in infructuous expenditure of
%4.44 crore. Similarly, procurement of Mail Hardware without assessing the
required specifications resulted in wasteful expenditure of 76.39 lakh. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that Dimensional weighment
system (DWS) installed at Vijayawada, Hyderabad, Lucknow and Jaipur Parcel
Hub has been integrated with Core Systems Integration (CSI) and DWS
installed at e-Commerce centre, Kolkata has since been repaired and
integration with Core Systems Integration (CSI) will be completed shortly.
Further, the Mail Operations Hardware (MOH), a part of IT Modernization
Project of Department of Posts, assessed the requirement of Tag
Printer/Barcode Printers/Barcode Scanners according to the requirements for
the introduction of functionality which got delayed due to delay in the
development of software. Functionality for generation of redesigned bag
labels through system has now been made available and all Tag
Printer/Barcode Printers/Barcode Scanners procured for the purpose are fully
utilized by the Circles. While emphasizing the need for prompt integration of
the Dimensional Weighing System (DWS) with the Core Systems Integration
(CSI) software in all relevant Circles with a view to ensuring optimum
utilization and efficient functioning of the DWS, the Committee recommend
that the integration of DWS installed at e-Commerce centre, Kolkata with Core
Systems Integration (CSI) should be completed in a time bound manner.
Before procuring Mail Operations Hardware (MOH) or any other IT equipment,
the Committee desire the Ministry to conduct a thorough assessment of the
required specifications and ensure compatibility with existing systems. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should improve coordination
between hardware and software development teams to align the timelines for
the development of software functionalities with the availability and utilization

of the procured hardware components.



30

Ih. MAIL SERVICES THROUGH ROAD TRANSPORT NETWORK (RTN)

11. Non-achievement of projected scheme objectives

The Committee note that while approving the Road Transport Network
scheme in June 2013 for carriage of parcels on selected routes, it was
expected that the implementation of Scheme would lead to additional parcel
traffic and revenue for DoP. Further, the new parcel traffic would grow at a rate
of 25 per cent per annum during the period 2012-2017. Audit noticed that DoP
approved 54 RTN routes in 18 Circles during the period from 2013-14 to 2016-
17 and of this, 43 routes in 16 Circles have been made operational between
2014-15 and 2016-17. Out of the 43 routes, six routes have been closed during
the original scheme period (up to March 2017) due to various reasons such as
non-improvement in service quality by providing time definite delivery of
parcels and speed post articles and poor growth in e-commerce parcels.
Further, 19 new RTN routes were approved by DoP, during the period from
2017-18 to 2019-20 (post-12th Plan) and out of these, eleven routes have been
made operational. However, one route has been closed during this period.
Audit also pointed out that between 2018-20, the traffic of RTN routes has been
less than a crore while the expenditure on the same was in excess of Rs.10
crore every year. Moreover, Audit scrutiny of parcel traffic handled through
Express Parcel/ Business Parcel during the years 2014-15 to 2019-20 revealed
that the expected growth in parcel traffic has not been achieved by the DoP
vis-a-vis expected growth of 25 per cent per annum and in fact; it reduced
considerably in terms of volume during the period 2016-17 to 2019-20. As
regards the reason for the net outgo on approved RTN routes, the Ministry
explained that Department is following a multimodal approach for
transmission of mail and parcels by air, railways and road transport depending
on the suitability of the connectivity in terms of delivery advantage. Further,
deployment of RTNs is an operational necessity. Wherever there was shortage
of space in RMS sections and timings not suitable for expedited delivery of
mail and parcel at the destination, Road Transport Network has been made
operational on such routes. As regards the performance of RTNs since 2020-
21, the Ministry stated that the impact of operationalization of RTNs and
infrastructure created can be seen in the parcel traffic figures of the last three

financial years. An increase of 57% in parcel traffic has been noted from 2020-


31

21 to 2022-23. (344.33 lakhs parcels with revenue of Rs 416.52 crore in 2020-21
to 540.71 lakhs parcels with revenue of Rs. 620.01 crore in 2022-23). Presently
the RTN comprises 74 routes (to and fro, 37X2=74) which are utilized
efficiently, to the extent of 80% capacity average load on a daily basis and on
certain routes it is 100%. Further, for exclusive handling and delivery of
Express/ Business Parcels since April 2018, with the setting up of Parcel
Directorate, 190 Processing hubs and 198 Nodal delivery centres have been
set up across the country. Considering the marked improvement in parcel
traffic infrastructure and volume as also revenue and capacity utilization on
some of the RTN routes in the recent past, the Committee expect that the
Department will take necessary action for improving service quality by
providing time specified delivery of parcels and increasing market share in e-
commerce parcels and thereby improving the revenue earned through RTN
routes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete steps being
taken in this regard vis-a-vis the extent of expenditure incurred towards

market expansion.

12. Setting up of Web-Based Dashboard to monitor RTN network

Audit scrutiny of records revealed that DoP did not set up QMC centrally
at Directorate level and also did not ensure the setting up of these Centres in
the Hub cities. In the absence of QMC, day-to-day monitoring, development
and maintenance of new applications where required, development and
maintenance of MIS and monitoring systems have not been achieved. In this
regard, the Ministry stated that since there are only few RTN routes in various
Circles, the magnitude of monitoring did not warrant setting up a dedicated
QMC at that stage. But, monitoring of RTNs was duly done by mails division of
the Postal Directorate, Circle office, Regional office and Postal Division. The
Ministry further clarified that since 21.06.2023, a Mail Monitoring Unit had been
set up at the Postal Directorate, Circle, Region and Division level by an order.
The said unit will monitor among other thing, the efficiency of RTN network. A
web-based dashboard had also been created to monitor capacity utilization,
timeschedule and discrepancy, if any, on each RTN route. While appreciating
the initiatives taken for monitoring the efficiency of RTN network, the


32

Committee desire that the Department should undertake concerted efforts to
evolve a mechanism to ensure updation of the entries in the web-based
dashboard on real. time basis so that capacity utilization, time schedule and
discrepancy, if any, on each RTN route may be judiciously addressed,

rationalized and optimized.

eter ered

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
477 January, 2024 January, 2024 Chairperson,

27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee