8

ACCOUNTING OF PROJECTS IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 109" Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

EIGHTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2189

EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS FYBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
SS A ENT COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ACCOUNTING OF PROJECTS IN _ INDIAN
RAILWAYS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 1097 Report (16"" Lok Sabha)}

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

Presented toLokSabhaon: —ooeessusee.s oh \
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: &

February, 2020 /Magha, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II*

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Solo) 5 ee

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................--

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ..................... ० ७०००५--०-३ ५०-०० ००००० ०७५० ५५०

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
18088 .....................-.-५५५७०५०५५००५५००-०-०५५५० ५५०५५»

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 11" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2019-20) held on
287 January, 2020.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

ee NDA wD

बजे.
Nes

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Vacant"

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

eo
BR Ww

Nn

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri 1. 0. Chandrasekhar —- Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

* Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his resignation from Rajya
Sabha on 05 August, 2019


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Accounting of Projects in Indian Railways".

2. The One Hundred and Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 9" August, 2018. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Eighth Report at their Sitting held on
28" January, 2020. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-//.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
30 January, 2020 Chairperson,

10 Magha,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT ;
PART -।

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in °
their One Hundred and Ninth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Accounting of Projects in

Indian Railways".

2. The One Hundred and Ninth Report (16" Lok Sabha) which was presented to
Lok Sabhaj/laid in Rajya Sabha on gth August, 2018, contained 10 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Railways are broadly
categorised as follows: _

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the

Government:

Para Nos. 1-10
Total: 10
Chapter - II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
: pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos, NIL
Total: NIL
. Chapter - Ill
(ili) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which ‘replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration:

Para Nos. NIL

— ~ - Total: NIL

~ Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. NIL
_ Total: NIL
Chapter -V



3. The One Hundred and Ninth Report of the Committee was based on Audit review
of accounting of projects in Indian Railways wherein Audit had observed that Indian
Railways was in general not following its own rules and regulations laid- down in the
Financial Code and Engineering Code for efficient execution of projects and for proper
accounting of financial transactions. The detailed examination of the subject by
Committee had revealed various shortcomings/lapses in the management of the railway
projects by the Ministry of Railways and the Committee had accordingly given their

Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred and Ninth Report.

Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations

4 Some of the important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee
in their 1097 Report (16" Lok Sabha) are as under:

1) The Ministry of Railways should take appropriate steps for prompt reconciliation
of expenditure booked under various projects so as to ensure financial propriety.

2) After taking stock of the total non completion Report, the Committee
recommended that the Chief Accounting Authorities in the Railways Board as
well as the concerned accounting authorities in all the Railway zones should be
held responsible for this lapse and suitable punishment awarded to them.

- 3) The Ministry should ensure that the extant procedure for monitoring the supply of
materials and utilization thereof is further monitored so as to make it more
effective.

4) Ministry should prepare investment schedule of all on-going projects after proper
consultation with concerned State Governments so that the cost of sharing
projects is not exceeded.

5) Ministry of Railways should pinpoint the inadequacies and evolve an effective

mechanism to bring systemic improvement in accurate estimation of budget

requirements.
6) Ministry should strengthen the internal control mechanism so as to avoid -
incurring of expenditure without proper sanction by the competent authority and

also to timely regularise the unsanctioned expenditure.

कि


@

5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the
Committee have dealt with the action taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.

1. Introductory
(Recommendation Para No. 1)

6... In their 109" Report, the Committee had noted that Indian Railways was in
general not following its own rules and regulations laid down in the Financial Code and
Engineering Code for efficient execution of projects and for Proper accounting of
financial transactions. The Committee had also noted that completion reports were not
prepared for 674 projects completed/commissioned prior to March 2011. This included
92 projects commissioned during 2008-09 to 2010-11 and 466 projects commissioned
more than three years ago, of which 78 projects were commissioned twenty years ago.
The date of completion of 116 projects was not on record. Cases of expenditure in

excess to sanctioned estimate etc remained un-regularized for decades and has led to

the situation of no control/check over expenditure on capital works. The Ministry of
Railways incurred expenditure more than its agreed percentage of cost due to non-
following the terms and conditions of the agreements executed with the State

Governments relating to cost-sharing projects.

7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

" The observations of the Committee regarding lapses and delays in selected
projects covered under C2AG Report has led to resurgence in activities towards
streamlining procedures and Processes relating to execution of project and
accounting of financial transactions, Overall checks on expenditure on capital
works are being exercised through budgetary controls. However, directions have
been issued by the Ministry ० Railways to ensure timely sanction of
detailed/revised estimates and monitoring of preparation of completion reports.
The Ministry of Railways has also directed fast tracking the end to end
computerisation of process for greater precision and ensuring that there is no
loss of data due to unforeseen delays."

8. In their vetting comments to the above said Action Taken Note, Audit have
observed as follows:


9.

have stated as under:—

10.

11.

12.

13.

BQ .
"The response of the MoR is not specific to the observations of PAC. While the
unsanctioned expenditure has shown a decréasing trend, it is still quite
significant. During 2017-18, 3729 cases of unsanctioned expenditure (for want of
sanctioned estimate, excess over sanctioned estimate etc.) of Rs. 5113 crore
was noticed. Despite issue of instructions and monitoring mechanism in place,
completion reports were not drawn for years in respect of many completed works
as was observed during a recent review on track renewal works in Indian
Railways. MoR may please offer specific remarks to PAC’s observations.”

In response to the Audit Comments on the above reply the Ministry of Railways

"Endeavour is made for avoiding the instances of excess over/unsanctioned
estimate to the extent possible. However, due to safety considerations and other
operational exigencies, the works are required to be executed pending
regularisation of the expenditure through revised/completion estimate. The
position of such cases is monitored on regular basis. As a result the quantum of
such expenditure has come down to 1.3% of total expenditure incurred during
2017-18 as compared to 2.5% during 2016-17. Railways have been advised to
clear the pending cases in a time bound manner besides taking timely action in
respect of the new cases."

Audit have further observed as follows:

"Ministry's reply is silent on delay in drawal of completion reports. The status of
preparation of completion reports as brought out in the report may please be
furnished."

The Ministry of Railways have further replied as under:

"Out of 674 completion reports reported by Audit, 265 CRs have since been
drawn and 409 CRs are outstanding. All Zonal Railways have been asked to
clear the outstanding CRs at the earliest."

Audit have vetted the aforesaid Action Taken Note with the following remarks:

"It is observed that the Chairman, Railway Board, vide letter No. 2014-BC-AP-
Chapter 3/12-13/PAC XVI/109 dated: 17.09.2018 and 13.02.2019 to GMs of all
Zonal Railways, reiterated that there should be no further delays in preparation of
completion report. Despite such repéated instructions, 409 completion reports
are yet to be drawn, =~

In view of the above, no further comments are offered.”

The Committee note that the Railways have initiated various measures viz.

exercising overall checks on expenditure on capital works through budgetary

controls, issuing directions for timely sanction of detailed/revised estimates and



monitoring of preparation of completion reports etc. Besides, the Ministry of
Railways have also directed fast tracking the end’ to end computerisation of
process. However, what concerns the Committee is the inability of the Ministry to
reduce the unsanctioned expenditure which is quiet significant. The Committee
are not convinced with the Ministry's contention that due to safety considerations
and other operational exigencies, the works are required to be executed pending
regularisation of the expenditure through ‘revised/completion estimate. In view of
the large number of cases of unsanctioned expenditure (for want of sanctioned
estimate, excess over sanctioned estimate etc) it seems imperative that
monitoring mechanisms in the Ministry should be made more robust, so that
corrective measures, as and when warranted can be resorted to. Moreover, in the
present age of technological advancement and instant connectivity between
zonal Railways, there is no valid justification for occurrence of irregularities like
unsanctioned/excess expenditure. Furthermore, since the directions issued by
the Ministry in this regard, year after year have not produced tangible results, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways should now make sincere
efforts to find the exact reasons responsible for the unrealistic budgetary
assumptions being made, by devising definite yardsticks to be scrupulously
adhered to by all the units involved in the budget preparation exercise for making
accurate budgetary projections, which would substantially reduce the
unsanctioned expenditure. Ministry should also make it incumbent upon budget
controlling authorities to ensure that such cases of unsanctioned/excess
expenditure are not incurred in future.

The Committee are deeply constrained to note that out of 674 completion
Reports, 265 CRs have since been drawn and 409 CRs are outstanding. In this
regard, the Ministry have apprised the Committee that all Zonal Railways have
been asked to clear the outstanding CRs at the earliest. The Committee note that
despite the repeated instructions, 409 Completion Reports are yet to be drawn
which indicates that instructions are not being scrupulously followed by the
Zonal Railways. Since repeated instructions have not produced the desired

results, the Committee recommend that penal measures should be taken against



के
the officers concerned for not submitting the CRs in time. The Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation that in the abgence of Completion Reports,
the final expenditure incurred on a project cannot be compared with that provided
in the last sanctioned estimate. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry
of Railways to give serious attention to this aspect and would like to be informed

of the efforts made and the progress achieved in this regard at the earliest.

I. Non-reconciliation of expenditure booked in Works Register
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

14. ‘In their 109" Report, the Committee observed that the total expenditure of
%51,667.83 crore was booked (up to March 2013) in 305 Works Registers in respect of
144 projects (excluding 10 projects each in NR and ECoR) maintained by accounts
office whereas the expenditure mentioned in the books of Executives was only
%35,960.86 crore. The variation in expenditure of =15,706.97 crore was not reconciled.
The Committee had, therefore, desired to know as to how the Ministry of Railways was
trying to augment the accounting staff for proper maintenance of all the Works Registers
as per the Engineering codes. Since expenditure booked in Works Registers was not
reconciled, it was not possible to ascertain the actual expenditure incurred on a project.
The Committee, had therefore, felt for an urgent need to take appropriate steps for
prompt reconciliation of expenditure booked under various projects so as to ensure
financial propriety. They had also desired to be apprised of the present status of
reconciliation of variation in expenditure to the tune of %15,706.97 crore and similar
instances/cases identified in all other projects of Ministry of Railways for the last three

years.

15. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows:

"Recourse to computerisation of activities of process flows to capture project
transactions and bill passing work is being done to efficiently handle record
keeping for projects with available staff strength. As per codal provision, (Para
1472 of Indian Railway Engineering Code) a single set of Works Registers is to
be maintained by Accounts Office. The works register captures information on
expenditure actually charged to the estimate and the actual expenditure on the
Projects is ascertained primarily from Works Register maintained in Accounts
Office. These figures are arrived at after considering cash expenditure as well as



16.

adjustment on accounts of receipt of ,material etc. from other
Railways/expenditure on labour etc. Thus, the amount booked in the Works
Register is the actual expenditure vis-a-vis the Project. Parallel sets of subsidiary
register are separately maintained by the Executive, which capture information at
various stages - at the time of preferring of bill, quantum of work, material at site
etc. After finalization of Accounts for the month, the detailed’ work-wise
expenditure statement is prepared and sent to the executive offices to facilitate.
reconciliation of expenditure booked under projects. The Zonal Railways are
ensuring that the subsidiary registers are reconciled with Work Registers every
month. As a result, out of un-reconciled amount of 15,706.97 crore pointed out
in the report, the variation of है 15581.80 crore has since been reconciled by the
Railways. Railways have been directed to complete the same by 31.3.2019.
Further, with end to end computerization of works register, which is expected to
be in place by March/2019, the difference in record of Accounts and Executive
shall be eliminated."

In their vetting comments to the aforesaid Action Taken Note Audit have

observed as under:-

17.

“Test check of records revealed that ‘the register of works was either not
maintained or maintained partially. Due to Improper maintenance of works
tegister, mismatch of expenditure actually incurred with that of expenditure
booked in the works register was noticed. MoR may please intimate the action
taken in respect of similar instances/cases identified in all other projects of MoR
for the last three years."

In response to the said Audit observation on the above reply the Ministry of

Railways have stated as under:

18.

19.

"As already clarified, the system has since been streamlined and differences
pointed out by Audit in their Report have been reconciled. As a result, to end of
March 2018, the expenditure as per Works Register has been reconciled and
difference is about 3.26%, which is under process of investigation. Further, with
ongoing computerisation of Work Register, the differences in records and
Executives will be eliminated completely."

Audit in their vetting comments have observed as under:-
"Apart from 144 projects, the status of reconciliation in respect of all other “=
projects may be furnished."

Ministry's comments on the abovesaid Audit observation are given as under:

"The current position as on 31,03.2018 has already been advised, Apart from
works pointed out by Audit, reconciliation has been carried out in 5102 works and
difference is about 3.26%, which is under process of reconciliation."



(2) .
20. — Audit have further vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-
"Since the differences between the expenditure booked in the Works Register of
Accounts and Executive office has been reduced considerably, no further
comments are offered."
21. Upon noticing the difference in booking of expenditure in the works
Registers maintained by the Accounts and Executives, the Committee in their
109" Report had recommended taking appropriate steps for prompt reconciliation
of expenditure booked under various projects so as to ensure financial propriety.
In this regard, the Committee are informed that out of un-reconciled amount of &
15,706.97 crore, the variation of ~ 15581.80 crore has since been reconciled and
Railways have been directed to complete the same by 31 March, 2019. Further, it
is stated that with end to end computeristaion of works registers, which is
expected to be completed by March 2019, the difference in record of Accounts
and Executive shall be eliminated. While appreciating that the differences have
been reduced considerably, the Committee desire to know about the present
position of reconciliation of remaining works registers as well as end to end
computerisation of works registers which were required to be completed by
March, 2019.

Hl. Non/Delayed completion of Productivity Test
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

22. In their earlier Report the Committee found that in none of the 93 major projects
completéd (New Lines, Doubling & Gauge Conversion) during 2007-08 to 2011-12, the
Productivity Test was carried out by Zonal Railways. Thus, the mandatory test to assess
the actual financial returns of the projects vis-a-vis the estimated return was not carried
out in all the 93 projects reviewed jin audit across the Zonal Railways. The Committee
had further noted that productivity test was delayed in some cases due to non-
finalization of completion reports and non-availability of information with respect to
parameters of assumption made at the time of estimation. The Committee were
surprised to note that non-conducting the post project appraisal of major projects had
not only violated the codal provisions but also resulted in non-payment of deferred

dividend liability on New Lines to Government of India as recommended by Railway



के.

Convention Committee. In such a situation, the Committee concluded that non-
observance of codal provisions had led to such a situation that productivity test was not
carried out.even in a single project out of the 93 major projects completed during 2007-
08 to 2011-12. The Committee had therefore desired the Ministry of Railways to review

these cases and apply necessary corrective measures to ward off such lapses again.

23... The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

"As per extant instructions post project appraisal is due in all major works. It has
to be undertaken in projects 7 years after the completion. Productivity test was
delayed in some cases due to non- finalization of Completion reports and non-
availability of information with respect to parameters of assumption made at the
time of estimation. After audit has taken up this issue, the system was reviewed.
53 Productivity tests were finalized in the years 2014-15 to 2016-17. Out of
pending 93 cases pointed out in the Report, Productivity tests have been carried
out for 17 works in 2017-18 and 10 were not due. The remaining are in process.
Detailed guidelines for streamlining the process of Productivity Test have also
been reiterated by Rly. Bd. vide No. 2018/F(X)II/10/24 dated 11.10.2018 to
ensure that such lapses do not occur again."

24. In their vetting comments Audit have observed as under:-

"MoR may please provide the details of 27 works for which productivity tests
were either carried out or not due. MoR may also intimate the reasons for not
conducting productivity tests of the remaining 66 major works. The action taken
in this regard may also be intimated." .~

25. In response to the vet ing comments by Audit on the above reply, the Ministry
have stated as under:

"As has been stated earlier productivity tests were delayed in some cases due to
non-finalisation of completion reports and non-availability of information with
respect to parameters of assumption made at the time of estimation. In addition,
Detailed guidelines have also been reiterated by Railway Board vide letter no.
2018/F(X)II/10/24 dated 11.10.2018 and CRB to ensure that such lapses do not
occur again." -

26. Audit in their vetting comments have obsérvéd as under:

"MOR stated that detailed guidelines had been issued by Railway Board vide
letter no. 2018(F(X)II/10/24 dated 11.10.2018 and CRB to ensure that: such
lapses do not occur again. As desired by PAC, the outcome of corrective
measures taken in conducting productivity tests of 66 major works may please be
furnished."



27.

28.

10

The Ministry of Railways have further stated as under:

"Zonal Railways have carried out productivity test in 22 projects, in 9 projects the
productivity tests were not due and 1 work is yet to be completed. The
Productivity tests in remaining cases are pending due to non-finalisation of
completion reports and non-availability of information with respect to parameters
of assumption made at the time of estimation. Concerned Zonal Railways have
been asked to complete the pending tests at the earliest." --

Audit comments on the aforesaid Action Taken Note of the Ministry are as

follows:

29.

"The Committee noted that productivity test was not carried out even in a single
project out of the 93 major projects completed during 2007-08 to 2011-12.

MoR furnished the status of 32 projects. The position in respect of remaining 61
projects may be intimated."

On the vetting comments of Audit on the above said reply, the Ministry have

stated as follows:

30.

31.

32.

"As per the updated status, Productivity tests for 26 projects have been carried
out and in 14 cases productivity tests are not due. .

Further, Zonal Railways are regularly being advised to carry out productivity test
for remaining 53 Projects, where these are due, at the earliest."

Audit in their vetting comments have further observed as under:-

"In the ATN dated 11.06.2019, MOR stated that in nine cases, productivity tests
were not due. This contradicts the present updated position which shows that in
14 cases, productivity tests were not due.

The action taken by MoR to carry out productivity tests seems to have not
yielded desired results as productivity tests for 53 projects are yet to be carried
out even after a lapse of more than eight years since completion."

The Ministry have further submitted as under:

"The reply furnished by MoR is based on the updated position submitted by
Zonal Railways from time to time. There may further be a possibility that
‘productivity test not due' number may increase from 14 after due diligence: in
pending productivity tests. Thus, there is no contradiction in MoR's reply. a
As per updated status, Productivity tests for 38 projects have been carried ‘out
and in 14 cases productivity tests are not due. Further, Zonal Railways” are
regularly being advised to carry out productivity tests for remaining projects,
where these are due, at the earliest."

The Committee are pleased to note that out of 93 cases of pending

productivity tests, the tests in 38 cases have been carried out and in 14 cases

productivity tests are not due. For remaining 41 cases the Committee are

ee.



i.

informed that Zonal Railways are regularly being advised to carry out such tests,
at the earliest. While taking note of the fact that due to the concerted efforts of the
Ministry pending productivity tests have been reduced, the Committee feel that a
large number of tests are yet to be carried out. The Committee therefore,
recommend that far greater and sustained efforts need to be made to carry out
“the remaining productivity tests. The Committee also recommend that a sound
- and efficacious mechanism should also be put in place to ward off such incidents

in future.

IV. Passing of bills without preparation of material reconciliation statement of bills without preparation of material reconciliation statement
(Recommendation Para No. 6)

33. In their 109" Report, the Committee were surprised to note that out of 5737 on-
account bills, 5118 bills were passed without material reconciliation statement while the
Ministry stated that they had a sound mechanism for monitoring the supply of materials
and utilization thereof. On being observed that the Procedure followed by the Ministry
was not in line with the extant provisions of reconciliation of material while passing each
on-account bill, the Committee had desired that the Minis ry of Railways should ensure
that the extant procedure in this regard is further monitored so as to make it more
effective and instructions issued are followed by all the Zonal Railways in letter and

spirit.

34. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"Railways have substantially reduced issue of material to’ the contractor as
contractors have started using their own cement and steel items. Material is
issued in S&T, Electrical and Track linking projects as free supply items. The
supply of materials and utilization thereof is being monitored by executive at
regular intervals and no bill is made without the issue/receipt statement of
material. On completion of the work, the final material statement is made and
accordingly recoveries effected, if necessary, in the final bill. Passing of bills
without material reconciliation statement was an error by the Zonal Railways and
instructions have now been reiterated to follow the same. Test checks are also
being carried out on regular basis to ensure compliance of codal provisions."

35. — During the course of vetting Audit have observed as under:-

“Audit test checked compliance of codal provision in respect of 393 track renewal
works completed or on-going during 2012-17. It was observed that material-at-



12

site account was not maintained in case of 209 works pertaining to 11 Zonal
Railways
In view of the above, action taken by the Railways seems not effective enough to
ensure compliance of codal provision
MoR may, therefore, needs to review the effectiveness of the action taken to
address the issue.”
36. In response to the vetting comments by Audit on the above reply, the Ministry
have further stated as under:- हु

“The supply of material and utilisation thereof is monitored by Executive at
regular intervals and no bill is made without issue/receipt statement of material.
On completion of work, the final material statement is made and accordingly
recoveries effected, if necessary, in the final bill.
Instructions have again been reiterated that no bill may be processed for
payment without proper material reconciliation statement for the period involved.
Zonal railways have been asked to follow the instructions scrupulously. Test
checks are also being carried out on regular basis to ensure compliance of codal
provisions."
37. In their original Report, while observing that out of 5737 'on-account bills’,
5118 bills were passed without material reconciliation statement, the Committee
desired the Ministry to further monitor the extant procedure and make it more
effective. In this regard, the Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have
now admitted that it was an error by the Zonal Railways and instructions have
now been reiterated to follow the same. Test checks are also being carried out on
regular basis to ensure compliance of codal provisions. Keeping in view the large
number of cases of non-reconciliation of bills, the Committee are of the opinion
that action taken by the Ministry does not seem to be effective enough to ensure
compliance of codal provision. They have not been provided with the details of
the efforts made for making their monitoring mechanism more effective. The
Committee, therefore, recommend initiation of a vigorous and purposive action
for prosecution of persons responsible for such errors. A Committee of experts
may be set up to study and suggest the best possible solution to this problem as
also prosecuting the culprits. The Committee also believe that with the increasing
use of electronic surveillance systems, prevention and pursuance of these cases
should be easier, faster and more decisive. For this, the Railways may enter into a

formal coordinating arrangement with zonal Railways to undertake proper

e


13

investigation of such cases and arrest the culprits for taking appropriate action
as per law. Further, an effective mechanism should be put in place for regular
monitoring of such cases.
ve Excess expenditure over sanctioned estimate expenditure over sanctioned estimate

(Recommendation Para No. 10) .
38. In their earlier Report the Committee were appalled to note that in respect of 60
works projects, expenditure of ₹ 44.35 crore was incurred without sanction of estimate
and %4,957.52 crore was incurred in excess of sanctioned estimate in respect of 555
projects/works. Thus expenditure of % 5,001.87 crore was incurred on 615 projects
Ttanging from one year to more than twenty years remained unsanctioned as of March
2013. These. unsanctioned expenditure that remained un-regularised for two decades
depicts the slackness on the part of the concerned Executive departments for not
following these cases and getting them regularised for such a long period. The
Committee had desired to know as to whether any responsibility had been fixed against
the concerned officers for showing laxity in such cases. Obviously such cases indicated
not only apparent inadequacies in the accounting system in the Railways but also
glaring lapses on the part of accounting officials. The Committee had, therefore,
strongly. recommended the Ministry of Railways to enquire into the reasons for such a
long pendency for sanctioning of expenditure in order to identify the individual officers
responsible for such a glaring lapse and to initiate disciplinary action against them. The
internal control mechanism should also be strengthened so as to avoid incurring of
expenditure without Proper sanction by the competent authority and also to timely
regularise the unsanctioned expenditure. The Committee had also desired to be
apprised of the present status of regularisation of all pending items of unsanctioned
expenditure.
39. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

"Normally no expenditure is incurred unless the work has sanctioned estimate.
- However, sometimes for safety consideration/operational exigencies/ avoid delay
in completion of works, booking of expenditure in excess of sanctioned estimate
becomes inescapable. In such cases revised estimates are Prepared and
Processed for sanction of competent authority and simultaneously the works are
kept Progressing. In case of delay in sanction of estimates, there can be chances


14

of excess expenditure over sanctioned estimates but efforts are made to keep
the same within permissible limit of 10% over sanctioned estimate. Out of the
615 cases referred to in the report, 306 cases have already been regularised.
Given the volume of projects handled by Railways, instructions have been issued
to streamline the process of regularisation of excess expenditure by Ministry of
Railways vide letter No. 2018/F(X)II/10/24 dated 11.10.2018 for framing an action
plan with prescribed timelines."

40. In their vetting comments, Audit have made the following observation:-

"MoR has not explained the action taken on the recommendation of the
Committee to enquire into the reasons for such a long pendency for sanctioning
of expenditure in order to identify the individual officers responsible for such a
glaring lapse and to initiate disciplinary action against them.

MoR's remarks are silent on the action taken by the Ministry to strengthen
internal control mechanism so as to avoid incurring. of expenditure without proper
sanction by the competent authority and also to timely regularize the
unsanctioned expenditure

MoR may please offer specific remarks to PAC's observations

41. In response to the vetting comments by Audit on the aforesaid reply, the Ministry
have stated as under:-

"Normally no expenditure is incurred unless the work has sanctioned estimate.
Endeavour is made for avoiding the instances of excess over/unsanctioned
estimate to the extent possible. However, due to safety considerations and other
operational exigencies, the works is required to be executed pending
regularisation of the expenditure through revised/completion estimate.

The position of such cases is monitored on regular basis. The position is
teceiving due attention and as a result the quantum of such expenditure has
come down to 1.3% of total expenditure incurred during 2017-18 as compared to
2.5% during 2016-17. Railways have been advised to clear the pending cases in
a time bound manner besides taking timely action in respect of the new cases."

42.  Audit’have further made the following observation:-

"Despite regular monitoring as stated by MoR, the instances of incurrence of
expenditure without proper sanction by the competent authority (Rs. 5000 crore)
were observed during 2017-18. This indicates the weakness in the existing
internal control mechanism."

43. In response to the Audit's further vetting comments on the abovesaid reply, the

Ministry have made the following comments:~’

"The position of such cases is monitored on regular basis. The position is
teceiving due attention and as a result the quantum of such expenditure has
come down to 1.3% of total expenditure incurred during 2017-18 as compared to

&


15

2.5% during 2016-17. Railways have been advised to clear the pending cases in

a time bound manner besides taking timely action in respect of the new cases."
44. Upon noticing that expenditure of € 5,001.87 crore was incurred over a
period ranging from one year to more than twenty years on 615 projects that
remained unsanctioned as of March 2013, the Committee had desired the Ministry
to enquire into the reasons for such a long pendency for sanctioning of
expenditure and to fix responsibility on the officers concerned. However, the
action taken by the Ministry is silent about enquiring into the reasons and fixing
of responsibility for such lapses. The Ministry have merely stated that
instructions have been issued to streamline the process of regularisation of
expenditure on 11.10.2018 for framing an action plan with prescribed timelines.
The Committee deplore the vague and evasive response given by the Ministry to
their recommendation that required specific tangible action. The Ministry's reply
is also silent on any specific timeline drawn up by the Ministry for clearing the
cases which are pending for more than twenty years. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation for regularisation of expenditure and desire
that clear timelines be specified for clearance of backlog as well as timely

sanctioning of expenditure in future.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
30 January, 2020 Chairperson,

10 Magha,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

“Ihe

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDERED AND NINTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK

SABHA)
Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1 to 10

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. -Nil

Observations/Recommendations in ‘respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. -Nil

10

Total : 10
Percentage: 100%

Total : 0

Percentage: 0

Total: 0
Percentage: 0

Total : 0
Percentage: 0