117

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2019-20)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty - Third Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2347

ONE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND

CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2019-20)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty - Third Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2023-24)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
CHAPTER I 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Governmen
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government...
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.....
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the Government have furnished interim replies........
APPENDICES
i Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) held on 06 February 2024
I Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government

on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Fifty-third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

OP NAARYN

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.c.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Seventeenth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Fifty-third Report on ‘Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2019-20)’ relating to various ministries.

2. The Fifty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 8"
August, 2022. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the One Hundred and Seventeenth Report at their sitting held on O6th
February 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-third Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 February, 2024 Chairperson,
18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART -।

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Fifty-third Report (177 Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2019-20)".

2. The Fifty-third Report (17 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 8" August, 2022, contained 9 Observations and Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received

from the Ministries/Departments concerned are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos.1-9
Total: 9
Chapter - II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter -V


A. Recommendation Para No. 3

3. The Committee note with concern that during the Financial Year 2019-20, excess
expenditure was incurred in respect of all the three Grants/Appropriations even after
obtaining high amounts of Supplementary Grants by the Ministries/Departments
concerned to meet their additional requirements. The percentage of excess expenditure
over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these cases ranged from 10.04 percent
(Grant No-20-Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Capital-Charged) to 79.77 percent
[Grant No.31 - Department of Revenue (Revenue-Voted)]. From the scrutiny of Grant-
wise position of obtaining Supplementary Grants and excess expenditure incurred
thereafter, the Committee notice that the Supplementary Grant to the tune of € 3.34 crore
was allocated for Grant No-21 operated by the Ministry of Defence in the Civil Sector but
this amount was short by € 2.00 crore. In case of Grant No. 31 operated by Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) under Civil Sector, though Supplementary Grant of &
40030.77 crore was obtained, yet an excess expenditure of = 31934.48 crore was
incurred. Similarly, the only excess registering Grant pertaining to Defence services i.e.
Grant No-20-Capital Outlay on Defence Services obtained a Supplementary Grant of &
6988.46 crore. Despite the grant, the actual expenditure exceeded the budgetary
provision by € 701.31 crore. The trend of incurring excess expenditure even after
obtaining Supplementary Grants persists year after year despite the recourse to
obtaining Supplementary Grants on three occasions. The Committee are astonished to
note that budget provisions are still not made with requisite precision even at the
Supplementary Grants stage. This is despite the recommendations of PAC and
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in this
regard as follow up. From the Action Taken Note on Para 1 of 24" Report of PAC (177
Lok Sabha), the Committee find that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) did not agree with the recommendation of NIFM regarding restricting the number
of Supplementary Grants in a year, as, according to them, this will restrict expenditure on
New Services/New Instruments of Services. In their Action Taken Report thereon [50"
Report (177 Lok Sabha)] while observing that Ministry of Finance are unable to check
this recurring phenomenon of incurring excess expenditure even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants, the Committee opined that if Ministries/Departments work with
prudence, expenditure on New Services/New Instruments of Services can be planned


4.

and included in the Budgetary/ Supplementary Grants provisions and the need for three
Supplementary Grants in a year can be avoided. The Committee, therefore, emphasized
that the recommendation made by NIFM in this regard should be taken in right spirit and
with due seriousness and necessary arrangements made in this direction by Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in consultation with C&AG and Controller
General of Accounts. While reiterating this recommendation, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance in this regard and desire that
the Ministry should formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as to avoid incurring excess
expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained. Strict instructions
be given to the Budget Controlling Authorities of the defaulting Ministries/Departments to

scrupulously adhere to this principle.

In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of

Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) submitted as under:

“ The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have
been noted.

2. With regard to Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) on Recommendation No. 3 of NIFM regarding restricting the number
of Supplementary Demands for Grants in a year, it may be submitted that the number
of Supplementary Grants during the last five years is as under:

FY No. of Supplementary Grants
2018-19 3
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23

DTI D IP]

3. While Article 115 of the Constitution provides for seeking Supplementary
Demands if the amount authorized by Parliament is found insufficient or a need has
arisen for new service, it does not indicate the number of Supplementary Demands for
Grants in a year. However, this Ministry is making efforts to restrict the number of
Supplementary Grants from three to two and making optimal use of the enhancement
in the corpus of the Contingency Fund of India from 500 crore to 30,000 crore during
the year.

4. Department of Expenditure has, vide its Office Memorandum dated 22.4.2022
and 17.1.2023, impressed upon Ministries/Departments to take all measures, including
use of electronic systems to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-
a-vis voted grants so that excess expenditure is avoided.


7.

5. The Ministries/Departments have been advised to revamp their existing
budgetary mechanism and financial control in consultation with Ministry of Finance
and Controller General of Accounts to altogether eliminate excess expenditure or
ensuring containing excess expenditure to the barest minimum under the
Grants/Appropriations operated by them.

6. It has further been stipulated that the budget proposals should be scrutinized
scrupulously, both at the time of preparation of Demands for Grants and
Supplementary Demands for Grants, and compliance to provisions of General
Financial Rule to eliminate the possibility of excess expenditure, under-spending
wrongful appropriations etc. "

Audit in their vetting comments mentioned as follows:

"7. Incurring of excess expenditure even after the supplementary grant shows that
proper estimation was not done by the Ministries.

8. As such it shows that recommendation of PAC is not being followed by the
Ministries, Ministry should formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as to avoid incurring excess
expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained.

9. It is further added that the excess expenditure has been incurred even after
obtaining supplementary provision. Concerned Ministries i.e. Ministry of Defence and
Department of Revenue need to overhaul and streamline the budgetary mechanism
and obtain supplementary grants with more precision. The Budget estimating
authorities of Defence while estimating requirement of funds should make an accurate
and realistic assessment of actual/ anticipated expenditure.

10. ‘It is also pertinent to mention that the entire expenditure management of
Government of India is now being managed through PFMS. System level
validations/controls in PFMS would go a long way in ensuring adherence to codal
provisions vis a vis budget management."

The Ministry in reply to further audit observations mentioned as under:

"11. Steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in ensuring that the Ministries must
exercise due diligence at the time of submitting the Supplementary proposals has
been adequately explained in para 6 of the comments.

12. The number of supplementaries has already been reduced from 3 (three)
batches in a year to 2 (two) in the last fiscal."

The Committee noted with concern that during the Financial Year 2019-20,

excess expenditure was incurred in respect of all the three Grants/Appropriations

even after obtaining high amounts of Supplementary Grants. The Committee had


observed that the Supplementary Grant to the tune of = 3.34 crore was allocated for
Grant No-21 operated by the Ministry of Defence in the Civil Sector and in case of
Grant No. 31 operated by Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) under Civil
Sector, though Supplementary Grant of = 40030.77 crore was obtained, yet an excess
expenditure of = 31934.48 crore was incurred. Despite the grant, the actual expenditure
exceeded the budgetary provision by = 701.31 crore in Grant No. 20 Capital Outlay on
Defence Services (Capital Voted) and exceeded the budgetary provisions by = 2.00
crore under Grant no. 21 Defence Pensions(Revenue Charged). The Committee had
observed that the trend of incurring excess expenditure even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants is persisting year after year despite taking recourse to
obtaining Supplementary Grants on three occasions. The Committee had thus
emphasized that the recommendation made by NIFM in this regard should be taken in
right spirit and with due seriousness and necessary arrangements made in this
direction by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in consultation with
C&AG and Controller General of Accounts. The Committee had desired that the
Ministry should formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as to avoid incurring
excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained. From the
Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee find that, with
regard to the recommendation no. 3 of NIFM for restricting the number of
Supplementary Demands for Grants in a year, the number of Supplementary Grants
during the last five years has reduced. The Committee also observe that the Ministry is
making efforts to restrict the number of Supplementary Grants from three to two and
making optimal use of the enhancement in the corpus of the Contingency Fund of

India from हैं 500 crore to = 30,000 crore during the year and that the Ministry of


Finance has advised the Ministries/Departments to revamp their existing budgetary
mechanism and financial control in consultation with Ministry of Finance and
Controller General of Accounts to altogether eliminate excess expenditure or ensuring
containing excess expenditure to the barest minimum under _ the
Grants/Appropriations operated by them. The Committee, however, note from the
Audit comments that excess expenditure has been incurred even after obtaining
supplementary provision. The Committee while opining that merely advising/ issuing
instructions would not suffice, desire the Ministry of Finance to be proactive and
conduct regular meetings with the Ministries that are yet to revamp their budgetary
mechanism and hand hold them to develop the same in a timely manner. The

Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

B. Recommendation Para No. 6

8. During the financial year 2019-20, the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess
expenditure of हैं 701.31 crore under Capital-Voted section of Grant No. 20- Capital
outlay on Defence services. The excess of 701.31 crore was the net effect of total
excesses of हैं 1502.08 crore and total savings of 800.76 crore. The Committee are
constrained to observe that the excess expenditure under Capital Voted section of this
Grant was incurred even after obtaining Supplementary Grant of 6988.46 crore. The
Committee feel that operation of this Grant is not being done conductively. The
contributory reasons as submitted by the Ministry of Defence for this excess expenditure
are Payments made for committed liabilities as well as initial payments for the New
Scheme contracted; more expenditure on custom duty; Progress of Annual Maintenance
Work plan; obligatory contractual Payments towards new ship-building contracts and
higher outgo than anticipated towards milestone Payments of ongoing projects than
anticipated; Obligatory contractual foreign Payments through letter of Credit (LC) as well
as exchange rate variations; fast progress of works and liability of completion of critical
projects on time etc. The Committee are not convinced with the reasons attributed by the


9.

10.

Ministry of Defence for incurring excess expenditure under this Grant as these do not fall
under the category of ‘unforeseen’ or ‘unanticipated expenditure’ which cannot be
predicted at the time of either approaching for BE/RE stage or at the time of seeking
Supplementary Grants. As the Supplementary Grant obtained by the Ministry of Defence
under this Grant is too high, the Committee feel that there is some inherent defect in the
operation of this Grant because the Ministry could not assess their actual requirement of
funds even at the stage of Supplementary Grant year after year. The Committee are
therefore, inclined to conclude that adequate attention has not been paid by the Ministry
of Defence to streamline and strengthen the extant mechanism for operation of this
Grant so as to tighten the budgetary control to effectively check the trend of incurring

excess expenditure under this Grant.

In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence stated as follows:

" One of the main reason for seeking additional funds through Supplementary
Demand for Grant is receipt of lesser allocations in BE than projections made. Though
additional funds are provided through Supplementary Demand for Grant, but at times
the additional funds are not as per requirements projected. This sometimes leads to
excess expenditure as payment due towards outstanding committed liabilities are
required to be made as per project schedule and contractual terms and conditions for
delivery of stores to avoid legal complications. The broad reasons for incurring excess
expenditure have already been mentioned in the observation/recommendation.

2. Further, additional funds are sought in anticipation of expenditure which could
either be not catered through lesser budgetary allocations or due to urgent/critical
requirements which could not be foreseen. Though every effort is made to estimate
and anticipate exact requirements, however due to unforeseen circumstances it is not
always possible to expend in accordance with budgetary allocations. However, it is
assured that this Ministry will be more careful in future while estimating additional
requirements through Supplementary Demand for Grants"

Taking note that during the financial year 2019-20, the Ministry of Defence

incurred an excess expenditure of = 701.31 crore under Capital-Voted section of Grant

No. 20- Capital outlay on Defence services, wherein the excess of = 701.31 crore was

the net effect of total excesses of हैं 1502.08 crore and total savings of € 800.76 crore,

the Committee had been constrained to observe that the excess expenditure under

Capital Voted section of this Grant was incurred even after obtaining Supplementary

Grant of = 6988.46 crore. The Committee were not convinced with the reasons


attributed by the Ministry of Defence for incurring excess expenditure under this Grant
and felt that there was some inherent defect in the operation of this Grant because the
Ministry could not assess their actual requirement of funds even at the stage of
Supplementary Grant year after year. The Committee had, therefore, observed that
adequate attention has not been paid by the Ministry of Defence to streamline and
strengthen the extant mechanism for operation of this Grant so as to tighten the
budgetary control to effectively check the trend of incurring excess expenditure under
this Grant. From the Action Taken Note of the Ministry of Defence, the Committee note
that the Ministry has attributed the main reason for seeking additional funds through
Supplementary Demand for Grant was receipt of lesser allocations in BE than
projections made that at times led to excess expenditure. Further, the Committee
observe that additional funds were also sought in anticipation of expenditure which
could either be not catered to due to lesser budgetary allocations or due to
urgent/critical requirements which could not be foreseen before-hand. The Committee
are of the view that seeking additional funds under the same grant year after year is
indicative of shortcomings in assessing the requirements under the grant both on the
part of Ministry of Defence - for underestimating, and Ministry of Finance - for not
giving or laying due emphasis on the past trends while making the allocation. The
Committee, therefore, desire that both the Ministries:make efforts to streamline and

strengthen the extant mechanism for operation of this Grant.


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of Union
Government relating to Civil Sector, Defence Services, Postal Services and
Railways for the Financial year 2019-20 reveals that a total excess expenditure of
₹ 32637.78 crore was incurred in three sections of three Grants/Appropriations
(as against हैं 5204.57 crore during 2018-19). The Ministries at fault are the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) and the Ministry of Defence. The Committee
are astonished to note that the bulk of excess expenditure was recorded under
two Grants i.e. Grant No. 31- Department of Revenue (¥ 31934.48 crore) operated
by Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) under Appropriation Accounts —
Civil and Grant No. 20 - Capital outlay on Defence Services (¥ 701.31 crore)
operated by Ministry of Defence under Appropriation Accounts - Defence
Services. The Committee find it to be a matter of concern that the excess
expenditure incurred under Grant No.-31 of Department of Revenue had
accounted for over 97.85 percent of the total excess expenditure incurred during
the year under review i.e. 2019-20. An analysis of the reasons as given by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Ministry of Defence for
incurring excess expenditure during 2019-20 reveals that like in the past, lack of
continuous watch over the flow of expenditure, lack of timely review of financial
requirements and failure to properly anticipate the requirement of additional
funds continue to be the main reasons for the excess expenditure. Attributing the
same causes for the excesses persisting year after year is a pointer towards the
fact that the matter has not been addressed with due seriousness by the
Ministries/Departments concerned, especially the Ministry of Defence, which has
been incurring a high amount of excess expenditure recurringly for the last ten

years (except 2015-16) in respect of various Grants/Appropriations operated by


them. Though the Committee have been repeatedly pointing out in their Reports
that the system of estimation of and control over expenditure is faulty, yet year
after year, Parliament is being presented with a ‘fait accompli’ of unremitting
phenomenon of excess expenditure. Viewing this fact with grave concern, the
Committee urge the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to
devise suitable and foolproof mechanism for tightening the control over the
exchequer and to deal sternly with such cases where any slackness in following
the prescribed financial Rules is noticed. The Committee, nevertheless are
pleased to note that the Department of Posts (during the years 2017-18 to 2019-
20) and Ministry of Railways (during the years 2017-18 and 2019-20) had not
incurred excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations operated. The
Committee feel that when the Department of Posts and Ministry of Railways
which have a large network throughout the country could manage their Grants in
an effective way to altogether eliminate incurring excess expenditure for atleast

two or three years, the other Ministries /Departments too could manage in equal


.measure. The Committee would, therefore, emphasize that all other
Ministries/Departments should also follow the trend set by the Department
of Posts as well as the Ministry of Railways for revamping their existing
budgetary mechanism and financial control in consultation with the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and Controller General of
Accounts in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to
altogether eliminate excess expenditure or ensuring containing excessive
expenditure to the barest minimum under the Grants/Appropriations
operated by them.

th

{Paragraph 1 of 537 Report of Public Accounts Committee(2022-23)(17
Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2019-20)”.

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT

The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
have been noted.

2. A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs on 14.7.2021 to discuss the issues of
control of excess expenditure with Ministry of Railways, Ministry of
Defence and Department of Posts, where excess expenditure was
recurrently incurred. These Ministries/ Departments were impressed upon
that endeavor should be made that there will be no instances of excess
expenditure and the efforts should be a collective responsibility.

3 Ministry of Defence was also requested demi-officially at
Minister’s level on 17.3.2022 to put in place an effective and functional
stem to prevent excess expenditure based on the discussions held with
ry of Defence on 14.7.2021.

4, The following Table shows the.trend of excess expenditure
incurred by the Government in the last five (5) years:
(=
_ ee _ crore)
Si. No. of : हु |

Amount of Excess |
Expenditure

99610.31 |
5204.57 /
_32637.78 |

2]


5. It may be seen frorn the above, the excess expenditure
incurred by Government in number of Grants/Appropriations have been
decreasing over the last five (5) years with the consistent efforts made by
Government. The excess expenditure incurred in 2019-20 was
necessitated due to apportionment of past dues from IGST to States,
adjustment of tax devolution to States and recoveries made therefrom,
amounting to an excess expenditure of = 31,934.48 crore.

6. This Ministry has continuously been engaging with
Ministries/Department for monitoring the progress of expenditure with the
objective of avoiding the recurring excess expenditure by specific
Ministries/Departments.

Vetted comments of Audit

7. Despite the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, it can
be inferred that excess expenditure over Grants / Appropriations has not
been stopped. As such PAC recommendation should be implemented through
a proper mechanism.

8. It is also pertinent to mention that the entire expenditure
management of Government of India is now being managed through PFMS.
System level validations/controls in PFMS would go a long way in ensuring
adherence to codal provisions vis a vis budget management

Further comments of Ministry of Finance:

9. The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
made by NIFM has been detailed in the Action Taken Note submitted by this
Ministry vide F.No.6(6)-B(AC)/2019 dated 15.3.2022 in response to paragraph
6 of 30" Report of Public Accounts Committee (2020-2021)(17" Lok Sabha) on
Excess over voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2016-17.

10. The Audit, while giving its vetting comments on the Para 6 of the
307 Report of 17" Lok Sabha on ‘Excess over Voted grants and Charged
Appropriations (2016-17) has acknowledged that the implementation of
suitable recommendations made by NIFM in concerned Ministries resulted in

decline in number of cases of excess expenditure.

11. This has been vetted by Audit vide their letter no. Coordn./F-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/2021-22/VollV dated 10.05.2023.

psc Vachhafii) _
Additional Secretary (Budget)

Lok Sabha Secretariat

Public Accounts Committee Branch

Parliament House, New Delhi.

F.No, 6(5)-B(AC)/2022 dated /03/2023.



MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

This Ministry is taking various steps towards avoidance of e:

Action Taken by Government

xeess expenditure, Some of the

remedial measures taken by this Ministry are as under

a)

b)

d)

2

made by all the stakeholdei

One of the major reasons of excess has been payments through Letters of Credit to meet foreign
contractual obligation where there is a time gap between the payments made by the banks and
receipt and adjustment of scrolls by the Services/Payment Controllers. To check this.
concurrent monitoring of LC based payments is being done at each stage.

Allocation of lesser funds than projections has also been flagged as one of the reason for excess
expenditure by the Services as payment due towards outstanding committed liabilities are
required to be made to avoid legal complications. Accordingly. all budget holders have been
advised to make realistic assessment of Committed Liabilities/projected outgo and available
resources for fresh contracts.

All the budget holders are regularly being sensitized on adhering to monthly and quarterly
expenditure plans.

Budgetary allocations are made by Services to various lower units/formations which aiso
include those in remote areas. Towards more effective budgetary control, a decision was taken
10 introduce a customized Public Finance Management System (PEMS) in Ministry of Defence.
The Defence Instance of PFMS has been named PRABAL-PFMS Raksha Budget Aaharan
aur Lekhaankan, Coding and Development work on the proposed modules of PRABAL. has
started. Regular review meetings on PRABAL are being carried out in the Ministry for

monitoring the progress.

in order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure. e-Pension System named SP.ARSH
has been introduced. The System entails creation of an integrated data base giving the complete
details of a pensioner beginning with personal and family details. service history. pay
particulars, pension sanction and subscquent revision along with payments made (ind
deductions there from, if any) and a computerized application for sanction. revision and
disbursement of pension by a single agency.

The Progress of expenditure is being regularly reviewed by Defence Secretary’ FA (DS)
Secretary Defence Finance to ensure that expenditure incurred is within the sanctioned grant

Due to adoption of large number of measures including those stated above and focused efforts
penditure has incurred in since FY 2020-21 onwards.

. 10 excess

(RS) & JS

MoD (Fin) 1.0 No. 7(2)/Budget-1/2022 dated 23/03/2023



Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee further observe that in pursuance of their recommendations made
in the past, National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) have undertaken a
study of the excess expenditure incurred by various Ministries/Departments
during the period from 2000-2001 to 2017-18 and submitted their Report
containing 12 recommendations, targeting different sectors of financial control.
The recommendations as contained in NIFM Report are at various stages of
implementation by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as
well as the other Ministries/Departments. Considering the unabated trend of
incurring excess expenditure, the Committee emphasize that in pursuance of the
NIFM recommendations, necessary steps may be taken by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) to implement the same at the earliest so that
tendency of incurring high amount of excess expenditure year after year is
curbed. Necessary guidelines need to be framed and instructions issued in this
regard to all the Ministries/Departments. The Committee would desire to be

apprised of the specific measures initiated in this connection.

(Para No.2)

Action Taken by Government

MINISTRY OF FINANCE


1

Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
( Budget Division )

RECOMMENDATION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

The Committee further observe that in pursuance of their
recommendations made in the past, National Institute of Financial
Management (NIFM) have undertaken a study of the excess expenditure
incurred by various Ministries/Departments during the period from 2000-2001
to 2017-18" and submitted their Report containing 12 recommendations,
targeting different sectors of financial control. The recommendations as
contained in NIFM Report are at various stages of implementation by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as well as the other
Ministries/Departments. Considering the unabated trend of incurring excess
expenditure, the Committee emphasize that in pursuance of the NIFM
recommendations, necessary steps may be taken by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) to implement the same at the earliest so that
tendency of incurring high amount of excess expenditure year after year is
curbed. Necessary guidelines need to be framed and instructions issued in this
regard to all the Ministries/Departments. The Committee would desire to be
apprised of the specific measures initiated in this connection.

[Paragraph 2 of 53" Report of Public Accounts Committee(2021-22)( 17" Lok
Sabha) on “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2019-
20)”.

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT

The Observations/recommendations of -the Public Accounts
Committee have been noted.

2. The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
made by NIFM has been detailed in the Action Taken Note submitted by this
Ministry vide F.No.6(6)-B(AC)/2019 dated 15.3.2022 in response to paragraph 6 of
30°" Report of Public Accounts Committee (2020-2021)(17" Lok Sabha) on Excess
over voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2016-17.

3. Department of Expenditure has, vide its Office Memorandum dated
22.4.2022 and 17.1.2023 (copies enclosed), impressed upon
Ministries/Departments to take all measures, including use of electronic systems
to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis voted grants so
that excess expenditure is avoided.

4. This Ministry has been taking all possible measures/steps towards
containing/avoiding excess expenditure in any of the grants/appropriations.

atv


Vetted comment of Audit

5. Considering the unabated trend of incurring excess expenditure, it is
suggested that necessary steps as suggested by the PAC may be taken to
implement the same at the earliest so that tendency of incurring high amount of
excess expenditure year after year is avoided.

6. It is further added that, though the recommendations made by
NIFM has been circulated to all the Ministries/ Departments for implementation,
still excess expenditure is being observed. Therefore, it is advised that the
recommendations of NIFM be implemented meticulously and adhered to at each
level in the Budget Division of every Ministry/ Department.

7. It is also pertinent to mention that the entire expenditure
management of Government of India is now being managed through PFMS.
System level validations/controls in PFMS would go a long way in ensuring
adherence to codal provisions vis a vis budget management.

Further comments of Ministry of Finance:

8. The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
made by NIFM has been detailed in the Action Taken Note submitted by this
Ministry vide F.No.6(6)-B(AC)/2019 dated 15.3.2022 in response to paragraph 6 of
30°" Report of Public Accounts Committee (2020-2021)(17" Lok Sabha) on Excess
over voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2016-17.

9. The Audit, while giving its vetting comments on the Para 6 of the
307 Report of 17 Lok Sabha on ‘Excess over Voted grants and Charged
Appropriations (2016-17) has acknowledged that the implementation of suitable
recommendations made by NIFM in concerned Ministries resulted in decline in
number of cases of excess expenditure.

10. The steps taken by the Ministry of Finance to contain the excess
expenditure have been edequately explained in para 3 of the comments.

11. This has been vetted by Audit vide their letter no. Coordn./F-

323/ATN/ATR/EN/2021-22/VollV dated 10.05.2023.
Pitt:

Additional Secretary (Budget)
Lok Sabha Secretariat
Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House, New Delhi.
F.No. 6(5)-B(AC)}/2022 dated 03.2023.

21


QObservation/Recommendation

The Committee note with concern that during the Financial Year 2019-20, excess
expenditure was incurred in respect of all the three Grants/Appropriations even
after obtaining high amounts of Supplementary Grants by the
Ministries/Departments concerned to meet their additional requirements. The
percentage of excess expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in respect of
these cases ranged from 10.04 percent (Grant No-20-Capital Outlay on Defence
Services (Capital-Charged) to 79.77 percent [Grant No.31 - Department of
Revenue (Revenue-Voted)]. From the scrutiny of Grant-wise position of obtaining
Supplementary Grants and excess expenditure incurred thereafter, the
Committee notice that the Supplementary Grant to the tune of % 3.34 crore was
allocated for Grant No-21 operated by the Ministry of Defence in the Civil Sector
but this amount was short by हैं 2.00 crore. In case of Grant No. 31 operated by
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) under Civil Sector, though
Supplementary Grant of हैं 40030.77 crore was obtained, yet an excess
expenditure of & 31934.48 crore was incurred. Similarly, the only excess
registering Grant pertaining to Defence services i.e. Grant No-20-Capital Outlay
on Defence Services obtained a Supplementary Grant of € 6988.46 crore. Despite
the grant, the actual expenditure exceeded the budgetary provision by = 701.31
crore. The trend of incurring excess expenditure even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants persists year after year despite the recourse to obtaining
Supplementary Grants on three occasions. The Committee are astonished to note
that budget provisions are still not made with requisite precision even at the
Supplementary Grants stage. This is despite the recommendations of PAC and
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
in this regard as follow up. From the Action Taken Note on Para 1 of 247 Report
of PAC a7 Lok Sabha), the Committee find that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) did not agree with the recommendation of NIFM
regarding restricting the number of Supplementary Grants in a year, as,
according to them, this will restrict expenditure on New Services/New
Instruments of Services. In their Action Taken Report thereon [507 Report (170


Lok Sabha)] while observing that Ministry of Finance are unable to check this
recurring phenomenon of incurring excess expenditure even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants, the Committee opined that if Ministries/Departments work
with prudence, expenditure on New Services/New Instruments of Services can be
planned and included in the Budgetary/ Supplementary Grants provisions and the
need for three Supplementary Grants in a year can be avoided. The Committee,
therefore, emphasized that the recommendation made by NIFM in this regard
should be taken in right spirit and with due seriousness and necessary
arrangements made in this direction by Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) in consultation with C&AG and Controller General of Accounts.
While reiterating this recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised
of the Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance in this regard and desire that the
Ministry should formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as to avoid incurring
excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained.
Strict instructions be given to the Budget Controlling Authorities of the defaulting

Ministries/Departments to scrupulously adhere to this principle.

(Para No. 3)

Action Taken by Government


made in this direction by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
in consultation with C&AG and Controller General of Accounts While reiterating
this recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the Action
Taken by the Ministry of Finance in this regard and desire that the Ministry
should formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as to avoid
incurring excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been
obtained. Strict instructions be given to the Budget Controlling Authorities of
the defaulting Ministries/Departments to scrupulously adhere to this principle.

[Paragraph 3 of 53” Report of Public Accounts Committee(2021-22)( 17" Lok
Sabha) on “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2019-
20)”.

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT

The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee have been noted.

2. With regard to Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) on Recommendation No. 3 of NIFM regarding restricting the
number of Supplementary Demands for Grants in a year, it may be submitted that
the number of Supplementary Grants during the last five years is as under:

FY _ No. of Supplementary Grants
2018-19 en 3
co 209920 "मा" _2 की
_2020-21 2
2021-22 _ 3
2022-28 - व 2 |
3. While Article 115 of the Constitution provides for seeking

Supplementary Demands if the amount authorized by Parliament is found
insufficient or a need has arisen for new service, it does not indicate the number
of Supplementary Demands for Grants in a year. However, this Ministry is making
efforts to restrict the number of Supplementary Grants from three to two and
making optimal use of the enhancement in the corpus of the Contingency Fund of
india from % 500 crore to % 30,000 crore during the year.

4. Department of Expenditure has, vide its Office Memorandum dated
22.4.2022 and 17.1.2023 (copies enclosed), impressed upon
Ministries/Departments to take all measures, including use of electronic systems
to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis voted grants so
that excess expenditure is avoided.


5. The Ministries/Departments have been advised to revamp their
existing budgetary mechanism and financial control in consultation with Ministry
of Finance and Controller General of Accounts to altogether eliminate excess
expenditure or ensuring containing excess expenditure to the barest minimum
under the Grants/Appropriations operated by them.

6. It has further been stipulated that the budget proposals should be
scrutinized scrupulously, both at the time of preparation of Demands for Grants
and Supplementary Demands for Grants, and compliance to provisions of General
Financial Rule to eliminate the possibility of excess expenditure, under-spending,
wrongful appropriations etc.

Vetted comment of Audit

7. Incurring of excess expenditure even after the supplementary grant
shows that proper estimation was not done by the Ministries.

8. As such it shows that recommendation of PAC is not being followed
by the Ministries, Ministry should formulate an effective mechanism to be
followed by all the Ministries/Departments to tighten their financial control so as
to avoid incurring excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has
been obtained.

9. It is further added that the excess expenditure has been incurred
even after obtaining supplementary provision. Concerned Ministries i.e. Ministry
of Defence and Department of Revenue need to overhaul and streamline the
budgetary mechanism and obtain supplementary grants with more precision. The
Budget estimating authorities of Defence while estimating requirement of funds
should make an accurate and realistic assessment of actual/ anticipated
expenditure.

10. It is also pertinent to mention that the entire expenditure
management of Government of India is now being managed through PFMS.
System level validations/controls in PFMS would go a long way in ensuring
adherence to codal provisions vis a vis budget management.

Further comments of Ministry of Finance:

11. Steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in ensuring that the
Ministries must exercise due diligence at the time of submitting the
Supplementary proposals has been adequately explained in para 6 of the
comments.

3]


12. The number of supplementaries has already been reduced from 3
(three) batches in a year to 2 (two) in the last fiscal.

13. This has been vetted by Audit vide their letter no. Coordn./F-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/2021-22/Vol IV dated 10.05.2023.

/1.4/५.५७५५ 2...
ae 191 Vachhani)
Additional Secretary (Budget)

Lok Sabha Secretariat

Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House, New Delhi.

F.No. 6(5)-B(AC)/2022 dated /03/2023.


MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

ment

Action Taken by Gover

This observation/recommendation pertains to Minist
ptioned that all the instruct idelines issued by Min
for strict compliance.

of 1
ry of

nee. However it may be

i

nance on finance!

.

\ PS

A aspects are

circulated among budget controller

rath,

URS TST 15

n) 1.19 No. 7(2)/Budget-1/2022 dated 23/03/2023


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find that in contravention of Article 114 (3) of the Constitution and
General Financial Rule (GFR) 52(3), the incurrence of excess expenditure has
been a recurring phenomenon in the past. The scrutiny of excess expenditure
incurred by various Ministries/Departments during the last ten years revealed that
in Civil sector, the excess expenditure which was reduced to a considerable
extent i.e. from ¥ 92461.31 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 0.22 crore in 2018-19 escalated to
% 31934.48 crore during the Year under review i.e. 2019-20. Further, in regard to
the trend of excess expenditure incurred under the Grants/Appropriation
operated by Ministry of Defence during the last four years, the Committee
observe that recurring excess expenditure under Grant No. 21- Capital outlay on
Defence Services had incurred during the years, 2016-17 to 2019-20. The excess
expenditure which was = 104.55 crore under this Grant during the year 2016-17,
witnessed a sudden increase to the tune of % 3552.72 crore during 2017-18.
Though, it was reduced to हैं 1257.29 in 2018-19 nevertheless, the amount has
been in excess of = 1000 crore. Now, during the year under review, the amount of
excess expenditure under this Grant has been reduced to € 701.31 crore, which is
not very low. Thus, the scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred during the last
ten years is indicative of the fact that sincere and effective measures remain to be
taken by the Ministries/Departments concerned to make their budgetary
mechanism strong enough to avoid excess expenditure under the
Grants/Appropriations operated by them. The Committee would also like to be
kept informed of the measures taken by each Ministry/Department to implement
the recommendations of NIFM with a view to tightening their financial control and

avoid recurring excess expenditure in future.

(Para No. 4)
Action Taken by Government

MINISTRY OF FINANCE


Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
( Budget Division )

RECOMMENDATION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

The Committee find that in contravention of Article 114 (3) of the
Constitution and General Financial Rule (GFR) 52(3), the incurrence of excess
expenditure has been a recurring phenomenon in the past. The scrutiny of
excess expenditure incurred by various Ministries/Departments during the last
ten years revealed that in Civil sector, the excess expenditure which was
reduced to a considerable extent i.e. from % 92461.31 crore in 2017-18 to है 0.22
crore in 2018-19 escalated to हैं 31934.48 crore during the Year under review i.e.
2019-20. Further, in regard to the trend of excess expenditure incurred under
the Grants/Appropriation operated by Ministry of Defence during the last four
years, the Committee observe that recurring excess expenditure under Grant
No, 21- Capital outlay on Defence Services had incurred during the years, 2016-
17 to 2019-20. The excess expenditure which was हैं 104.55 crore under this
Grant during the year 2016-17, witnessed a sudden increase to the tune of =
3552.72 crore during 2017-18. Though, it was reduced to ¥ 1257.29 in 2018-19
nevertheless, the amount has been in excess of है 1000 crore. Now, during the
year under review, the amount of excess expenditure under this Grant has been
reduced to = 701.31 crore, which is not very low. Thus, the scrutiny of excess
expenditure incurred during the last ten years is indicative of the fact that
sincere and effective measures remain to be taken by the
Ministries/Departments concerned to make their budgetary mechanism strong
enough to avoid excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations operated
by them. The Committee would also like to be kept informed of the measures
taken by each Ministry/Department to implement the recommendations of
NIFM with a view to tightening their financial control and avoid recurring excess
expenditure in future.

[Paragraph 4 of 53" Report of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22)( 17” Lok

Sabha) on “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2019-
20)”.

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT

The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee have been noted.

2 This Ministry has continuously been engaging with
Ministries/Department for monitoring the progress of expenditure with the
objective of avoiding the recurring excess expenditure by specific
Ministries/Departments.

|


3. A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs on 14.7.2021 to discuss the issues of control of
excess expenditure with Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence and
Department of Posts, where excess expenditure was recurrently incurred. These
Ministries/ Departments were impressed upon that endeavor should be made
that there will be no instances of excess expenditure and the efforts should be a
collective responsibility.

4, The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
made by NIFM has been detailed in the Action Taken Note submitted by this
Ministry vide F.No.6(6)-B(AC)/2019 dated 15.3.2022 in response to paragraph 6 of
307 Report of Public Accounts Committee (2020-2021)(17"" Lok Sabha) on Excess
over voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2016-17.

5. Department of Expenditure has, vide its Office Memorandum dated
22.4.2022 and 17.1.2023 (copies enclosed), impressed upon
Min es/Departments to take all measures, including use of electronic systems

to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis voted grants so
that excess expenditure is avoided.

6. Ministry of Defence was also requested demi-officially at Minister’s
level on 17.3.2022 to put in place an effective and functional system to prevent
excess expenditure based on the discussions heid with Ministry of Defence on
14.7.2021.

7 As regards implementation of the recommendations of NIFM by
each Ministry, it is submitted that the recommendations of NIFM are examined

ntrally by Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs as most of the
commendations of NIFM are on regulating the number of supplementary
demands for grants in a year, increasing the accountability of Chief Accounting
Authorities, revision in the definition of 'New Service’, ‘New Instrument of
Service’ for greater flexibility, etc. While some of the recommendations are
already implemented, the other recomrnendations of NIFM are getting the
attention of Government for implementation. For exampie, the recommendation
relating to revision in the definition of 'New Service’, 'New Instrument of Service’
is under active consideration of the Government.

ce
re

Vetted comment of Audit

8. Keeping in view of the recommendation of PAC, a suitable
mechanism should be implemented to avoid excess expenditure than allotment.
It is further advised that the Budget estimating authorities of Ministry of Defence
while estimating requirement of funds should make an accurate and realistic
assessment of actual/ anticipated expenditure at every stage viz. BE, RE and
Supplementary grant.

2]


9. It is also pertinent to mention that the entire expenditure
management of Government of india is now being managed through PFMS.
System level validations/controls in PFMS would go a long way in ensuring
adherence to codal provisions vis a vis budget management.

Further comments of Ministry of Finance:

10. The steps taken by the Ministry of Finance to contain the excess
expenditure have been adequately explained in para 5 and 6 of the comments.

11. This has been vetted by Audit vide their letter no. Coordn./F-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/2021-22/VollV dated 10.05.2023.

TAMA rp —
lee nish Vachhani}
Additional Secretary (Budget)
Lok Sabha Secretariat
Public Accounts Committee Branch
Parliament House, New Delhi.
F.No. 6(5)-B(AC)/2022 dated /03/2023.

3]



MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Action Taken by Government

This Ministry is taking large number of measures to reduce instances of excess expenditure
which are detailed in replies given in subsequent paragraphs. In order to substantiate this statement.
excess expenditure figures from 2015-16 are indicated below:

inancial Year Defence ee ee — Revenue

Charged

2015-16
2016-17
“2017-18
2018-19 :
2019-20 =
2020-21 =
2021-22 | a

2 It is also highlighted that excess expenditure from 2018-19 has shown a decline compared to the
. Further, due to focused efforts made by all the stakeholders, no excess expenditure has

previous ye:
incurred since FY 2020-21 onwards.

3 Towards more effective budgetary control in Ministry of Defence. a decision was taken 10
introduce a customized Public Finance Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of De
Defence Instance of PFMS has been named PRABAL-PFMS Raksha Budget Aaha
Lekhaankan. Coding and Development work on the proposed modules of PRABAL has started.
Regular review meetings on PRABAL are being carried out in the Ministry for monitoring the pr
Also, the Progress of expenditure is being regularly reviewed by Defence Seeretary/ FA (05)
Defence Finance to ensure that expenditure incurred is within the sanctioned grant

Addl. FA G2S7-8IS

MoD (Fin) 1.0 No. 7(2)/Budget-I/2022 dated 23/03/2023


Observation/Recommendation

As brought out in the preceding paragraphs, during the financial year 2019-20,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) incurred an excess expenditure
of ¥ 31934.48 crore under Revenue-Voted section of Grant No-31 - Department of
Revenue. Excess expenditure under Revenue- Voted section of this Grant
incurred even though Supplementary Grant of हैं 40030.77 crore was obtained.
According to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), as per GST
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017, the provisional GST compensation is being
released on bi-monthly basis to the States/UTs. The quantum of GST
compensation required is based upon collection trends of SGST/IGST and the
subsumed tax collection by States/UTs. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the
actual budget requirement, as the same is dependent upon variable data received
from States on a bi-monthly basis. The Committee further observe that the
- Department of Revenue took only one Supplementary Grant of = 40030.77 crore in
March, 2020 i.e. at the fag end of the financial year. The Committee are perturbed
to note that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the reasons for not assessing
their actual requirement of funds on a continuous basis in the financial year and
also at the stage of seeking Supplementary Grant. The Committee are of the view
that had a precise assessment of funds required to cover the impending excess
expenditure been made and adequate supplementary provisions sought from
Parliament in the first two occasions, the excess expenditure under this Grant
could very well have been avoided. Unfortunately, the Supplementary Grant i.e.
Rs.40030.77 crore finally obtained could not meet the additional requirement
under this Grant thereby leaving the balance amount for regularization by
Parliament. Barring unforeseen circumstances, it is not expected of any Ministry
to cross their financial limits even after having huge amounts of Supplementary
Provisions as has happened in this case. The Committee are again astonished to
note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) also surrendered =
1420.59 crore under this Grant. While taking a serious view of the apparently
casual attitude of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in operating
this Grant, the Committee desire that the reasons for failure in making realistic


assessment of funds requirement be analysed so as to enable in taking timely
action for ensuring adequate provision of funds under this Grant and monitor the
progress of expenditure and smooth flow of expenditure within the provisions
sanctioned by Parliament in future. As regards the action taken to avoid excesses
under this Grant, the Ministry in their Explanatory Note, have submitted that
apportionment of entire unsettled IGST between Centre and States/UTs in the
ratio of 50:50 at the end of each financial year will ensure non-occurrence of such
expenditure in future. While taking note of the assurance given by the Ministry to
prevent such excesses in future, the Committee express hope that the Ministry
would surely be able to overcome this situation of incurring excess expenditure

in future.

(Para No.5)

Observation/Recommendation

During the financial year 2019-20, the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess
expenditure of ¥ 701.31 crore under Capital-Voted section of Grant No. 20- Capital
outlay on Defence services. The excess of = 701.31 crore was the net effect of
total excesses of हैं 1502.08 crore and total savings of ~ 800.76 crore. The
Committee are constrained to observe that the excess expenditure under Capital
Voted section of this Grant was incurred even after obtaining Supplementary
Grant of = 6988.46 crore. The Committee feel that operation of this Grant is not
being done conducively. The contributory reasons as submitted by the Ministry
of Defence for this excess expenditure are Payments made for committed
liabilities as well as initial payments for the New Scheme contracted; more
expenditure on custom duty; Progress of Annual Maintenance Work plan;
obligatory contractual Payments towards new ship-building contracts and higher
outgo than anticipated towards milestone Payments of ongoing projects than
anticipated; Obligatory contractual foreign Payments through letter of Credit (LC)
as well as exchange rate variations; fast progress of works and liability of

completion of critical projects on time etc. The Committee are not convinced with


the reasons attributed by the Ministry of Defence for incurring excess
expenditure under this Grant as these do not fall under the category of
‘unforeseen’ or ‘unanticipated expenditure’ which cannot be predicted at the time
of either approaching for BE/RE stage or at the time of seeking Supplementary
Grants. As the Supplementary Grant obtained by the Ministry of Defence under
this Grant is too high, the Committee feel that there is some inherent defect in the
operation of this Grant because the Ministry could not assess their actual
requirement of funds even at the stage of Supplementary Grant year after year.
The Committee are therefore, inclined to conclude that adequate attention has not
been paid by the Ministry of Defence to streamline and strengthen the extant
mechanism for operation of this Grant so as to tighten the budgetary control to

effectively check the trend of incurring excess expenditure under this Grant.

(Para No. 6)


Action Taken by Government

One of the main reason for seeking additional funds through Supplementary Demand for Grant is
receipt of lesser allocations in BE than projections made. Though additional funds are provided through
Supplementary Demand for Grant, but at times the additional funds are not as per requirements
projected. This sometimes leads to excess expenditure as payment due towards outstanding committed
liabilities are required to be made as per project schedule and contractual terms and conditions for
delivery of stores to avoid legal complications. The broad reasons for incurring excess expenditure have
already been mentioned in the observation/recommendation.

2. Further, additional funds are sought in anticipation of expenditure which could either be not
catered through lesser budgetary allocations or due to urgent/critical requirements which could not be
foreseen. Though every effort is made to estimate and anticipate exact requirements. however duc to
unforeseen circumstances it is not always possible to expend in accordance with budgetary allocations.
However, it is assured that this Ministry will be more careful in future while estimating additional
requirements through Supplementary Demand for Grants.

at

Addl FAQ(RS)-8TS

MoD (Fin) 1.0 No. 7(2)/Budget-I/2022 dated 23/03/2023


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry of Defence
recurringly incurred excess expenditure under this Grant during the last four
years i.e. © 104.55 crore in 2016-17, © 3552.72 crore in 2017-18, © 1257.29 crore
during 2018-19 and * 701.31 crore during 2019-20. Having noticed the recurring
phenomenon of excess expenditure by the Ministry of Defence under this Grant,
the Committee, in Para 8 of 247 Report (177 Lok Sabha) had recommended the
Ministry to overhaul their budgeting mechanism and evolve an effective means to
bring continual and progressive improvement in operation of their Grants in
future. In their ATN on this recommendation, the Ministry of Defence apprised the
Committee that they had decided to create a separate instance/Parallel Chapter in
PFMS in consultation with Controller General of Accounts and in this regard an
evolutionary mode of Software Development and simultaneous processing of
activities is being carried out with a view to expedite the project. The Committee
would like to be apprised as to whether the parallel chapter has since been
created in the PFMS and outcome thereof.

As regards the steps taken to avoid recurrence of excess expenditure under this
Grant, the Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have issued routine
instructions, as in the previous years, which have not produced the desired
results. Thus, the Committee feel that the routine instructions issued in the past
have had hardly any effect in improving the budgetary procedures and financial
control under this Grant and the fresh instructions issued may also meet the
same fate unless earnest measures are taken to ensure effective implementation
of the instructions issued. The Committee therefore, urge Ministry of Defence to
examine critically the specific steps taken towards effective implementation of
the instructions and identify additional measures to contain/curtail the recurring
phenomenon of excess expenditure under this Grant.

(Para No.7)


below:

a)

d)

5

Action Taken by Government

This Ministry has taken various steps to avoid excess expenditure, some of which are lisied

One of the major reasons of excess has been payments through Letters of Credit to meet foreign
contractual obligation where there is a time gap between the payments made by the banks and
receipt and adjustment of scrolls by the Services/Payment Controllers. To check this.
concurrent monitoring of LC based payments is being done at each stage.

Allocation of lesser funds than projections has also been flagged as one of the reason for excess
expenditure by the Services as payment due towards outstanding committed liabilities are
required to be made to avoid legal complications. Accordingly, all budget holders have been
advised to make realistic assessment of Committed Liabilities/projected outgo and available
resources for fresh contracts.

All the budget holders are regularly being sensitized on adhering to monthly and quarterly
expenditure plans.

Budgetary allocations are made by Services to various lower units/formations which also
include those in remote areas. Towards more effective budgetary control, a decision was taken
to introduce a customized Public Finance Management System (PFMS) in Ministry of Defence.
The Defence Instance of PFMS has been named PRABAL-PFMS Raksha Budget Aaharan
aur Lekhaankan. Coding and Development work on the proposed modules of PRABAL. has
started. Regular review meetings on PRABAL are being carried out in the Ministry for
monitoring the progress.

In order to monitor Defence Pensions related expenditure, e-Pension System named SPARSII
has been introduced. The System entails creation of an integrated data base giving the complete
details of a pensioner beginning with personal and family details. service history. pay
particulars, pension sanction and subsequent revision along with payments made (and
deductions there from, if any) and a computerized application for sanction. revision and
disbursement of pension by a single agency.

The Progress of expenditure is being regularly reviewed by Defence Secretary/ FA (DS):
Secretary Defence Finance to ensure that expenditure incurred is within the sanctioned grant

The steps taken in the Ministry has borne fruitful results and no excess expenditure is incurred

since FY 2020-21 onwards.

Addl. FA-RSTR IS


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee observe that the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) under Revenue-Voted Section of Grant No - 31 and Ministry of Defence
under Capital-Voted Section of Grant No. 20 have surrendered the funds during
the financial year 2019-20 despite having incurred excess expenditure under
these Grants. In case of Grant No.— 31 - Department of Revenue the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) while incurring an excess expenditure of =
31934.48 crore also surrendered Rs.1420.69 crore. Further, in Grant No.20 —
Capital outlay on Defence Services, the Ministry of Defence surrendered हैं 0.01
crore and incurred excess expenditure of = 701.31 crore. The Committee are also
perturbed to note that in both the cases, huge amounts were also obtained as
supplementary grants. This clearly indicates that both the Ministries have
completely failed in assessing their actual requirement of funds under these
Grants. To their utter dismay, the Committee find that surrendering of funds,
despite incurring excess expenditure, under the Grant No. 20 - Capital outlay on
Defence Services has been a recurring feature since the financial Year 2017-18.
On earlier two occasions, the Committee had emphasized upon the Ministry of
Defence to devise suitable and effective measures with a view to removing
inherent defects in the existing system. However, no improvement has been
made in this direction. Since surrendering of funds despite having
Supplementary Grant and incurring excess expenditure is a clear indication of
poor budgeting and is also indicative of failure on the part of Budget Controlling
Authorities, the Committee once again urge the Ministries/Departments
concerned to revamp their prevailing expenditure review mechanism so that

surrendering of funds could be avoided in future.

(Para No.8)


Action Taken by Government

The Original Budget for Demand No-20 Capital Outlay on Defence Services for 2019-20 was
%1.03.394.31 crore. In 1° Supplementary Demands for Grants 2019-20, an amount of 20.01 crore was
approved by the Parliament to carry out re-appropriation-of funds between Minor Heads of Grant No-20.
This amount of 20.01 crore is called token supplementary and this amount is not meant for expenditure.
in 2" Supplementary Demands for Grants 2019-20, an additional amount of 27,000 crore was approved
of Finance under Demand No 20 was

by the Parliament. Thus total ceilings conveyed by Minist
21.10.394.31 crore in. Revised Estimates (RE) 2019-20. This figure was final allocation for Grant No.
20 for 2019-20, whereas total of allocations in Budget Estimates 2019-20 + 1 and 2" Supplementary
was 21, 10,394.32 crore (i.e. 1,03,394.31 + 0.01 +7000 crore).

2. The difference of %1,10,394.32 crore (i.e. BE + Supplementary) and final allocation of
21.10.394.31 worked out to 20.01 crore which was surrendered before the close of financial year 20.9-
20, The figure of 20.01 crore was technical surrender and could not be utilized for other requirements
With regard to observation of the Committee that Ministry is surrendering funds on one hand and
incurring excess expenditure on other hand, it may be mentioned that an amount of Rs. 1.433.96 Crove
was surrendered in FY 2019-20 under Grant No. 19-Defence Services (Revenue). however. since the
said surrender was under separate Grant. this Ministry could not utilize it for meeting expenditure under
ant No. 20-Capital Outlay on Defence Services.

3 Further. it is assured that this Ministry will be more careful in future while estimating
requirements.

MoD (Fin) 1.10 No. 7(2)/Budget-1/2022 dated 23/03/2023


Observation/Recommendation

Subject to the observations/recommendations made in the preceding paragraphs,
the Committee recommend that the expenditure referred to in para 12 of Part-I of
this Report be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115 (1) (b) of the
Constitution of India.

(Para No.9)


Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)

Action Taken Note (On Paragraph 9)

As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess Grants
for Expenditure of the Central Government relating to 2019-2020 was submitted to
Parliament in the Winter Session, 2022. The Parliament has passed the Excess Demands for
Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularizing the money drawn in excess of the
amounts authorizec by the Parliament for the year 2019-2020, has also been passed and
the corresponding Act published in the Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part Il, Section 1
dated 247" December, 2022 as Act No. 4 of 2022, after obtaining assent of the President. In
view of this, the excess amount drawn in 2019-2020 stands regularized. Action taken in this
regard is, therefore, completed.

This Note has been vetted by Audit, vide their U.O. No. Coordn./F-
323/ATN/ATR/EN/2021-22/Vol. 1V/745 dated 03.03.2023 dated 03.03.2023 whereby they have informed that
they have no comments to offer.

the

Pett ArmA”
(Ashish Vachhani) - ~~
Additional Secretary (Budget)

Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-O1 Delhi-01
MOF, DEA (Budget Division) ID No.7(1)-B(SD)/2022 dated 207 March, 2023



Action Taken by Government

Based on the replies given by this Ministry on the observations/recommendations made by the PAC in
the Report, it is proposed that the excess expenditure of 2701.31 crore in respect of Ministry of Detence.
ized in the manner prescribed in Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of India.

may be regula

4

Addl, FA ( C Sols

MoD (Fin) 1.0 No. 7(2)/Budget-1/2022 dated 23/03/2023



CHAPTER Ill
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF

GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 February, 2024 _ Chairperson,

18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


(APPENDIX — Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 08 THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1 to 9
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government: पु

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

09

Total: 09
Percentage — 100%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil

Percentage- 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%