5

IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF PAC
BY MINISTRIES OF FINANCE, DEFENCE AND WOMEN
AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

VARIOUS MINISTRIES

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

FIFTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


ol


PAC NO. 2186

FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IMPLEMENTATION OF
RECOMMENDATIONS OF PAC BY
MINISTRIES OF FINANCE, DEFENCE AND
WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

VARIOUS MINISTRIES

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2020 / Magha, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2019-20)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iv)
COMMITTEE (2018-19)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE III OF (v)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19
INTRODUCTION (vi)

CHAPTER | [Tal (cole [Ve (0) 5 ene

CHAPTER II Implementation of recommendations of the 75th
Report on 'Performance of Import and Export Trade
Facilitation through Customs Ports' and 97th Report
on Action Taken Thereon.

Chapter Ill Implementation of recommendations of the 21°

Report on “Role of Indian Coast Guard” and 51°
Report on Action Taken by the Government thereon

Chapter IV-

Implementation of recommendations of the 32nd
Report on ‘Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval
Warships’ and 59th Report on Action Taken by the
Government thereon

Chapter V-

Implementation of recommendations of the 14th
Report on ‘Integrated Child Development Services
(ICDS) Scheme’ and 35th Report on Action Taken
by the Government thereon

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Sub-
Committee Ill of PAC (2018-19) held on 11
September, 2019

Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Sub-Committee
Ill of PAC (2018-19) held on 27 September, 2019

Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Sub-Committee
Ill of PAC (2018-19) held on 27 February, 2019

Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Sub-Committee III
of PAC (2018-19) held on 29 April, 2019

Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of PAC (2019-20)
held on 28 February, 2020

*Will be appended at the time of printing.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
hri Sudheer Gupta

mt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Ajay (Teni) Misra

hri Jagdambika Pal

hri Vishnu Dayal Ram

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

SNA A wD
n

८2 (८2 (४ ०? ५2५ ५७०५० ५०

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Vacant’

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G.Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director
4. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Committee Officer

* Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his resignation from Rajya
Sabha on 05 August, 2019


16.
17.
18.

20.

21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE ECA OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2018-19)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS ,
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Shri Abhishek Singh

Shri Gopal Shetty

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shwait Malik
Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri C.M. Ramesh



Composition of Sub-Committee ~ Ill (Implementation of Recommendations of PAC) of Sub-Committee - ॥| (Implementation of Recommendations of PAC
of Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) Public Accounts Committee (2018-19

Convenor : Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Alternate Convenor : Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Members : Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Dr. P.Venugopal
Shri Shwait Malik
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

PAWN >


INTRODUCTION

!, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Implementation
of Recommendations of PAC by Ministries of Finance, Defence and Women and
Child Development" relating to the Ministries of Finance, Defence and Women and
Child Development.

2. The Sub-Committee Ill on ‘Implementation of Recommendations of PAC’ was
constituted by the Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) (16" Lok Sabha) to ascertain
the actual implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee in their
various reports and a total of 46 10015 were allocated to the Committee. The Sub-
Committee took up the following reports presented during the 16" Lok Sabha for
detailed examination and report thereon:- the 75" Report on “Performance of Import
and Export Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports” and 977 Report on “Action taken
by the Ministry on the 75th Report”; 21° Report on "Role and Functioning of Indian
Coast Guard" along with 51° Report on "Action taken by the Ministry on the 21%
Report”; 327 Report on "Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval Warships" and 59"
Report on "Action taken by the Ministry on the 32" Report” and 14" Report on
"Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)" and 357 Report on “Action taken by
the Ministry on the 14" Report.

3. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of
Finance, Defence and Women and Child Development on the status of implementation
of recommendations at their sittings held on 11 September, 2019, 27 September, 2019
and 27 February, 2019. The Sub-Committee of PAC (2018-19) considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 29 April, 2019. The Report was considered and
adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) during their sitting held on 28"
January, 2020. The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold at the end of chapters
2,3,4and5.

5. The Committee thank Sub-Committee-I!I (Implementation of Recommendations
of PAC) of the predecessor Committee (2018-19) for taking oral evidence of the
concerned Ministries and obtaining information on the subjects.

6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance, Defence and Women and Child Development for tendering
evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the
Committee in connection with the examination of the subjects.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
3० January, 2020 © January, 2020 Chairperson,

lo Magha 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER-I

Introduction

1.1. The Public Accounts Committee is the principal instrument of the Parliament for
enforcing financial accountability of the Executive to the Legislature. In pursuance of
this objective, the Committee take up subjects for detailed examination. The lines of
inquiry and preliminary information are derived from the reports of the C&AG of India
followed by written and oral submissions made by the Government. Thereafter, the
Committee give observations/ recommendations’ in their .reports pointing out
extravagance or waste for corrective and remedial action. These recommendations not
only bring out the inefficiencies, irregularities and other shortcomings in the
implementation of policies and programmes approved by the Parliament but also are
Constructive suggestions for bringing about improvements in working and better
utilization of resources in the larger interest of the nation. The Government is expected
to gear up the administrative machinery for optimum performance and galvanise the
national.economy to serve public interest.

1.2 The Government is required to take action on the observations/recommendations
given by the Committee and submit its replies within six months. After analyzing the
action taken replies so submitted, Action Taken Reports are presented. by the
Committee to the Parliament. The analysis includes categorization of replies into those
accepted by the Government, those which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government, those that have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration and those in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies. Regarding actual implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee that have been accepted by the Government,
though the C&AG examines the status of implementation of these recommendations
during follow up audit after a few years, there is no mechanism to simultaneously
determine and ensure actual implementation of the same. As the implementation of
these recommendations is imperative in ensuring best use of limited resources for
accelerating the process of development, transparency in Government action, probity in
public life and inspiring reverence for accountability to Parliament, the need was felt to
devise an alternative to monitor the implementation of the compliance by the
Government.

1.3 It is in the above context, to ascertain the actual implementation of the
recommendations made by the Committee in their various reports, that the Sub-
Committee III on ‘Implementation of Recommendations of PAC’ of Public Accounts

Committee (2018-19) (167 Lok Sabha) was constituted and a total of 46 reports were

allocated to the Committee. The Committee took up for detailed examination 8 reports

(four Original Reports along with their four Action Taken Reports) for finding out the

extent of implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee. These are:-


2

i. 75" Report (16th LS) on “Performance of Import and Export Trade
Facilitation through Customs Ports” and 97" Report’ (16th LS) on “Action
taken by the Ministry on the 75th Report” ibid;

ii. 21° Report on "Role and Functioning of Indian Coast Guard" along with
515 Report (16th LS) on “Action taken by the Ministry on the 217 Report”
ibid;

ili. 3211 Report (16" LS) on "Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval
Warships" and 59" Report (16th LS) on "Action taken by the Ministry on -
the 3274 Report” ibid; and,

iv. 44" Report (167 LS) on “Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)"
and 357 Report (16th LS) on "Action taken by the Ministry on the 44h
Report" ibid.

1.4. Each of the above eight reports are available on the webpage of the Public
Accounts Committee on Lok Sabha website. The reports have been examined in detail
in the succeeding chapters wherein the Committee have recorded their observations
and recommendations on important issues.

—_—

* The 977 Report was the Action Taken Report on the 75" Report, therefore, though not allocated to the Sub-
Committee, it was also considered.


3

!

Chapter ॥- Implementation of recommendations' of the 757 Report on
‘Performance of Import and Export Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports' and
97"" Report on Action Taken Thereon.

A. Summary of 75" Report

2.1 The 757 Report (16th LS) of PAC (2016-17) on ‘Performance of Import and
Export Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports' was presented to the Hon'ble Speaker
on 29" April, 2017 and presented to the Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of the Rajya
Sabha on 18" July, 2017. The Committee had observed the importance of effective
trade facilitation measures for India to maintain its current pace of growth and felt
therefore, that adequate regulatory framework, policy implementation, operational
issues and internal controls were of Paramount importance. The Committee had found
inordinate delays in the various stages of export and import clearances on account of a
complex and arduous documentation process, delays in allotment of berths by port
authorities and bottlenecks in reduction of transaction costs. It was also found that
delays in import clearances were of a higher order than in the case of export
clearances. There were shortfalls such as incomplete facilitation process mapping,
weak target setting, inadequate monitoring mechanism, lack of infrastructure and feeder
network facilities, non-coordination between stakeholders to improve trading
infrastructure and non-existent electronic connectivity among all the regulatory
agencies.

2.2 After in depth examination of the subject which included deliberations with
various stakeholders such as Ministry of Textiles, Department of Commerce, Director
General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, Railway Board, Federation of Indian Export Organization and Federation of
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the Committee in their 75" report made 8
recommendations which mainly included a comprehensive policy to be brought out with
defined milestones for trade facilitation to adhere to the binding commitments and
timelines of WTO (World Trade Organisation) Trade Facilitation Agreement; analysis of
the impact ofall trade facilitation measures including an analysis of compliance costs
vis-a-vis the benefits accrued along with stringent steps against those who did not
adhere to the timelines and Preparation of a plan for trade facilitation for the next 5
years; comprehensive audit of all trade facilitation measures and installation of feedback
mechanism by CBIC; prescribing of time frames for clearing goods by the various
authorities concerned; recruitment to augment operational requirements of the Customs
at air/sea ports, procurement of Mobile Gamma Ray container Scanners etc. to help in
coordinating fast clearances of consignments and facilitate trade; regular training and
orientation programmes; uniform investigation protocol in DRI: separate trade disputes
redressal mechanism; intimation of notifications to all ports on real time basis;
development of an integrated risk management system; and, regulator for controlling
operations of shipping lines.



1
॥

8... Summary of 97" Report
2.3 After examination and analysis of the action taken replies from the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Revenue, Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs, the
Committee presented the 97" Report (16th LS) on Action taken by the Ministry on the
75" Report to the Parliament on 28" February, 2018. While the Committee accepted
replies of the Ministry on five recommendations, they made further observations in
respect of three of them. In case of remaining three recommendations, replies of the
Ministry were categorized as interim. Regarding the impact of trade facilitation
measures, the Committee further desired that a comparative statement of the border
and compliance costs of trading in India vis-a-vis other countries like China, USA, Brazil
and South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries may be
furnished to evaluate the effectiveness of efforts made by the Department of Commerce
(DoC); and that a cost benefit analysis be carried out to check if importers and exporters
had actually benefitted by the measures implemented by the DoC.

2.4 — Inthe context of Key Performance Indicators, the Committee desired that internal
controls be strengthened for all manual transactions and 100 % internal audit be
provided to ensure that such transactions have been done on genuine grounds and that
migration of CBIC’s e-services to the new hardware may be done in a prescribed time
frame to minimise inconvenience to the users. Further in respect of delay in clearing
goods by importers at ports, the Committee recommended that since all the agencies
were functioning under the National Committee on Trade Facilitation (NCTF) for trade
facilitation, the time frames for clearance of goods be fixed for each of the agency
concerned by the NCTF and in addition to publishing of the SLS of PGAs, a
consolidated chart of timelines of all departments/ agencies may also be uploaded on
the website. The Committee had also desired that provision may be made for punitive
action against the officials of the agencies concerned for not adhering to the timelines
and a statement of such irregularities and the action taken thereon be placed before the
NCTF for their perusal.

2.5 In regard to factors affecting facilitation, the Committee while noting that the
National Committee for Trade Facilitation (NCTF) had taken various measures to
ensure ‘ease of doing business’ the Committee had desired to be apprised of the action
taken on the following issues:- prescribing a time frame for clearance of goods by all
departments/agencies involved, development of an integrated Risk Management
System (RMS) essential for clearance of goods within a prescribed time frame,
intimation of notifications to all the ports on real time basis, integration of Customs and
Excise portals for factory stuffing permissions, adjusting duties, delays in executing
Chennai-Ennore Port Connectivity Project and Four lane Elevated Link Road from
Chennai to Maduravoyal due to differences with the State Government, lack of rail and.
other infrastructure to move containers to inland container depots and lack of feeder
network at the international container trans shipment terminal.



5
|
2.6 On implementation of recommendations contained ॥ the 75" and 97" reports of
the Committee, the Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue along with the other concerned Ministries and Departments on
11" September, 2018. :

७. Trade Facilitation

2.7 The Committee had desired that a comprehensive policy with defined milestones
for trade facilitation may be made urgently to adhere to the binding commitments and
the timelines in the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement. While furnishing the status of
implementation of the same, the Ministry of Finance submitted the following:-
“The Union Cabinet approved the formation of National Committee on Trade
Facilitation (NCTF) as per Article 23.2 of the WTO TFA with the Cabinet
Secretary as its chair.Consequent to India’s ratification of the WTO Agreement
on Trade Facilitation (TFA) on 22nd April 2016, the National Committee on Trade
Facilitation (NCTF) has been constituted vide order dated 11" August 2016. It is
the apex body for driving trade facilitation measures across all Ministries. The
establishment of the Committee is part of the mandatory, institutional
arrangement of the TFA. Its mandate is to finalize a National Trade Facilitation
Action Plan and monitor the work of TFA implementation and domestic co-
ordination in the country.

India ratified the TFA on 22/04/2016 and has also notified its Category A and
Category B commitments. Our category A commitments contain measures that
are immediately enforceable and our Category B commitments have a timeline of
5 years for implementation. Though we are largely compliant with regard to our
Category A commitments, we aim to achieve global standards of performance for
such Articles. For our Category B commitments, we intend to strengthen our
institutional, administrative, legal and IT related capabilities including
identification of nature of changes required in these areas to ensure time- bound
compliance within the next five years of the TFA coming into force i.e. by
22™February, 2022.

The composition of NCTF is inclusive of all major stakeholders from the —
government and the private sectors. है

The NCTF has a three- tiered structure -
(1) National TF committee - Representatives of all stakeholders included.

(2) Steering committee — A subset of the National committee with a core group of
public and private membership.

(3) Working groups — Small &adhoc groups of experts from relevant institutions
working on a specific trade facilitation measure or project.

It was decided in the first meeting of the Steering committee, held on 16/1 1/2016,
to constitute the following four Working Groups as follows —


6
|
(i) Working Group on Legislative Changes - To identify areas where requisite
changes are required in our policy, regulatory and legal framework so as to
dynamically improve the level of compliance of our Category A commitments and
fulfil our Category B commitments.

(ii) Working Group on Infrastructure Augmentation: As infrastructure is the prime
enabler for trade facilitation, to identify and upgrade our present infrastructura
gaps vis-a-vis reduction in transaction costs and time at critical sea ports, airports
and land custom stations at the borders.

(iii) Working Group on Time Release Study- To study the dwell — time patterns o'
import — export cargo across major ports, airports, 1005, LCSs in India in a multi
—modal framework w.r.t. air, land and sea modes of transportation and to suggest
an Action Plan on measuring and publishing the average release times for import
and export goods so as to recommend ways to reduce the overall cargo dwell
time.

(iv) Working Group on Outreach Programme - To disseminate and publish
information pertaining to WTO- TFA and trade facilitation measures undertaken
by the government in general across the country. This will be a collaborative
effort between the government officials and private stakeholders on a user-
friendly platform / interface.

The suggestions of all the four Working Groups along with the recommendations
received from the Private Sector have been co-opted in the Draft National Trade
Facilitation Action Plan which was presented at the second’ meeting of the NCTF
held on 08/06/2017.

- The second meeting of NCTF was held on 8 June, 2017.The meeting focused
on the approval of the National Trade Facilitation Action Plan 2017 -2020 which
has 76 trade facilitation measures with definite timelines for implementation.
Each activity is identified with a lead agency responsible for its execution with
either of the three timelines - Short Term (0-6 months), Mid Term (6-18 months)
and Long — term (18-36 months). The private sector members of Steering
Committee and NCTF like ASSOCHAM, FFFAI, FICCI, EICI etc.also gave their
suggestions on augmenting the trade facilitation climate. All these have been co-
opted in the Action Plan which is also mapped to the TFA Articles and aligned to
our policy objectives on improving the Ease of Doing Business. The Action plan
has an overall aim to transform cross border clearance eco-system through
efficient, transparent, risk based, coordinated, seamless, hurdle free, technology
driven procedures which are supported by state-of-the-art sea ports, airports, rail,
road and other logistics infrastructure.

The. National Trade Facilitation Action Plan aims to bring down the overall cargo
release time as below -

i. For imports ~ Within 3 days for Sea Cargo, within 2 days for Air Cargo
and Inland Container Depots and on the same day for Land Customs
Stations.

ii, For exports —Below 2 days for Sea Cargo and on the same day for Air
Cargo, Inland Container Depots and Land Customs Stations.



®

1

Since, infrastructure and technology augmentation are prime enablers for trade
facilitation, more so for India, the draft National Trade Facilitation Action Plan
presented at the second meeting of the NCTF also contains 51 activities in these
areas. Since they go beyond the ambit of the TFA per se, they have been
defined as TFA Plus category as they will continue to be pivotal pillars for the
NCTF.

There were also significant representations from the private sector bodies such
as FICCI, PHD Chamber of Commerce, FIEO, FFFAI and Cll in both the first and
second meetings of the NCTF who gave a variety. of recommendations to the
Committee.

Some recent developments in regard to trade facilitation are:

The percentage of Direct Port Delivery (DPD) in JNPT is 46% and in Chennai it is
more than 50%. These ports constitute more than 50% of total containerised
cargo in the country. Efforts are underway to improve the percentage of DPD in
other ports like Mundra, Tuticorin, Vishakapatnam Cochin etc. Also, at JNPT, the
number of importers who have been granted DPD facility have increased from
around 700 on 1st June, 2017 to more than 2500 in June, 2018. Once all these
importers avail DPD facility, the overall percentage of DPD clearances would go
up to 72%. Consignments availing DPD have an overall clearance time of 68
hours.

On the export side measures like DPE (Direct Port Entry), introduction of e-
sealing of containers have increased the trade facilitation. Also, eSANCHIT for
electronic filing of supporting documents have been introduced on pilot basis for
exporters. This is in continuation of similar facility for importers.

Legislative changes have been made to implement a number of provisions of the
Trade Facilitation Agreement Viz. Advance Ruling, Inward Processing of Goods,
Outward Processing of Goods etc.”

With regard to status of implementation of the recommendation. on impact of

trade facilitation measures, the Ministry of Finance submitted the following information:-

“Departments associated with international trade have taken a number of
measures in the past few years for facilitating exports and imports. The overall
effectiveness of these measures has been captured through the World Bank's
Doing Business Reports released annually. The reports capture the efficiency of
ease of exports and imports through its Trading Across Borders parameter. The
reports show that India’s performance has improved on many parameters. For
example, report shows that the Time of export has.come down. The border
compliance time for exports has come down from 109.3 hours (2016 report) to
106.1 hours (2018 report). The documentary compliance time for exports has


8

come down from 41.5 hours (2016 report) to 38.4 hours (2018 report). The
report also shows that the cost of export has come down.

DGFT/DOC has implemented the following Trade Facilitation Measures in the
past few years. है

4. Reducing number of Documents: Number of mandatory documents
required for exports and imports have been reduced to 3 each for export and
import. Earlier 7 documents were required for exports and 10 for. imports.
DGFT in January 2016 has also specified that any violations in this regard
should be brought to its notice.

2. Reducing number of Schemes: The New Foreign Trade Policy (2015-20)
was launched on ‘st April, 2015 with a focus on supporting both merchandise
and services exports and improving the ‘Ease of Doing Business’, DGFT

, consolidated 5 different incentive schemes under the earlier policy for
rewarding merchandise exports into a single scheme, namely the
Merchandise Exports from India Scheme. The replaced schemes are: Focus
Product Scheme (FPS), Focus Market Scheme (FMS), Market Linked Focus
Product Scrip (MLFPS), Vishesh Krishi and Gram UdyogYojna (VKGUY),
Agri. Infrastructure Incentive Scrip.

3. PAN of firm is being issued as IEC by the DGFT w.e.f July 1,2017. The
process of making application and issuance of IEC is online and secure. IEC
has also been integrated with the. eBIZ portal of DIPP. IEC and EPCG
applications have been integrated with the eNivesh portal implemented by
PMG set up by the Cabinet Secretariat.

4. Use of electronic Bank Realization Certificate (eBRC) system has been
extended. DGFT shares data generated by the electronic bank realization
certificate (eBRC) system with 17 agencies. The eBRC system captures
details of the foreign exchange received by exporters through the banking
channel. So far, DGFT has signed MOUs with 14 State Governments, 2
Central Government agencies and GSTN for sharing of the data. At the State
level, Commercial Tax Departments of 14 states have signed MoU with DGFT
for receiving e-BRC data for VAT refund purposes. These are: (i)
Maharashtra, (ii) Delhi, (iii) Andhra Pradesh, (iv) Odisha, (v) Chhattisgarh, (vi)
Haryana, (vii) Tamil Nadu, (viii) Karnataka, (ix). Gujarat, (x) Uttar Pradesh,
(xi) Madhya Pradesh, (xii) Kerala, (xiii) Goa and (xiv) Bihar. In addition,
Ministry of Finance, Enforcement Directorate, Agricultural & Processed Food
Products Export Development Authority and GSTN have signed MoU.

5. The ‘Aayat Niryat’ Forms used for making online application to DGFT, have
been simplified bringing in clarity in different provisions, and enhancing
electronic governance. हि


- Web Portals !

DGFT has launched a new look website making it more user-friendly and
easy to navigate. DGFT website has a large dynamic component whereby the

trade community can file applications online for IEC and various other

schemes of DGFT. The exporters can also see the status of their electronic
Bank realization certificates in almost real-time. The website is rich in content
with all documents related to Foreign Trade Policy along with a responsive
online grievance redressal system.

Indian Trade Portal launched by Department of Commerce and managed by
FIEO displays information useful for export import. It contains the Trade
enquiries uploaded by Indian trade missions, Tariff and Trade data of India’s
major trade partners, Export Market Reports, and Trade Agreements etc.

EXIM Dashboard launched at the commerce.gov.in website. Allows users a
graphical understand of India’s export and imports at the product, country and
port level. Popular with exporters on account of useful data depicted in
uncomplicated manner.

. DGFT: Facilities for Complaint Resolution

Contact@DGFT system has been activated at the DGFT website
(www.dgft.gov.in) as a single point contact for resolving all foreign trade
related issues. Exporters/Importers use this facility for resolution of foreign
trade related issues either directly concerning DGFT. (headquarters or
regional offices) or concerning other agencies of the Central or State
Governments. A reference number is issued for each request so that the
status of action taken can be tracked. Effective monitoring arrangements
have been made.

DGFT maintains an active Twitter handle (#DGFTINDIA) with more than
26400 followers. Responses to tweets sent to CIM’s account and DGFT
handle are managed through the Twitterseva service and more than 7200

tweets have been replied to w.e.f Apr 2016 with an average reply time of less _

than 12 hours

Grievances on policy, procedure and implementation issues registered at the
Public grievances portal of Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances are handled promptly.

. Outreach & Niryat Bandhu Scheme-in the last two years, .50,000 new and
Prospective exporters have attended the Niryat Bandhu outreach programs
through the regional offices of DGFT. DGFT conducted outreach activities at
34 clusters, as part of NiryatBandhu. In addition, an online training
Programme has been started with the IIFT for first time entrepreneurs.


10

®

॥

Further, India has signed the WTO agreement on Trade Facilitation and is
duty bound to implement the commitments taken towards facilitating trade.
For this, Government has prepared a National Trade Facilitation Action Plan
to transform cross border clearance eco-system through efficient, transparent,
risk based, coordinated, digital, seamless and technology driven procedures
which are supported by state-of-the-art sea ports, airports, land border
crossings, rail, road and other logistics infrastructure and to bring down the
overall cargo release time.

The first Task Force on Transaction Cost in Exports was constituted in 2009,
with the main objective of making India’s export more competitive. The Report
of the Task Force was released in February 2011. The task force identified 44
key issues and provided recommendations to the concerned Government
department and agencies. Twenty-three of these recommendations were
implemented leading to mitigation of transaction costs by approximately Rs
2,100 Crores.

The second task force on Transaction Cost in Exports, constituted in 2013,
gave 63 recommendations pertaining to various Ministries. As per the status
available on Aug-2016, concerned Departments didn’t agree on 11
recommendations and 8 recommendations were pending for implementation.
After the implementation of Goods and Services Tax (GST), some of these
recommendations are no longer relevant.

A separate Logistics Division has been created in DoC to deal with ‘integrated
development of logistics’ with its mandate to promote inter-modal movement.
A copy of the Report of the task force has been furnished to the Logistics
Division for further follow up.”

D. Governance, Risk and Compliance

2.9 In ‘the context of governance, risk and compliance, the Committee had
recommended that a comprehensive audit of the implementation of all trade ‘facilitation
measures taken by the Government of India may be undertaken. In response, the
Ministry submitted the following:-

“The Committee observed specific cases of lapses in implementation of trade
facilitation measures however it has been the endeavor of the department to
ensure that each trade facilitation measure is implemented successfully. As
regards concurrent audit of various information systems, CBEC, in the past had
constituted a Working Group to audit and examine ICES 1.5 application for
detecting deficiencies and to suggest improvement in the application. Following
areas were covered by the Working Group:

a. Adequacy of business processes covered in ICES 1.5 vis-a-vis important
processes that are associated with clearance of goods in the field formations.



®

E.
2.10

b.

11
1

Correctness of business rules in ICES 1.5 application with regard to

various levies, exemptions, duty calculations, compulsory requirements on behalf
of other Regulatory Agency, procedures related to assessment, examination and
clearance of goods for home consumption/warehousing/export.

0.

Improvement and additional functionalities that can be incorporated on the

ICES 1.5 application.

d.

Regular audit of database, operating system, infrastructure and

application hardware for IT security audit etc.

॥ this regard, it is submitted that most issues highlighted by the Working Group
have either been resolved or necessary provisions were already available in the
system. Some issues like those pertaining to RSP based declaration and
valuation, SAD Refunds etc. are no more relevant after the implementation of
GST. Some of the recommendations of the Working Group like codification of
Anti-Dumping Duty notifications, issues related to SEZ etc. require further
discussions with the Ministry of Commerce and also internal discussions to
assess feasibility. This assessment can be undertaken once other urgent
priorities relating to Single Window and Goods and Services Tax are over.

Implementation of Trade Facilitation measures may be taken up as one of the
Subjects for Thematic Audit by the Audit Commissionerates.”

Key Performance Indicators for Trade Facilitation

In the context of key performance indicators, the Ministry submitted the following
information on the status of implementation of various trade facilitation measures:-

“Ministry's reply in respect of observations and recommendations of the
Committee is as under:

(i)

=

Updating ICEGATE to minimize breakdowns- Under CBEC's Project
SAKSHAM, new IT hardware has been commissioned and migration of
C.B.E.C.'s e-services to the new hardware is underway. The working of
ICEGATE is being monitored to achieve optimization and minimize the
inconvenience on account of technical glitches and network disruptions.
Further, Ministry submits that downtime of ICEGATE is minimal. An online
helpdesk service provided to ICEGATE users to resolve their technical
problems and queries so that there should not be any difficulty in using
ICEGATE services. A number of measures have also been taken for
updating ICEGATE to minimize breakdown and improve downtime. The
measures, in brief are as follows:

The old servers hosting the application have been migrated to new servers.

By putting alternative servers, the services have been synchronized to the

High Availability (HA) mode.

. The capacity and nos of the Disaster Recovery (DR) servers have been

increased.

Code review of the application was conducted and corrective measures taken
on identified issues.

The application has been tweaked to handle more number of files at a time.



6.

(ii)

(iii)

(v)

(vi)

12
i

A strict SOP is being enforced to manage lplanned downtime which is

necessary for maintenance and upgrade. It is carried out late in night and on

holidays.

Faster and secured data transmission with stakeholders implemented.

improving the supporting hardware infrastructure through Project SAKSHAM.
Making e-filing of BEs and EGMs mardatory- Majority of Bills of Entry are
being filed through e-filing. Fi ing of Bill of Entry through a Service Centre
is an additional facilitation measure. Further, under section 46 of the
Customs Act, 1962, it is mandatory to file Bills of Entry and Shipping Bills
electronically only. EGM and IGM are also being filed electronically.
Full use of 24x7 facility. CBEC has been making efforts to encourage
importers/exporters to make ull use of 24x7 facility. Field formations are
reaching out to the stakeholders to encourage them to optimally make use
of the facility. Further, regarding full usage 0 24x7 facility field formations
Are engaging with stakeholders for proper deployment of manpower.
Pre-clearance of consignments by Custom authorities- CBEC intends to
introduce this measure as a trade facilitation measure and an instrument
to reduce dwell time. ॥ is felt that machine based clearance is an
important aspect for implementation of pre-clearance of consignments by
Customs authorities. For implementation of pre-clearance, Ministry has
brought out suitable changes in the Customs Act, 1962 by way of
amendment carried out in section 47 of the Customs Act, 1962 through
Finance Act, 2018.

Opening running accounts of registered traders- CBEC intends to ~

introduce this measure as a trade facilitation measure and an instrument
to reduce dwell time. Also, enabling provisions has been enacted in the
Act to open electronic cash ledger of the prescribed persons.
Making ACP/AEO schemes user friendly and rectification of errors easier-
Vide Circular No. 33/2016-Customs dated 22™July, 2016, CBEC has
decided to merge the two facilitation schemes namely ACP (Accredited
Client Programme) and AEO (Authorized Economic Operator) into a
combined three-tier AEO programme, to enhance the scope of these
programmes so as to provide further benefits to the entities who have
demonstrated strong internal control system and willingness to comply
with the laws administered by the Central Board of Excise and Customs.
Now, a comprehensive unified trade facilitation AEO programme has been
developed by incorporating the existing ACP scheme and ongoing AEO
programme, in the light of international developments, as well as in view of
the focus of the Government of India on “Ease of Doing Business”.|n order
to make Accredited Client Programme (ACP)/Authorized Economic
Operator (AEO) schemes user friendly, CBIC has issued a circular no.
3/2018-Customs dated 17.01.2018 wherein in order to maximize the reach
of this programme, it has been decided by the competent authority to
decentralize the processing of AEO applications so as to meet the
objective of trade facilitation and ease of doing business. Further, a
5 number ‘of other incentives have been introduced by way of the said
circular in order to make the scheme more gainful. A total of 1405 AEOs


डंडे

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)

13
{

have been enrolled so far and the target ig to have 2000 AEOs by 31%
December, 2018 and 3500 AEOs by March, 2019. है
Permitting minor amendments in IGM by the shipping line/shipping agents
online instead of going to the service centre may reduce the dwell time- In
this regard, steps have already been initiated to cut down errors in IGM.
The board vide circular 14/2017-Customs dated 11.04.2017 has notified
procedures for carrying out minor amendments in IGM. The circular
mandates that all minor amendment application are disposed of on the
same day of filing the amendment application and also not resorting to
recourse of adjudication and levy of penalty. In case of major
amendments also, it has been necessitated that the amendment
applications are disposed of by 24 hours or else they are escalated to
officers at the rank of Joint/Additional Commissioners. Further, minor
amendments in IGM by shipping line/shipping agents online has already
been implemented and now amendment can be made through RES
subject to final approval of Customs Officer.
Launching a Mobile App for filing error free IGM/BE/EGM/SB- CBIC has
launched Mobile App, ICETRAK on January, 27" 2018. However, filing of
IGM/EGM and other customs documents by trade does not appear to be
feasible as large amount of data is required to be keyed in. The present
facility of filing these documents electronically using output generated
seamlessly from their own electronic systems & databases without any
need for data entry appears more trade friendly.
Uploading scanned documents
An electronic utility, eSANCHIT (Electronic Storage And Computerised
Handling of IT documents) for the uploading digitally scanned supporting
documents has been developed and has been made mandatory for
importers w.e.f. 1% April, 2018. To give a legal backing to this initiative,
“Bill of Entry (Electronic Integrated Declaration and Paperless Processing)
Regulations, 2018" have also been introduced from 11.05.2018. A pilot-on

eSANCHIT in exports has been launched

in Chennai and Delhi from

01.09.2018. Based on the feedback, full- ledged export eSANCHIT will

start shortly. This would be in continuation o
allowing rectification of minor errors-
In this regard, CBEC has taken a number 0

similar facility for Importers.

steps like issuing notification

no. 35/2017-Customs (N.T.) dated 11.04.2017, decentralizing the minor
amendment process by making Superintendent or Appraiser of Customs
as the proper officer. ‘Notification no. 36/2017-Customs (N.T.) dated

11.04.2017 has been issued to amend t
Documents) Regulations, 1970, levying fe

he Levy of Fees (Customs
es for amendments so that

minor amendments are decided without recourse to adjudication or levy of
penalty and at the same time fee is levied to discourage the tendency to

file amendments. However, no amendment

‘ee shall be levied in respect

of advance Bill of Entry, where amendment is necessitated due to
amendment in import manifest. Further, suitable instructions have been
issued for timely approval of amendments.

Adjustment of excess duty paid due to short landing etc. by opening a
wallet- Enabling provisions has been enacted in the Customs Act, 1962 to
allow the provision for the importer or exporter to have an Electronic Cash


14

Ledger, which can be used to pay duty, interest, penalty, fee or any other
sum for Customs clearances.

(xii) E-sealing procedure- Self sealing of export containers by using RFID
tamper proof e-seals have replaced the earlier practice of supervised
sealing by the departmental officers using bottle seals. This has enhanced
the integrity of cargo.

(xiii) Document/Container tracking- All importers and exporters can track their
documents and containers on ICEGATE website. The location of
Container can be traced using facility “Track your Container”
on www.icegate.gov.in for cargo moving to Nhava Sheva, Hazira and
Mundra Ports. Electronic tracking of Nepal bound cargo has also been
launched by Customs.

With regard to furnishing reply to the queries raised by the department,
examination by other Agencies and payment of duty/refund and or
drawback, formations have been instructed to ensure. that unwarranted
delays are avoided.”

F. Delay in clearing goods by Importers at Ports

2.11 Regarding the Committees’ recommendation on delay in clearing the goods by
the importers at ports, the Ministry submitted the following response:-

“In order to address the issue of delayed clearance of goods, beyond free period
of three days, suitable regulations have been framed, making it mandatory to file
the ‘bill of entry before the end of the next day following the day (excluding
hotidays) on which the aircraft or vessel or vehicle carrying the goods arrives at
a customs station at which such goods are to be cleared for home consumption
or warehousing. Where the bill of entry is not filed within the time and the proper
officer of Customs is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay,
the importer has been made liable to pay charges for late presentation of the bill
of entry.

So far there are 6 agencies that have integrated online with Customs
through Single Window Interface for Facilitation of Trade (SWIFT). These
agencies are: Food Safety & Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), Animal
Quarantine & Certification Service, Plant Quarantine, Drug Controller, Wild
Life Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) and Textile Committee. The Service
Level Standards (SLS) of all these 6 agencies, including time frames for
examination/ inspection/ clearance 0 goods, have been obtained from them
and are already published on ICEGATE website.

Further, NCTF Committee is paying attention to the delays at various levels in
clearance of goods. Time Release Study is being conducted to see the time
stamps of various processes. Target for clearance has been fixed and all
agencies have been asked to monitor delay. With regard to suggestion by the
Hon'ble PAC, “CBEC has obtained Service Level Standard (SLS) of PGAs which
are being published on the ICEGATE website for information of the trade”. In the
third meeting of NCTF held on 42.02.2018 chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, it
was decided that a single integrated portal is to be designed to assist importers
and exporters for the required compliances/clearances under various laws, rules



15
and regulations along with establishment of! a Single Window for all
clearances/approvals required from various tegulatory agencies for ensuring
necessary coordination between multiple agencies. Special Secretary (Logistics)
has been asked by the NCTF to monitor the development of both these portals.”

2.12 In reference to the delay in filing of BEs by importers, the Committee while
opining that interest should be calculated from the date of deposit of the enhanced duty
paid due to procedural irregularities had desired that such credit should be given in the
running account wallet. In response, the Ministry responded the following:-

“Sub-section (2) of Section 27 of the Customs Act, 1962 has been amended so
as to keep the refund of duty paid in excess by the importer before an order
permitting clearance of goods for home consumption is made, outside the scope
of principle of unjust enrichment. This shall apply when such excess payment is
evident from the Bill of Entry (BE) in the case of self-assessment by the importer
or the duty actually payable is reflected in the reassessed BE in the case of
reassessment.

In Budget 2018, Section 51A was inserted in the Customs Act to allow the
maintenance of an Electronic Cash ledger for deposits made towards duty,
interest, penalty, fee or any other sum payable by a person under the provisions
of this Act or under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) or under any other
law for the time being in force or the rules and regulations made thereunder,
using authorised mode of payment. CBIC is consulting various stakeholders like
Controller General of Accounts for implementing this provision. Once the
provision is implemented refunds can be granted in this ledger.”

2.13 Regarding examination of imported goods by Customs, the Committee had
desired that the Government take steps to help in coordinating fast clearances of
consignments and facilitate trade. The Ministry submitted the following information in
this regard:-

“The points wise submissions of the Ministry are as below:

Shortage of Manpower

The concerned cadre controlling authorities have been requested to allocate
sufficient officers for ‘clearance of goods. Steps have also been taken to recruit
more number of people through SSC in recent years. As regards cadre review,
CBEC has undergone cadre restructuring as early as 2014 and the next cadre
review will be due in 2018. ;

24X7 facility

CBEC has provided this facility at 20 sea ports and 17 Air Cargo Complexes. In
order to further boost this facilitation measure, it has’ been provided that no
merchant overtime fee would be charged for availing the facility. Jurisdictional
authorities have been asked to reach out to the stakeholders for encouraging
them to utilize this facility.

Mobile Gamma Ray Container scanners



16
|

Till date, 9 scanners have been commissioned at 5 ports ie. NPT, Mumbai,
Chennai, Tuticorin and Kandla. Further, work for installation of 3 Drive-through
Container Scanners (Road), one each at Gateway Ports of JNPT &Mundra,
besides Cochin, has been awarded on 05.01.2017. The construction work has
commenced at all sites. The procurement of scanners was subsequently
entrusted to the Ministry of Shipping, as per a decision taken by the Committee
of Secretaries in December, 2015. Pursuant to this decision, the additional
requirement of Scanners for all Major Ports and select Private Ports was
conveyed to the Ministry of Shipping on 22.01.2016. Briefly stated, Ministry of
Shipping was requested to procure 46 Mobile Scanners, 7 Drive-through
Scanners (Road) and 2 Drive-through Scanners (Rail) for 12 Major Ports and 4
Private Ports. Specifications of these scanners were also provided to the Ministry
of Shipping. Ministry of Shipping, through Indian Ports Association (IPA), is in the
process of procuring Scanners for Major Ports, in a phased manner. Further,
Ministry of Shipping has indicated their inability to procure scanners for the non-
major/private ports as these are outside their jurisdiction. Therefore, Directorate
of Logistics under CBEC has requested the concerned field formations to
examine the request of the Private Ports who are willing to install scanning facility
on their own and send the proposals for consideration of the competent authority.
So far two proposals i.e. in respect of Krishnapattnam Port and Pipavav Port for
Drive-through Container Scanners (Road) have been finalized. It is learnt that the
Scanner suggested for the Krishnapatnam Port is nearing completion. Matter is
also under discussion with Katupally and Hazira Ports and these ports have been
advised to revert with a firm proposal through their jurisdictional Customs
formations.

Factory Stuffing
For the sake of uniformity and ease of doing business, CBEC has issued Circular

No. 26/2017 dated 01.07.2017 to simplify the procedure relating to factory
stuffing hitherto carried out under the supervision of the Central Excise officers.
CBEC has laid down a simplified procedure for stuffing and sealing of export
goods in containers. It has been decided to do away with the sealing of
containers, under supervision of CBEC officials;instead, self-sealing procedure
shall be followed as per procedure, laid down. है
Regular training of customs officers and orientation programmes Tor एक्ट and orientation programmes for officers
Regular training is being provided to Customs officers by National Academy of
Customs, Excise and Narcotics and its Regional Training Institutes.”

G. Other Factors Affecting Facilitation

2.14 The Ministry also submitted detailed information on other factors affecting
facilitation:-

“The observations/recommendations also pertain to DoC/DGFT/MoShipping.
However, with regard to observations related to Department of Revenue, it is
stated that at the first meeting of the NCTF held on 28/10/2016, it was suggested



7
1

by the Revenue Secretary to do away with tHe multiplicity of committees
overseeing trade facilitation at various levels and for subsuming all other such
committees in Commerce, Shipping and. Civil Aviation Ministries. The suggestion
was endorsed by the Chair and it was decided that henceforth, NCTF will be the
single high level national body for trade facilitation. The committee will aim for
simplification, standardization, harmonization and integration of all trade related
Processes and procedures and will attempt to avoid any duplication in such
efforts. In the first meeting of the NCTF held on 28/10/2016, the Cabinet
Secretary directed all Ministries and governmental organizations to expedite the
actions to simplify the procedures, to reduce time and costs involved in the
procedures, to introduce technology to eliminate human interaction in routine
tasks and to augment infrastructure required for the processes to run smoothly.
He also highlighted it to all agencies that dissemination of policy changes and
procedural reforms is very important in order to obtain quick results. He had also
added that NCTF and Steering Committee shall be the only fora for reviewing
and resolving trade facilitation issues. NCTF forum should be used for all policy
decisions regarding Trade Facilitation whereas Steering Committee may work on
operational issues and implementation of the decisions. All concerned Ministries,
departments & agencies are very pro-active in their participation in such
meetings, where issues pertaining to them are put forth and a regular discussion -
around such issues takes place amongst the stakeholders. These highlighted
issues are then carefully chronicled in the minutes of the meetings that are then
circulated amongst all stakeholders. As per the directions of the chair, a regular
follow up is mandatory and this is also being routinely followed. In the second
meeting of the NCTF held on 08/06/2017, the Cabinet Secretary directed that it
shall be ensured by all concerned agencies that sufficient staff strength is
available at all designated airports/ ports at all times to avoid delay. In the same
meeting Commerce Secretary who is also the co-chair of the Steering
Committee, the operational arm of NCTF, highlighted the need for action on
issues pertaining to de- minimis rule for courier imports/exports. These have to be
addressed on top — priority as they are linked to e- commerce deliberations at
WTO.

The chair also directed that the Steering Committee should monitor all issues
raised by stakeholders on regular basis and the action taken report should be
presented in the next NCTF meeting.

The Cabinet Secretary has also directed that a single interactive portal may be
developed hosting updated regulatory information related to all government
agencies involved in trade facilitation and necessary IT systems may be put in
place for submission of electronic documents in place of manual documents and
a central repository of original documents may be created in all field formations of
the agencies. For the issue of arbitrary high charges imposed by the Shipping
lines, the Cabinet Secretary has directed that the nexus between shipping lines



18
H

and CFS and the issue of excessive charges being levied by shipping lines may
be examined by Ministry of Shipping, Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Commerce and Ministry of Railways for appropriate action.

In this’ regard, Ministry submits that timeframes for agencies which are part of
SWIFT are already published as Service Level Standards on ICEGATE website.
Customs already has a functional ris management system. With SWIFT,
Participating Government Agencies (PGAs) are also being encouraged to adopt
a risk.based approach to inspect/ examine consignments. So far risk criteria/
parameters from 3 PGAs i.e. FSSAI, ४४०08 and Plant Quarantine have already
been accommodated in the Integrated Risk management system of Customs.
Further, moving towards electronic and faceless interface, under SWIFT, CBIC
recently launched eSANCHIT application. eSANCHIT is a paperless processing
application of SWIFT, which allows trade to submit clearance related supporting
documents electronically with digital signatures. After successful pilot
implementation, eSANCHIT has been made mandatory in imports since 1st April,
2018. The initiative has also been given wide publicity through departmental
circulars, public notices, social media etc. To avoid inconvenience to trade,
ICEGATE help desks and email ids of the officer! system managers have been
provided to enable trade to give feedback and for resolution of issues, if any,
faced during implementation of eSANCHIT. With regard to intimation of any
amendments/changes to the Act/Rules/Procedures/Duties to the ports, it is
submitted that as soon as notifications are issued, they are posted on the
departmental website, in public domain for information of the departmental officer
as well as the stake holders. As GST has replaced Central Excise duty for all
goods except a few, integration of Customs and Central Excise portal for factory
stuffing permissions may not be required.

With regard to observations of the Hon'ble Committee related to NCTF, it is
submitted that at the third meeting of NCTF held on 42.02.2018, it was decided
that the targets for cargo release times in the Action Plan be revised downwards
to 24 hours and 12 hours in respect of exports for Sea Cargo and Air Cargo
respectively. The target for imports have also been revised downwards to two
days for Sea Cargo, and one day for Air Cargo. In the NCTF meeting dated
42.02.2018, it was also decided that every PGA may either post a representative
at every sea port or authorise Customs formation concerned to carry ,out
regulatory work. Customs would be the lead agency. and representatives from all
PGAs should work under the administrative control of the senior most Customs
officer posted there for efficient clearance of export/import related checks.
Further, at the fourth meeting of the Steering Committee of NCTF held on
23.03.2018, it was decided that every PGA should put their Risk Management
System in place and identify all such commodities where certain percentage of
sampling is required and submit such a list to Steering Committee. Regarding the
proposal of committee to setup a sub-group to look into the effectiveness of the


19

:

measures taken for increasing efficiency at ports! it is to submit that there is
already a working group on infrastructure, which looks into all such kinds of
measures. The said group is being sensitized about this observation of PAC so
as to ensure compliance.

With regard to the detailed status of implementation of the recommendation,
Directorate General of Foreign Trade has made following submissions: गा

The ease of doing business related issues are always taken up on priority by the

Department of Commerce which coordinates ‘with different departments to

facilitate the implementation of such measures. One example is notifying the

reduction in the number of mandatory documents to three each for exports and

imports. Before implementation of this measure the numbers of documents

required were 7 for exports and 10 for imports. Department of commerce
coordinated with Department of Revenue and Ministry of Shipping to drop

additional documents and limit the number to 3 only. All suggestions made by the

Hon'ble Committee for taking up with the NCTF would be informed to the NCTF

Secretariat for inclusion in next NCTF meeting’s agenda.

With regard to the detailed status of implementation of the recommendation,
Ministry of Shipping has made following submissions:

Elevated Road from Chennai Port to Maduravoyal

The 19 km Elevated: Road connects the Port directly to Maduravoyal on
Bangalore Highway without any interference with the City Roads. The upcoming
Chennai Bengaluru Industrial Corridor and Chennai Bangalore Expressway will
substantially improve cargo movement between the Port and hinterland. The
work on the elevated road was stopped in March, 2012 due to objections from
the State Government, but lot of efforts were made for convincing the State
Government of Tamil Nadu about the necessity of the project and ultimately
State Government had given their no objection to the revised alignment of the
elevated corridor. The design was prepared in the year 2017. It is likely that the
construction work for the revised alignment would start in 2019. NHAI, which is -

implementing the project, has appointed a DPR consultant for preparing a Report” है

covering the revised alignment, Detailed Engineering and cost of Land
Acquisition & Rehabilitation of Resettlement of project affected families. The
revised cost is expected to be around Rs.4000 Cr. The Project Report is likely to
be finalized by the end of July, 2018. Earlier, the cost of LA & RR was estimated
as Rs.470 Cr and was to be shared equally by ChPT and Govt. of Tamil Nadu.

_This cost is also expected to be revised during the preparation of DPR. The

project is expected to resume in early 2019 and is likely to be executed through
the EPC mode in about 3 years' time.

2 Sagar Mala



20

583 projects have been identified so far under Sagarmala Programme and are
expected to mobilize more than Rs. 8.7 Lac Cr of infrastructure investment. 72
projects (cost: Rs. 13,489 Cr) completed and 500 projects worth Rs. 4.3 Lac
Crore are already under various stages of implementation and development. In
the year 2018-19, 101 projects (cost: Rs. 26,798 Cr) are likely to be completed.

To improve road connectivity to ports, 412 road projects (cost: Rs.1,80,642 Cr,
8705 Km) have been identified under Sagarmala and are being implemented by
MoRTH, NHAI, State PWDs and Port Trusts. To improve rail connectivity to
ports, ICDs and MMLPs, more than 70 projects have been identified under the
Sagarmala program costing over Rs. 47,322 Cr. Over 4,220 km of rail network
will be developed as part of these 70 projects which are being implemented by
Indian Railways, Indian-Port Rail Corporation Limited (IPRCL), major Port Trusts,
RITES, Konkan Railways and private port operators.

In order to promote transshipment, Ministry of Shipping has relaxed licensing
conditions u/s 406 and 407 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 in May 2018 for
EXIM and Empty Containers to divert transshipment of container cargo and
specialized cargo from foreign ports to Indian ports. On similar lines, licensing
conditions u/s 406 and 407 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 were further
relaxed in June 2018 for movement of Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal
Husbandry, Fisheries and Fertilizers. There were some alignment issues raised
by Government of Tamil Nadu for Chennai to Maduravoyal elevated road corridor
project. This has been resolved and NHAI has appointed DPR Consultant for
finalization of DPR as per revised alignment.”

. Chennai Ennore Port Road Connectivity Project -

This project is also known as Ennore Manali Road Improvement Project
(EMRIP). The project which is being executed by an SPV, Chennai Ennore Port
Road Company Ltd., comprising NHAI, GoTN, ChPT and KPL. connects the Port
through the Kolkata and Bangalore Highways to the hinterland and includes the
following roads viz., Fishing Harbour Road, Ennore Express way, Thiruvottiyur-
Ponneri-Panchetty Road, Manali Oil Refinery Road and Northern segment of the
Inner Ring Road. The work on the roads for a total length of about 30 km is
substantially completed except for a small stretch in the Fishing Harbour Road.
State Government of Tamil Nadu is on the job of resettlement of fishermen
community and this stretch is expected be completed by the end of August 2018.
The upgraded portion of this road project has improved evacuation of cargo
between the Port and the hinterland.

Towards facilitating ‘Ease of Doing Business (EoDB)’, Ministry of Shipping had
identified various parameters for reducing dwell time and transaction costs in the
Major Ports. These include elimination of manual Forms, accommodation for
laboratories to Participating Government Agencies (PGAs), Direct Port Delivery,


21
!

Installation of Container Scanners, E-delivery ‘orders; RFID based Gate-
automation System, etc. These initiatives have already been implemented at
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JN Port) and are being taken up in other Major
Ports.

Elimination of manual forms has cut down long queues and waiting time for
containers at the port gate and enabled faster evacuation of EXIM cargo and
reduced congestion at port gates. a

The RFID solution has been implemented in all Major Ports to enhance security,
remove bottlenecks for seamless movement of traffic across Port gates, ensure
tracking & tracing of man, material, vehicle, equipment, & other assets, and
collection of revenue as per the notified rates. Besides a centralized web-based
Port Community System (PCS) has been operationalized across all Major Ports
which enables seamless data flow between the various stakeholders viz.
Customs, CFSs, Shipping Lines & ICDs.

Ministry of Shipping has issued an order making use of e-invoice, e-payment and
e-delivery order mandatory for all stakeholders across all Major Ports, all
terminals within the Major Ports, private ports, private terminals and CFSs/ICDs.
In order to enhance the transparency of charges for traders, on the direction of
Ministry, all Major Ports and Indian Ports Association (IPA) have provided Link of
all rates and charges levied by the Port & Shipping Lines on their website. JN
Port, which is the pilot port for implementation of reforms under EoDB has
undertaken a number of initiatives for ensuring convenience to trade and
reduction in cargo EXIM Dwell time. To ensure faster cargo evacuation JNPT has
set up Customs Processing Zones, Centralized Parking Plaza, besides
undertaking widening of Port Highways. It has also developed a Common Rail
Yard. JNPT has procured electronic RTGCs for increasing yard productivity,
besides making ground breaking initiatives’ for facilitating Direct Port Delivery &
Direct Port Entry to facilitate trade. All these reforms are regularly communicated
to the stakeholders through website update, social media and regular
stakeholder meetings. JN Port is the first port to start Direct Port Delivery (DPD)
and Direct Port Entry (DPE). DPD has increased from 5.42 % in March 2016 to
39.15 % in March 2018. In JNPT the percentage of Direct Port Entry of Export
containers increased from 44.57% in March,2016 to 79% in March, 2018. The
exporters are currently benefitted by savings in cost of about Rs.2,000/- and in
time of 1 to 2 days while resorting to DPE. At JN Port the dwell time of import
containers has reduced from 58.08 hrs. in 2015-16 to 50.82 hrs. in 2017-18. The
dwell time of export containers has reduced from 88.35 hrs, in 2015-16 to 83.71
hrs. in 2017-18.

Multimodal Transportation of Goods (MMTG) Bill



22 ; @

॥
With regard to the said Bill, Ministry of Shipping has submitted that it deals with:
transportation by inland waterways or sea borne transportation whereas
‘multimodal transportation’. can also take place in combination of modes
excluding waterways/sea like road-rail and road air etc. Hence, the subject
matter of multimodal transportation does not fall strictly in the domain of Ministry
of Shipping. In this background, recently, the Allocation of Business Rules was
amended to include the subject matter of integrated development of logistics
sector in the domain of Department of Commerce since 7" July 2017. Therefore,
the Logistics Division of Department of Commerce was identified as the
appropriate agency to deal with the legislative proposal of the Multimodal
Transportation of Goods Bill. The Department of Commerce, on 26" February,
2018, held stakeholder consultation meeting on the Multimodal Transportation of
Goods Bill under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary (Logistics).
Subsequently, the Department had circulated a draft Cabinet Note for Inter-
Ministerial consultations on the proposal for introduction of the Multi Modal
Transportation of Goods Bill for enactment and for repealing the Multi Modal
Transportation of Goods Act, 1993. The comments of the Ministry of Shipping on
the draft Bill have been sent to Department of Commerce.
With regard to the detailed status of implementation of the recommendation, of implementation of the recommendation.

Railway Board, Ministry.of Railways has made following submissions: following submissions:

4. That almost all CONCOR facilities “are connected by rail to move
containers to Inland Container Depots to promote faster transportation
and reducing the load of traffic carried by road transport.

2. Recently an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) between Ministry of
Railway and Ministry of Shipping had been constituted to undertake
“Steps to reduce turn round time (TRT) of freight trains at Port".

Action taken on TRT Report is as below:

(i) Haridaspur-Paradeep project revived through joint efforts of Ministry of
Shipping and Ministry of Railways.

(ii) CCRS relaxations obtained for additional six paths on Castle Rock-
Kuelem sections.

(iii) Electrification taken up in Vizag Port.

(iv) Engine on Load (EOL) introduced for Visakhapatnam Port Trust
operations.

(v) Alternate manual coal loading points opened at Paradeep.

(vi) Most of soft issues stand resolved.


23
i
i
(vii) Monitoring mechanism of DRMs and Chairman to monitor
implementation of recommendations.

3. Dedicated Freight Corridor projects

The Dedicated Freight Corridor is the most ambitious and biggest ever project in
the railway infrastructure sector. Ministry of Railways has sanctioned for
construction of two dedicated freight corridors; i.e. Eastern and Western DFCs
along the golden quadrilateral and its diagonals.

The Eastern DFC (1856 kms) will start from Ludhiana in Punjab and terminate at
Dankuni in West Bengal will cater to mineral traffic from Eastern India. The
Western DFC (1504 kms) will start from Jawaharlal Nehru Port, New Mumbai
and terminate at Dadri near Delhi will cater to port traffic of western coast.

Status of DFC projects:

98.7% Land acquisition has been completed and overall 97.2% contracts have
been awarded. है

Sanctioned cost of the project is Rs.81459 Crores. The overall financial and
physical progress is 48.9% and 51.6% respectively. Project is being
commissioned in phases from 2018-20 as per the following schedule: -

EDFC
S.No. Section Target
1. Kjurja-Bhaupur (343 kms) November-2018
2. Bhaupur-Mughalsarai (402 | August-2019
: kms_
3. Sonnagar-Mughalsarai (126 | October-2019
kms)
4. Khurja-Dadri (46 kms) __| December-2019
5. Pilkhani-Sahnewal (179 kms) March-2020
[fe | Khurja-Pilkhani (222 kms) March-2020
WDFC
S.No. Section Target
4. Rewari-Marwar (432 kms)* | December-2018



24
|
2. Marwar-Palanpur (207 kms) | September-2019
3. Palanpur-JNPT (738 kms) March-2020
4. Rewari-Dadri (127 kms) March-2020

* Trial run of trains was introduced on Ateli — Phulera (192 kms), a part of
Rewari - Marwar section on 15" August, 2018 -

On complete commissioning of Dedicated Freight Corridors, Indian Railways will
be able to offer higher transport output with faster transit time and increase in
average speed of trains. This would improve the supply chain for the
industries/logistics players etc. in its catchment areas leading to additional stack
container trains and heavy haul will also add to the carrying capacity and help
increase Railway's market-share.

4, 54 numbers of projects (6967 Kms) costing Rs. 50,834 cr. are sanctioned
and under progress, to handle the port connectivity traffic on IR. Out of this, 37
numbers of projects (4552 Kms) costing Rs.35739 cr. are on Eastern Coastal
Region and 17 numbers of projects (2415 Kms) costing Rs.15095 cr. on Western
Coastal Region.”

Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee of the Committee

2.145 With regard to the impact of trade facilitation measures, the Committee in
their Original Report had desired that the Department of Commerce (DOC)!
Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) should carry out a comprehensive
audit and analysis of the impact of the same including an analysis of compliance
costs vis-a-vis the benefits accrued. The Committee had also desired that
stringent action be taken against those who did not adhere to the timelines and a
plan for trade facilitation for the next five years be prepared. In their Action Taken
Report, while acknowledging the numerous measures undertaken by the
Department for facilitating trade, the Committee had noted the effectiveness of
Governments’ measures that were captured by the World Banks’ Doing Business
Reports being released annually. These reports showed that documentary and
border compliance ‘costs for both imports and exports had come down. The

Committee had exhorted the Government to carry out regular analysis to derive

the assurance that importers and exporters were actually benefitted by the
measures implemented by the Department. While noting with dismay that till date
no provision has been made for carrying out impact analysis, the Committee
opine that the steps taken are required to be evaluated to determine their
effectiveness and merely depending on third party reports would not be an
appropriate indicator of the actual effect on importers and exporters. The


25
|

Committee recommend that the Working Groups concerned of the National recommend that the Working Groups concerned of the National
Committee on Trade Facilitation may carry out the impact-analysis of various on Trade Facilitation may carry out the impact-analysis of various
measures and apprise the Committee thereof. and apprise the Committee thereof. Further, it is imperative that India
may assess where it stands in terms of ease of trade in comparison with
countries which are in the same stage of development. The Committee,
accordingly, further reiterate their recommendation made in the 97" report that a further reiterate their recommendation made in the 97" report that a
comparative statement of the border and compliance costs of trading in India vis- statement of the border and compliance costs of trading in India vis-
a-vis other countries like avis other countries like China, USA, Brazil and South Asian Association for USA, Brazil and South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries may be furnished within three months Cooperation (SAARC) countries may be furnished within three months
of presentation of this report to evaluate the effectiveness of efforts made by the resentation of this report to evaluate the effectiveness of efforts made by the
DoC.

2.16 The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry of Finance that CBEC
and field formations have been making efforts to encourage importers/exporters
to make full use of 24x7 facility. Further, in order to ensure full usage of 24x7
facility, field formations are engaging with stakeholders for proper deployment of
manpower, The Committee would like to be apprised of the resultant increase in Committee would like to be apprised of the resultant increase in
use of this facility and the reduction in dwell time by introducing the aforesaid of this facility and the reduction in dwell time by introducing the aforesaid
measures. The Committee further note that CBEC has provided the facility of
24x7 at 20 sea ports and 17 Air Cargo Complexes. In order to further boost this
facilitation measure, it has been provided that no merchant overtime fee would be
charged for availing the facility. Jurisdictional authorities have been asked to
reach out to the stakeholders for encouraging them to utilize this facility. The out to the stakeholders for encouraging them to utilize this facility. The
Committee may be apprised of the result of this endeavour. may be apprised of the result of this endeavour.

2.17 The Committee observe that CBEC has merged the two facilitation
schemes namely ACP (Accredited Client Programme) and AEO (Authorized
Economic operator) into a combined three-tier AEO programme, to enhance the
scope of these programmes so as to provide further benefits to the entities who
have demonstrated strong internal control system and willingness to comply with
the laws administered by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. While noting
thata that a total of 1405 AEOs had been enrolled and the target was to have 2000 AEOs of 1405 AEOs had been enrolled and the target was to have 2000 AEOs
by 34st December, 2018 and 3500 AEOs by March, 2019, the Committee would like 31st December, 2018 and 3500 AEOs by March, 2019, the Committee would like
to be apprised of targets achieved so far by the CBEC. be apprised of targets achieved so far by the CBEC.

2.18 The Committee observe that an electronic utility, eSANCHIT (Electronic
Storage And Computerised Handling of IT documents) for uploading digitally
scanned supporting documents had been developed and was made mandatory
for importers w.e.f. 1* April, 2018. To give a legal backing to this initiative, “Bill of
Entry (Electronic Integrated Declaration and Paperless Processing) Regulations,
2018” were introduced from 11.05.2018. A pilot on eSANCHIT in exports had been
launched in Chennai and Delhi from 01.09.2018. Based on the feedback, full-
fledged export eSANCHIT would start shortly. This would be in continuation of



26
|

similar facility for Importers. The Committee desire that the implementation of ine desire that the implementation of the
utility be completed in a specified time frame. specified time frame.

2.19 As regards Committees’ recommendation on delay in clearing the goods by
the importers at ports, the Committee observe that in the third meeting of NCTF
held on 12.02.2018 chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, it was decided that a single
integrated portal was to be designed to assist importers and exporters for the
required compliances/clearances under various laws, rules and regulations along
with establishment of a Single Window for all clearances/approvals required from
various regulatory agencies for ensuring necessary coordination between
multiple agencies and that Special Secretary (Logistics) was asked by the NCTF
to monitor the development of both these portals. The Committee are unhappy to unha to
note that the same has not been done even after a lapse of one year anc urge that that the same has not been done even after a lapse of one year and urge that
the same may be expedited.

2.20 Regarding credit of interest for enhanced duty paid, the Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that, Section 51A was inserted in the Customs Act in
Budget, 2018 to allow the maintenance of an Electronic Cash ledger for deposits
made towards duty, interest, penalty, fee or any other sum payable by a person
under the provisions of this Act or under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 or under
any other law for the time being in force or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, using authorised mode of payment and that CBIC is consulting
various stakeholders like Controller General of Accounts for implementing this
provision. The Committee expect that the same may have been finalised by now Committee expect that the same may have been finalised by now
and refunds granted through the electronic cash ledger instantly. [he vommittee ledger instantly. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the updated information in the matter. information in the matter.

2.24. In the context of cadre review and creation of vacancies and immediate
recruitments to augment the operational requirements of the Customs at air/sea
ports, the Committee note the Ministry’s reply that CBEC had undergone cadre
restructuring as early as 2014 and the next cadre review was due in 2018. The
Committee are disappointed to note that while these replies were submitted in the
second half of 2018, no mention was made of such a review being carried out.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the status thereof and the steps taken to Committee desire to be apprised of the status thereof and the steps taken to
have adequate number of officers at air/sea ports for faster clearances o' goods. adequate number of officers at air/sea ports for faster clearances of goods.

2.22 The Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that for the issue of arbitrary
high charges imposed by the Shipping lines, the Cabinet Secretary has directed
that the nexus between Shipping lines and Container Freight Stations (CFS) and
the issue of excessive charges being levied by shipping lines may be examined
by Ministry of Shipping, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Commerce and
Ministry of Railways for appropriate action. The Committee are perturbed to note
that in spite of Cabinet Secretary's directions the Ministries concerned have not directions’the Ministries concerned have not



27
I

taken concrete action to wenet concrete action to contain the nexus betweén the Shipping Lines and the nexus between the Shipping Lines and
Container Freight Stations and on the issue of excess charges. The Committee Freight Stations and on the issue of excess charges. The Committee
are turther disappointed to note that no response has been given by the Ministry further disappointed to note that no response has been given by the Ministr
on appointing a regulator to oversee the issue. appointing a requlator to oversee the issue. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the status of resolution of the matter, of the status of resolution of the matter. The Committee hope that NCTF
would ensure that all the decisions taken by them in their various meetings would
be implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee further reiterate ine Committee further reiterate their
recommendation made in the 977 report that an agreement/ MoU with State made in the 977 report that an_agreement/ MoU with State
Governments be invariably made before taking up infrastructure augmentation be invariably made before taking u infrastructure augmentation
projects to avoid disputes at later stages. The Committee would like to be to avoid disputes at_later stages. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the status of completion/progress of 101 projects under the Sagar of the status of completion/progress of 101 projects under the Sagar
Mala. Further, the Committee desire that all infrastructure projects should be the Committee desire that all infrastructure rojects should be
completed within a specified time frame and monitoring be done on a regular within a specified time frame and monitoring be done on a regular
basis: the Multimodal Transportation of Goods (MMTG) Bill may be followed up the Multimodal Transportation of Goods (MMTG) Bill may be followed u
and and finalized and the Dedicated Freight Corridors may be monitored vigorously and the Dedicated Freight Corridors may be monitored vigorous!
so that they are completed in time and thereby preventing cost escalation, that they are completed in time and thereb reventing cost escalation, While
acknowledging the various measures taken by the Ministry to facilitate trade, the
Committee also_opine that timelines may be specified for each activity, the also opine that timelines may be specified for each activity, the
efficacy and success of initiatives undertaken by the Government may be and success of: initiatives undertaken by the Government _may be
reqularly assessed and responsibility fixed in case of non-achievement of the assessed and responsibility fixed in case of non-achievement of the

Specified targets.



28
|

Chapter-lll - Implementation of recommendations of the 21% Report on “Role of
Indian Coast Guard” and 51°*Report on Action Taken by the Government thereon

A. Summary of 21% Report

3.14 The 21 Report (16th LS) of PAC (2015-16) on ‘Role and Functioning of Indian
Coast Guard' was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on
13" August, 2015. The Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is mandated to protect the maritime
and other national interests in the Maritime Zones of India by way of providing
protection to offshore and other structures, protection to fishermen and assisting in anti-
smuggling/piracy-operations, safeguarding the maritime interests and security of India,
assisting vessels and fishermen in distress and protecting the maritime environment.
The examination of ICG brought out various shortcomings/lapses in the functioning of
the ICG viz. delay in/non-approval of 15 year Perspective Plans and 5 year Coast
Guard Development Plans, huge shortfall in utilisation of sanctioned funds,
inadequate/lack of infrastructural facility, lack of coordination between the Indian Navy
(IN) and the ICG, non-achievement of planned acquisitions, defective acquisition
procedure, inadequate force level, shortage of manpower and equipment, shortfalls in
decommissioning and replacement of obsolete vessels, huge number of outstanding
refits, legal limitation faced by the Indian Coast Guard etc.

3.2. After carrying out detailed examination of the subject along with interaction with
the Ministry of Defence and the ICG, the Committee in their 21% report made 27
recommendations including better formulation and earnest implementation of both the
Long Term and Five Year term plans for ICG, overhauling of planning and budgeting
mechanism and prioritizing their items of expenditure to make plans achievable,
improving of defence procurement procedures to achieve targetted acquisitions,
planning ,sanction and establishment of ICG stations to be.carried out on mission mode,
concerted efforts for faster inductions to improve the age profile of vessels, ensuring
timely repair/refits of ICG ships for more effective deployment of vessels for operational
duties, filling up of vacancies, need for training to Indian Coast Guard personnel, award
of contracts to competent and financially sound shipyards, clear cut roles to be assigned
to the Marine Police and ICG, and need to monitor efficacy and continuity of coastal
security measures and norms for patrolling in maritime / coastal zones. The Committee
also recommended that relevant amendments to the Acts, Rules, Regulation and
Manuals need to be effected early to make the ICG empowered and competent enough
to carry out its duties more effectively, steps to be taken to track ships and register
fishing vessels putting in place a reliable Management information System and ICG to
be entrusted with task of preventing marine environmental pollution.

8... Summary of 51** Report

3.3. After examination and analysis of the action taken replies from the Ministry of
Defence, the Committee presented its 51° Report (16th LS): on Action taken by the
Ministry on the 215 Report to the Parliament on 2277 November, 2016. Out of 27


29
i

recommendations in the original report, the Committee becepted 19, did not wish to
Pursue 4 recommendations in view of the replies of the Government and reiterated 4
recommendations. Regarding acquisitions, the Committee recommended the Ministry of
Defence to make efforts to see that the defence procurements which are at various
stages of acquisition are fast-tracked particularly in the context of the new Defence
acquisition procedure being put in place, so that all the targetted acquisitions are
achieved at the earliest and the country's defence preparedness may be maintained at
the required level. For the difficulties being faced in getting refits done by DPSU/PSU
shipyards, the Committee recommended that the DPSU shipyards may be strengthened
and that a dedicated shipyard for ICG ships such as the Navy be developed to get the
refit jobs on ICG ships. The Committee had also urged the MoD/ICG to fast-track the
execution of the project for establishing ICG Academy at Azhikkal, Kerala. The
Committee recommended that duties and responsibilities of all the Ministries/
Departments and forces concerned with the country’s coastal security be clearly
demarcated so as to ensure effective coordination amongst them and minimise
possibilities of system failures. While noting that the MEA had proposed to seek legal
opinion of the Attorney General of India with respect to grant of powers to the Navy and
the Coast Guard for visit, board, search and seizure of vessels in the EEZ in
contravention of MZI Act, 1976, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the latest
status of the aforesaid Act which would empower the ICG as well as the Indian Navy for
search and seizure of boats and vessels. The Committee had desired that correlating,
correcting and updating of data with the Regional Hars. which was under progress, be
accomplished within a given time-frame so that an internal audit of data could be carried
out thereafter. They had also desired that the Search and Rescue (SAR):software which
was under progress be developed at the earliest.

3.4 On selection of the 21° and 51% reports for examination, the Sub-Committee took
oral evidence of the Ministry of Defence on 27" September, 2018.

c. Inadequate Training Infrastructure

3.5 — Regarding inadequate training infrastructure, the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence and ICG made the following oral submissions:-

“Sir, as you were aware, we had, in our ATNs, submitted that the Note for the
approval of the CCS for sanction of the revised project cost was moved by the
Ministry. However, while the matter was under consideration, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests withdrew the environmental clearance and refused to
grant it because of the CRZ Regulation. So, as of now, we are in touch with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests to give us a final word on the status of the
clearance regarding the project. Meanwhile, the Ministry is also exploring other
options so that further delay in setting up this academy can be avoided...

Sir, we have approached various coastal States. There is nothing firm as on date
but the coastal States are being approached to see whether we can have the
final appropriate plan, which has adequate seafront to meet the requirement of
Coast Guard for the training of officers. .....


D.

3.6

30
!

Sir, we have already gone to two States. Letters! were written to all the Chief
Secretaries of the coastal States. But only two States, namely, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu have responded. In Karnataka, we have identified 160 acres of land
and in Tamil Nadu, we have identified 140 acres of land.”

Non-installation of Static Sensors

Regarding, installation of proposed 38 Static Sensors for tracking illegal

activities, the representatives of the Ministry made the following oral submission:-

E.

3.7

‘Sir, you asked about the 38 sites. At 46 locations, Coastal Surveillance Network
has already been set up by the Coast Guard, which is already operational. About
he 38 sites, the second phase of Coastal Surveillance Network is in the final
stage. Most probably, it will be approved within two-three months’ time. The
Completion Report is due in 2019. Land identification has already been done.
Land has already been acquired. Money has already been paid. So, everything
as been done. Only the order is to be placed to the BEL.”

Legal constraints and lack of empowerment of the Indian Coast Guard

In the context of empowering the ICG by amending the MZI Act, 1976 which was

inordinately pending since July, 2011, the Representatives of the Ministry stated the
following:-

3.8

“The MZI Act 1976, which of course the MEA is responsible for, it demarcates the
various maritime zones along the country. It lays down very clearly the sovereign
rights of the country, particularly the EEZ. Now, big challenge that the Coast
Guard currently faces is that while MZI Act identifies the sovereign rights of the
country in that zone and it also identifies the places where people can be tried for
offences under that, it does not designate an authority for the purposes of
investigation and arrest, seizure of vessels and individuals who are currently
undertaking any activity which is hostile to the interests of the nation. That is
precisely our point with MEA that you need to empower Coast Guard to be
designated as the agency which is legally empowered within the purview of this
Act to be able to carry out this activity. MEA, of course, is of the view that the
purpose of this Act is very different. It is only to implement the UNCLOS
regulation on maritime laws and it is therefore a very peaceful act and it does not
serve the purpose. It needs to be appreciated that this is the only Act which talks
about the maritime zones.”

The Ministry submitted the following detailed information regarding efforts made

and present status to further empower Indian Coast Guard (ICG) since last review
covering infrastructure, land, acquisition, personnel, legal empowerment and financial
planning and budgetary aspect:-

“4.0. Infrastructure

4.14. In order to meet the growing operational requirements of Coastal Security,
Law Enforcement, Pollution Response and Search & Rescue, the 106 has grown


31

| .
in strength with respect to number of stations! and establishment. of new
Headquarters at field level. The Indian Coast Guard now has 05 Regional
Headquarters (RHQs), 16 District Headquarters (DHQs), 10 Air establishments
and 42 stations as on date, apart from the Coast Guard Headquarters at New
Delhi. The operational capability of ICG has ‘increased manifold with the
implementation of numerous measures instituted by the Government.

1.2 The infrastructure development has been accorded due .priority and
impetus to cater for the force level expansion of the service. All 42 sanctioned
stations have been commissioned including 20 new stations post 2009. The
creation of deficient infrastructure at these stations is at various stages for
sanction.

1.3. The ICG has a varied array of ships and aircraft to execute its charter of
duties. A number of modern platforms, including Twin Engine Heavy Helicopters
and Multi Mission Maritime Aircraft (MMMA) have been proposed for acquisition
into ICG. These new age Aviation platforms will not only strengthen ICG but will
also give early warning to surface platforms.

1.4. The various accretions with respect to operational HQs, surface platforms

and Aircraft post 2009 are as under:-

(a) Surface /Air Units
HQs /Stations 2009 _| Accretion Present
CG Command [| 02 02°
HQs (West & East)
[RHQs—~—SS 03 02 05
(01105... | 11 05 16
CG Stations" 22 20 42
[CG Air Units sd Air Units 04 | 05.1 16

(b) Operational Units Ships /Aircraft

Ships 2009 Accretion Present
OPVs / PCVs 14 07 21
FPVs 28 13 41
IBs 13 44 - 58
ACVs [| 06 | 12 18
Total 61 76 138

(c) Operational Aircrafts

Aircraft 2009 Accretion Present
Dornier 24 15 39
Chetak 21 | - [ 19
ALH [= | 04 04

Total 45 19 62


1.5

1.6

1.7

32
1

Training Infrastructure: पर

(a) For induction training, downstream and specialised training for
officers and Enrolled Personnel, ICG takes help of Indian Navy as both the
services operate in the common Maritime Domain. The ICG also utilises
the advance training infrastructure of Indian Navy for progressive training
and promotion related courses. With regard to training of the Aviation
Cadre, ICG utilizes services of:Indian Navy & Indian Air Force (IAF) for
Pilots and Observers (Navigators). Indian Navy and IAF provide training
for Aviation technical cadre of the ICG for maintenance of air assets. Also
the training from other Govt / PSUs firms viz. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya
Udan Academy (IGRUA) are resorted to, whenever Indian Navy/ IAF are
not able to meet ICG training requirements.

(b) For a period from 4982 to 2009, on an average, per year 30-40
officers and 200-220 Enrolled Personnel (EPs) were inducted into ICG
from 1982 till 2009. Post 2009, the induction has been enhanced to 115-
420 officers per year. This has been further enhanced to 130 officers and
720 Enrolled Personnel per year w.e.f. 2016. A proposal for creation of
246 posts (60 officers & 186 EPs) for additional training staff in under
consideration for supplementing training staff at Indian Navy's training
establishments, to meet enhanced requirements of ICG.

(c) The Coast Guard Training Centre (CGTC) at Kochi has limited
facilities being an ad-hoc training centre for ICG personnel on CG charter
of duties. Many services / organization and friendly nations are being
provided ICG assistance to train their personnel on marine aspects.
Despite the constraints on instructors and infrastructure, keeping the
National Perspective in mind, ICG is providing training to personnel of
Paramilitary, Police and other Govt agencies like Customs, DG
Lighthouses and Lightships, etc.

ICG Academy Project: The proposal for establishing the Indian Coast
Guard Academy at Azhikkal, Kerala was accorded Approval-in-Principle
(AIP) in September 2012. However, Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change has denied grant of Environment and CRZ clearances for
setting-up Indian Coast Guard Academy at Azhikkal, Kerala, as the project
site at Azhikkal falls under CRZ-1(A) area, wherein no construction is
permissible as per the CRZ notification. Therefore, the process of
exploring / identifying suitable alternate land for Indian Coast Guard
Academy has been initiated by Indian Coast Guard in other coastal states.

Aviation Infrastructure

(a) ICG has its own Aviation Infrastructure at Daman, Bhubaneswar,
Chennai, Porbandar and Goa. Further, ICG Air operations are also being
carried out at Kochi, New Mangalore, Mumbai, Port Blair and Vizag
through hired facilities from Airports Authority of India (AAI) or facilities of



1.8.

(b)

1.9.

(a)

33
i

Indian Navy. The civil works pertaining to aviation infrastructure’ at
Ratnagiri is in progress.

(b) The Govt has also accorded sanction for leasing of 7326 sqm. land
from AAI at Porbandar. The land has been taken over by ICG now.
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has also accorded approval for leasing of
AAI land at Tuticorin, Kolkata and New Mangalore for a period of 30 years.
Leasing of AAI land at Juhu Airport has been sanctioned. The
development of aviation infrastructure is being given utmost priority.

Birthing/ Refit / Repair Facilities for ICG Ships

(a) Presently, ICG has built / acquired 1798 meters dedicated berthing
facilities for its ships at 13 stations. ICG has added almost 650 meters in
overall holding of berthing facilities in last five years and as on date; 676
meters of sanctioned jetty work for 6 stations is in progress. Further, new
jetty construction proposals for 1,110 meters have been initiated.

Approval for construction of 03 lane slipway at Port Blair was accorded in *
March 2018, with completion period of 364 weeks after award of work.
After completion this facility would be used for docking facility for all Fast
Patrol Vessels (FPVs) & below class of ships of Andman & Nicobar
region.

Consultancy services for preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR)
and cost estimates for Slipway / Ship-lift Facility at Ratnagiri has been
awarded to IIT Chennai.

IT Infrastructure

The proposal for Digital Coast Guard Phase-I (BCG-I) which consists of
the following three components is under consideration:

(i) Establishment of CG Chakra — An Optical Fiber Network
connecting all Coast Guard establishments (86 units / 51 locations)
till date, Controller of Defence Accounts (CDA) offices dealing with
ICG including CGDA and ICG ships at various jetties to meet all the
operational and administrative requirements.

(ii) Establishment of Coast Guard Main Data Center (CG-MDC) and
Disaster Recovery Center (CG-DRDC) to host all applications and
its utilities. The main data center will be located at ICG premises at
Noida and disaster recovery centre. would be at seismic free zone
at Bangalore. है

(ili) | Development of an Integrated Enterprise Résource Planning (ERP)
based platform for following:-


(b)

(a)

34
i

. A separate application specially designed to meet the
inventory management of CG surface units and CGSDs.

न A separate application specially designed to meet the
inventory management of Air units and CGASD.

. A Finance management application which will integrate with

Surface and Air inventory.
°
The phase-l of project SAERA (Surface Aviation E-Returns Application) is
currently undergoing final user acceptance test, and will be functional by
October 2018. The full project will be completed by February 2019.

Land Acquisition
Land acquisition is a long drawn process. The graphical depiction below

highlights the earnest efforts of Ministry to augment the land holding of
Coast Guard.

2000 ee

— ही |

2085 | 1200

(b)

2010 2014 2018

Three times increase in land holding

A total no. of 34 land acquisitions / lease proposals have been sanctioned

_ from December 2015 till date. New proposals for acquisition/lease of land

2.0

(a)

at New Mangalore, Kochi, Karwar, Androth, Kakinada, Veraval, Vizag and
Daman are under consideration. -
Manpower

As on date, Coast Guard has a total strength of 13,346 personnel
(officers-1762, EP-10284 & Civilian-1300) against a sanctioned strength of
16,676 (officers-2312, EP-12417 & Civilian-1947). 249 vacancies of
officers have been filled within last two years through the special
measures besides enhancing the induction to 130 officers during general
recruitment, as appended below:-

Si.

Measures Undertaken Vacancies Remarks



35

1

filled till date
(i) | Re-Employment of IN SSC officers 14 Lo |
in the rank of Comdt(JG) & below
(ii) | Re-Employment of Law officer from 07 | |
Army/Navy/AF
(ili) | Short term deputation of IN officers 133 Including 13
against vacant billets, in case of Army and 09
Officers i AF officers
(iv) | Induction of Commercial Pilot 95 po
License (CPL) holders as pilots
under scheme of Short Service
Appointee (SSA
LC Tota | 249
(b) The ICG has kept pace with the manpower requirement and in last four
years has recruited a large number of personnel as follows:
Year 2015 2016 2017 2018
Officers 113 147 131 128
Yantrik 135 132 | 656 | 125
Nvk (GD) 524 553 456 485
Nvk (DB) 30 43 | 59 | 40 #
Total 802 875 722 778
# only one batch selection completed as on date
(c) The manpower status with respect to officers, Enrolled Personnel and
Civilian Personnel before and post 2009 is as follows:-
Before Present Strength Increase
2009 including deputationists) %
Officers 702 1894 63
Enrolled Personnel 4436 10509 58
Civilians Personnel 858 1301 34

The manpower shortage has come down to 17.84% from earlier shortage
of 20% in 2016 and 19% in 2017

(d)
personnel by 2030.
3.0 Legal Empowerment
3.1. Responsibility for Coastal
(a)

Security

The Coast Guard manpower is envisaged to be stabilised at about 25000

In February, 2009, the CCS approved setting up of a robust Coastal

Security mechanism along the Indian coastline. As per the CCS directives,
Indian Navy has been made the overall authority responsible for Maritime
Security including Offshore and Coastal Security.


(b)

36
॥

i
ICG has been designated as the authority responsible to coordinate
Coastal Security in Territorial Waters (12 NM from baseline) including
waters to be patrolled by Marine Police.

3.2 Legal Empowerment under various Acts. The ICG has been
empowered under various Acts to enforce respective provisions as enumerated
“below: :

(a) Cr PC, 1973. These are procedural in nature:-

Section 41(1)- Arrest without warrant.

Section 47 - Search of place entered by persons sought to be arrested
Section 51(1)- Search of arrested person.

Section 52- Power to seize offensive weapons.

Section 149- Prevention of cognizable offences.

Section 150-Information of design to commit cognizable offences.
Section 151- Arrest to prevent commission of cognizable offences.
Section 152-Prevention of injury to public property.

(b) | Customs Act, 1962.

Section 37- Power to board conveyances.

Section 38- Power to require production of documents and ask questions.
Section 100- Power to search suspected persons entering or leaving
India. :

Section 101- Power to search suspected person in certain other cases.
Section 102- Persons to be searched may require to be taken before
Magistrate /Gazetted officers of Customs.

Section 103- Power to screen or x-ray bodies of suspected persons
for detecting secreted goods.

Section 104- Power to arrest.

Section 106- Power to stop and search conveyances.

Section 107- Power to examine persons

Section 110 - Seizure of goods, documents and things.

(c) | Merchant Shipping Act, 1958

Section 69. - Proceedings on forfeiture of ship.

Section 356G - Inspection & control of oil tankers and other ships.

Section 356J - Power to give a notice to owner of polluting ship.

Section 356K - Powers to take measures for preventing or containing oil or
noxious liquid substance pollution. |

(d) Regulation of Fishing by Foreign Vessels (४21) Act, 1981.

The Coast Guard Officers/ Subordinate Officers have been designated as
Authorised Officers and exercise all powers under Maritime Zones of India
(Regulation of Fishing by Foreign Vessels) Act, 1981.

+0


4.0

(a)

(b)

(c)

5.0.

(a)

(b)

37
|

i

(e) Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Maritime
Navigation and Fixed Platforms on Continental Shelf Act, 2002 (SUA
Act, 2002).

Coast Guard Officers have been’ empowered with powers of arrest,
investigation and prosecution with respect to offences against ships, fixed
platforms, cargo of a ship and navigational facilities etc. under the SUA
Act, 2002.

(f) Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act,
1985.

Section 41(2)-Power to issue warrant and authorisation.

Section 42(1)-Powers of entry, search, seizure and arrest without
warrant or authorisation.

Section 67 - Power to call for information etc.

Increases in Operations/Exercises

Coastal Security Exercises and Operations. Post 2009, ICG has
coordinated 179 Coastal Security Exercises and 343 Coastal Security
Operations along the Indian coast and Island territories.

Deployment of Ships and Aircraft. The ships and aircraft
deployment has been progressively increased since 2009. Presently, on
an average, 35-40 ships/ boats are being deployed in non-monsoon
period and 8-10 air sorties are undertaken every day.

Boarding Operation. The boarding operations undertaken by
ICG ships at sea have also increased since 2009. ICG has undertaken
more than 30,000 boarding operations in 2017 compared to 2274
boarding operations in 2009. हि

Equipment Modernisation
The new generation state-of-art navigation and communication equipment,

sensors and machineries have been fitted onboard ships as well as
aircraft for undertaking Coast Guard Charter of responsibilities. The

“sustenance and reach coupled with the new generation equipment

provides the new generation ships and aircraft, the capability to perform
the role of a command platform. These ships are also equipped with
modern Pollution Response Equipment to respond to oil spill at sea.

As part of Coastal Security mechanism, a surveillance system called
Coastal Surveillance Network (CSN), comprising of Chain of Static
Sensors having radars, Automatic Identification system (AIS), day/night
cameras and meteorological sensors is being established in two Phases
along the coastline and Islands by Indian Coast Guard. As on date, 46
radar stations in Phase-] have been established and are functioning


38

i

optimally. Additional 38 radar stations aré being installed under CSN
Phase-II in order to achieve near gap free surveillance of coastline, the
same is under consideration.

6.0 Capital Acquisition

(a) As on 30 September, 2018, ICG has a force level of 138 ships/boats and
62 aircraft. 55 ships/boats are under construction in various shipyards and 16
Advance Light Helicopters are under production at HAL, Bangalore. These
aircraft are likely to join the ICG fleet, commencing January 2019. ICG has
envisaged 23 ships/boats and 20 aircraft in Coast Guard Definitive Action
Programme (CGDAP) (2017-22). With the fructification of schemes envisaged in
CGDAP (2017-22) and de-induction of old assets, ICG will have a targetted force
level of 216 ships/boats (with no old/aged ships) and 100 aircraft.

(b) The status of carryover of twelfth plan for 07 surface platforms/ on-going
acquisition projects are as follows:

(i) Surface Platforms

(a) 02 PCVs, 02 IBs & 03 OPVs are under process.

(b) New Schemes of XIII Plan {(06+06) ACVs and 08 FPVs are under
consideration.

(ii) Aviation Platforms

(a) Fresh RFI is being issued for acquisition of 14 Twin Engine Heavy
Helicopter (TEHH) which has been retracted due to expiry of
validity bid by M/s Airbus Helicopters, France.

(b) The case for acquisition of 06 Multi-Mission Maritime Aircraft
(MMMA) is being progressed by DRDO / CABS, Bangalore for ‘In
Principle’ approval of CCS.

(c) Replacement of 02 Aircraft (01 Dornier and a Chetak each) is being
processed.

7.0 Financial Planning and Budgetary aspects
(a) The details of budget allocated to ICG in both heads i.e. Capital and
Revenue and utilisation for the last five years is as follows:-

(Rs. in crore)

Year BE ~ Final, Utilisation % age
Allocation Utilisation
2013-14 2829.81 2078.15 2117.72 400.00 %

4°


39
2014-15 | 2680.26 2435.28 2428.02 99.70 %
2015-16 | 3014.00 3047.61 3033.95 99.55 %
2016-17 | 4124.41 4269.17 4242.24 99.37 %
2017-18 | 4029.79 4348.97 4334.25 99.66 %
2018-19 | कक |. - | - | Ld

(b) The budget allocations have been need based and fully utilised.”

F. Need for an effective mechanism of co-ordination

3.9 The Ministry submitted the following note on efforts made on the issues which
require cooperation/facilitation from Ministry of Shipping, Agriculture and External
Affairs.:-

“(A) Ministry of Shipping
(i) Incorporation of International Convention on oil spill preparedness,

response and cooperation (OPRC) 1990 in Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016.
Background: OPRC 1990 stipulates that the parties undertake, individual or
jointly, to take all appropriate measures in accordance with the provisions of
convention. International conventions are advisory in nature and same can be
enforced by incorporating them in the National Legislation. Merchant Shipping
Act 1958, consolidates the laws relating to Merchant Shipping to ensure
compliance with. the country's obligation under the Maritime Treaties and
International Instrument in which India is a party.

Efforts made: Coast Guard Act, 1978 mandates Indian Coast Guard to take
such measures as are necessary to preserve and protect Marine Environment
and to prevent and contro! Marine Pollution. In order to meet this functional
responsibility, ICG draws its empowerment from Merchant Shipping Act. During
consultative meetings of Merchant Shipping Bill (2016), ICG had brought out the
need for incorporating provision of OPRC 1990 in the proposed bill.

Present Status: Due to non inclusion of provisions of OPRC (1990) in Merchant
Shipping MS Bill (2016) National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan (NOS-DCP)
provisions cannot be enforced. Therefore, the burden for preservation and
protection of Marine Environment and-prevention and control of Marine Pollution
rests with Government of India rather than the states/ports. Further, ICG has
signed a MoU with SACEP Maritime Nations for Regional Cooperation for Oil and
Chemical Spill Response on behalf of the Government and hence, it is prudent to
incorporate OPRC 1990 in the National Legislation to meet the International
obligation by Ministry of Shipping.

(ii) Incorporation of penalties for non carriage of mandatory equipment
onboard fishing boats as per Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016.

Background: Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 stipulates fittings/ materials/
appliances and apparatus for safety, security and prevention of pollution onboard
fishing boats as may be prescribed by the Central Government.


40
ह I

Efforts made: Coast Guard Act, 1978 mandates Indian Coast Guard to
take such measures as are necessary for providing protection to fishermen
including assistance to them at sea while in distress. There is a need for fishing
boats to be equipped with the stipulated equipment / communication equipment
for safety of fishers at sea.

Present Status: Efforts are in hand to impress upon the concerned Ministry
to incorporate penalties under the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 as deterrence for
mandatory carriage of life saving equipment and communication equipment.

(B) Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (MoA&FW) of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (MoA&FW:

(i) Enactment of Central Marine Regulation Fisheries Act for regulating
fishing in EEZ and High Seas. पु

Background: Presently, there is no act to regulate fishing in Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ) and High Seas for Indian fishing boats. The State Marine Fisheries
Regulation Acts enacted by Coastal States/UTs are applied only in the territorial
waters i.e. upto 12 NM from shore.

Efforts made: Indian Coast Guard has been entrusted with ensuring the
security of the maritime zones of India with a view to protect maritime and other
national interests in such zones and for matters, connected therewith. Fishing by
ndian fishermen in Indian EEZ and High Seas falls under category of Illegal,
Unreported, Unregulated (IUU) fishing. Indian fishermen are venturing into
neighbouring countries EEZ/ territorial waters for fishing and are being
apprehended/ fired upon by security forces of neighbouring countries. Precious
ives being lost at sea due to cyclones/ collision due to inadequate carriage of life
saving/ communications/ navigational appliances. ICG from time to time has
been taking up with MoA&FW for enactment of Central Marine Regulation
Fisheries Act (CMRFA) for regulating fishing in Indian EEZ and High Seas for
ishing by Indian fishing boats in the Maritime Zones.

Present Status: On 6" September, 2018, MoA&FW was requested to constitute
a Committee/Task Force for undertaking following:-

(a) Review of the existing Draft Marine Fisheries Regulation and Management
Bill.

(b) Review of Registration and Licensing of Fishing Craft (ReALCraft) website
for optimizing its utility in monitoring fishing activity and developing
communication link.

(c) Formulation of guidelines on documentation related to fishery activity.

(d) Developing an effective mechanism of Survey and Certification for
fishing boat.

(C) Ministry of External Affairs

(i) Empowerment of ICG under MZI Act 1976 for Visit, Board, Search
and Seizure through suitable notification under the said Act.

Background: In July, 2011, the proposal for amendment of Maritime Zones of
India Act (MZI Act), 1976 for empowerment of ICG and IN to exercise the powers

oy

rs


41
to stop, board, search and seize foreign vessels violating the MZI Act, 1976 was
taken up with MEA. However, since then, MEA (L&T) Division has been
repeatedly returning the case insisting that MZI Act, 1976 is not the appropriate
instrument for such power to be authorized to ICG and IN as it only defines and
extends the maritime zones of India.
Efforts made: The above issue was discussed in 127 National Committee on
Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against threats from the Sea
(NCSMCS) meeting in Oct 2015 and MEA was requested to consider the case.
The issue has been also taken up in the subsequent meetings of the NCSMCS.
Present status:
The position of MEA has been that MZI Act 1976 gives effect to the provisions of
UNCLOS, which basically regulates issues relating to peaceful use of seas and
marine resources and the rights, obligations and jurisdiction of countries to that
effect. It does not deal with general criminal offences and security. It has further
been pointed out by MEA that an Act (Coast Guard Act) which is already in force
in the Indian EEZ does not require to be “extended’to the EEZ through a
notification under Section 7(7) of the MZI Act.

Based on further discussions as the subject in Cabinet Secretariat, Legal opinion
on the feasibility of authorizing Indian Coast Guard under Section 121 of the
Coast Guard Act to carry out visit, Board, Search & Seize (VBSS) operations in
the EEZ to enforce the provisions of MZI Act, 1976, without a corresponding
notification under the MZI Act, 1976, is being sought. Further action in the matter
shall be taken accordingly.”

Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee

3.10 With regard to creation of dedicated training academy/ infrastructure for
ICG, the Committee note that due to withdrawal of environmental and Coastal
Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearance by Ministry of Environment and Forests for
setting up the Indian Coast Guard Academy at Azhikkal, Kerala, the process of
exploring/ identifying suitable alternate land for ICG Academy has been initiated
in other coastal States. The Committee further note from the submission of DG,
ICG during oral evidence that 160 acres of land for the same was identified in
Karnataka and 140 acres in Tamil Nadu. The Committee strongly feel that when
ICG is shouldering the responsibility of providing training not only to its own
officers but also to personnel of Paramilitary, Police and other Government
agencies like Customs, DG Lighthouses and Lightships, etc. and with the Coast
Guard Training Centre (CGTC) at Kochi having limited facilities, it is imperative
that a dedicated training facility may be developed at the earliest and desire that a dedicated training facility may be developed at the earliest and desire that
urgent efforts be made to select and finalise an alternate site and construction of efforts be made to select and finalise an alternate site and construction of
the training facility be done in a time bound manner. The Committee recommend
that the new proposals for acquisition/lease of land_at New Mangalore, Kochi, the new proposals for acquisition/lease of land at New Mangalore, Kochi
हु Karwar, Androth, Kakinada, Veraval, Vizag बाप Daman be expedited. Further, Androth, Kakinada, Veraval, Vizag and Daman be expedited. Further,
while noting that in the second phase of coastal surveillance network at 38 sites noting that in the second phase of coastal surveillance network at 38 sites



42
1

the order was to be placed to BEL, the Committee desire that the same may be order was to be placed to BEL, the Committee desire that the same may be
done at the earliest and the network be set up in a specified time frame. network be set up in a specified time frame.

3.11. The Committee note that ICG has been designated as the authority
responsible to coordinate Coastal Security in territorial Waters (12 NM from
baseline) including waters to be patrolled by Marine Police. The Committee
observe that at present, the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive
Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones (MZI)... Act, 1976 Act which is
implemented by the Ministry of External Affairs does not designate an authority
for the purposes of investigation and arrest, seizure of vessels and individuals
who undertake any activity which is hostile to the interests of the nation. The
Committee note that the MEA (L&T) Division has been repeatedly returning the
proposal insisting that MZI Act, 1976 is not the appropriate instrument for such
power to be authorized to ICG and Indian Navy (IN) as it only defines and extends
the maritime zones of India. In the wake of increased security threat to the nation the nation
through the sea, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should the Ministry of Defence should

to empower and strengthen the Coast Guard to investigate and arrest Indivicuals, Guard to investigate and arrest individuals.

and seize vessels and carrying out criminal and anti-national activities. anti-national activities.

3.42 The Committee note that required infrastructure at 42 ICG stations is at
various stages for sanction, that a number of platforms, including Twin Engine
Heavy Helicopters (TEHH) and Multi Mission Maritime Aircraft (MMMA) have been
proposed for acquisition into ICG which would strengthen ICG and give early
warning to surface platforms, that development of aviation infrastructure along
with jetty work at 6 stations is in progress, that new jetty construction proposals
for 1110 meters have been initiated and that the proposal for Digital Coast Guard
Phase-| and the Coast Guard manpower is envisaged to be stabilized at about
25000 personnel by 2030. The Committee further note that the ICG targets to have
a force level of 216 ships/boats and 100 aircraft by 2022. The Committee desire
that infrastructural development in all the fields may be monitored and completed infrastructural development in all the fields may be monitored and completed
in a time bound manner.

3.13 The Committee note that the Coast Guard Act, 1978 mandates ICG to take
such measures as are necessary to preserve and protect Marine Environment and
to prevent and control marine pollution and that in order to meet this functional
responsibility, ICG draws its empowerment from Merchant Shipping Act.
Observing that during consultative meetings of Merchant Shipping Bill (2016),
ICG had brought out the need for incorporating provision of Oil Spill
Preparedness Response and Cooperation (OPRC) 1990 in the proposed bill. The
Committee observe that ICG has also been entrusted with ensuring the security
of the maritime zones of India with a view to protect maritime and other national
interests in such zones and that ICG has been taking up” with Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW) for enactment of Central Marine


43
1

Regulation Fisheries Act (CMRFA) for regulating fishing in Maritime Zones. In this
regard, the Committee observe that the National Committee for Strengthening
Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) is a national-level forum and an apex
review mechanism for maritime and coastal security, in which all concerned
Ministries and Government agencies are represented. The Committee desire that
NCSMCS may take up issues such‘ as identification and tracking of ships and may take up issues such as identification and tracking of ships and
uniform system of registration of fishing vessels and 3150 demarcation of system of registration of fishing vessels and also demarcation of
' responsibilities of all the Ministries/Departments and forces concerned with the
Country’s Coastal Security so_as to ensure effective coordination and prevent Coastal Security so as to ensure effective coordination and prevent
system failures. The said Committee may meet at frequent reqular intervals so failures. The said Committee may meet _at frequent reqular intervals so
that the coastal and maritime security of the country is effectively monitored and the coastal and maritime security of the country is effectively monitored and
strengthened. The Committee desire that _NCSMCS may also take up The Committee desire that NCSMCS may also take u
incorporation of the provisions as suggested by ICG in the Merchant Shipping of the provisions as suggested by ICG in the Merchant Shippin
Bill, and early enactment of CMRFA for regulation of fishing in maritime zones. and early enactment of CMRFA for requlation of fishing in maritime zones.



44
|

Chapter IV- Implementation of recommendations! of the 32™ Report on
‘Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval Warships’ and 59" Report on Action
Taken by the Government thereon

A. Summary of 327 Report

4.1 The 32" Report (16th LS) of PAC (2016-17) on ‘Indigenous Construction of
Indian Naval Warships’ was presented to the'Lok Sabha on 22™ December, 2015 and
laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 23 December, 2015. The Committee had’
observed the importance of performance of the indigenous ship building capability for
the Navy for achieving operational efficiency and preparedness and felt, therefore, that
adequate accountability framework, infrastructural upgradation, indigenisation, and
realistic cost estimation were of paramount importance. The Committee had found
inordinate delays in shipbuilding, poor cost estimation and undue delay in the
conclusion of the contracts for Project 15A and Project 17. It was also found that delays
were mainly due to lack of adequate infrastructural facility, non-finalization of structural
designs and slippages in delivery. There were shortfalls such as lack of cost estimation
mechanism, non-availability of warship quality steel and other supplies and several
issues related to procurement and slackness in financial management.

4.2 After in-depth examination of the subject which included deliberations with
various stakeholders such as Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy, Mazagaon Dock
Limited, Goa Shipyard Limited, Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited, the
Committee made 12 recommendations which mainly included single point accountability
to be fixed for ship building project; institutionalized mechanism in NHQ to ensure
calculation of accurate cost of a warship; promotion of indigenous production of naval
warship; creation and development of industrial bases across country and setting up of
ancillary units to enhance manufacturing capability of defence as well as other sectors;-
the Navy to maintain statement of accounts on yearly basis; expansion of domestic
vendor for timely delivery and modernization and expansion of shipyards.

B. Summary of 59 Report

4.3. After examination and analysis of the action taken replies from the Ministry of
Defence, the Committee presented the 597" Report (16th LS) on Action taken by the
Ministry on the 3271 Report to the Parliament on 2274 November, 2016. While the
Committee accepted replies of the Ministry on eight recommendations, they made
further observations in respect of three of them. In case of remaining four
recommendations, replies of the Ministry were not accepted against two of them and the
Committee did not desire to pursue two recommendations by the Committee in view of
the replies received from the Government. The Committee had recommended that
Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP&A) be made more accountable
and given mandate to ensure strict compliance by agencies and also pointed to the lack
of adequate mechanism for accurate cost estimation which further affected the delivery
schedule. The Committee was of the opinion that domestic vendor be expanded by the



45
1

Ministry so that dependency on international suppliers could be reduced thereby
automatically arresting delays and protracted negotiations. In view of various
irregularities brought out by the Audit in naval warship building, the Committee had also
recommended the Ministry to order enquiry against officials responsible. Apart from
fixing of responsibility, the Committee had recommended that single point accountability
for shipbuilding project be fixed under which unity of command would ensure better
span of control and result in effective management of ship building processes and
procedures. हे

4.4 The Committee had made special emphasis on promoting indigenous production
of naval warships and the military hardware which will also give boost to Government's.
“Make in India” campaign. The Committee felt that India being a major maritime nation
with vital economic and security interest linked to the sea, it was imperative for the
Indian Navy to be equipped with requisite number of ships in a timely manner to mee
multifarious challenges. The Committee had also stressed the importance of
infrastructural upgradation and modernization of shipyards and that the Ministry may
initiate timely expansion while making the necessary resources available for the
purpose. The Committee had further recommended that the Ministry may make efforts
to bring all the shipyards at par with the best shipyards of the world and that
modernization programmes be restructured and implemented expeditiously so that the
production of warships would be in sync with the demands of the Indian Navy.

4.5 In regard to contentious issues such as delay in warship building, inaccurate cost
estimation, delay in signing of contract, nomination and readiness of shipyards, cost and
time overrun, etc. the Committee had urged the Ministry to ensure that the Apex
Committee meetings be held regularly with the issues being discussed and proper
guidance given so that the anomalies may be removed before surfacing as big
problems in the way of warship building exercise of Indian Navy. The Committee was of
the view that Apex Level Committee Meetings were crucial for reviewing and monitoring
warship production.

4.6 On selection of the 32™ and 59" reports for examination, the Sub-Committee
took oral evidence of the Ministry of Defence on 27 February, 2019.

०. Warship Building

4.7 The Ministry submitted: the following steps taken with regard to warship building,
cost estimates and revision in costs and nomination and readiness of shipyards and
other issues:-
“1. Delays. Reasons for delays in the Projects under examination were as
follows :-
(a) Delay in delivery of equipment by both indigenous and foreign vendors.
(b) The disintegration of former Soviet-Union adversely affected both the
delivery schedules as well as the costing of the weapons and sensors for the
projects under review.


46.
|

(c) Indigenisation / development of steel, certain weapons and sensors, took
time and resulted in time-over-runs.

(d) Considering the long build periods of warship projects and lifecycle of
warships i.e of about 25-30 years, it becomes necessary at times to upgrade the
weapons and sensors during the execution of the project which is likely to result
in time and cost overruns.

2. Mandating the Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition for
ensuring strict compliance and accountability for warship building.

(a) Besides NHQ and the shipyards there are various agencies like DRDO,
OFB / other PSUs, private vendors, foreign Governments / Foreign OEMs etc
who are involved in warship building in our context. :

(b) | Whilst various agencies as mentioned above perform their respective
roles, the Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP8A), at NHQ is
the single point authority to monitor the design and production activities related to
warship building.

3. Strengthening of existing institutional mechanism for preparation of
accurate cost estimates.

(a) A ‘standing committee’ has been constituted by Indian Navy on ‘Costing
Methodology of Warships being built in DPSU shipyards’.

(b) | The recommendations of the Costing Committee have also been shared
with the different stakeholders for necessary action. Recommendations have
been extensively used during the CNC of recent projects.

(c) The Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) for shipbuilding projects inter-
alia include members from NHQ, Acquisition Wing and MoD (Finance). The CNC
carties out considerable scrutiny of the budgetary quote submitted by the
shipyards vis-a-vis the extant and international benchmarks. This costing is
approved by the CFA, post vetting of MoD (Finance) and MoF.

4. Method of selection of shipyatds for warship building.

(a) Shipbuilding projects are awarded to shipyards (DPSU / PSUs as well as
private sector shipyards) based on capacity assessment / qualification carried out
as stipulated in the DPP considering the capacity, experience and capability of
the Yard to build a specific ship as per requirements of Indian Navy with final
decision by DAC.
(b) In order to optimally utilize the capacity of other shipyards viz private and
PSU shipyards, orders for warship construction have now been placed on these
shipyards “also based on capacity assessment / qualification carried out as
stipulated in the DPP. ह

5. Fixing of responsibility on shipyards for delaysin delivery.

Delays and cost escalation in each of the audited Projects was examined by the
Ministry and re-casting of timelines and revision of cost has been accorded by


“la

48

47
!
the CFA / CCS after ascertaining the reasons / attributability in each case.
Accordingly, both MDL and GRSE have been levied LD by the Ministry as per
Defence Procurement Procedure / contractual provisions for delays attributable
to them in P-17, P-15A, and P-28 respectively.

6. Creating a robust monitoring mechanism for all projects.

The organization under CWP&A monitors the projects and the progress is also
reviewed by the Apex Committee chaired by Secretary, Defence Production.

7 Infrastructure upgradation of Shipyards. Modernisation of facilities is
an ongoing process. A comprehensive assessment of the modernisation needs
of the DPSU Shipyards have been made based on the requirement of the
ongoing and future projects. The modernisation programme is intended to
increase productivity and reduce build periods through upgradation of existing
infrastructure, enhancement of capacity and incorporation of state-of-the-art
shipbuilding technology. Accordingly, MDL, GRSE, GSL & HSL have embarked
on a major modernisation programme to augment their facilities.

Upgradation_of Shipyards / New Technologies and Processes. As regards,
incorporating technologies. and processes, a performance benchmark study of
DPSU shipyards vis-a-vis international shipyards / standards and best practices
have .been carried out by a reputed consultant. Further, MDL and GRSE have
entered into a contract with an international ‘know-how provider’ for adopting
‘Integrated /‘Modular Construction’ in P-17A. Industry best practices, procedures
and state-of-the art methodology is envisaged to be imbibed through the ongoing
construction of P-17A. In addition, GSL would be collaborating with an
international shipyard for acquiring Mine Counter Measure Vessel (MCMV)
technology and with a Russian shipyard for construction of Frigates.”

Regarding indigenous private players, representatives of the Ministry of Defence

stated the following:-

4.9

“...private ship building yard nurturing and grooming, two shipyards close to MDL
are being nurtured to groom for mega outsourcing.”

In this regard, the following detailed information was submitted by Mazagon

Docks Limited:-

"2. Requisite information is as given below:

a) MDL is currently executing three (03) major projects for Indian Navy. These
projects are as under:
i. 04 Nos. Missile Destroyers — P15B
ii. 04 Nos. Stealth Frigates - P17A
iii, 06 Scorpene Class Submarines
b) In accordance with Govt. of India’s thrust for private participation in Defence
activities, MDL has been making concerted efforts for involvement of private
Shipyards to assist MDL for timely liquidation and execution of the Naval


48
i
projects. In this regard, MDL has entered into Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) with two private Shipyards in the West-Coast of the country:
i. M/s. Shoft Shipyard Pvt. Ltd. (SSPL), Gujarat.
ii. M/s. Chowgule & Co. Pvt. Ltd. (CCPL), Goa
0) In conventional shipbuilding methodology, individual units were fabricated and
errected on slipways. With the newly introduced concept of integrated
construction, MDL is undertaking parallel construction at different

geographical locations including at Private shipyards. Since these yards do
not have adequate experience of warship construction, MDL is not only
ordering blocks for fabrication and outfitting but also providing handholding
during the construction process. Handholding to vendors is provided by
undertaking the inspection at various stages during the construction viz
welder qualification test, material inspection, radiography, deformation
checks, pressure test of pipes etc.
The details of blocks outsourced for mega-outsourcing for P15B Destroyer
class and P17A Frigate class to SSPL and CCPL are as below:
Project | No. of Total No. of | Mega Vendor Value
Ships ~ Blocks | Blocks (Rs. In
outsourced Cr)
to Private
Shipyards
P15B [4 a 25 M/s. Shoft 82.19
Shipyard
Pvt. Ltd.,
P17A |4 116 22 Bharuch, 61.11
: Gujarat
24 M/s 108.34
Chowgule &
Company
Pvt. Ltd.
Goa
Total | | 184 7A 451.64

Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee

4.40 The Committee note that in pursuance of the recommendations made by
them in their 32™ and 59" reports, Ministry of Defence along with Indian Navy and
allied organisations have taken numerous steps, especially in the case of
Warships building, making accurate cost estimates and in capacity building of
shipyards. The Committee observe that the delay in warship building which was
mainly on account of delay. in procurement of equipment from foreign vendors,
delay in availability of developmental equipment and time taken for indigenization



49

1

etc., have been corrected to a great extent. The Committee also observe that a
standing committee has been constituted by Indian Navy on ‘Costing
Methodology of Warships being built in Defence Public Sector Undertakings
(DPSU) shipyards, whose recommendations have been extensively used by the
Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) of recent projects. The CNC carries out
considerable scrutiny of the budgetary quote submitted by the shipyards vis-a-
vis the extant and international benchmarks. This costing is approved by the
Competent Financial Authority (CFA), post vetting of Ministry of Defence (MoD)
(Finance) and Ministry of Finance (MoF). The Committee also note that the
Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP&A), at Navy Head
Quarters (NHQ) has been made the single point authority to monitor the design
and production activities related to warship building. The Committee further
observe that Shipbuilding projects are awarded to Shipyards (DPSU / PSUs as
well as private sector shipyards) based on capacity assessment / qualification
carried out as stipulated in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)
considering the capacity, experience and capability of the Yard to build a specific
ship as per requirements of Indian Navy with final decision by Defence
Acquisition Council (DAC). Delays and cost escalation in each of the audited
Projects was examined by the Ministry and re-casting of timelines and revision of
cost has been accorded by the CFA / Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) after
ascertaining the reasons in each case. Accordingly, Mazagaon Dock Limited
(MDL), Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers (GRSE), Goa Shipyard Limited
(GSL) & Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) have embarked on a major
modernisation programme to augment their facilities. The Committee further note
that two private shipyards viz. M/s Shoft Shipyard Pvt. Ltd., Gujarat and M/s
Chowgule & Co. Pvt. Ltd., Goa close to MDL are being nurtured to groom for
mega outsourcing. While acknowledging the various measures taken by the
Ministry for warship building, the Committee opine that timelines may be for warship building, the Committee opine that timelines may be
specified for each activity, the efficacy and success of initiatives undertaken by for each activity, the efficacy and success of initiatives undertaken b
the Government may be regularly assessed _and responsibility fixed in case of Government may be regularly assessed and responsibility fixed in case of
non-achievement_ of the specified targets. The Committee hope that all the
measures mentioned above would enhance the nation’s defence preparedness
and that the Ministry and Navy would continue to augment their resources and
reduce time and cost overruns in warship building projects. The Committee
desire the Ministry to make earnest efforts to encourage production of warships the Ministry to make earnest efforts to encourage production of warships
of international standards by Public Sector Undertakings as well as Private Ship
Building Companies so that our country become self-reliant in the field. Companies so that our country become self-reliant in the field.



50
|

Chapter v- Implementation of recommendations of the 147 Report on Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme’ and 357 Report on Action Taken by

the Government thereon

A. Summary of 14" Report

5.1. The 14" Report (16" LS) of PAC (2014-15) on ‘Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS) Scheme’ was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27" April, 2015 and laid
on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 28" April, 2015. The Committee had observed that
the Integrated Child Development Services(ICDS) Scheme to be crucial in he country’s
commitment to its children and nursing mothers, its response to the challenge of
providing Pre-School non-formal Education on one hand and breaking the vicious cycle
of malnutrition, morbidity, reduced learning and mortality on the other. The Committee
had felt therefore, that adequate regulatory framework, policy implementation,
operational issues, and internal controls were of paramount importance for the benefit of
the scheme to reach to the intended beneficiaries. The Committee had found inordinate
delays in the implementation of the scheme due to inadequate coordination between
Ministries and different Departments. There were shortfalls such as lack of
infrastructural facilities, poor hygiene and sanitation due to absence of toilets and non-
availability of drinking water, unavailability of essential utensils and other requirements
for providing supplementary nutrition, large scale vacancies and failure of internal
monitoring and evaluation.

5.2. After in-depth examination of the subject which included deliberations with the
Ministry of Women and Child Development, the Committee made 17 recommendations
which mainly included complete universalization of the scheme; coverage of all
SC/STIOBC and minority community habitation under the scheme; extension of
Anganwadi Centres(AWCs) to cover areas in vicinity of industrial areas, need for review
mechanism and effective coordination between Departments at different levels;
provision of basic infrastructural facilities and equipments for AWCs; provision of mobile
toilets in AWCs with no toilet facilities; Information, Education and Communication(IEC)
and communication mobilisation; need for staffing and training; monitoring and
evaluation mechanism.

B. Summary of 35" Report

5.3. After examination and analysis of the action taken replies from the Ministry of
Women and Child Development, the Committee presented the 35" Report (16th LS) on
Action taken by the Ministry on the 14" Report to the Lok Sabha on 22" December,
2015 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 23" December, 2015. ~~ While the
Committee accepted replies of the Ministry on thirteen recommendations, they made
further observations in respect of seven of them. In case of remaining four
recommendations, replies of the Ministry were categorized as interim. In respect of
Nutritional needs of child, the Committee were of the view that besides age, health and


e 51

weight of the children were vital parameters in ascertaining their nutritional needs and
further recommended that child health experts maybe engaged to evolve a
comprehensive criteria for determining the nutritional requirements of children, link the
financial norms for supplementary nutrition with the Cost Inflation Index and the
Committee be apprised of their opinion.

5.4 In the context of non-operationalization of AWCs and delay in recruitment of
~Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)/Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), the Committee
recommended that the Ministry should take up the issue of expediting the financial
processes with the respective State Mission Steering Groups and issue instructions to
the State Governments to take urgent steps to fill up these vacancies on priority basis.
The Committee observed that an Anganwadi Centre (AWC), being focal point for
delivery of ICDS services requires basic infras' ructure, and desired that the Ministry
should closely monitor the construction of AWC buildings taken up by the State
Governments so as to ensure availability of good quality buildings for the AWCs fulfilling
the prescribed standards. In matter of hygiene and sanitation, the Committee noted that
child friendly toilets and drinking water facility are the basic minimum requirements for
he effective functioning of an AWC. The Committee recommended that the Ministry
should take up the matter of providing child friendly toilets and drinking water facility to
he children with the State Governments on priority basis and also to provide mobile
oilets in AWCs where no toilets were available.’

5.5 In regard to Pre-School Education (PSE), the Committee desired that the State
Governments be instructed to immediately provide PSE kits to each AWC, as imparting
PSE is an important component of the ICDS. The Committee also felt that the Child
Development Project Officer (CDPO) should analyse the reasons for shortfall in number
of children joining primary school and persuade/counsel the parents to make their child
join the mainstream education. With respect to expansion of AWCs to cover areas in the
vicinity of large factories and industrial areas where substantial number of women
“workers are employed, the Committee reiterated that the Ministry while sanctioning
future AWCs give adequate attention to the areas where a large number of women
workers work and the timings of such AWCs may also be adjusted according to the
needs of these women. On the issue of inadequate follow-up action on internal
monitoring and evaluation by the Ministry, the Committee desired that Central
Monitoring Unit be strengthened and Supervisors be sensitized about being thorough in
his/her approach and visits to AWCs be made regular for CDPOs and aperiodic
assessment be done to evaluate the achievement leading to efficient implementation of
ICDS.

5.6 On selection of the 14" and 35" reports for examination, the Sub-Committee
took oral evidence of the Ministry of Women and Child Development on 27" February,
2019.


Cc.

5.7

52

|
Operationalisation and Infrastructure of Anganwadi Centres

Regarding construction and operationalisation of Anganwadi Centres, the

representatives of the Ministry submitted the following:-

5.8
vacan

5.9

“Previously, our Ministry was giving an amount of Rs. two lakh for construction of
anganwadi. The Ministry of Finance has reduced this amount to Rs. One lakh,
and that too on reimbursement basis. So, now States are not able to provide that
extra money from their own side. Very shortly, we will be going to the EFC and
requesting them to go back to the original scheme. Otherwise, the construction of
anganwadi centres with the help of convergence programme will come under a
lot of pressure. So, we are trying to restore it to the original amount of Rs. Two
lakh...

Why most of these anganwadis are not getting operationalized is because all
these proposals have come from the State- Government and in the State
Governments, each State Government follows a very detailed process wherein
MLAs consulted and thereafter based on certain parameters the proposals are
sent. We have approved it here. Thereafter, for some reason either the MLA
changes or the Government changes and then there are perpetual requests to
the Central Government to change the location of specific anganwadis. In that
case, in the year 2014 we issued very clear orders that in case a State
Government wants to change the location of an already sanctioned anganwadi,
hen it should be located within one kilometer of the urban area or within two or
three kilometres of the rural area but where there is substantial number of
disadvantaged children who are living there who are in need of anganwadi
service and they can change it. But this is the type of problem that we are
acing.”

The Ministry further provided a list of State-wise sanctioned, in-position and
t posts as on which is attached as Annexure to this report.

Regarding construction of Anganwadi Centres in urban slum areas, the

representatives of the Ministry submitted the following during oral evidence:-

55.10

“The problem arises because about 10 per cent of our Anganwadi centers are in
the urban areas where they have become urban slums. We do not have any
unds for those. We are trying to have a tie up with the Urban Development
Ministry.” ना

As regards, Anganwadi centers in which créches are to be constructed, the

representatives of the Ministry stated the following:-

"Sir, with your permission now, | would like to address the issue of the 25,000
Anganwadi centers in which créches are to be constructed in the urban areas.
Unfortunately, we have not succeeded much on this account. Earlier, we had
tried, as per our norms, 5 per cent of the Anganwadi centers can develop as
créches also. We tried to have some créches in Anganwadi but it did not
succeed. Now, what we have done is that with the help of the Urban
Development Ministry, we have chalked out a programme and we are going to


53
the Finance Ministry. We are going to take these 25,000 Anganwadi centers for
having créche facility in urban areas. We are working on it very seriously. We
hope to make a breakthrough very soon.”

5.11 For construction of child friendly toilets and drinking water facilities, the Ministry

submitted the following in their written replies:-
“There are 1172896 AWCs having drinking water facilities and 929339 AWCs
having Toilet facilities out of 13.63 lakh functional AWCs. That means, 86.1%
AWCs are having drinking water facilities and 68.18% AWCs are having Toilet
facilities. During 2017-18, funds for construction of Toilets in 69974 AWCs and
providing drinking water facilities in 19993 AWCs were released to States. For
the current financial year ie. 2018-19, construction of Toilets in 70000 AWCs and
providing drinking water facilities in 20000 AWCs have been approved.”

D. Incentives, Honorarium and Vacancies

5.12 Regarding large number of vacancies in the posts of Angwadi Workers and
helpers, when asked what steps have been taken to fill up the same apart from revising
the rate of honorarium which was felt by the Committee to be low since an anganwadi
worker and an anganwadi helper is a fulltime job, the Ministry during oral evidence
submitted the following:-

“the honorarium is Rs.4,500 for anganwadi workers and Rs.2,250 for helper.
We give 60 per cent of this and 40 per cent is given by the State. In addition to
this, States are adding from their own side. In addition, as ... we have taken the
big step towards covering all the anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers
under the various insurance schemes. We have got them two types of insurance
schemes. One is insurance for life cover and the other is accidental insurance
scheme. The entire premium is being paid by the Central Government. They do
not have to pay anything. In addition, we have recently moved a file to the
Finance Department. There is going to be launch of a scheme for granting
pension to workers of the unorganized sector. Basically it is for the building
.workers but we are trying to cover anganwadi workers and helpers also in that
scheme. “

E. Malnutrition

5.13 With regard to reducing the problem of malnutrition through the Anganwadi
Centres, the Committee felt that certain programmes of Brazil were required to be
adopted for fighting malnutrition. Further, Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development stated the following:-

“Under the POSHAN Abhiyan, we are now in direct touch with the Collectors. We
have identified about 115 Aspirational Districts. These Aspirational Districts are
those where the status of malnutrition, underweight, stunting and wasting has
gone to alarming levels. With the help of Tata Trust, we have placed with each
Collector one SwasthPrerak. These are well qualified students of IIT or IM. They
are health- volunteers. We have been guiding them. We have placed them in 350


54

districts but 115 districts are the worst off. ... it was identified by NITI Aayog
based on stunting and wasting figures. Now all the Collectors are under
obligation to hold a meeting at least once in three months devoted only to
nutrition and health. They cannot make it a jumbled-up meeting with law and
order and revenue matters. It has to be only with nutrition... That we are
monitoring. We are getting information and we are directly in touch with the
Collectors. After Some time, we will have report of the fractal. Today, we have
seen that 68 per cent of the children who were born with low birth weight have
emerged out in seven months and have gained normal weight.”

Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee Committee

5.14 The Committee understand that shifting of sites by State Governments for
Anganwadi Centres, pending court cases and less amount of money allotted for
construction of the same are some of the reasons for non-completion of
construction and operationalisation of Anganwadi Centres. The Committee
desire that the Ministry interact with the State Governments to tind out “he the State Governments to find out the
constraints that they are facing in implementation _of the Inteqratec Ville that they are facing in implementation of the Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS) Scheme and construction of Anganwac! ven'res Services (ICDS) Scheme and construction of Anganwadi Centres
and then help them in resolving their problems. resolving their problems. The Committee have been given
to understand that previously, the Ministry was giving an amount of Rs. two lakhs
for construction of each Anganwadi Centre and that the Ministry of Finance had
reduced this amount to rupees one lakh which would be on reimbursement basis.
The Committee note that due to this reduced amount, States are not abe © reduced amount, States are not able to
provide any extra money from their side and the Ministry 1s reported To D& any extra money from their side and the Ministry is reported to be
considering to request the Ministry of Finance to 9० back to the origina’ scheme. to request the Ministry of Finance to go back to the original scheme.
The Committee urge the Ministry to get it expedited at the eariest. Ministry to get it expedited at the earliest. The Committee
also recommend that a committee comprising of a representative each TO recommend that a committee comprising of a representative each from the
ministries and State Governments concerned may be made for resolution concerned may be made for resolution of all
such matters. While recommending that the implementation of the Scheme may matters. While recommending that the implementati of the Scheme mai
be monitored district-wise_on a regular basis, the committee also Cesie न reqular basis, the committee also desire the
Government to appoint district welfare officers for monitoring Various WeNaTS to appoint district welfare officers for monitoring various welfare
schemes.

5.15 The Committee observe that the maximum number of vacancies exist in the
posts of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), and the
same are mainly in the States of Bihar, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh and West. Bengal. The Committee are of the view that the current
remuneration being paid to the AWWs and AWHs is quite low and hence
unattractive. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the AWWs and
AWHs are not only shouldering the responsibility of taking care of children but
also shaping the nation’s future and accordingly the remuneration should be
comparable with that being given to the Government teachers of Primary


55

comparable with that being given to the Government teachers of Primary

Schools. The The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may revise and therefore, recommend that the Ministry may revise and

increase the remuneration of Anganwadi Workers and helpers accordingly. the remuneration of Anganwadi Workers and helpers accordingly,

5.16 Regarding construction of Anganwadi Centres in urban slum areas, the

Committee desire that as submitted by the Ministry, they may coordinate with the desire that as submitted by the Ministry, they may coordinate with the

Ministry of Urban Development and Municipal Corporations to find land and of Urban Development _and Municipal Corporations to find land and

construct AWCs within a time bound construct AW¢s within a time bound manner. The Committee also recommend

that Anganwadi Centres need to be identified in urban slum areas preferably near Anganwadi Centres need to be identified in urban slum areas referably near

industrial mausira" areas where women are working and their timing may be made as per where women are working and their timing may be made as per

the working timings of the industries. working timings of the industries.

5.17 The Committee while observing that the POSHAN abhiyan has resulted in

good results in reducing the problem of malnutrition through AWCs, desire that

the Ministry may examine similar programmes of Brazil and other countries in Ministry may examine similar programmes of Brazil and other countries in

fighting malnutrition and use their valuable lessons to combat the problem in malnutrition and use their valuable lessons to combat the roblem in

India.

5.18 The Committee observe that not much progress has been made in 25,000
Anganwadi centres in which creches were to be constructed in the urban areas
and now the Ministry of Women and Child Development with the help of the
Ministry of Urban Development has chalked out a programme for creating these
créches and is also reported to have approached Ministry of Finance. The

Committee desire that ~ommittee desire that as recommended earlier, the matter may be vigorously recommended earlier, the matter may be vigorous!

taken up with the Ministries concerned to make a breakthrough in the matter and up with the Ministries concerned to make a breakthrough in the matter and

they be apprised of the achievement. be apprised of the achievement.

5.19 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry take up the matter of
providing child friendly toilets and drinking water facility to the children with the
State Governments on priority basis and also to provide mobile toilets in AWCs
where no toilets were available. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that there are 11,72,896 AWCs having drinking water facilities and 929339
AWCs having toilet facilities out of 13.63 lakh functional AWCs. That means,
86.1% AWCs are having drinking water facilities and 68.18% AWCs are having
toilet facilities. During 2017-18, funds for construction of toilets in 69974 AWCs


56

and providing drinking water facilities in 19993 AWCs were released to States.
For the financial year 2018-19, construction of toilets in 70000 AWCs and
providing drinking water facilities in 20000 AWCs have been approved. The

Committee desire that_an increase in allocation of money for construction of of money for construction of

drinking water facilities and toilets may be considered so that the remaining the remainin

AWCs also set facility of drinking water and toilets in a time bound manner. toilets in a time bound manner.

Further, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that mobile tollets earlier recommendation that mobile toilets

may be provided to ensure that_no Anganwadi Centre Tunctions without the Anganwadi Centre functions without the

facility and that the children from the very beginning of their lives inculcate beginning of their lives inculcate

hygienic habits.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
2aJanuary, 2020 Chairperson,

\o Magha 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee