120

SHORT ASSESSMENT OF RENT

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

NEW DELHI
PAC NO. 2350


PACK HO! 2935०
LAT OP

ONE HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

| SHORT ASSESSMENT OF RENT |

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

(vil)

PART- 1

REPORT

PART -॥

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
20-11-2023

i.

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
06-02-2024

*Not appended in the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

PA 9 ७ की ७ ०

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Penn

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

रा Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

पट

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray,
MP on 18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred Twentieth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “SHORT ASSESSMENT OF RENT” based on para
3.4 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 20-12-2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-28) took oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs’ on 20-11-2023 The Committee
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 06-02-2024. The Minutes
of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-ll of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
0G February, 2024 Chairperson,
[न Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
Part -I

REPORT ON SHORT ASSESSMENT OF RENT BASED ON PARA 3.4 OF C&AG
REPORT NO. 24 OF 2022

In regard to the subject under examination the Committee have found that The
Estate Office of Union Territory Chandigarh, when determining rent for shops/booths in the
year 2000, deviated from the prescribed procedure for rent increase, leading to a shortfall of
29.37 crore for the period 1992-2022. The Chandigarh Administration had leased out
government-built shops (SCOs)/booths in Sector 17-E in the 1960s and 1970s, renewing
the lease every five years with a 20% rent increase. In 1992, the rent was raised to
314,000/month.

2. A legal challenge in 1999 resulted in a Supreme Court order prohibiting further rent
hikes without proper rules. The Chandigarh Administration then introduced the "Leasing out
of Government Built up Shops/Booths on Monthly Rent Basis in Chandigarh Scheme,
2000," specifying a rent increase formula in Clauses 9 and 10.

3. The audit in their report No. 24 of 2022 in Para 3.4 revealed that, contrary to the
scheme, the Estate Officer fixed rents without following the prescribed stages, causing a
revenue loss of 83.71 crore. The Estate Office admitted the lapse and conducted a review,
determining a total short assessment of %9.37 crore for 1992-2022. Demand notices were
issued, and the failure to adhere to rent increase procedures during 1992-2000 resulted in
the substantial shortfall. Internal Audit at the Estate Office failed to identify the discrepancy
during the rent assessment calculations.

4. During the oral evidence, the representative of the Chandigarh Administration,
explaining the response of the Administration on the Audit findings related to short
assessment of rent stated as under:

"Sir, the next para is regarding the short assessment of rent of Rs.9.37 crore. We
have a few shops and SCOs in Chandigarh which was given on rent under a
scheme. When audit did calculation of rent of the estate office, they found the
manner in which rent was being calculated was not appropriate. In fact, there was
disagreement on the interpretation’ of the rule. Audit-gave out a finding after which


5.

corrective action was taken. Notices were issued for recovery of the rent. Finally,
when these shopkeepers have failed to give the pending rent, action has been
initiated against them for cancellation of their lease and for recovery of the pending
dues. All those dues which are pending, necessary action has been initiated. In
case if they fail to submit the rent, their lease will be cancelled. This is on the last
stage of hearing before the court of SDM. Their pending arrears will be recovered as
arrears of land revenue."

Asked whether there was any incidence of cancellation of licence, he further

submitted as under:

6.

"Sir, in these cases there are 27 cases involved which were found out. All cases
have been initiated for cancellation of licence. The proceedings are on the very last
stage for cancellation. They will be concluded in next one month. Post that, lease
will be cancelled and all pending revenue will be recovered as arrears of land
revenue. We have also taken action against the erring officers. Eight officers have
been charge-sheeted under major penalty."

Explaining the measures during the oral evidence, that have been taken by the so

that these kinds of anomalies do not take place, he went on to add further:

8.

"For improving the institutions so that these kinds of anomalies do not happen again,
we have initiated the process where an online accounting software has been made
and tested and will be made operational in the Estate Office by the month of
December. Henceforth, these anomalies should not come in the Estate Office
regarding the calculation of the rent or the lease amount."

It was further stated:

“With your permission Sir, as | highlighted that the software has been made. It is at
the testing stage and will be adopted from December this year itself. Henceforth,
there will be automatic calculation of the rent so that these anomalies do not
happen."

Asked to furnish the reasons for fixing rent of five booths on pro rata basis while

others are fixed amount, he added as under:

-2-


9.

"Sir, this anomaly was found out. We accept that there was a calculation mistake
when this calculation was done for assessing the rent of these booths on pro rata
basis. The audit findings have been duly acknowledged and corrective action has
been taken."

When further probed whether it was only calculation error or some mala fide

intention was there, he further added as under:

10.

"Sir, that is why disciplinary action has also been taken. They have been charge-
sheeted under the major penalty.

Sir, the status mentioned here is of the earlier stage. Now, demand notices including
the notice for cancellation of the lease have been issues by the court of SDM in all
cases which were found out. Likewise, we also did audit of the similar other cases
and six more cases we had found out and similar action has been taken in those
cases also. We are taking it seriously. In case the recovery does not happen, which
amounts to Rs.5.08 crore the lease will be cancelled and all pending rent will be
recovered by attaching the properties of these tenants in these cases. Itis at the last
stage. The last hearing is scheduled in next one week. As per the decision, the
lease will be cancelled if they fail to pay the amount and their properties will be
attached subsequently for recovery of the pending dues.

When the point of delay in the matter was raised, he added as under:

"| agree, Sir. In this case, as per the guidelines, three months’ time was also given
to them. Once they had failed to give it, then the court proceedings for cancellation
of the lease were initiated. As | mentioned, they are at the last stage and will be
concluded within this month itself."


PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee note that the Estate Office of Union Territory Chandigarh
deviated from the prescribed procedure for enhancing rent in the year 2000,
leading to a significant shortfall of $9.37 crore for the period 1992-2022. The
Committee observe that this deviation occurred despite the legal framework in
place, including the Supreme Court order and the introduction of the "Leasing
out of Government Built up Shops/Booths on Monthly Rent Basis in
Chandigarh Scheme, 2000."

2. The Committee learn from the Audit Report (No. 24 of 2022, Para 3.4)
which highlighted the failure of the Estate Officer to adhere to the prescribed
stages for rent increase, resulting in a revenue loss of 3.71 crore. The
Committee acknowledge the admission by the Estate Office of the lapse and
the subsequent review that determined a total short assessment of %9.37 crore
for 1992-2022 .

3. In response to the audit findings, the Committee note that demand
notices were issued and actions taken by the Chandigarh Administration,
including the initiation of proceedings for the cancellation of leases and
recovery of pending dues. The Committee observe that disciplinary action has
been initiated against eight officers who have charge-sheeted under major
penalty clauses for their role in the anomaly. The Committee take note of the
seriousness with which the Chandigarh Administration is addressing the
issue. In this regard, the Committee recommend continued vigilance and
timely resolution of pending cases, ensuring that lease cancellations and
recovery processes are efficiently concluded within stipulated timeframes.

4, In light of the above, the Committee observe that the case is not simply
a matter of computational error, but is indicative of lack of monitoring and
possibility of irregularity. The Committee accordingly, recommend that the
Estate Office, Chandigarh Administration strengthens its internal audit


mechanisms to prevent such deviations in the future. The Committee would
also like to suggest that regular training and awareness programs be
conducted for officers involved in rent assessment to ensure a clear
understanding of the prescribed procedures.

5. While being appreciative of the measures taken by the Chandigarh
Administration, such as the development of an online accounting software,
aimed at preventing similar anomalies, the Committee would like to
recommend prompt implementation of the online accounting software in the
Estate Office, as indicated during oral evidence, along with a mechanism
soliciting feedback from shops/booth owners, so as to continually improve the
online system. Regarding the pro rata basis for fixing the rent of five booths,
the Committee observe the acknowledged calculation mistake and corrective
action taken by the Ministry. However, the Committee recommend that the
Estate Office conducts a thorough review of its calculation procedures to
prevent such errors in the future.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
0G February, 2024 Chairperson,
[न Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee