137

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2020-21)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty - sixth Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

Rata जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PAC NO. 2367

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY.
SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

oe OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2020-21)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty - sixth Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabhaon: 23.02.2024
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Phalgun;-1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

I

I

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government....... sseearacseenseceresersenss

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government... जन

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration...

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the Government have furnished interim replies........

APPENDICES

Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) held on 19.02.2024

Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Sixty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report

PAGE

(iv)

(vy)

22

23

24


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

90 NOahwWN

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Sixty-sixth Report on ‘Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2020-24)? relating to various ministries.

2. The Sixty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 257
July, 2023. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received, The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the One Hundred and Thirty Seventh Report at their sitting held on 190
February 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been Printed in bold in the body of the

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-il,

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

20 February, 2024 Chairperson,
0 Phalgung 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



CHAPTER-I

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-sixth Report (17" Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged

Appropriations (2020-21)".

2. The Sixty-sixth Report (17" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 257 July, 2023, contained 6 Observations and Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received

from the Ministries/Departments concerned are broadly categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos.1-6
Total: 6
Chapter - Il

(il) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government:

Para No, NIL
Total: NIL.

Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL

Chapter - 1४
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para No. NIL
Total:NIL

Chapter -V



A. Recommendation Para No. 2

3. Excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants
The Committee are constrained to observe that in all the three cases of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations, the excess expenditure had been incurred by Ministries/Departments
concerned even after obtaining large amount of Supplementary Grants. The percentage of
excess expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these three cases ranged
from 0.12 per cent in. Grant No-18 — Ministry of Defence (Misc) to 37.7 per cent in Grant
No.-15 — Department of Food and Public Distribution. From the scrutiny of Grant-wisc
position of obtaining Supplementary Grants and excess expenditure incurred thereafter, the
Committee find that the Supplementary Grants to the tune of ¥314557.83 crore was allocated
for Grant No.-15 — Deparimenit of Food and Public Distribution but this amount was short by
T 118648.60 crore. In case of Grant No.18 — operated by Ministry of Defence under Civil
Sector, though Supplementary Grant of Z1599.00 crore was obtained, yet an excess
expenditure of ¥ 1.92 crore was incurred. " Similarly, under Grant No.-21-Defence Pensions,
the Ministry of Defence obtained Supplementary Grants of T 1.41 crore which remained
- inadequate and resulted into excess expenditure of ¥ 0.52 crore. In this régard though the
Committee have repeatedly cautioned the Ministries/Departments in the past against
incurring excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants, this trend continues
unabated. While taking note of the trend of incurring excess expenditure year after year
despite the recommendations of PAC which are followed up by instructions/guidelines issued
by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), the Committee are inclined to
conclude that not only the Budget Estimates are made inadequately, but even at
Supplementary Demands stage, the requirements projected are not realistic. The Committee
are of the view that when the Ministries/Departments have opportunities to obtain
Supplementary Demands for Grants during three Sessions of Parliament in a year, there is
no reason for incurring excess expenditure being inevitable. Only last year, while scrutinizing
this phenomenon, the PAC, in their 53" Report (17% L.S.), had emphasized upon the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to formulate an effective mechanism to be
followed by all the Ministries/Departments to strengthen their financial control so as to avoid
incurring excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained. Strict
instructions --are=.to--be =givento-=the =;Budget-=Controlling -Authorities~-of=the. defaulting ==

Ministries/Departments to scrupulously adhere to this principle. While reiterating their earlier


3

recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard,
and outcome thereof.
4, In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public

Distribution stated as follows:

“It has always been the effort of Department of Food and Public Distribution to Strictly
adhere to the guidelines and rules given by the Ministry of Finance. Now, the
department has take up the matter with MoF for regulization of excess expenditure. In
the present case excess expenditure amount ¥ 118648.60 crore over supplementary
grant was on account of direction given by MoF in order to clear outstanding NSSF
loan."

5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence stated as follows:

In this connection it is mentioned that initially there was an allotment of Rs.5.90 crore
only undercharged portion under Defence Pensions of various pensionary heads taking into
consideration the pace of the expenditure under charged portion PCDA(P), Allahabad had
projected supplementary demands for Rs. 1.41 crore under charged portion under Grant No.

-21- Defence Pensions. As the Court cases involving approximately for Rs.93.05 lakhs were .

finalized in the month of March 2021 during the financial years 2020-21, it resulted in excess
booking. Further, this Ministry is of the view that it is not possible to accurately forecast court
Gecrees and their impact in terms of charged expenditure during the year. It is also important
to mention here that in the Financial Year 2021-22 and 2022-23 there is no excess
expenditure under the Charged Section of the Defence Pensions Grant.

Regarding MoD(Civil) Grant it is submitted that under Capital Section (Voted) the
Original Appropriation of हैं, 7206. 00 crs. was augmented by a Supplementary Appropriation
of %. 1599.00 crs. obtained in March,2021. Against the Final Appropriation of %.8805.00 crs.
the actual expenditure was %. 8806.91 crs. resulting in an excess expenditure of %.1.91 crs.
The excess expenditure was incurred due to requirement of additional funds of &. 3.40 crs.
towards Acquisition of Ships & Fleet and there was a savings of %. 0.19 crs. under head
“Land Acquisition (Major Works)" thus resulting the overall excess of %. 3.21 crs. in respect
of the Coast Guard Organisation . Further in Defence Estate Organisation an excess of &.
0.41¢rs. occurred due to requirement of additional funds towards Construction of Office

Building ands
Border Road Organisation. The total excess expenditure was Rs. 9.82 crs. and the total
savings was %. 7.91crs. under the Capital portion of Grant thus resulting in an overall

Works carried out By 5°


4

excess of Rs. 1.91 crs. The total excess of €1.91crs. against the Final Grant of %. 8805.00
crs. comes to 0.02 percent which is marginal. Though there is a marginal excess
expenditure under the Capital Section of the Grant, however, there is an overall savings
under MoD(Civil) Grant in the FY 2020-21. Further in the successive Financial years ie.
2021-22 and 2022-23 there is no excess expenditure either in the Capital Section or in the
overall Grant.

As a measure of control, necessary instructions have been issued to all concerned
user departments of MoD(Civil) and Defence Pensions to prepare their budget proposals on
realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects such as commitments, trend of
expenditure and the anticipated expenses and concrete remedial action taken immediately
to arrest the savings/excess to an optimum level. Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure
over the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation and to assess the requirement of funds properly, the
pre-budget discussions are held with the user departments. The instructions/measure issued
by Ministry of Finance are circulated to all budget controlling authorities from time to time to
take noteworthy and suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent
monitoring of funds of the expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be made to rectify the
loopholes/deficiencies with view to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure to the barest
minimum, The latest instructions were issued vide this Ministry ID no. 1(8-ATN)/Fin Bud-
11/2023 dt 26.09.2023and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-Il/2020-21 dt.1/10/2021. In addition to
above the Monthly expenditure plan and quarterly Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil
Estimate) in prescribed format has been incorporated in Detailed Demands for Grants for FY
2023-24,

6. The Committee observed that in all the three cases of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations, the excess expenditure had been incurred by
Ministries/Departments concerned even after obtaining large amount of
Supplementary Grants. The Committee had noted that in spite of their repeated
cautioning, the trend continued unabated. The Committee were, therefore, inclined
to conclude that not only the Budget Estimates were made inadequately, but even
at Supplementary Demands stage, the requirements projected were not realistic.
The Committee, accordingly, reiterated their recommendation and emphasized

effective mechanism to be followed by all the Ministries/Departments to

strengthen their financial contro! so as to avoid incurring excess expenditure in

===upon-the=Ministry-of-Finance+{Department-of-Economic=Affairs)-to-formulate-an===———


5

cases where Supplementary Grant has been obtained. The Committee note from
the reply of the Department of Food and Public Distribution that efforts are always
made to strictly adhere to the guidelines and rules given by the Ministry of
Finance. Further, the Committee note from the reply of the Ministry of Defence that
the total excess expenditure during 2010-21 was Rs. 9.82 crs. and the total savings
was हैं, 7.91crs. under the Capital portion of Grant resulting in an overall excess
of Rs. 1.91 crs which is marginal against the Final Grant of हैं, 8805.00 crs. The
Committee are disappointed to note the casual attitude of Ministry of Defence
towards incurring excess expenditure and impress upon the MoD to strengthen
the financial controls with a view to completely avoiding excess expenditure, more
so, in cases where Supplementary Grant has already been obtained. Further,
Department of Economic Affairs may issue strict instructions to the Budget
Controlling Authorities of all Ministries/Departments to scrupulously adhere to
this principle. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this

regard, and outcome thereof.

Recommendation Para No. 3

. The Committee find that incurring excess expenditure has been a recurring phenomenon
in all the sectors viz. Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways. The
scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred by various Ministries/Departments during the last
ten years reveals that in Civil Sector, the excess expenditure which was reduced to a
considerable extent during the year 2018-19 (%0.22 crore under one Grant) has again
witnessed an upward trend during the year 2019-20 (%31936.47 crore under two Grants)
and 2020-21 (%118651.04 crore under three Grants). Further, in regard to Appropriation
Accounts — Defence Services, it has been revealed that during the last ten years period,
there were only two years (i.e. 2015-16 & 2020-21), when there was no excess
expenditure incurred under the Grants/Appropriations operated by Ministry of Defence.
In case of Appropriation accounts - Postal Services, the Committee are appreciative of
the fact that in last ten years, no excess expenditure was incurred during six years 2013-
144,-2015-16-and-2017-18-to-2020-21:-Further,in-regard to-excess-expenditure incurred
by Ministry of Railways during the last ten years, the Committee find that during three
years i.e. 2017-18, 2019-20 and 2020-21, no excess expenditure was incurred under the



6

Grant operated by Ministry of Railways. Thus, the scrutiny of trend of expenditure during
the last ten years is indicative of the fact that a lot of efforts have been made by Ministry
of Railways, Ministry of Defence as well as Department of Posts to contain their
expenditure within the limit of sanctioned budget. On the other hand, incurring excess
expenditure appears to be a recurring phenomenon in case of Grants/Appropriations
operated by Civil Ministries/Departments, which implies that sincere/effective measures
remain to be taken by the Civil Ministries/Departments to make their budgetary
mechanism strong enough to avoid excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations
operated by them. The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Civil
Ministries/Departments should once again analyze in depth the reasons for the recurring
phenomenon of excess expenditure with a view to initiating timely remedial measures,
whereby budget as well as revised estimates are prepared more precisely and the actual

expenditure remains within the domain of funds authorized by Parliament.

8. In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of

Defence submitted as under:

. This Ministry, as a measure of control, issues necessary _ instructions
repetitively to all concerned user departments of MoD(Civil) and Defence Pensions to
prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the
related aspects such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated
expenses and concrete remedial action must be taken immediately to arrest the
savings/excess to an optimum level. Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure over
the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation and to assess the requirement of funds properly,
the pre-budget discussions are held with the user departments. The
instructions/measure issued by Ministry of Finance are circulated to all budget
controlling authorities from time to time to take noteworthy and suitable remedial
measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of funds and
expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be made to rectify the
loopholes/deficiencies with view to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure (0 the
barest minimum. The latest instructions were issued vide this Ministry ID no. 1(8-
ATN)/Fin Bud-l/2022 dt 01.09.2022 and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-li/2020-21
dt. 1/10/2021. In addition to above the Monthly expenditure plan and quarterly
Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil Estimate) and Defence Pensions in prescribed
format has been incorporated in Detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2023-24.

dditic that an applicatic
“coriprenen
System for Defence Pensioners and this system will receive pension proposals and
make payments centrally). This system has been completely rolled out for 3 services
and 47 civilian organisations under Ministry of Defence w.e.f. 01.08.2021.



As on date SPARSH has received pension claims for 1,74,599 retirees and
disbursement has been made for Rs.56,794.92 crores during FY 2023-24 as on
05.10.2023. The data obtained through SPARSH will be helpful for estimating
Defence Pensions Budget accurately. "

9. In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of

Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution submitted as under:

“The excess expenditure i.r.o. Department of Food and Public Distribution occurred
during FY 2020-21 only and there has not any recurring phenomenon of excess
expenditure. The Department follows all the guidelines issued by MoF and actual
expenditure are regularly monitored by senior level Officers to keep the expenditure
within the funds authorized by Parliament. As we already mentioned, it is reiterated
that excess was on account of the Government making complete repayment of
outstanding balance of NSSF loan grant fo FCL.”

10.Noting that the incurring excess expenditure has been a recurring phenomenon in
case of Grants/Appropriations operated by Civil Ministries/Departments and
sincere/effective measures remained to be taken by them ta make their budgetary
mechanism strong enough to avoid excess expenditure, the Committee had
recommended the Civil Ministries/Departments to analyze the reasons for the same
with a view to initiating timely remedial measures, whereby budget as well as revised
estimates are prepared more precisely and the actual expenditure remains within the
domain of funds authorized by Parliament. The Committee note from the reply of the
MoD (Civil) and Defence Pensions that as a measure of control, necessary
instructions are repetitively issued to all concerned user departments to prepare their
budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects
such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenses and further
to assess the requirement of funds properly, pre-budget discussions are held with the
user departments. Further, efforts will be made to rectify the loopholes/deficiencies
with a view to restrict the quantum of excéss expenditure to the barest minimum. The

Committee note from the reply of that Department of Food and Public Distribution

the Department follows all the guidelines issued by MoF and actual expenditure are
regularly monitored by senior level Officers to keep the expenditure within the funds


8

authorized by Parliament. The Committee while noting that the excess expenditure
was also incurred to meet additional requirement towards Pradhan Mantri Garib
Kalyan Ann Yojna (PMGKYA) and Aatm Nirbhar Bharat (AMB) packages desire to be
apprised of the specific steps taken by Department of FPD to analyze the reasons for
excess expenditure and remedial measures initiated to ensure budget as well as
revised estimates are prepared more precisely and the actual expenditure remains

within the domain of funds authorized by Parliament.



CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the
Union Government relating to Civil Sector, Defence Services, Postal Services and
Railways for the Financial year 2020-21 has revealed that an expenditure to the
tune of %118651.04 crore was incurred by two Ministries/Departments of Union
Government, viz Department of Food and Public Distribution (¥118648.60 crore
under Grant No.-15) and Ministry of Defence (1.92 crore under Grant No.-18-
Ministry of Defence (Misc) and 0.52 crore under Grant No.-21-Defence Pensions)
in excess of the provision sanctioned under three Grants/Appropriations during
the year 2020-21. The bulk of excess expenditure i.e. %118648.60 crore was
recorded under Grant No.-15 of Appropriation Accounts (Civil) operated by the
Department of Food and Public Distribution, which accounts for over 99.99 per
cent of the total excess expenditure incurred during the year under review i.e.
2020-21. The Committee are, however, pleased to note that the Department of
Posts had not incurred excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations
operated by them during the last four years i.e. 2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20 and
2020-21. The Committee also note with satisfaction that Ministry of Defence had
not incurred any excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations covered
under Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services). However, the Ministry had
incurred excess expenditure to the minimum extent under two Grants (1.92 crore
under Grant No.-18- Ministry of Defence (Misc) and €0.52 crore under Grant No.
21- Defence Pensions). The reasons attributed by the Ministries/Departments
concerned for incurring excess expenditure reveals that lack of adequate alacrity
in the budgetary estimation stage, negligence in invoking the provisions of
Supplementary Demands and failure in ensuring strict fiscal discipline continue
to be the main reasons for the excess expenditure year after year. The Committee
are of the view that in an age of e-governance, issues like excess expenditure
should not continue or recur year after year. In pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendations over the years for containing the excess expenditure, the
National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) had undertaken a study on the
trend and causes of excess expenditure incurred by _ various
Ministries/Departments during the period 2000-01 to 2017-18. NIFM had made 12
-recommendations..in..their..Report for.an_informed..system.of.Budgeting and_-


10

Expenditure Control. The Committee are pleased to note that action taken by the
Ministries/Departments concerned on the recommendations of NIFM have yielded
positive results in containing excess expenditure under the
Grants/Appropriations pertaining to Appropriations Accounts of Defence
Services, Postal Services and Railways during the FY 2020-21. The lone Grant
No.-15 relating to Department of Food and Public Distribution (Revenue-Voted)
contributed to a major chunk of the excess expenditure incurred under Civil
sector during the year under review. Also, at the Grant level, this has been the
highest ever excess expenditure incurred under one Grant in the last five years.
The Committee, in this regard would emphasize that stringent measures be taken
for scrupulous scrutiny of Budget proposals, rigorous monitoring of the pace of
expenditure and strict compliance of General Financial Rules so as to reduce the
expenditure to the barest minimum.

(Para No. 1)

Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Defence

In this regard, the actual Position under Grant No.-21- Defence Pensions for the

Financial Year 2020-21 is as under :
& in thousands

Revenue Total Approved Actual Saving(-)
Section Amount Expenditure Excess (+
Charged O- 5,90,00
$- 1.41,00 7,83,23 +52,23
T- 7,31,00
Voted
O- 133819,10,00 128058,04,69 -5761,05,31
Total 133826,41,00 128065,87,92 -5760,53,08

The above table shows that there was an excess expenditure of हैं, 0.52 crs
under Charged Portion of the Defence Pensions Grant for FY 2020-21.

In this regard, this Ministry is of the view that it is not possible to accurately
forecast court decrees and their impact in terms of charged expenditure during the year.
Whenever more court cases were anticipated a Supplementary Grant has been
obtained for materialization of more court cases. However, despite obtaining


tl

Supplementary Grant, excess expenditure was incurred due to finalization of more
court cases and the booking of this obligatory expenditure led to the said excess.
However, as per the Appropriation Accounts (Stage -IV) in respect of Defence
Pensions, there is an overall saving under Grant No.-21 Defence Pensions in the
Financial Year 2020-21.

Regarding Ministry of Defence (Civil) it is submitted the excess expenditure of &.
1.91 crs has been incurred under Voted portion of the Capital Section of the Grant and
the actual position under Capital Section of the Grant is as follows :-

(%. in thousands)

Capital Section; Total Approved Actual Saving
Amount Expenditure Excess (+)
Charged

40,00,00 24,89,50 -15,10,50

Voted O- 7206,00,00
$-1599,00,00 8806,91,62 +1,91,62

8805,00,00
Total 8845,0000 88318112 -13,18,88

The excess expenditure under Capital Section (Voted) in FY 2020-21 occurred
mainly under three organisations CGO, DEO and Boarder Road Organisations. Under
CGO excess expenditure was incurred due to requirement of additional funds of @.
3,40,23 thousands towards Acquisition of Ships & Fleet and there was a savings of &.
19,34 thousands under head “Land Acquisition (Major Works)” thus resulting in overall
excess of % 3,20,89 thousands in respect of the Coast Guard Organisation. Further, in
Defence Estate Organisation an excess of हैं 41,04 thousands occurred due to
requirement of additional funds towards Construction of Office Building and similarly an
excess of %6,20,31 thousands occurred due to more works carried out by Border Road
Organisation. The total excess expenditure was = 98,224 thousands and the total
savings was %. 79,062 thousands under the Capital portion of Grant thus resulting in an
overall excess of रहें, 1,91,62 thousands. The total excess of %1,91,62,184 against the
Final Grant of हैं. 8805,00,00.00 thousand comes to 0.02 percent which is
marginal. Though there is a marginal excess expenditure under the Capital Section of

the Grant, however, there is 4 overall savings under MoD(Civil) Grant in the FY 2020-


12

21. Further in the successive Financial years i.e. 2021-22 and 2022-23there is no
excess expenditure either in the Capital Section or in the overall Grant.

As a measure of control, necessary instructions have been issued to all
concerned user departments of MoD(Civil) and Defence Pensions to prepare their
budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects such
commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenses and concrete remedial
action must be taken immediately to arrest the savings/excess to an optimum level.
Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure over the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation
and to assess the requirement of funds properly, the pre-budget discussions are held
with the user departments. The instructions/measure issued by Ministry of Finance are
circulated to all budget controlling authorities from time to time to take noteworthy and
suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of
funds and expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be made to rectify the
loopholes/deficiencies with a view to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum. The latest instructions were issued vide this Ministry ID no. 1(8-
ATN)/Fin Bud-I/2023 dt 26.09.2023 and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-II/2020-21
dt.1/10/2021. In addition to above, the Monthly expenditure plan and quarterly
Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil Estimate) in prescribed format has been
incorporated in Detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2023-24.

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

"It has always been the endevour of the Department to adhere to the guidelines
and rules given by Ministry of Finance and the Department strictly monitors the
expenditure right from the start of financial year. For this, Monthly Expenditure Plan
(MEP) is prepared beforehand and weekly expenditure statement is monitored by
holding Senior Officers' Meetings (SOM) regularly.

Further, excess was due to additional requirement towards Pradhan Mantri Garib
Kalyan Ann Yojana (PMGKAY) and Aatm Nirbhar Bharat (ANB) package and
repayment of NSSF loan granted to Food Corporation of India (FCI). Out of the total
excess of Rs. 118758.63 crore an amount of Rs. 46.63 crore was provided through re-
appropriation of funds with the prior approval of Ministry of Finance and token
supplementary approved by Parliament for the same. However, remaining excess

“expenditure of Rs. 11871200 crore was as per the direction of Ministry of Finance


15

received on 30.03.2021 for complete repayment of outstanding balance of NSSF loan
which shall be regularized at appropriate time by obtaining approval of Parliament in
consultation with Ministry of Finance. "

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee are constrained to observe that in all the three cases of
excess registering Grants/Appropriations, the excess expenditure had been
incurred by Ministries/Departments concerned even after obtaining large amount
of Supplementary Grants. The percentage of excess expenditure over the
Supplementary Grants in respect of these three cases ranged from 0.12 per cent
in Grant No.18 - Ministry of Defene (Misc) to 37.7 per cent in Grant No.-15 —
Department of Food and Public Distribution. From the scrutiny of Grant-wise
position of obtaining Supplementary Grants and excess expenditure incurred
thereafter, the Committee find that the Supplementary Grants to the tune of
%314557.83 crore was allocated for Grant No.-15 — Department of Food and Public
Distribution but this amount was short by =118648.60 crore. In case of Grant No.-
18 - operated by Ministry of Defene under Civil Sector, though Supplementary
Grant of 1599.00 crore was obtained, yet an excess expenditure of 71.92 crore
was incurred. Similarly, under Grant No.-21-Defence Pensions, the Ministry of
Defence obtained Supplementary Grants of २1.41 crore which remained
inadequate and resulted into excess expenditure of 70.52 crore. In this regard
though the Committee have repeatedly cautioned the Ministries/Departments in
the past against incurring excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary
Grants, this trend continues unabated. While taking note of the trend of incurring
excess expenditure year after year despite the recommendations of PAC which
are followed up by instructions/guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), the Committee are inclined to conclude that
not only the Budget Estimates are made inadequately, but even at Supplementary
Demands stage, the requirements projected are not realistic. The Committee are
of the view that when the Ministries/Departments have opportunities to obtain
Supplementary Demands for Grants during three Sessions of Parliament in a
year, there is no reason for incurring excess expenditure being inevitable. Only
last year, while scrutinizing this phenomenon, the PAC, in their 53 Report (177
L.S.), had emphasized upon the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) to formulate an effective mechanism to be followed by all the
Ministries/Departments to strengthen their financial control so as to avoid
incurring excess expenditure in cases where Supplementary Grant has been
__obtained. Strict instructions are to be given to the Budget Controlling Authorities

of the defaulting Ministries/Departments to scrupulously adhere to this principle. — है


14

While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard, and outcome thereof.

(Para No.2)

Action Taken by Government

Ministry of Defence

"In this connection it is mentioned that initially there was an allotment of Rs.5.90
crore only undercharged portion under Defence Pensions of various pensionary heads
taking into consideration the pace of the expenditure under charged portion PCDA(P),
Allahabad had projected supplementary demands for Rs. 1.41 crore under charged
portion under Grant No. -21- Defence Pensions. As the Court cases involving
approximately for Rs.93.05 lakhs were finalized in the month of March 2021 during the
financial years 2020-21, it resulted in excess booking. Further, this Ministry is of the
view that it is not possible to accurately forecast court decrees and their impact in terms
of charged expenditure during the year. It is also important to mention here that in the
Financial Year 2021-22 and 2022-23 there is no excess expenditure under the Charged
Section of the Defence Pensions Grant.

Regarding MoD(Civil) Grant it is submitted that under Capital Section (Voted) the
Original Appropriation of हैं, 7206. 00 crs. was augmented by a Supplementary
Appropriation of हैं, 1599.00 crs. obtained in March,2021. Against the Final
Appropriation of %.8805.00 crs. the actual expenditure was हैं, 8806.91 crs. resulting in
an excess expenditure of %.1.91 crs. The excess expenditure was incurred due to
requirement of additional funds of %. 3.40 crs. towards Acquisition of Ships & Fleet and
there was a savings of %. 0.19 crs. under head “Land Acquisition (Major Works)” thus
resulting the overall excess of %. 3.21 crs. in respect of the Coast Guard Organisation .
Further in Defence Estate Organisation an excess of हैं, 0.41crs. occurred due to
requirement of additional funds towards Construction of Office Building and similarly an
excess of ¥.6.20 crs. occurred due to more works carried out by Border Road
Organisation. The total excess expenditure was Rs. 9.82 crs. and the total savings
was हैं, 7.91crs. under the Capital portion of Grant thus resulting in an overall excess of
Rs. 1.91 crs. The total excess of 71.91crs. against the Final Grant of . 8805.00 crs.
comes to 0.02 percent which is marginal. Though there is a marginal excess
expenditure under the Capital Section of the Grant, however, there is an overall
savings under MoD(Civil) Grant in the FY 2020-21. Further in the successive Financial
years i.e. 2021-22 and 2022-23 there is no excess expenditure either in the Capital
Section or in the overall Grant.


As a measure of control, necessary instructions have been issued to all
concerned user departments of MoD(Civil) and Defence Pensions to prepare their
budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects such
as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenses and concrete
remedial action taken immediately to arrest the savings/excess to an optimum level.
Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure over the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation
and to assess the requirement of funds properly, the pre-budget discussions are held
with the user departments. The instructions/measure issued by Ministry of Finance are
circulated to all budget controlling authorities from time to time to take noteworthy and
suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of
funds of the expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be made to rectify the
loopholes/deficiencies with view to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum. The latest instructions were issued vide this Ministry ID no. 1(8-
ATN)/Fin Bud-II/2023. dt 26.09.2023and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-II/2020-21
dt.1/10/2021. In addition to above the Monthly expenditure plan and quarterly
Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil Estimate) in prescribed format has been
incorporated in Detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2023-24. "

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

"It has always been the efforts of Department of Food and Public Distribution to
strictly adhere to the guidelines and rules given by the Ministry of Finance. Now, the
department has take up the matter with MoF for regularization of excess expenditure.

In present case excess expenditure amount = 118648.60 crore over
supplementary grant was on account of direction given by MoF in order to clear
outstanding NSSF loan."

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find that the incurring excess expenditure has been a
recurring phenomenon in all the sectors viz. Civil, Defence Services, Postal
Services and Railways. The scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred by various
Ministries/Departments during the last ten years reveals that in Civil Sector, the
excess expenditure which was reduced to a considerable extent during the year
2018-19 (%0.22 crore under one Grant) has again witnessed an upward trend
during the year 2019-20 (%31936.47 crore under two Grants) and 2020-21
(%118651.04 crore under three Grants). Further, in regard to Appropriation
Accounts — Defence Services, it has been revealed that during the last ten years

period, 2020-21), when there was no
“excess” Appropriations operated by



16

Ministry of Defence. In case of Appropriation accounts — Postal Services, the
Committee are appreciative of the fact that in last ten years, no excess
expenditure was incurred during six years 2013-14, 2015-16 and 2017-18 to 2020-
21. Further, in regard to excess expenditure incurred by Ministry of Railways
during the last ten years, the Committee find that during three years i.e. 2017-18,
2019-20 and 2020-21, no excess expenditure was incurred under the Grant
operated by Ministry of Railways. Thus, the scrutiny of trend of expenditure
during the last ten years is indicative of the fact that a lot of efforts have been
made by Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence as well as Department of Posts
to contain their expenditure within the limit of sanctioned budget. On the other
hand, incurring excess expenditure appears to be a recurring phenomenon in
case of Grants/Appropriations operated by Civil Ministries/Departments, which
implies that sincere/effective measures remain to be taken by the Civil
Ministries/Departments to make their budgetary mechanism strong enough to
avoid excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations operated by them.
The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Civil Ministries/Departments
should once again analyze in depth the reasons for the recurring phenomenon of
excess expenditure with a view to initiating timely remedial measures, whereby
budget as well as revised estimates are prepared more precisely and the actual
expenditure remains within the domain of funds authorized by Parliament.

(Para No. 3)

Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

“The excess expenditure i.r.o. Department of Food and Public Distribution
occurred during FY 2020-21 only and there has not any recurring phenomenon of
excess expenditure. The Department follows all the guidelines issued by MoF and
actual expenditure are regularly monitored by senior level Officers to keep the
expenditure within the funds authorized by Parliament. As we already mentioned in
observation para 1, it is reiterated that excess was on account of the Government made
complete repayment of outstanding balance of NSSF loan grant to FCI. "

Ministry of Defence

"This Ministry, as a measure of control, issues necessary _ instructions
repetitively to all concerned user departments of MoD(Civil) and Defence Pensions to
prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related
aspects such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenses and
concrete remedial action must be taken immediately to arrest the savings/excess to an
optimum level. Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure over the sanctioned


it

Grant/Appropriation and to assess the requirement of funds properly, the pre-budget
discussions are held with the user departments. The instructions/measure issued by
Ministry of Finance are circulated to all budget controlling authorities from time to time to
take noteworthy and suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and
subsequent monitoring of funds and expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be
made to rectify the loopholes/deficiencies with view to restrict the quantum of excess
expenditure to the barest minimum. The latest instructions were issued vide _ this
Ministry ID no. 1(8-ATN)/Fin Bud-lI/2022 dt 01.09.2022 and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-
11/2020-21 dt.1/10/2021. In addition to above the Monthly expenditure plan and
quarterly Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil Estimate) and Defence Pensions in
prescribed format has been incorporated in Detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2023-
24.

In addition to that an application with project name SPARSH System has
been developed (which is a comprehensive web based interactive Pension
Disbursement System for Defence Pensioners and this system will receive pension
proposals and make payments centrally). This system has been completely rolled out
for 3 services and 47 civilian organisations under Ministry of Defence w.e.f. 01.08.2021

As on date SPARSH has received pension claims for 1,74,599 retirees and
disbursement has been made for Rs.56,794.92 crores during FY 2023-24 as on
05.10.2023. The data obtained through SPARSH will be helpful for estimating Defence
Pensions Budget accurately. "

QObservation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution incurred an excess expenditure of 118648.60 crore under Revenue —
Voted section of Grant No. - 15- Department of Food and Public Distribution, the
excess of =118648.60 crore was the net effect of total savings of $120.94 crore
and total excesses of %118769.54 crore under various sub-heads of the Grant.
The Committee note in this regard that the excess expenditure under Revenue-
Voted Section of this Grant was incurred after obtaining Supplementary Grant of
%314557.83 crore on two occasions i.e. in September 2020 and February 2021. As
indicated by the Ministry, the excess expenditure was on account of subsidy
payable to Food Corporation of India (FCI) incurred under Sub-Head
2408.01.102.10 — Subsidy Payable to FCI and others on food grains transactions
under National Food Security Act. This was because the Government made
complete repayment of outstanding balance of NSSF loan grant to FCI, stating

___.that the excess shall_be-regularized_at.appropriate time by obtaining Parliament's


158

approval. Also, the excess expenditure has been incurred to meet additional
requirement towards Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Ann Yojna (PMGKYA) and
Aatm Nirbhar Bharat (AMB) packages.

The Committee would emphasize that while obtaining the Supplementary
Grant, the actual requirement need to be assessed realistically so that the amount
does not fall short of the actual requirement and thereby necessitate excess
expenditure. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry in this regard
that in future, projections will be made more carefully in consultation with nodal
agencies i.e. 1701 and NCDC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard and outcome thereof.

(Para No. 4)

Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

"It has always been the efforts of Department of Food and Public Distribution to
strictly adhere to the guidelines and rules given by the Ministry of Finance. Now, the
department has been taken up the matter with MoF for regularization of excess
expenditure occurred during occurred during FY 2020-21 at the appropriate time by
obtaining Parliament's approval.

As, such occurrence took place on the direction of Ministry of Finance and the
department to follow strict control over expenditure in order to avoid such occurrence in
future."

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) under Revenue-Voted
Section of Grant No. -15 — Department of Food and Public Distribution and
Ministry of Defence under Capital - Voted Section of Grant -18 - Ministry of
Defence (Misc) have surrendered the funds during the Financial Year 2020-21
despite having incurred excess expenditure under these Grants. In case of Grant
No. -15 - Department of Food and Public Distribution, the Department
surrendered %59.69 crore. Further, in case of Grant No. -18- Ministry of Defence
(Misc) the Ministry, while incurring excess expenditure of २1.92 crore
surrendered 6.36 crore..While expressing —-concern..on-the. persisting —


13

phenomenon of surrendering of funds despite having Supplementary Grant and
incurring excess expenditure, the Committee had, in their 53" Report (17 L.S)
urged that the Ministries/Departments concerned to revamp their prevailing
expenditure review mechanism so that surrender of funds could be avoided in
future. The Ministries/Departments concerned have not taken due care despite
the Committee’s recommendation. The Committee would, therefore, once again
like to emphasize that through proper control over expenditure and with more
accurate estimation of liabilities, the phenomenon of surrendering of funds
despite incurring excess expenditure can be avoided. They would desire to be
apprised of the specific steps taken by the Ministries/Departments concerned in
this regard.

(Para No.5)

Action Taken by Government

Ministry of Defence

"In this regard, it is submitted that under the Capital Section of MoD(Civil)Grant,
Defence Estate Organizationhas the approved provision of Rs. 8.40 crores in BE 2020-
21. Subsequently at the stage of Modified Appropriation the amount has been reduced
to Rs. 0.16 crs as proposed by the said Organization. As the Organization has
surrendered Rs. 8.24 crs at the Modified Appropriation, Out of total saving of Rs. 8.24
crs, this Ministry has re-appropriated Rs. 1.88 crs to the other organizations as
requested under the Capital Section of the Ministry of Defence (Civil) Grant and the
balance amount i.e. 6.36 crores. has been surrendered to Ministry of Finance.

However, after the saving has been surrender by Ministry at MA stage, the excess
expenditure under Capital Section (Voted) in FY 2020-21 occurred mainly under three
organizations viz CGO, DEO and Boarder Road Organisation. In this regard it is
mentioned that at the Modified Appropriation stage under Capital Section the funds
have been provided to these Organizations as per the trend of the
expenditure/approved allocation by Ministry of Finance and also as per projection of
these organization. However, excess expenditure has been incurred by aforesaid
Department/Organisation at March Final Stage of the Financial Year 2020-21 over and
above their approved Budget Allocation and at that juncture the re-appropriations/
Supplementary allocation was not possible due to closure of the Financial Year 2020-
21.

As a measure of control, necessary instructions have been issued to all

~—==--oncerned user departments of MoD(Civil) and-Defence-Pensions~-to~ prepare कक्ष एप:


90

budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects such
commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenses and concrete remedial
action must be taken immediately to arrest the savings/excess to an optimum level.
Moreover, to avoid any excess expenditure over the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation
and to assess the requirement of funds properly, the pre-budget discussions are held
with the user departments. The instructions/measure issued by Ministry of Finance are
circulated to all budget controlling authorities from time to time to take noteworthy and
suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of
funds of the expenditure flow. Moreover, the efforts will be made to rectify the
loopholes/deficiencies with view to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum. The latest instructions were issued vide this Ministry ID no. 1(8-
ATN)/Fin Bud-Il/2022 dt 01.09.2022 and MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/Bud-II/2020-21
dt.1/10/2021. In addition to above the Monthly expenditure plan and quarterly
Expenditure allocations of MoD (Civil) in prescribed format has been incorporated in
Detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2023-24. "

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

"Department regularly monitored the expenditure occurred under various
segment of the dept. accordingly in terms of the rule 62(2) of GFR 2017. Dept. had
always been surrendered the savings.

However, due to a major policy decision taken by Ministry of Finance dept. was
directed to incurred excess expenditure to the tune of = 118648.60 crore under Sub-
head 2408.01.102.10 - Subsidy Payable to FCI and others on food grains transactions
under National Food Security Act to clear all the outstanding NSSF loan i.r.o. FCI. As,
such occurrence took place on the direction of Ministry of Finance, action has been
taken to regularized excess expenditure and to follow strict control over expenditure in
order to avoid such occurrence in future."

Observation/Recommendation

Subject to the observations/recommendations made in the preceding
paragraphs, the Committee recommend that that excess expenditure referred to
in Para 12 of Part-l of this Report be regularized in the manner prescribed in
Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of India.

- oo oo oe (Para No.6)


ot

Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)

"As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government relating to 2020-21 was submitted to
Parliament in the Winter Session, 2023. The Parliament has passed the Excess
Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularizing the money drawn in
excess of the amounts authorized by the Parliament for the year 2020-21, has also
been passed and the corresponding Act published in the Gazette of India (Extra-
ordinary) Part Il, Section 1 dated 24th December, 2023 as Act No. 41 of 2023, after
obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess amount drawn in 2020-
2021 stands regularized. Action taken in this regard is, therefore, completed."

Ministry of Defence

"The proposal for regularization of excess expenditure incurred under Grant No. -
21 Defence Pensions and Grant No. 18- Ministry of Defence (Civil) for the FY 2020-21
has already been submitted to Min of Finance vide MoD(Fin) ID No. 2(6)/FDin/Bud-
11/2020 dt.05/10/2023 in r/o Defence Pensions and vide MoD(Fin) ID No. 1(1)/Fin/Bud-
11/2023/Pt- | dt. 10.11.2023 in respect of Ministry of Defence (Civil) Grant."

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution

"The excess expenditure has been regularized by taking approval of Parliament
and assented to by the President of India on 24th December, 2023 and corresponding
Act has also been published in the Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part Il, Section 1 on
the same date."


CHAPTER-III

Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of

the replies received from the Government

~NIL-



CHAPTER-IV

Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the Government have not

been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration

-NIL-



CHAPTER-V

Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the Government have furnished

interim replies

-NIL-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
20 20 February, 2024 2024 Chairperson,
0] Phalgun, 1945 (Saka)

Public Accounts Committee



(APPENDIX - Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 01 THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY SIXTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1 to 6
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

06

Total: 06
Percentage — 100%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil

Percentage— 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%