37

DOUBTFUL RECOVERY OF OUTSTANDING DUES
BECAUSE OF FAILURE OF FIDUCIARY DUTY-
BANGALORE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT ~LIMITED,
BANGALORE (BIAL)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirteenth Report (17 Lok Sabha)’

Ministry of Civil Aviation

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2245

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DOUBTFUL RECOVERY OF OUTSTANDING
DUES BECAUSE OF FAILURE OF FIDUCIARY
DUTY-BANGALORE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
LIMITED, BANGALORE (BIAL)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirteenth Report (17 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION

on 13, 04. 2021

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

March, 2021/Chaitra, 1943 (Saka)


_ CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2020-21)
INTRODUCTION ooo. ccc cece cece ee जज हज रन {iv)
CHAPTER I Report ...

CHAPTER Il

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .........................-

CHAPTER Ill

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ..................... ०-०० ">> जज धन

CHAPTER ५

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
POPS .................. "७ >> जज जज ध 5५5

ANNEXURES/APPENDICES

Minutes of the 12™ Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on 26" March, 2021.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Thirteenth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha).



CEN AAR WE

मी ७ Po

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram .

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri 8.7, Mishra - Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director
Smt. Malvila Mehta - Under Secretary

* Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021.

Wp


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Doubtful Recovery of Outstanding Dues because of Failure of Fiduciary Duty-
Bangalore International Airport Limited, Bangalore (BIAL)'relating to the Ministry of
Civil Aviation. है

2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 18"
March, 2020. Final Action Taken Replies of the.Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 17.11.2020. The
Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the Report at their
Sitting held on 26" March, 2021. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-|

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government णा the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll. पर

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
‘& March, 2021 Chairperson,
७६5 Chaitra, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(०)


CHAPTER -1
~ REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by

the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Doubtful
Recovery of Outstanding Dues because of Failure of Fiduciary Duty-Bangalore
International Airport Limited, Bangalore (BIAL)” relating to Ministry of Civil
Aviation.
2. The Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the
Parliament on 18.03.2020. It contained eight Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation in
respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorised
as follows:-

(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the

Government
Para Nos. 1-3, 5, 6 and 8.
Total:06
Chapter Il
(ii) | Observation/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
NIL
Total:Nil
: Chapter Ill
(iii) | Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
Para No. 4
Total:01
Chapter IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies
Para No. 7
Total:01
Chapter V

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had signed a concession agreement with
Bangalore International Airport Limited (BIAL) for the development, construction,
operation and maintenance of the Bangalore International Airport. The


agreement included inter-alia levy of security fee as required under Rule 88A of
the Aircraft Rules, 1937 from each departing passenger which was to be
collected by BIAL through the various airlines operating from the airport. The
payment so received from the airlines was to be deposited immediately in an
escrow account with a scheduled nationalised bank in fiduciary capacity. The
Committee had noted that the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) required
BIAL to ensure realization of dues from the airlines regularly and furnish MoCA
with copies of its audited annual accounts. However, BIAL had failed to fulfill its
fiduciary duty to promptly realise the security fees from the airlines and remit the
same in the designated escrow account and as a result, outstanding dues
against airlines accumulated and recovery of Rs.9.19 crore from Kingfisher
Airlines was rendered doubtful.

4. The Committee had recommended various measures to be undertaken by
Ministry of Civil Aviation such as concession agreement to contain a general
penal clause for imposition of penalty, tighter monitoring by MOCA, imposition of
penalty on airlines for withholding dues meant for security, recovery of Dues from
Air India, broadening of the facilities extended to CISF personnel and cost of
security to be equally borne by all users of airport apart from passengers etc.

5. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirteenth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters
of this Report in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will now deal with
the Action Taken by the Government on some of _ their
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which merit
comments.

6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish Action
Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in
Chapter | and chapter V within six months of the presentation of the Report
to the House.

Recommendation at Para No. 4- Imposition of penalty ०0 airlines for
withholding dues meant for security

7. The Committee had observed that the Ministry was paying an incentive for
timely payment of dues by airlines and was foregoing the said incentive in case
the collections were not paid to the Passenger Services Fee (Security
Component) PSF(SC) account on time. The Committee had further observed
from the submission of the Ministry that, given an option, airlines were not willing
to be involved in the process of collection of PSF(SC) as they were doing this
fiduciary job for the Ministry and hence, imposing a penalty would be double
jeopardy for them. The Committee had noted that taxation laws also provided for

—g-


taxes to be collected and deposited by a party other than the party which was
liable to pay the tax and the collecting party was further liable to pay
interest/penalty in case of default. Accordingly, the Committee had opined that
the airlines should not be allowed to withhold Government dues which they were
supposed to collect and deposit in fiduciary capacity and had recommended that
the Ministry may impose a provision of penalty in proportion to the delay in
depositing of the passenger security fee in the trust fund along with interest for
the period of delay.

8. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Notes have submitted
as under:

“In oral evidence, ministry has explained that the there is a system of
positive reinforcement i.e. incentives on timely deposit of fee, instead of
punitive measures. As NASFT is now in place, close monitoring of ASF
collection and management will be ensured.”

9. Audit in their vetting comments have stated the following:-

“There is no provision of penalty in proportion to delay in depositing
Passenger Security Fee(PSF) in trust fund along with interest for the
period of delay.”

10. The Ministry have submitted the following in response to Audit
observations:-

“C&AG in its vetting comments has taken note that there is no provision of
penalty in proportion to delay in depositing Passenger Security Fee (PSF)
in trust fund along with interest for the period of delay provision.”

11. The Committee had noted that the Ministry were paying an incentive
for timely payment of dues by airlines and was not providing the said
incentive in case the collections were not paid to the Passenger Services
Fee (Security Component) PSF (SC) account on time. The Committee had,
in this regard opined that a provision of penalty in proportion to the delay
in depositing of the passenger security fee in the trust fund along with
interest for the period of delay may be imposed as was the practice under
the taxation laws. The Committee, while once again noting from the reply of
the Ministry that instead of punitive measures, there is a system of positive
reinforcement such as incentives on timely deposit of fee reiterate that
since security fee is collected from the passengers along with the
passenger fare and is already available with the airlines, the same should

न्छ्न


not be allowed to be withheld. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that imposing penalty will act as a deterrent against delayed
payments and will go a long way in ensuring financial probity. They,
therefore, exhort upon the Ministry to impose a provision of penalty in
proportion to the delay in depositing of the passenger security fee in the
trust fund along with interest for the period of delay.

Recommendation at Para No. 5- Recovery of Dues from Air India

12. The Committee had noted that an amount of €3.26 crore from Air India and
हैं 0.04 crore on account of Passenger Services Fee (Security Component) (PSF
(SC) from other Airlines were still outstanding. Further, the Committee had noted
from the submission made by the representative of the MoCA that in the cases of
Air India and Alliance Air, the Ministry had been liberal and had given them
leverage and, therefore, their payment was expected to be delayed.The
Committee had been disappointed to note that despite being a Government
owned airline, Air India had not been making its payments on time, although
there was no deficit in collecting this amount as it was being collected from
passengers. While opining that the conduct of the national carrier should be
exemplary, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
may direct Air India to pay the outstanding dues immediately and henceforth, not
to give the airline any leverage to pay the dues meant for security personnel
guarding the airports.

13. | The Ministry of Civil Aviation in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under:
"NASFT has been suitably advised.”

14. Audit have given the following observations:-
“Audit observed that NASFT is in correspondence with Air India for
outstanding Aviation Security Fee.”

15. The Ministry have submitted the following in response to Audit
observations:-

“NASFT and Ministry of Civil Aviation is continuously pursuing with Air
India to pay outstanding dues towards Aviation Security Fee. C&AG in its
vetting comments has taken note of the same.”

16. The Committee had noted with disappointment that despite being a
Government owned airline, Air India had not been making its payments on
time. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of

“nr


Civil Aviation may direct Air India to pay the outstanding dues immediately
and not to give the airline any leverage to pay the dues meant for security
personnel guarding the airports. The Committee, while noting from the
reply of the Ministry that NASFT and MoCA are continuously pursuing with
Air India to pay outstanding dues towards Aviation Security Fee, are
dismayed to find that no information is given on the status of recovery
made, so far. The Committee desire that the Ministry may actively engage
with Air India to pay the outstanding amount and inform the Committee of
the amount so recovered within one month of the presentation of this
Report to the House.

Recommendation at Para No.6- National Aviation Security Fee Trust

17. The Committee had observed that a National Aviation Security Fee Trust
(NASFT) had been formed to collect the security fee through a centralized
accounting system and for better management of Aviation Security Fee (ASF).
The Committee had noted that the collection and disbursal of ASF would be done
by the Trust instead of airport operators who would only help the Trust to raise
the invoice and collect the money from the airlines. While noting that the
appropriate SOPs for the airlines as well as the airport operators had been
communicated, the Committee had desired that a comparative statement of the
resultant improvement in collection of dues from airlines may be furnished within
six months of presentation of the Report .

18. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:
“National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has been set up with the
mandate to manage Aviation Security Fee. The recommendation of the
Committee has been conveyed to NASFT to submit the comparative
statement as sought by the Committee.”

19. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-
“Comparative Statement of the resultant improvement in collection of dues
from airlines needs to be furnished by the Ministry within six months of
presentation of the Report 1.8 by September 2020. Thus, no further
comments.”


20. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in the Action Taken Notes have further
submitted as under:

“As per vetting comment of C&AG, the comparative statement of the resultant
improvement in collection of dues from airlines is as under:
1. To streamline the management of Aviation Security Fee, National Aviation
Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has been created and started functioning w.e.f.
01/07/2019.
2. NASFT has been created with the objective to -
i. replace the earlier system of collection and expenditure of ASF
airport-wise by a centralised mechanism
ii. bring in uniformity and standardisation in ASF collection and
expenditure across the country and
iii. bring in transparency and accountability.
Hence, the objective of NASFT is to develop a centralized ASF
management besides addressing the issue of shortfall in collection.
3. The comparative statement indicating ASF collection post NASFT
creation till 28/02/2020 (i.e. during 01/07/2019 to 28/02/2020) and
corresponding period previous year is as under:
(Rs in Crore)

Period ASF billing ASF Collection
01/07/2019 to 28/02/2020 2051 1956
(01/07/2018 to 28/02/2019 1699 1671

21. Noting that a National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT) was
formed to collect security fee through a centralized accounting system, the
Committee had desired that a comparative statement of the resultant
improvement in collection of dues from airlines may be furnished. The
Committee while noting that the objective of NASFT is to develop a
centralized ASF management besides addressing the issue of shortfall in
collection observe from the reply of the Ministry that from 1.7.2018 to
28.2.2019 (prior to creation of NASFT) the billed amount was Rs.1699 crore
and the collection was Rs. 1671 crore and after the creation of NASFT i.e.
from 1.7.2019 to 28.2.2019, the billed amount was Rs. 2051 crore and the
collection was Rs. 1956 crore. The Committee do not find any visible
improvement in billing or in collection amount after creation of NASFT.
Keeping this in view, the Committee desire that the Ministry should keep a
close watch on the expected gain and report back to the Committee in their
next reply. The Committee desire to be apprised of the average dues that
remain pending beyond the billing cycle, the steps taken to recover the
same and the gap, if any, between the money collected by the Ministry

—6-


through imposition of this fee and the amount disbursed to the CISF for
providing security at the airports.

Recommendation at Para No.8- Distribution of Passenger Security Fee

amongst all beneficiaries
22. The Committee had noted that aviation security is funded through PSF

(SC)/ASF collections only and that PSF (SC)/ASF was levied on embarking
passengers at Rs.150/ per domestic pax and USD 4.85 per international pax.
The funds collected from this levy were used for funding aviation security. The
Committee had noted that there was a huge gap between the money collected by
the Ministry through imposition of this fee and the amount disbursed to the CISF
for providing security at the airports. In order to handle this situation, the Ministry
had decided to maintain a single escrow account, form a National Aviation
Security Fee Trust (NASFT) and raise the amount of PSF(SC) to be collected
from the passengers which was to be indexed to the Consumer Price Index(CPI).
The Committee were of the considered view that since CISF was also providing
security to the infrastructure created by the airport operators at airports, the
equipment of airlines and their staff deployed on the airports as well as the
commercial establishments set up at the airports, the burden of paying for
security should be distributed amongst all the users and not just the passengers.
As the CISF was deployed at 60 airports across the country, this would increase
the corpus of the security fund, address the issue of acute deficit and enable
provision of more amenities to CISF personnel as recommended by the
Committee in their previous recommendation. The Committee had recommended
that the Ministry may make a formula whereby the cost of security may be
equally borne by all i.e. airport operators, airlines and vendors who have set up
their shops at the airports, apart from passengers.

23. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:
“The Rule 88A of Aircraft Rules 1937 provides for levying Aviation Security
Fee from specified sources. Hence expanding the source of ASF, as
recommended by the Committee, may not be agreed under the provisions
under Rule 88A of Aircraft Rules 1937.”

24. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-
“Ministry submitted levying Aviation Security Fee from specified sources
however, Ministry may explore suitable steps to follow the
recommendation of PAC.”


25. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in the Action Taken Notes have further

submitted as under:
“The issue of regulating Aviation Security Fee had been deliberated by a
Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Expenditure) and
NASFT is collecting ASF as per the recommendation of the Committee.
General international practices also supports charging Aviation Security
Fee from embarking passengers. However, the recommendation of the
PAC is noted.”

26. The Committee had noted that aviation security is only funded
through PSF (SC)/ASF (Aviation Security Fees)collections and that there
was a huge gap between the money collected by the Ministry through
imposition of this fee and the amount disbursed to the CISF for providing
security at the airports. Opining that the burden of paying for security
should be distributed amongst all the users and not just the passengers,
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry may make a formula
whereby the cost of security may be equally borne by all ie. airport
operators, airlines and vendors who have set up their shops at the airports,
apart from passengers. The Committee observe from the reply of the
Ministry that the issue of regulating Aviation Security Fee had been
deliberated by a committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary
(Expenditure) and NASFT is collecting ASF as per its recommendation.
According to the Ministry, general international practices support charging
Aviation Security Fee from embarking passengers. However, in this regard,
the Committee observe that the Council of International Civil Aviation
Organization in their Policy on Security charges for airports (Seventh
Edition- 2004) recommended inter-alia that the entities concerned may
recover the costs of security measures at airports from the users in a fair
and equitable manner, subject to consultation. Further, as per the Position
Paper of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) (an association
of the world's airlines) on ‘Security Charges’, the charges should be split
between all users on an equitable basis. In view of the above, the
Committee reiterate their view that since security is meant for all users of
the airport including the embarking passengers, the cost of security should
also be borne by all users/establishments inside the airport and desire that
the same may be placed before the aforementioned ministerial committee
for necessary action.


CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation signed a concession
agreement with Bangalore International Airport Limited (BIAL) for the
development, construction, operation and maintenance of the Bangalore
International Airport. The agreement included inter-alia levy of security fee as
required under Rule 88A of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 from each departing
passenger which was to be collected by BIAL through the various airlines
operating from the airport. The payment so received from the airlines was to be
deposited immediately in an escrow account with a scheduled nationalised bank
in fiduciary capacity. The Committee note that the Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) required BIAL to ensure realization of dues from the airlines regularly and
furnish MoCA with copies of its audited annual accounts. However, BIAL failed to
fulfill its fiduciary duty to promptly realise the security fees from the airlines and
remit the same in the designated escrow account and as a result, outstanding
dues against airlines accumulated and recovery of %9.19 crore from Kingfisher
Airlines was rendered doubtful. The Committee’s observations and
recommendations based on the examination of audit findings and discussions
with the representatives of the Ministry as well as written replies submitted by
them are elucidated in the succeeding paragraphs.

[Para 1, Part-II, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(17" Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
The above para is matter of record.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
NIL

Ministry's comments on Audit’s observations
The above para is matter of record.

Observation/Recommendation
Failure of BIAL to act in accordance with SOP

The Committee note that the BIAL failed to exercise its fiduciary
responsibility and airlines were allowed to accumulate dues. As of 31 March 2014,
the amount outstanding from the Airlines was %16.77 crore out of which %9.64
crore was outstanding for a period of more than one year. The outstanding
amount further increased to %17.44 crore as on 31 March 2016, out of which

-4-


%10.12 crore was outstanding for a period of more than one year. Of this, 9.19
crore was due from Kingfisher Airlines that ceased operations in September 2012.
The Committee observe that after Audit raised the issue of dues of Kingfisher
Airlines in February, 2014, BIAL sought approval of the Ministry to write them off.
However, the Ministry advised BIAL to consider legal action for recovery of %9.19
crore and, consequently, outstanding dues were recovered by invoking the
corporate guarantee through Court. The Committee further note from the reply of
the Ministry that as there was no certainty of revival of the airline and recovery of
dues in normal course of action, as a matter of conservative accounting policy,
BIAL had sought approval of the Ministry for writing off the PSF(SC)dues. The
Committee observe that though BIAL had a deposit of 2 months billing of
Kingfisher as security deposit i.e. an amount of %14 crore, it proposed writing off
the dues which is indicative of an utter disregard for the fiduciary responsibility
bestowed upon BIAL under the agreement. The Committee, while noting that the
SOP neither provided for levy of penal interest for non-payment of dues by the
Airlines on time nor imposed any penalties on the airport operators for not
carrying out their duties, desire the Ministry to ensure, henceforth, that any
concession agreement entered into by the Ministry and a private party may
invariably contain a general penal clause for imposition of penalty in cases where
the private party concerned fails to discharge its assigned duties.
[Para 2, Part-II, of 13 Report of Public Accounts Committee
(177 Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Recommendation of the Committee is noted for consideration while entering into
concession agreements in future.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for future compliance. Further, agreements
entered in future by the Ministry will be reviewed in upcoming Audit.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
Vetting comments of C&AG is in agreement with Action Taken. Recommendation of the
Committee is noted fornoted for consideration while entering into concession
agreements in future.

Observation/Recommendation

Tighter monitoring by MOCA

The Committee note that Article 13.3 of the agreement provided for the
consequences of a 'BIAL Default Event’ stipulating payment of dues by BIAL
within twenty-one days of a request from Government of India. In this regard, the
Committee note the Audit’s finding that though Ministry received periodic
accounts from BIAL, it did not direct BIAL to collect and remit outstanding dues
in the escrow account. The Ministry advised BIAL to explore actions for recovery

—\o-


only after the matter was pointed out by Audit. The Committee are disappointed
to note from the written submission of the Ministry that it does not have any
mechanism of preparing a periodic record of dues recoverable from different
airport/ airlines under different heads. As per the reply of the Ministry, the
accounts are kept by the concerned airport operators which are periodically
audited and when any discrepancy is brought to notice of the Ministry, action as
required is initiated by it. The Committee are of the considered opinion that
instead of waiting for audit to point out discrepancies, the Ministry should be
proactive in its approach and call for periodic statements of dues outstanding
beyond the prescribed period and action taken for their recovery from the airlines
to ensure that the money already collected from the passengers is not withheld
by them. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may consider
developing an online system that monitors compliance of all terms and
conditions, particularly collection and payment of dues, periodically, say, on
quarterly basis. The Committee further desire that the internal audit system in
the Ministry may be strengthened to ensure that such defaults are brought to the
notice of the Ministry at the earliest.

[Para 3, Part-I, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee

(17" Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has been set up with the mandate to
manage Aviation Security Fee. The concern of the Committee is shared with the
NASFT for taking proactive actions. NASFT has floated tender for hiring services of
professional firm for developing internal audit system.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
NASFT has been set up with the mandate to manage Aviation Security Fee (ASF). In
this regard, it is observed that NASFT has an online system on ASF accounting in ERP
SAP system. Audit observed that to strengthen the Internal audit system. Ministry
floated a tender for hiring the services of professional firm. The same will be teviewed in
next audit.

Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
C8&AG in its vetting comments has taken note of the Action Taken by the ministry. As
commented by them, the ASF accounting system will be submitted for review in next
audit.
Observation/Recommendation

Recovery of Dues from Air India

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that an amount of %3.26
crore from Air India and %0.04 crore on account of Passenger Services Fee
(Security Component) (PSF (SC) from other Airlines are still outstanding. Further,
the Committee note from the submission made by the representative of the MoCA

-N\—


that in the cases of Air India and Alliance Air, the Ministry has been liberal and
has given them leverage and, therefore, their payment is expected to be
delayed.The Committee are disappointed to note that despite being a Government
owned airline, Air India has not been making its payments on time, although there
is no deficit in collecting this amount as it is being collected from passengers.
The Committee while opining that the conduct of the national carrier should be
exemplary, recommend that the Ministry of Civil Aviation direct Air India to pay
the outstanding dues immediately and henceforth, not to give the airline any
leverage to pay the dues meant for security personnel guarding the airports.

[Para 5, Part-I, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(177 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
NASFT has been suitably advised.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
Audit observed that NASFT is in correspondence with Air India for outstanding Aviation
Security Fee.

Ministry's comments on Audits observations
NASFT and Ministry of Civil Aviation is continuously pursuing with Air India to pay
outstanding dues towards Aviation Security Fee. C&AG in its vetting comments has
taken note of the same.

Observation/Recommendation
National Aviation Security Fee Trust
The Committee observe from the written submission by the Ministry that a
National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has recently been formed to collect
the security fee through a centralized accounting system and for better
management of Aviation Security Fee (ASF). The Committee note that the

collection and disbursal of ASF would now be done by the Trust instead of airport

operators who would only help the Trust to raise the invoice and collect the

money from the airlines. While noting that the appropriate SOPs for the airlines

as well as the airport operators have been communicated, the Committee desire

that a comparative statement of the resultant improvement in collection of dues
from airlines may be furnished within six months of presentation of this Report .

[Para 6, Part-II, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee

(177 Lok Sabha)}

Age


Action Taken

National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has been set up with the mandate to
manage Aviation Security Fee. The recommendation of the Committee has been
conveyed to NASFT to submit the comparative statement as sought by the Committee.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
Comparative Statement of the resultant improvement in collection of dues from airlines
needs to be furnished by the Ministry within six months of presentation of the Report i.e
by September 2020. Thus, no further comments. :

Ministry's comments on Audit’s observations
As per vetting comment of C&AG, the comparative statement of the resultant
improvement in collection of dues from airlines is as under:
4. To streamline the management of Aviation Security Fee, National Aviation
Security Fee Trust (NASFT) has been created and started functioning w.e.f.
01/07/2019.
2. NASFT has been createdwith the objective to -

i. replace the earlier system of collection and expenditure of ASF airport-wise by a

centralised mechanism

ii, bring in uniformity and standardisation in ASF collection and expenditure
across the country and

iii. bring in transparency and accountability.

Hence, the objective of NASFT is to develop a centralized ASF management besides

addressing the issue of shortfall in collection.
3. The comparative statement indicating ASF collection post NASFT creation till
28/02/2020 (i.e. during 01/07/2019 to 28/02/2020) and corresponding period previous
year is as under:

Rs in Crores

Period IASF billing _ क्‍ _ |] g ASF Collection
01/07/2019 to 28/02/2020 2051 1956
(01/07/2018 to 28/02/2019 7609 1671

Observation/Recommendation
Distribution of Passenger Security Fee amongst all beneficiaries

The Committee note that aviation security is funded through PSF (SC)/ASF
collections only and that PSF (SC)/ASF is levied on embarking passengers at
Rs.150/- per domestic pax and USD 4.85 per international pax. The funds
collected from this levy are used for funding aviation security. The Committee
note that there is a huge gap between the money collected by the Ministry
through imposition of this fee and the amount disbursed to the CISF for providing
security at the airports. In order to handle this situation, the Ministry has decided
to maintain a single escrow account, form a National Aviation Security Fee Trust
(NASFT) and raise the amount of PSF(SC) to be collected from the passengers

“\3—


which is to be indexed to the Consumer Price Index(CPl). The Committee are of
the considered view that since CISF also provides security to the infrastructure
created by the airport operators at airports, the equipment of airlines and their
staff deployed on the airports as well as the commercial establishments set up at
the airports, the burden of paying for security should be distributed amongst all
the users and not just the passengers. As the CISF is deployed at 60 airports
across the country, this would increase the corpus of the security fund, address
the issue of acute deficit and enable provision of more amenities to CISF
personnel as recommended by the Committee in their previous recommendation.
The Committee accordingly recommend that the Ministry may make a formula
whereby the cost of security may be equally borne by all i.e. airport operators,
airlines and vendors who have set up their shops at the airports, apart from
passengers.
[Para 8, Part-II, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(17 Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

The Rule 88A of Aircraft Rules 1937 provides for levying Aviation Security Fee from
specified sources. Hence expanding the source of ASF, as recommended by the
Committee, may not be agreed under the provisions under Rule 88A of Aircraft Rules
1937.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
Ministry submitted levying Aviation Security Fee from specified sources however,
Ministry may explore suitable steps to follow the recommendation of PAC.

Ministry's comments on Audit’s observations
The issue of regulating Aviation Security Fee had been deliberated by a Committee
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Expenditure) and NASFT is collecting ASF as
per the recommendation of the Committee. General international practices also
supports charging Aviation Security Fee from embarking passengers. However, the
recommendation of the PAC is noted.

AY -


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation
Imposition of penalty on airlines for withholding dues meant for security securit

The Committee observe that the Ministry pays an incentive for timely
payment of dues by airlines and forego the said incentive in case the collections
are not paid to the PSF(SC) account on time. The Committee further observe from
the submission of the Ministry that, given an option, airlines are not willing to
involve in process of collection of PSF(SC) as they are doing this fiduciary job for
the Ministry and hence imposing a penalty would be double jeopardy for them.
The Committee note that taxation laws also provide for taxes to be collected and
deposited by a party other than the party which is liable to pay the tax and the
collecting party is further liable to pay interest/penalty in case of default.
Accordingly, the Committee opine that the airlines should not be allowed to
withhold Government dues which they are supposed to collect and deposit in
fiduciary capacity and recommend that the Ministry impose a provision of penalty
in proportion to the delay in depositing of the passenger security fee in the trust
fund along with interest for the period of delay.

[Para 4, Part-II, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(17 Lok Sabha)}
Action Taken
In oral evidence, Ministry has explained that the there is a system of positive
reinforcement i.e. incentives on timely deposit of fee, instead of punitive measures. As
NASFT is now in place, close monitoring of ASF collection and management will be
ensured.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
There is no provision of penalty in proportion to delay in depositing Passenger Security
Fee(PSF) in trust fund along with interest for the period of delay.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
C&AG in its vetting comments has taken note that there is no provision of penalty in
proportion to delay in depositing Passenger Security Fee(PSF) in trust fund along with
interest for the period of delay provision.

“NGT


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation
Provision of amenities to CISF personnel

The Committee note from the oral submission of the representatives of the
Ministry that the passenger fees that is collected by the airlines is used only for
the purpose of aviation security which includes the cost of deployment of CISF
personnel and other expenses such as medical expenses of the CISF personnel,
barrack expenses and transportation expenses. The Committee also note that
since CISF is a paramilitary force, the facilities/amenities extended to CISF are as
per norms prescribed by Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee observe that
CISF has been providing security facilities professionally and have become a
specialized aviation security force at airports. In view of the above, the Committee
desire that with the setting up of National Aviation Security Trust, the Ministry
should , in coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs, broaden the facilities
extended to CISF personnel, for providing services round the clock at airports,
including provision of accommodation for them and schools for their wards in
the vicinity of the airports.

[Para 7, Part-II, of 13" Report of Public Accounts Committee

(17' Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

Aviation Security Fee [earlier known as PSF (SC)] is levied under Rule 88A of Aircraft
Rules 1937 wherein the purpose of ASF has been defined. It covers cost of deployment
and other security related expenditures. Accordingly, National Aviation Security Fee
Trust (NASFT) has been set up with the mandate to manage Aviation Security Fee and
expenditure to be made as provided under Rule 88A of the Aircraft Rules 1937.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
Ministry may explore the possibilities to expand the amenities to CISF personnel, as
recommended by PAC.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
Aviation Security Fee [earlier known as PSF (SC)] is levied under Rule 88A of Aircraft
Rules 1937 wherein the purpose of ASF has been defined. ASF is used to cover the
cost of deployment of security personnel payable to CISF directly and other security
related expenditures met by airport operators. Cost of deployment covers education to
wards besides other salary components. Other security related expenditures includes
accommodation, medical, mobile (on operational requirement) for security personnel
and creche facilities for children of working female security personnel. Moreover, in

-५४३-


consultation with MHA, a service level agreement/MoU, to be signed between CISF and
NASFT, is under finalization which covers details of entitlements of security personnel
to be provided under ASF.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
24 March, 2021 Chairperson,
05 Chaitra, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

>>)


Appendix-l

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-21) HELD ON 26™ MARCH, 2021.

The Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) sat on Friday, the 26"
March, 2021 from 1100 hrs to 1135 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘C’,

Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury -Chairperson
Members
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

NO ark wn

RAJYA SABHA

©

Shri Naresh Gujral

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri T.G.Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director

Shri S.R.Mishra - Director

Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - Additional Director

ही ७ ७ :+

2020९... 2232९... 2020000. XXXX

“10१-


-2-
PART-ll

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

1... Ms. Kavita Prasad - Director General

2. Shri S. V. Singh - Principal Director

2. The Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Officers of C&AG of India to the sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the Members on the following Draft
Reports:-

i. Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirteenth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Doubtful Recovery of Outstanding Dues
because of Failure of Fiduciary Duty-Bangalore International Airport Limited,
Bangalore (81651 )"; and

ii, Draft. Repert on Action Taken by  the..Government ‘on the
Observa idhts/Recommendations ofthe Committee contained‘in their Twelfth Report
(Severiteenth.Lok Sabha) on “Management of Funds", -~ हु 5

3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Doubtful Recovery of Outstanding
Dues because of Failure of Fiduciary Duty-Bangalore International Airport Limited
Bangalore (810 )" without any modification /and Draft Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of tte Committee contained in their
Twelfth/‘Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Management of Funds” with minor
modifications. |

4. The Members authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of
factual verification done by the Audit and desired that since the House had adjourned sine-
die and the term of the Committee will end on 30" April, 2021, the Reports may be
presented to the Hon’ble Speaker.

The Committee then adjourned.

फ़कफैजैफअ#,

नी० —


(i)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 8

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. 4

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para No. 7

“a

08

Total : 06
Percentage

Total: 0

Percentage:

Total :1
Percentage

Total : 1
Percentage

275%

112.5%

212.5%