73
IMPROPER MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE
LAND
[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Commitee contained in their 106 Report (16

Lok Sa ha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY THIRD

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2302

SEVENTY THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IMPROPER MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE
LAND

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 106" Report (16
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: [@- 26: -?०2-४

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: [Q-o8 2022

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Page
No.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (i)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I Report
CHAPTER I Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government
CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the
: Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of PAC (2023-24) on 09.08.2023
॥. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government onthe

Obsérvations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 106" Report (16" Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Sh:i Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
0. Sha Brijendra Singh
44. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
42. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

43. Shri Jayant Sinha

44. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

45. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

aoeanoar YN

RAJYA SABHA
46. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
47. Dr. K. Laxman
48. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
49. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
4. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having beer:
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy Third Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action taken by the Government on the:
Observations/Recommendations contained in their One Hundred and Sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Improper Management Of Defence Land’
relating to the Ministry of Defence.

2. The One Hundred and Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaf/laic|
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 July 2018. Replies of the Government to
all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been
received from the Ministry. The Committee considered and adopted the
Seventy Third Report at their Sitting held on 09 August, 2023. Minutes of the
Sitting of the Committee are given at Appendix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of
the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Sixth
Report (167 Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-I]

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
09 August, 2023 Chairperson,
18 Sravana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(iii)


REPORT

PART-1

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations contained in their One
Hundred and Sixth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on the subject “Improper Management of
Defence Land” based on C&AG Report No. 6 of 2015 (Union Government) related to
the Ministry of Defence.

2. The One Hundred and Sixth Report (167 Lok Sabha) which was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 19" July, 2018, contained 5
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations
and Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence on 42th April,
2022 and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.

Total: 5
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter — Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos
Total: NIL

Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies:
NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V


3. The Action Taken Notes have been furnished by the Ministry of Defence
after a long delay, which in the normal course, is unacceptable. The Committee
take serious exception to the undue delay in submission of Action Taken Notes
and desire that the Ministry ensure that the Action Taken Notes on the
observations/recommendations made in the Reports of the Committee are
henceforth furnished within the stipulated timeframe without fail.

4. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed repeated
instances of unsatisfactory management of Defence estates, serious lapses and
irregularities, misuse of Defence land by the the Local Military Authorities (LMA) for
unauthorised purposes, unauthorised occupation of Defence land by the ex-lessees due
to non-renewal of leases in time, encroachment of Defence lands by other Union/State
Government Departments, lapses/discrepancies on the part of the Directorate General
of Defence Estates (DGDE), an agency specifically created for the said purpose under
the aegis of Ministry of Defence to renew/ terminate leases of Defence Lands,
Unauthorised occupation / transfer of Defence Land by other Government Departments
/ State Government and consequent loss of revenue to the tune of approximately रे
838.34 crore for periods ranging from four years to as long as 46 years.

5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on each of the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and
Sixth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The
Cormittee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, 91 some of their
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.

6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to furnis{: Action Taken
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter | of the

Report, positively within six months of the presentation of the Report to the

Parliament.

Delay in renewal of leases of Defence lands and consequent non-realisation of

Revenue.
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

7. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that there were many cases
spread across the length and breadth of the country where renewal of leased Defence
lands had been pending for years and the concerned DEOs had not taken any action on
the same on the pretext of litigations, unavailability of documents, incomplete or missing
land records etc. Also, since hiring of land is a direct agreement between the DEOs and
the lessees, the Committee are of the view that onus lies entirely on the former for

2


timely renewals and the subsequent realization of revenues in each case. The
Committee note the cases of inordinate delay in renewal of leases pointed out by the
Audit viz. Royal Calcutta Turf Club (RCTC), Kolkata; IOCL Bulk Petroleum Installation at
Pune; HPCL petrol pump cum service station at Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi; BPCL petrol
pump at Delhi Cantt, New Delhi; Thane Sporting Club Committee at Thane, Mumbai
and Kumaon Mandai Vikas Nigal Limited (KMVNL) at Nainital. The Committee are
dismayed to note tha! the lease renewals were not being done timely resulting in non-
realization of revenue for years. The Committee observe that Defence land record
management has not been satisfactory and requires a complete overhaul. They note
that all records pertaining to Defence lands leased to other Government Departments or
private parties, exchanged between Government Departments or bought and sold are

not regularly updated resulting in evasion of taxes and non-reflection of the actual ,

ground position as well. The Committee desires that the system of maintaining land
records should be such so as to ensure availability of updated records with all
stakeholders so that Defence lands are managed systematically and scientifically. The
Committee while noting the Project Raksha Bhoomi & Bhuvan are being implemented,
desire that a comprehensive database be created containing details of the lessees
(present and past), previous land owners, date of lease and expiry thereof, hyperlink to
the maps, present status of the land whether being used commercially or otherwise, the
lease rates, the present measurement, rentals and the category of the land. The
Committee desire that people should be proactively encouraged to report
encroachments on Defence lands by taking pictures of the same and
uploading/geotagging it on the DGDE website and at the same time keeping the identity
of the uploader confidential thereby stemming encroachments. The Committee exhort
the Ministry/DGDE to finalize the leasing policy, as the Sumit Bose Committee has
already given its Report, within three months of the presentation of this Report to
Parliament. The Committee desire the Ministry to issue instruction to the DEOs that the
process of renewal of i2ase be started one year before the date of expiry of every lease.

8 The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“As regard to the points, pointed out by the Public Accounts Committee on the
cases of inordinate delay in renewal of leases the action taken are as under:~

i) Royal Calcutta Turf Club (RCTC), Kolkata:- The matter of renewal/

extension of lease in respect of RCTC pertains to DEO Kolkata Circle, under ,

jurisdiction of Eastern Command. The Defence land measuring 153.416 acres at
Kolkata Maidan is leased out to RCTC for a period of 30 years, with effect from
01.01.1932. The lease was further renewed for another period of 30 years w.e.f.

01.01.1962 to 31.12.1991 at an annual rent of Rs.20,000/-. The MoD vide letter :

dated 12.2.2004 accorded sanction for extension of the lease period for another
15 years with effect from 01.01.1992 to 31.12.2006. As per the terms and
conditions laid down in the MoD letter dated 12.02.2004, the lease rent was
received by DEO from RCTC up to 31.12.2006. After expiry of the lease period
on 31.12.2006, RCTC requested for the renewal of the lease for another 15 years
with effect from 01.01.2007 to 31.12.2021, with certain additional facilities. The
rent from RCTC is not recovered, as the policy on ‘Sports and Recreational
Clubs’ is under preparation in the DGDE and will be finalized soon. Further, the
question regarding loss of revenue for Government does not arise in this case, as
the rent will be realized after finalization of the Policy.


ii) 1001. Bulk Petroleum installation at Pune:- The MoD issued ex-post
facto sanction vide letter dated 18.11.2016 for renewal of lease of one acre of
defence land in Rev Sy No. 311 at Wellesly Road, Pune held under occupation of
100 w.e.f 07.09.1966 to 06.09 2016 on payment of total value of rent and
premium of 2%8,50,62,790/--DEO, Pune has recovered lease rent of
%8,42,96,161/- (Rupees Eight Crore Forty Two Lakhs Ninty Six thousand one
hundred and sixty one only) towards the rent, premium and additional payment
as arrears, as per MoD sanction dated 18.11.2016 for the period 07.09.1966 till
up to 06.09.2016. The details of recovery are:

S.No. Date of recovery Lease rent
recovered in Rs.
1 09.02.2018 4,48,51,360/-
2 07.02.2019 3,94,44,801/-
Total 8,42,96,161/-

The Indian Oil Corporation has stated that it has previously paid %11,71,129/-
between the Year 1966-2013. The IOC has now forwarded payments receipts
issued by BSO, Army Pune which were not taken into account in MoD sanction
dated 18.11.2016. The same is being verified and reconciled by the DEO Pune.

iii) HPCL petrol pump cum service Station at Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi

(i) An area measuring 5525 sqft out of defence land in Sy. No.211/1 Dhaula
Kuan was last leased out to M/s HPCL. upto 31.01.1995 at the annual rent of
%98,102/- and premium of = 490512/-. In another case for an area measuring
12000 sqft out of Sy. No.211/1, Dhaula Kuan defence land was leased out up to
31.01.1995 @ annual rent of %3,84,829/- and premium %19,24,145/- was fixed.

(ii) When this sanction was communicated to M/s HPCL, they refused to
accept the enhanced rentals and premium and kept on making payment of
rentals, as per the previous sanctioned rates which was accepted by DEO as part
payment of damages. Accordingly, Defence Estates officer Delhi Circle issued
several notices on regular intervals to M/s HPCL asking them to clear
outstanding Govt. dues and hand over possession of Defence land.

(iii) Taking cognizance of said reference and in order to take the possession
of the defence land measuring 5525 sqft and 12000 sqft both situated at Sy.
No.211/1, Delhi Cantt, action/proceedings under PPE Act, 1971 on defence land
measuring 12000 sqft was initiated against the occupant to evict them from
Defence land. Thereafter, finalization of proceedings, order under Sub-Section
(1) of Section 5 of the PPE Act, 1971 was passed on 03.03.2015, directing them
to vacate the premises.

(iv) | Aggrieved with the said order, HPCL filed an appeal before the Court and
obtained stay order on 12.03.2015. The said Case is still subjudice whereas,
imposition and recovery of damage case is going on before Estate Officer, under
PPE Act 1971. .


iv) BPCL petrol pump at Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi:

The leases for retail petro! pump outlets/service stations were given under MOD
policy letter dated 12.04.1972 read with letter dated 24.04.1980. These leases
were initially given for a period of 10 years which were subsequently renewed for
a period of 05 years at a time. The lease rent to be charged was on commercial
basis at the rate of 04 times the residential/normal rent and premium was equal
to rent multiplied by the number of years of lease period.

A number of such leases could not be renewed since the lessees (PSU oil
companies like IOC, BPCL, HPCL) did not pay due rent with premium giving
reasons of high lease rent and premium. In a few cases, the lease could not be
renewed due to litigation.

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. filed the Writ Petitions (c) No.8877 of 2017
(M/s BPCL V/s Delhi Cantt. Board and Anr.) and No.8878 of 2017 (M/s L.
Gopinath & Ant. Vs Delhi Cantonment Board & Ors) before the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court challenging the order of the Ld. ADJ, Patiala House Courts, Delhi in
PPA No.301 of 2016

The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi constituted a Committee comprising Secretary
(Defence) and Secretary (Petroleum) and Mr. Kirtiman Singh, learned Central
Government Standing Counsel to examine the issue. The report of the
Committee was considered by the Hon'ble Court. The Hon’ble Court vide its
order dated 14.09.2018 has disposed of the case. Action on the
observations/directions of Hon'ble Court is being taken by DGDE.

The subsequent progress in the case is as under:-

(i) BPCL and M/s L. Gopinath & Anr. Filed writ petition No.8877-8878 of
2017. The same came up for hearing on 09.10.2017 and 11.10.2017. The BPCL
has pleaded that Ministry of Defence was in the process of formulating a new
policy for renewal of leases of Petrol Pumps. Cantt Board Advocate clarified that
the NOC for renewal of lease has not been given by Local Military authority on
account of security threat to Military installations. In view of BPCL argument

Hon'ble High Court sought following information:

(a) Whether MoD, Government of India was in process of formulating any
policy for renewal of expired leases of petrol pumps.

(b) The existing policy as to lease of Defence land to oil companies and renewal
of such leases. .

(c) Basis of decision by the Station headquarters about the petrol pump being a
security threat and

(d) Was there any policy of Government of India for relocation of petrol pump.


(ii) Affidavit on behalf of Union of India was filed. The Court directed both
BPCL and Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB) to file brief note of submission
alongwith copies of relevant documents on the next date of hearing.

(iii) | The matter came up for hearing on 20.12.2017 & the Court permitted de-
sealing of the Petrol Pump on 22.12.2017 for a period of 04 days for the purpose
of enabling the dealer to empty the entire stock of petrol, diesel, oil and lubricants
from the petrol pump and re-seal the same on 26.12.2017. The court also called
for complete records relating to the plea of security issue raised by Delhi Cantt
Board/LMA.

(iv) | On the instructions of Hon’ble High Court, BPCL and Cantt Board Delhi
agreed for a meeting on 24.05.2018, for amicable settlement. However, no
agreement could be reached.

(v) The case was then heard on 31.05.2018 and Hon'ble High Court did not
find material on record to support the contention of Cantonment Board, Delhi that
Petrol pump was a security hazard. The High Court allowed to de-seal the petrol
pump w.e.f. 15.06.2018 to 11.07.2018 & was pleased to constitute a committee
comprising of Secretary (Defence), Secretary (Petroleum) and Shri Kirtiman
Singh, CGSC to examine the following questions:-

(a) Whether petrol pumps per se is a security hazard in cantonment; and
more particularly whether the petrol pump in question is a security hazard
to military installations in Delhi Cantonment? If so, the reasons be
provided for the same.

(b) If the petrol pump in question is found not to be a secutiiy hazard, whether
the Petitioner is entitled to the renewal of the lease in terms of the policy of
the Government contained in the letter dated 03.02.2016

(c) | Whether the action of Respondent No.1 in sealing the petrol pump on
09.10.2017 before the commencement of writ petition is fair and
reasonable?

The Committee submitted its report before the Hon'ble Court on 27.08.2018. The
matter was lastly listed on 14.09.2018 and disposed off as the Cantonment Board
agreed to renew the lease deed of the petitioners.

LPA No. 337 of 2018 filed by Cantt Board was also heard by Hon'ble
Court on 13.06.2018, and did not consider it appropriate to interfere with order of
the single judge, passed on 31.05.2018. The matter was lastly listed on
02.11.2018 and The Hon'ble Court dismissed the LPA with observation “keeping
in view of the subsequent development that has taken place in the matter,
learned counsel for appellant fairly states that now this appeal has been rendered
infructuous. The appeal accordingly dismissed". Action on the
-observations/directions of Hon’ble Court is being taken by DGDE.


v) Thane <‘porting Club Committee at Thane, Mumbai: The policy on
leases given tc “Recreational and sports clubs” is under finalization in DGDE.
The due rent wth arrears will be recovered on finalization of relevant policy.

vi) Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited (KMVNL) at Nanital:- The lease
deed between Ranikhet Cantt Board and Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited
(KMVL) has been executed on 08.08.2018 in Schedule IX of Cantonment Land
Administration Rules, 1937 for a period of 05 years each, w.e.f 18.07.1989 to
17.07.2019 . THe rent, premium and damage charges amounting Rs.79,34,650/-
have already been received in full, from KMVL.

No action is pending as all outstanding dues have already been paid by Kumaon
Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited.

As regards updating of records pertaining to defence land leased out to Govt
Department or private parties, DEOs/CEOs have updated their records and made
relevant entries in Raksha Bhumi Software version 5.0 (RB 5.0). Based on
guidelines issued from time to time by DGDE, all details pertaining to
encroachments and leases have been entered by the field offices in RB 5.0. Most
DEOs have also integrated the survey maps with BHUVAN. The remaining maps
are being integrated. In some survey reports, due to loss of basic data it has not
been possible to integrate the same with BHUVAN. DEOs are in the process of
collating the data and uploading the survey maps on BHUVAN.

A High Level Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Sumit
Bose, IAS(Retd.), for Study on optimum use of Defence land and to regulate its
commercial exploitation. The Committee made a detailed study in the matter and
submitted its report wherein 131 recommendations have been made on various
aspects of defence land. The said recommendations have been accepted by
Hon'ble Raksha Mantri, for phase wise implementation.

With reference to Observations of PAC in its report, directions have been issued
to DGDE vide MoD ID note dated 23.09.2019, to ensure that the process of
renewal of lease be started one year before the date of expiry of every lease.
(Annexure-1)

9. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

(1) Ministry may intimate the PAC regarding recovery of outstanding lease
rent alongwith arrears on finalization of policy on “Sports and Recreational clubs”
alongwith final status of sub-judice cases.

(2) The Ministry in reply stated that the policy on “Sports and Recreational
clubs” is under preparation in the DGDE and will be finalized soon. However, the
draft policy is long pending with MoD since 2014. Ministry may apprise PAC the
reasons for this abnormal delay in finalization of this policy.

(3) Ministry in reply has mentioned that 131 recommendations made by Shri
Sumit Bose committee on various aspects of Defence land would be


10.

under:

implemented phase-wise. However, the Ministry has not specifically stated
timelines for implementation of Sumit Bose Committee recommendations.

(4) The Ministry in reply stated that most DEOs have also integrated the survey
maps with BHUVAN & the remaining maps are being integrated. However, the
Ministry is silent on the exact number of DEOs which have integrated the survey
maps with BHUVAN.

(5) The PAC had desired to finalize the leasing policy within three months of the
presentation of the Report to Parliament. However, the Ministry is silent on
specific timelines for implementation of leasing policy.

In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as

“As the policy for leasing out defence land for sports & recreational club is under
consideration, the lease rent and premium will be assessed as per the provisions
of the new policy as and when the same is finalized. It is further informed that
MoD has issued a policy for extension or renewal of expired / expiring
Cantonment Code or CLAR lease vide letter No. 110113/02/2016/D(Lands) dated
10.03.2017. The same was extended upto 31.12.2021. Further extension of
policy with a provision for lease renewal automation on the online portal is under
consideration.

The Status of Sub-judice cases are as under :

(i) HPCL petrol pump cum service Station at Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi

District Court have allowed the appeal filed by M/s HPCL against the Eviction
order dated 03.03.2015, passed by Estate Officer, Delhi Cantt. and has
remanded back the matter to Estate Officer for reconsidering it afresh in view of
MoD policy dated 03.02.2016. Matter has been heard by the Estate Officer and
the case has been reserved for final orders.

(ii) BPCL petrol pump at Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi: at Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi:

Writ petition filed by BPCL has been decided by Hon’ble Court wherein it has
been ordered that the writ petitions are disposed of as the Cantonment Board
has agreed to review the lease deed of the petitioners. The Hon'ble Court further
directed that appropriate action in terms of the report of the Committee of Board
Resolution dated 07.09.2018 be taken by the Board within ei¢itt weeks from the
date of issue of orders with advance copy to the petitioners. CEO, Delhi have
initiated a proposal for renewal/ Extension of the lease from 14.11.1992 to
31.12.2021. Simultaneously, CEO, Delhi has raised a demand of Rs.7,46,58,871
towards occupation charges/ premium. The same is yet to be deposited by
BPCL.

The draft policy is presently under inter —ministerial consultations. The draft
policy is required to be deliberated clause wise with all stake holders.

—§-


131 Recommendations made by the Shri Sumit Bose Committee on various
aspects of defence land, have been accepted by Hon'ble Raksha Mantti, for
phase wise implementation. Out of 131 recommendations, 30 recommendations
have already been implemented and the rest are under consideration for
implementation.

GIS layer of the maps of defence land pockets generated in the land surveys
carried out in phase | and ॥ have been created in Land Management System
(LMS) which is a software developed in conjunction with DGDE and Armed
Forces. The layer comprises of defence land pockets under jurisdiction of alt
DEO circles.

MoD had issued interim policy for extension or renewal of expire/expiring

Cantonment Code or CLAR lease vide letter no. 11013/02/2016/D(Lands) dated

10.03.2017. The same was extended upto 31.12.2021. The proposal of further

extension of the ibid policy with suitable amendments and automation is under

consideration.” *
41. The Committee, in their Original Report had noted that failure to ensure
timely lease renewal of defence lands under occupation of other Government
Departments or private parties, by the Defence Estates Officers (DEOs)
concerned on the pretext of litigations, non-availability of documents, incomplete
or missing land records etc resulted in non-realization of revenue for years. The
Committee, while emphasizing that the system of maintaining land records
should be such as to ensure availability of updated records with all stakeholders
and thereby enable in ensuring that Defence lands are managed systematically
and scientifically, recommended that a comprehensive database containing
necessary details on leased lands, its ownership etc. be created. The Committee
had also desired the Ministry of Defence to finalize the leasing policy for defence
lands which was periding since 2014 within three months of presentation of the
Report to Parliament. The Committee had also desired that people should be
proactively encouraged to report encroachments on Defence lands by
uploading/geo-tagging the information on the Directorate General of Defence
Estate (DGDE) website without having to reveal their personal identities. Further,
the Committee had desired the Ministry to issue instructions to the DEOs that the
process of renewal of lease be started one year before the date of expiry of the
lease. 5

As regards creation and updating of data base of records pertaining to
defence land leased out to other Government Departments or private parties, the


Committee note from reply of the Ministry that DEOs/Chief Executive Officers
(CEOs) have updated their records and made relevant entries in Raksha Bhumi
Software version 5.0 (RB 5.0) developed for the purpose. Further, DEOs are in the
process of collating the data and uploading and integrating the survey maps on
BHUVAN software. While taking note of the initiatives of ‘he Ministry, the
Committee desire that the process of collating data and integration of the survey
maps be completed in a time bound manner and the Committee be apprised
thereof.

On the issue of finalization of the leasing policy, the Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that the draft policy is under consideration and pending
with Ministry of Defence for inter-ministerial consultation. The Committee are
dismayed to note that instead of expediting finalization of the draft leasing policy,
the Ministry have stated that extension of policy with a provision for automated
lease renewal on the online portal is under consideration. The Committee feel that
this is a short term measure only and cannot serve the purpose of leasing policy.
While cautioning that such ad-hocism as well as undue delays may defeat the
very objectives as envisaged in the leasing policy, the Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire that leasing policy may be finalized
expeditiously and completed within a specific timeline.

Further, the Committee also note that out of 131 recommendations, made
by Sumit Bose Committee on various aspects of defence land, only 30
recommendations have been implemented as far. Taking serious note of the
sluggish pace in implementation of recommendations of Sumit Bose Committee,
the Committee desire the Ministry to furnish a detailed account of reasons for
inordinate delay in initiating action in regard to as many as 101
recommendations. The Committee also desire that the timelines for
implementation of the remaining recommendations may be specified and they be
apprised thereof.

As regards the recommendation of the Committee that the process of
renewal of lease be started one year before the date of expiry of the lease, the
Ministry, in its action taken reply stated that directions have been issued in this
regard to Directorate General of Defence Estate (DGDE) on 23.09.2019. The


Committee desire that.a monitoring mechanism should also be evolved to ensure
strict compliance of ihe instructions issued in the matter.

With regard to the recommendation of the Committee to proactively
encourage reporting encroachments on Defence lands by uploading/geo-tagging
the related information on the DGDE website, the Committee however, note that
the reply of the Ministry is silent. The Committee exhori the Ministry of Defence to
take necessary steps to create awareness amongst the people to report
encroachment so that defence land stays protected. In this regard, the Committee
also desire that the number of encroachments reported during the last three
years and action taken thereon are also shared with them.

Unauthorized Occupation of Defence land by Other Government Department.
(Recommendation Para No. 2A)

12. Audit highlighted that Defence land, measuring 0.7829 acres valuing Rs. 9.29
crore at Chennai wer? under unauthorized occupation of Railways for the last twenty
five years without proper sanction by the Ministry of Defence and the rent outstanding
was Rs. 8.63 crore. The Committee are shocked to note that the Defence authorities
remained as mute spectators when the Railway authorities merely on the basis of a “No | :
objection’ for 0.52 acres of land, unauthorisedly occupied and completed construction
on 0.7829 acres of Defence land. The Committee are surprised to observe that Defence
Estate Officer failed to issue any show cause notice of the Railway authorities for further
encroaching Defence land beyond the allotted land.

The Committee are perturbed to see that after being pointed out by the Audit and
examined by the PAC, even though the Ministries of Defence and Railways in their
meeting held on 14-3-2017 decided for mutual exchange of land at Chennai on
equitable basis, they could not resolve the issue till date. At last when the Railways हु
offered land opposite to Trisoolam station now the Defence instead of taking over the °
land and resolve the.long pending issue demanded suitable land in the vicinity of ,
Central Railway Station, Chennai for construction of MCO and Armabagh. The है
Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to take urgent steps to ensure equitable »
exchange of Railway land, set its record straight and obtain rental from Railway till such.
transfer of land. The committee desire that exemplary punishment for the officers who
failed to take suitable action during encroachment and did not issue show cause notice }
to Railways at that time. Audit pointed out that Air Force Station, Pune allowed the AAI
to use 4.73 acres of Defence land valuing Rs. 17.23 crore for commercial purpose as
parking area without Government sanction resulting in revenue loss of Rs. 4.52 crore to
the State on account of non-recovery of lease rent. Further, DEO Pune failed to take |
over the land and remained and meekly allowed commercial exploitation of the same
leading to revenue loss, t

“J fe


The Committee are dismayed to note yet another classic example of continuous
unauthorized commercial use of 4.73 acres of Defence land valuing Rs. 17.23 crore by
the Airports Authority of India at Pune since 2007. This resulted in further loss of rent to
the tune of Rs. 4.52 crore to the State.AAl had further leased the land for parking to a
private centre who was collecting parking charges and no rent was recovered from AAI
and credited to Government accounts. Even though the land was provided for the
upcoming Commonwealth Youth Games, no formal working permission was given to
the AAI. The Board of Officers constituted could not complete its task as the
representative of AAI did not report for its proceedings. The Defence Ministry while
tendering evidence apprised the Committee that despite assurance for full cooperation
given during the meeting of Defence Ministry and the MoCA on 13/8/2014, the AAI is
still to act in the matter. Subsequently, it was decided by the Ministries. that the land can
be exchanged alongwith other pockets of land on the basis of barter matrix. A proposal
for approval of Cabinet on the exchange of land between IAF(MoD) and AAI (MoCA) as
per land barter Matrix is at the stage of inter ministerial consultation.

The Committee note that the Ministry became proactive oniy after the land
irregularities were pointed out by the Audit. The Committee desire that the land Barter
Matrix between MoD and MoCA be expedited, land restored, lease rent for the period
obtained this being tip of the iceberg and enquiry set up to find out similar cases of
encroachments, land restored and the officials responsible for allowing such
encroachments be awarded exemplary punishments.

The Committee are of the strong view that since computerization has led to
accessibility of records at every level, timelines be fixed for physical verification of lands,
disposing off the cases of requests for leasing of land etc. The Cominittee desire that
the Ministry may apprise them about the steps being taken for streamlining the
procedure of transfer of Defence land from MoD to other Government Departments.

13. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“() Southern Railways, Chennai: The LMA sought equal value of Railway land
at the Central Railway Station, Chennai or Egmore Railway Station for the
purpose of MCO and Aramgrah in lieu of the defence land measuring 0.7829
acre under occupation of Railway authorities. However the Ministry of Railway
vide their letter dated 12.02.2018, intimated that the said lands cannot be spared
as the same are proposed for redevelopment of stations and offered land
measuring 990.056 Sqm at Meenambakkam Railway Station.

Further, it is submitted that a offer given by Ministry of Railway in lieu of above
cited land, was conveyed to the local Military Authorities/Station HQ, who
informed that the “Transfer of land measuring 990.056 sq mtr at Meenabakkam
Railway Station is not required/not recommended, to be taken as the same is of
no use for them”. Further, LMA has again requested to transfer of land in
Chennai Central/ Egmore/ Cochin/ Coimbatore/Madurai Railway Stations for
MCO/Aramgrah, in lieu of defence land, encroached by Railways. DEO Chennai
vide letter dated 07.09.2018 and 16.10.2018, has taken up the matter with Senior

—f2e


Divisional Engineer (Coordination) Divisional Office Chennai. The matter is under
consideration with Railway Authorities.

(ii) Exchange of Defence Lands with Air Port Authority of India (AAI) : As
regards, unaut'torized commercial use of 4.73 acres of Defence land valuing
Rs.17.23 crore by the Airports Authority of India at Pune since 2007. The subject -
land transfer is a part of Land Barter Matrix (LBM) between Indian Air Force(IAF) :
and Airports Authority of India (AAI) which includes mutual land transfer at six
places i.e. Pune, Ahmedabad, Gorakhpur, Agra, Trivandrum and Belgaum. The
LBM provides for waiving of rentals and mutual transfer of land between IAF and -
AAI as per requirements of both the organizations. A copy of Land Barter Matrix
is enclosed as Annexure-2. The said LBM has approved by Hon'ble Raksha ~
Mantri in October 2017 and also approved by Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) in -
May 2018. Head Quarter, SWAC has been directed to complete Board
Proceedings towards transfer of 4.73 acres of land to AAI at Pune.

A Cabinet Note for the proposed ‘land barter matrix’ between IAF(MoD) and
Airport Authority of India (AAI), Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) is yet to be
approved by Cabinet. A copy of the approval of the Cabinet would be furnished
as and when received from Ministry of Civil Aviation.

Further, with the computerization of land record and periodic monitoring of
encroachments at the DGDE/MoD, the cases of encroachments are reported
immediately on detection. DEOs and CEOs have been issued strict instructions
to remove encroachments in the earliest possible time. There are certain
constraints in removal of encroachments due to disputes on land title, non
availability of police, status quo orders issued by Courts or admin stays issued by
the Govt. Such cases take long time before the encroachments can be removed.
As on 31.12.2018, the encroachment by State/Central Govt. Deptt. are as

follows:-

P| State/Union Area of
Territory encroachment
{in acres)
1 Andhra Pradesh 21.97
2 Andaman & Nicobar 26.521
3 Assam 460.5397
4 Arunachal Pradesh 87.8141
5 Bihar 478.974
fF 6 [| Chandigarh रिएफििफओ
7 Chhattisgarh 165.768
[8 | Delhi 111.3013



(9 | Goa 4.264
10 Gujarat 164.6238
11 Haryana 538.8215
12 Himachal Pradesh 60.1421
13 Jammu & Kashmir 339.2447
14 Jharkhand 304.932
15 Karnataka 131.7923
16 Kerala 2.6839
17 Lakshadweep 0.08
18 Maharashtra 923.5062
19 Madhya Pradesh 1639.83
20 Manipur 6.1308
21 Meghalaya 11.0855
22 Mizoram | 0
23 Nagaland 357.53
24 [ __Odisha si 0.11
25 Puducherry |. 0०|
26 | Punjab sd 240.68
27 Rajasthan 475.2829
28 Sikkim 0.2903
29 Telangana 146.2478
30 Tamilnadu 101.2418
31 Tripura 1
32 Uttar Pradesh 2.204.836
33 Uttarakhand 57.3982
34 West Bengal 558.165
35 Dadra & Nagar है

Haveli 0
36 | Daman & Diu _ 0

Total 9922.807

These have been taken up with respective State Governments, on principle of
EVL/EVI, both by DGDE & MoD. However, strict monitoring ensures that new
encroachments are prevented and if detected the same are removed within a
short time.

14.. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

(i) The Ministry may apprise the PAC regarding status of land
transferred to Local Military Authorities (LMA) by Railway Authorities as well
as approval by Cabinet of proposed Land Barter matrix between IAF(MoD)
and AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation(MoCA).

Ihe


(ii) The Ministry is silent on PAC recommendation of exemplary
punishment to officials responsible for allowing encroachment.

(iii) | Further, status of encroached land (9622.807 acre) restored has
not been provided by the Ministry in its reply.

(iv) | The PAC had desired to be intimated of the steps being taken for
streamlining the procedure of transfer of Defence land from MoD to other
Government Departments. Ministry reply is silent on this aspect. Ministry
may therefore apprise PAC of steps taken in this regard.

15. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry

stated as under:-

1. The Railways has not offered any land other than 990.056 sqm of land at
Meenambakam; Railway Station. Hence, there is no change in the status. With
regard to proposed Land Barter Matrix between IAF(MoD) and AAI, Ministry of
Civil Aviation(MoCA), it is informed that the Land Barter Matrix is under
examination in MoD in consultation with Air Force HQ.

(2&3) Actions for removal of encroachments are taken as per provisions of
Cantonment Act, 2006 and PPE Act, 1971 by the field officers. Concrete actions
have been taken for early detection and removal of encroachment. Following
specific actions including interventions by use of high end technologies have
been initiated for management of defence land:-

i.Land Management System (LMS): The Land Management System (LMS)
software has been developed by Department of Defence in conjunction with
DGDE and Armed forces. The technical support for this GIS-based system has
been provided by BISAG, India's premier organization in GIS based informatics.
The software, apart from capturing the textual details of all proposals relating to
defence land management, integrates these textual details with Raksha Bhoomi
software as well as other relevant GlS-layers which include satellite imagery of
the area, other amenities etc. The portal is expected to bring in greater speed,
transparency and efficiency into the Land Management System (LMS) of the
Department.

ii. Use of drones and satellite imagery: Latest survey technology using drone and
satellite imagery have been adopted to complete survey of defence land in
shortest possible time. Such survey shall help in detection of encroachments.

ii. Change detection software: Change detection software based on thermal
imagery is being developed by DGDE under the guidance of BARC. This


software is expected to detect encroachment on far flung defeiice land almost on
real time basis. : ha.

iv.Analysis of open/vacant areas: A software is. being developed «under the
guidance of BARC to analyse the open/vacant defence land using satellite
imagery. This would help in better management.of vacant defenge.jand which is
otherwise prone to encroachment. ‘ a eee eTae

v.3D resolution on hilly terrain: 3D images are being utilized to calculate area of
defence land in hilly terrain Ved हि

vi. Threat Matrix: Threat matrix based on eleven: (11). objective. criteria 199 been
developed and implemented to detect vulnerability..of. defence: and, and stake
appropriate steps based on vulnerability assessment See lee : -

vii.Construction of Boundary walls/ Pillars/ Fencing: MoD has sanctioned

project for construction of boundary wall, fencing and boundary pillars for

protection of defence land prone to encroachment: Fund:has' also: been-allocated -.

for this purpose.

defence land :

ix.Land Audit: Regular land audit for all de’ being undertaken “by |
Defence Estate Organization at regul y interalia covering “|
encroachments on Defence Lands; the extent and reasons’ thereof and ~~
effectiveness of encroachments’ removal actions. Defence land audit is a
continuing process which commenced on 2011-12. The ‘land audit reports are oe है
circulated to the respective Service 1015 for their further necessary’ बलांणों, 8 ~
total of 1027.9369 acres of defence land ha& been’ freed from éncroachment in

last 5 years. The state wise details of such land'is‘enclosed as Annexure3, ©

4. Transfer of defence land to other Government-Departments/State Governmen
and its agencies are done as per the provisions. contained in: Ministry
Defence letters No.11015/02/2012/B(Lands) dated ». 11.05.20
11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated 02.02.2016 amended vide..even number dated.
21.10.2020 and 03.03.2022 on the basis..of. provisioning of Equal Value -...
Land(EVL)/ payment of market value of. land/..construction of Equal Value. —.-... हि
Infrastructure(EVI) by the Indenting Agency,:as,the 0996 119५ be. The ibid. policy. :
letters are enclosed as Annexures 4A, 48, 40 and 4D. yal .

In addition to this, Ministry....has. -developed... a _ portal (
survey.ncog.gov.in/NOC_Land) through which..the..Indenting Agencies submit. .
their application for transfer of defence.;land.for,.public utility. Infrastructure/ -... -
projects. All such proposals are now processed. through: the, portal for approval of
the Competent Authority. This has expedited + ime.taken for disposal of such
requests received from different Indenting Agenci ‘or.defence.land proposed to ._
be used for public infrastructure projects. Besides,.an,online.portal.by the name
Land Management System (LMS) has been developed for monitoring of all such

ब्ूप५ 5


requests for Working Permission. The ibid portal, apart from capturing the textual
details of all proposals relating to defence land management, integrates these
textual details with relevant GlS-layers which include satellite imagery of the
area, other amenities etc.”

16. The Committee, while observing that Ministries of Defence and Railways
decided for mutual exchange of land at Chennai on equitable basis to resolve the
issue of encroachment of defence lands by Railways had exhorted the Ministry to
take urgent steps to ensure equitable exchange of Railway land, and obtain rental
from Railways till such exchange is concretized. The Committee had also noted
that a proposal for approval of Cabinet on the exchange of land between
IAF(MoD) and AAI (MoCA) as per land barter Matrix is at the stage of inter
ministerial consultation. The Committee had recommended that the proposed
land Barter Matrix between MoD and MoCA be expedited, land restored, lease rent
for the period obtained and enquiry set up to find out similar cases of-
encroachments, and the officials responsible for allowing such encroachments
be awarded exemplary punishment. The Committee had also desired that the
Ministry may apprise them about the steps being taken for streamlining the
procedure of transfer of Defence land from MoD to other Government
Departments.

As regards the status of equitable exchange of Railway land, the
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that transfer of land measuring
990.056 Sqm at Meenambakkam Railway Station offered by the Railway has not
been agreed upon by the Ministry. Further, DEO Chennai vide letter dated
07.09.2018 and 16.10.2018, has taken up the matter with Senior Divisional
Engineer (Coordination), Divisional Office, Chennai and the matter is under
consideration with Railway Authorities. The Committee note that the matter is
being dealt with by middle level officers and they have not been able to resolve
the issue by working out a mutually acceptable solution. The Committee desire
that the matter of equitable exchange with Railway lands may be taken up at the
senior most level to ensure early resolution of the matter. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the tangible action taken in the regard.

As regards unauthorized commercial use of 4.73 acres of Defence land
valuing Rs.17.23 crore by the Airports Authority of India at Pune since 2007, the


Ministry in its reply has stated that this is a part of Land Barter Matrix (LBM)
between Indian Air Force(IAF) and Airports Authority of India (881) that provides
for waiving of rentals and mutual transfer of land between IAF and AAI as per
requirements of both the organizations at six places. The Committee have also
been informed that the proposed Land Barter Matrix (LBM) between IAF (MoD)
and AAI (Ministry of Civil Aviation) is under examination in Ministry of Defence in
consultation with Air Force HQ. The Committee, while noting that Land Barter
Matrix (LBM) has been proposed for streamlining the procedure of transfer of
Defence land from M/o Defence to other government bodies opine that the lot of
time has gone into the consultation process. They therefore, desire that concrete
action should be taken for early implementation of this measure.

The Committee also note that specific actions including interventions by
use of high end technologies have been initiated for management of defence land
and also for removal of encroachments which inter alia include initiation of Land
Management System, Use of drones and satellite imagery; Change detection
software; Analysis of open/vacant areas; 3D resolution on hilly terrain; threat
Matrix and Construction of Boundary walls. The Committee however, note with
concern that despite the claim of concrete actions taken for early detection and
removal of encroachment by use of high end technologies, only 1027.9369 acres
(merely 10% of total 9622.807 acres encroached of defence land) has been freed
from encroachment in the last 5 years. In view of the fact that a large chunk of
defence land is still not free of encroachment, the Committee desire the Ministry
to pursue the matter more vigorously and make earnest efforts to get their land
freed in a time bound frame.

The Committee also urge the Ministry to vigorously follow up the cases
where status quo orders have been issued by Courts. The Committee also find
from the reply that the Ministry of Defence only issued instructions on 31.03.2020
to ell Government bodies including all CPSEs/Boards/Authorities, etc. to resolve
all cases between the various wings of Government of India or those that fall
under its aegis. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific actions
taken thereon.

; Regarding ensuring exemplary punishment to officials responsible for
allowing encroachment, the Committee note that action taken reply of the

lS


Ministry is silent on this aspect. The Committee, while expressing dismay over

tne inaction of the Ministry, reiterate that an enquiry should be urgently set up to ;

identify the officers who allowed encroachment of defence land.

i


CHAPTER I

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

1. Introduction

The Ministry of Defence (MoD) is the biggest land holder of Government lands in
our Country comprising about 17.60 lakh acres. The management of Defence
lands is handled by Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE), an agency
specifically created for the said purpose under the aegis of MoD and provides
advisory inputs on all Cantonments and land matters to the MoD and Service
Headquarters i.e. Army, Navy, Air Force and other organizations under MoD. The
responsibilities of DGDE include acquisition of lands, resettlement and
rehabilitation of displaced persons, hiring and requisitioning of lands and
buildings, ensuring Implementation of Cantonments Act 2006, Policies, Rules &
Regulations and Ex«:cutive Instructions. The comptroller and Auditor General of
India (C&AG) have ime and again scrutinized Defence land management and in
their various Audit Reports have highlighted repeated instances of unsatisfactory
management of Defence estates, serious lapses and irregularities, misuse of
Defence land by the “ocal Military Authorities (.MAs) for unauthorized purposes,
unauthorized occupation of Defence land by the ex-lessees due to non-renewal of
leases occupation of Defence land by the ex-lessees due to non-renewal of leases
in time, encroachment of Defence lands by other Union/State Government
Departments, failure on the part of Defence Estates Officers (DEOs) to renew/
terminate leases and consequent loss of revenue to the tune of approximately =
838.34 crore for periods ranging from four years to as long as 46 years. Against
this backdrop, the PAC (2014-15) selected the said subject for detailed
examination and Report. However, due to paucity of time, the subject was carried
forward and examined by PAC (2015-16), (2016-17) and (2017-18) which revealed
various other short comings. The observations/ recommendations of Committee
have been detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

[Para 1]

Vetting Remarks of Audit

There are no commenis by Audit

20 —


Delay in renewal of leases of Defence lands and consequent _non-realisation of
Revenue.

The Committee noted that there were many cases spread across the length
and breadth of the country where renewal of leased Defence lands had been
pending for years and the concerned DEOs had not taken any action on the same
on the pretext of litigations, unavailability of documents, incomplete or missing
land records etc. Also, since hiring of land is a direct agreement between the
DEOs and the lessees, the Committee are of the view that onus lies entirely on
the former for timely renewals and the subsequent realization of revenues in each
case. The Committee note the cases of inordinate delay in renewal of leases
pointed out by the Audit viz. Royal Calcutta Turf Club (RCTC), Kolkata; IOCL Bulk
Petroleum Installation at Pune; HPCL petrol pump cum service station at Dhaula
Kuan, New Delhi; BPCL petrol pump at Delhi Cantt, New Delhi; Thane Sporting
Club Committee at Thane, Mumbai and Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigal Limited
(KMVNL) at Nainital. The Committee are dismayed to note that the lease renewals
were not being done timely resulting in non-realization of revenue for years. The
committees observe that Defence land record management has not been
satisfactory and requires a complete overhaul. They note that all records
pertaining to Defence lands leased to other Government Departments or private
74185, exchanged between Government Departments or bought and sold are not
regularly updated resulting in evasion of taxes and non-reflection of the actual
ground position as well. The Committee desires that the system of maintaining
lard records should be such so as to ensure availability of updated records with
all stakeholders so that Defence lands are managed systematically and
scientifically. The Committee while noting the Project Raksha Bhoomi & Bhuvan
are being implemented, desire that a comprehensive database be created
containing details of the lessees (present and past), previous land owners, date
of lease and expiry thereof, hyperlink to the maps, present status of the land
whether being used commercially or otherwise, the lease rates, the present
measurement, rentals and the category of the land. The Committee desire that
people should be proactively encouraged to report encroachments on Defence
lands by taking pictures of the same and uploading/geotagging it on the DGDE
website and at the same time keeping the identity of the uplozder confidential
thereby stemming encroachments. The Committee exhort the iviinistry/DGDE to
finalize the leasing policy, as the Sumit Bose Committee has already given its
Report, within three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament. The
Committee desire the Ministry to issue instruction to the DEOs that the process
of renewal of lease be started one year before the date of expiry of every lease.

[Para 2]



Action Taken

As regard to the points, pointed out by the Public Accounts Committee on the

cases of inordinate delay in renewal of leases the action taken are as under:-

i) Royal Calcutta Turf Club (RCTC), Kolkata:- The matter of renewal/ extension
of lease in respect 9f RCTC pertains to DEO Kolkata Circle, under jurisdiction of
Eastern Command. 116 Defence land measuring 153.416 acres at Kolkata Maidan is
leased out to RCTC for.a period of 30 years, with effect from 01.01.1932. The lease was
further renewed for another period of 30 years w.e.f. 01.01.1962 to 31.12.1991 at an
annual rent of Rs.20,000/-. The MoD vide letter dated 12.2.2004 accorded sanction for
extension of the lease period for another 15 years with effect from 01.01.1992 to
31.12.2006. As per the terms and conditions laid down in the MoD letter dated
12.02.2004, the lease rent was received by DEO from RCTC up to 31.12.2006. After
expiry of the lease period on 31.12.2006, RCTC requested for the renewal of the lease
for another 15 years with effect from 01.01.2007 to 31.12.2021, with certain additional
facilities. The rent from RCTC is not recovered, as the policy on ‘Sports and
Recreational Clubs’ is under preparation in the DGDE and will be finalized soon.

Further, the question regarding loss of revenue for Government does not arise in this ,

case, as the rent will be realized after finalization of the Policy.

ii) IOCL Bulk Petroleum installation at Pune:- The MoD issued ex-post facto
sanction vide letter dated 18.11.2016 for renewal of lease of one acre of defence land in
Rev Sy No. 311 at Wellesly Road, Pune held under occupation of IOC w.e.f 07.09.1966
to 06.09 2016 on payment of total value of rent and premium of %8,50,62,790/-.

DEO, Pune has recovered lease rent of %8,42,96,161/- (Rupees Eight Crore
Forty Two Lakhs Ninty Six thousand one hundred and sixty one only) towards the rent,
premium and additional payment as arrears, as per MoD sanction dated 18.11.2016
for the period 07.09.1966 till up to 06.09.2016. The details of recovery are:

= “Date of recovery ड़ “Lease rent recovered in

——
4 [09.02.2018 | 4,48,51,360/-
2 07.02.2019 3,94,44,801/-

Total | 8,42,96,161/-

The Indian Oil Corporation has stated that it has previously paid %11,71,129/-
between the Year 1966-2013. The IOC has now forwarded payments receipts issued
by BSO, Army Pune which were not taken into account in MoD sanction dated
18.11.2016. The same is being verified and reconciled by the DEO Pune.

Oe


(ii)

(iii)

iii) HPCL petro! pump cum service Station at Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi

An area measuring 5525 sqft out of defence land in Sy. No.211/1 18918 Kuan was last
leased out to M/s HPCL. upto 31.01.1995 at the annual rent of 798,1:92/- and premium
of € 490512/-. In another case for an area measuring 12000 sqft oui of Sy. No.211/1,
Dhaula Kuan defence land was leased out up to 31.01.1995 @ annual rent of
%3,84,829/- and premium 219,24, 145/- was fixed.

When this sanction was communicated to M/s HPCL, they refused to accept the
enhanced rentals and premium and kept on making payment of reritals, as per the
previous sanctioned rates which was accepted by DEO as part payment of damages.
Accordingly, Defence Estates officer Delhi Circle issued several notices on regular
intervals to M/s HPCL asking them to clear outstanding Govt. dues and hand over
possession of Defence land.

Taking cognizance of said reference and in order to take the possession of the defence
land measuring 5525 sqft and 12000 sqft both situated at Sy. No.211/1, Delhi Cantt,
action/proceedings under PPE Act, 1971 on defence land measuring 12000 sqft was
initiated against the occupant to evict them from Defence land. Thereafter, finalization of
proceedings, order under Sub-Section (1) of Section 5 of the PPE Act, 1971 was
passed on 03.03.2015, directing them to vacate the premises.

(iv) Aggrieved with the said order, HPCL filed an appeal before the Court and obtained stay

order on 12.03.2015. The said Case is still subjudice whereas, imposition and recovery
of damage case is going on before Estate Officer, under PPE Act 1971.

iv) BPCL petrol pump at Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi:

The leases for retail petro! pump outlets/service stations were given under MOD
policy letter dated 12.04.1972 read with letter dated 24.04.1980. These leases were
initially given for a period of 10 years which were subsequently renewed for a period of
05 years at a time. The lease rent to be charged was on commercial basis at the rate of
04 times the residential/normal rent and premium was equal to rent multiplied by the
number of years of lease period

A number of such leases could not be renewed since the lessees (PSU oil
companies like 105, BPCL, HPCL) did not pay due rent with premium giving reasons of
high lease rent and premium. In a few cases, the lease could not be renewed due to

litigation.

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. filed the Writ Petitions (c) No.8877 of 2017 (M/s
BPCL V/s Delhi Cantt. Board and Anr.) and No.8878 of 2017 (M/s L. Gopinath & Anr. Vs

>-१2५८


Delhi Cantonment Board & Ors) before the Hon'ble Delhi High Court challenging the
order of the Ld. ADJ, Patiala House Courts, Delhi in PPA No.301 of 2016.

The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi constituted a Committee comprising Secretary
(Defence) and Secretary (Petroleum) and Mr. Kirtiman Singh, learned Central
Government Standing Counsel to examine the issue. The report of the Committee was
considered by the Hon’ble Court. The Hon'ble Court vide its order dated 14.09.2018
has disposed of the case. Action on the observations/directions of Hon’ble Court is
being taken by DGDE.

The subsequent progress in the case is as under:-
(i) BPCL and M/s L. Gopinath & Anr. Filed writ petition No.8877-8878 of 2017. The
same came up for hearing on 09.10.2017 and 11.10.2017. The BPCL has pleaded that
Ministry of Defence was in the process of formulating a new policy for renewal of leases
of Petrol Pumps. Cantt Board Advocate clarified that the NOC for renewal of lease has
not been given by Local Military authority on account of security threat to Military
installations. In view of BPCL argument Hon'ble High Court sought following
information:

(a) Whether MoD, Government of India was in process of formulating any policy for renewal
of expired leases of petrol pumps

(b) The existing policy as to lease of Defence land to oil companies and renewal of such
leases.

(c) Basis of decision by the Station headquarters about the petrol pump being a security
threat and

(d) Was there any policy of Government of India for relocation of petrol pump.

(ii) Affidavit on behalf of Union of India was filed. The Court directed both BPCL and
Dethi Cantonment Beard (DCB) to file brief note of submission alongwith copies of |;
relevant documents on the next date of hearing.

(iii) The matter came up for hearing on 20.12.2017 & the Court permitted de-sealing
of the Petro! Pump on 22.12.2017 for a period of 04 days for the purpose of enabling
the dealer to empty the entire stock of petrol, diesel, oil and lubricants from the petrol
pump and re-seal the same on 26.12.2017. The court also called for complete records
relating to the plea of security issue raised by Delhi Cantt Board/LMA.

(iv) On the instructions of Hon'ble High Court, BPCL and Cantt Board Delhi agreed
for a meeting on 24.05.2018, for amicable settlement. However, no agreement could be
reached.

-- ye


(५) The case was then heard on 31.05.2018 and Hon'ble High Court did not find material on
record to support the contention of Cantonment Board, Delhi that Petrol pump was a
security hazard. The High Court allowed to de-seal the petrol pump w.e.f. 15.06.2018 to
11.07.2018 & was pleased to constitute a committee comprising of Secretary (Defence),
Secretary (Petroleum) and Shri Kirtiman Singh, CGSC to examine the following
questions:-

(a) Whether petrol pumps per se is a security hazard in cantonment; and more particularly
whether the petrol pump in question is a security hazard to military installations in Delhi
Cantonment? If so, the reasons be provided for the same.

(b) If the petro! pump in question is found not to be a security hazard, whether the
Petitioner is entitled to the renewal of the lease in terms of the policy of the Government
contained in the letter dated 03.02.2016.

(०) Whether the action of Respondent No.1 in sealing the petrol purrp on 09.10.2017
before the commencement of writ petition is fair and reasonable? ५

The Committee submitted its report before the Hon'ble Court on 27.08.2018. The
matter was lastly listed on 14.09.2018 and disposed off as the Cantonment Board
agreed to renew the lease deed of the petitioners.

LPA No. 337 of 2018 filed by Cantt Board was also heard by Hon'ble Court on
13.06.2018, and did not consider it appropriate to interfere with order of the single
judge, passed on 31.05.2018. The matter was lastly listed on 02.11.2018 and The
Hon‘ole Court dismissed the LPA with observation “keeping in view of the subsequent
development that has taken place in the matter, learned counsel for appellant fairly
states that now this appeal has been rendered infructuous. The appeal accordingly
dismissed”. Action on the observations/directions of Hon'ble Court is being taken by
DGDE.

v) Thane Sporting Club Committee at Thane, Mumbai: The policy on leases
given to “Recreational and sports clubs” is under finalization in DGDE. The due rent with
arrears will be recovered on finalization of relevant policy.

vi) Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited (KMVNL) at Nanital:- The lease deed
between Ranikhet Cantt Board and Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited (KMVL) has
been executed on 08.08.2018 in Schedule IX of Cantonment Land Administration
Rules, 1937 for a period of 05 years each, w.e.f 18.07.1989 to 17.07.2019 . The rent,
premium and damage charges amounting Rs.79,34,650/- have already been received in
full, from KMVL.

1K -


No action is pending as all outstanding dues have already been paid by Kumaon
Mandal Vikas Nigam Limited.

As regards updating of records pertaining to defence land leased out to Govt
Department or private parties, DEOs/CEOs have updated their records and made .
relevant entries in Raksha Bhumi Software version 5.0 (RB 5.0). Based on guidelines,
issued from time to time by DGDE, all details pertaining to encroachments and leases,
have been entered by the field offices in RB 5.0. Most DEOs have also integrated the
survey maps with BHUVAN. The remaining maps are being integrated. In some survey.
reports, due to loss of basic data it has not been possible to integrate the same with
BHUVAN. DEOs are in the process of collating the data and uploading the survey maps
on BHUVAN.

A High Level Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Sumit
Bose, IAS(Retd.), for Study on optimum use of Defence land and to regulate its
commercial exploitation. The Committee made a detailed study in the matter and
submitted its report wherein 131 recommendations have been made on various aspects
of defence land. The said recommendations have been accepted by Hon'ble Raksha
Mantri, for phase wise.implementation.

With reference to Observations of PAC in its report, directions have been issued
to DGDE vide MoD ID note dated 23.09.2019, to ensure that the process of renewal of
lease be started one ear before the date of expiry of every lease. (Annexure-1)

Vetting Remarks of Audit
MoD reply is vetted subject with following comments :- ;

(1) Ministry may intimate the PAC regarding recovery of outstanding lease rent
alongwith arrears on finalization of policy on “Sports and Recreational clubs” alongwith
final status of sub-judice cases.

(2) The ministry in reply stated that the policy on “Sports and Recreational clubs’ is .
under preparation in the DGDE and will be finalized soon. However, the draft policy is
long pending with MoD since 2014. Ministry may apprise PAC the reasons for this
abnormal delay in finalization of this policy.

(3) Ministry in reply has mentioned that 131 recommendations made by Shri Sumit
Bose committee on various aspects of Defence land would be implemented phase-wise.
However, the Ministry has not specifically stated timelines for implementation of Sumit,
Bose Committee recommendations.

a


(4) The Ministry in reply stated that most DEOs have also integrated the survey maps
with BHUVAN & the remaining maps are being integrated. However, the Ministry is
silent on the exact number of DEOs which have integrated the survey maps with
BHUVAN.

(5) The PAC had desired to finalize the leasing policy within three months of the
presentation of the Report to Parliament. However, the Ministry is silent on specific
timelines for implementation of leasing policy.

Reply of the Ministry on the vetting remarks of Audit

1) As the policy for leasing out defence land for sports & recreational club is under
consideration, the lease rent and premium will be assessed as per the provisions of the
new policy as and when the same is finalized. It is further informed that MoD has issued
a policy for extension or renewal of expired / expiring Cantonment Code or CLAR lease
vice letter No. 110113/02/2016/D(Lands) dated 10.03.2017. The same was extended
upto 31.12.2021. Further extension of policy with a provision for lease renewal
automation on the online portal is under consideration.

The Status of Sub-judice cases are as under :

(i) HPCL petrol pump cum service Station at Dhaula Kuan, New De Dethi

District Court have allowed the appeal filed by M/s HPCL against the Eviction order
dated 03.03.2015, passed by Estate Officer, Delhi Cantt. and has remanded back the
rsatter to Estate Officer for reconsidering it afresh in view of MoD policy dated
C3.02.2016. Matter has been heard by the Estate Officer and the case has been
reserved for final orders.

(ii) BPCL petrol pump at Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi:

Writ petition filed by BPCL has been decided by Hon'ble Court wherein it has been
ordered that the writ petitions are disposed of as the Cantonment Board has agreed to
review the lease deed of the petitioners. The Hon'ble Court further directed that
appropriate action in terms of the report of the Committee of Board Resolution dated
07.09.2018 be taken by the Board within eight weeks from the date of issue of orders
with advance copy to the petitioners. CEO, Delhi have initiated a proposal for renewal/
Extension of the lease from 14.11.1992 to 31.12.2021. Simultaneously, CEO, Delhi has
raised a demand of Rs.7,46,58,871 towards occupation charges/ premium. The same is
yet to be deposited by BPCL

qn


5)

The draft policy is presently under inter —ministerial consultations. The draft policy is.
required to be deliberated clause wise with all stake holders.

131 Recommendations made by the Shri Sumit Bose Committee on various aspects of
defence land, have been accepted by Hon'ble Raksha Mantri, for phase wise
implementation. Out of 131 recommendations, 30 recommendations have already been
implemented and the rest are under consideration for implementation.

GIS layer of the maps of defence land pockets generated in the land surveys carried out
in phase | and Il have been created in Land Management System (LMS) which is a
software developed in conjunction with DGDE and Armed Forces. The layer comprises
of defence land pock¢ts under jurisdiction of all DEO circles.

MoD had issued intetim policy for extension or renewal of expire/expiring Cantonment
Code or CLAR lease vide letter no. 11013/02/2016/D
(Lands) dated 10.03.2917. The same was extended upto 31.12.2021. The proposal of
further extension of thé ibid policy with suitable amendments and automation is under
consideration.

2A. Unauthorized Occupation of Defence land by Other Government
Departments.

Audit highlighted that Defence land, measuring 0.7829 acres valuing Rs. 9.29
crore at Chennai were under unauthorized occupation of Railways for the last
twenty five years without proper sanction by the Ministry of Defence and the rent
outstanding was Rs. 8.63 crore. The Committee are shocked to note that the
Defence authorities remained as mute spectators when the Railway authorities
merely on the basis of a “No objection’ for 0.52 acres of land, unauthorisedly
occupied and completed construction on 0.7829 acres of Defence land. The
Committee are surprised to observe that Defence Estate Officer failed to issue
any show cause notice of the Railway authorities for further encroaching Defence
land beyond the allotted land.

The Committee are perturbed to see that after being pointed out by the
Audit and examined by the PAC, even though the Ministries of Defence and
Railways in their meeting held on 14-3-2017 decided for mutual exchange of land
at Chennai on equitable basis, they could not resolve the issue till date. At last

when the Railways offered land opposite to Trisoolam station now the Defence, ;

instead of taking over the land and resolve the long pending issue demanded
suitable land in the vicinity of Central Railway Station, Chennai for construction
of MCO and Armabagh. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to take
urgent steps to ensure equitable exchange of Railway land, set its record straight

OD


and obtain rental from Railway till such transfer of land. The committee desire
that exemplary punishment for the officers who failed to take suitable action
‘during encroachment and did not issue show cause notice to Railways at that
time. Audit pointed out that Air Force Station, Pune allowed the AAI to use 4.73
acres of Defence land valuing Rs. 17.23 crore for commercial purpose as parking
area without Government sanction resulting in revenue loss of Rs. 4.52 crore to
the State on account of non-recovery of lease rent. Further, DEO Pune failed to
take over the land and remained and meekly allowed commercial exploitation of
the same leading to revenue loss.

The committee are dismayed to note yet another classic example of
continuous unauthorized commercial use of 4.73 acres of Defence land valuing
Rs. 17.23 crore by the Airports Authority of India at Pune since 2007. This
resulted in further loss of rent to the tune of Rs. 4.52 crore to the State.AAl had
further leased the land for parking to a private centre who was collecting parking
charges and no rent was recovered from AAI and credited to Government
accounts. Even though the land was provided for the upcoming Commonwealth
Youth Games, no formal working permission was given to the AAI. The Board of
Officers constituted could not complete its task as the representative of AAI did
not report for its proceedings. The Defence Ministry while tendering evidence
apprised the Committee that despite assurance for full cooperation given during
the meeting of Defence Ministry and the MoCA on 13/8/2014, the AAI is still to act
in che matter. Subsequently, it was decided by the Ministries that the land can be
exchanged alongwith other pockets of land on the basis of barter matrix. A
proposal for approval of Cabinet on the exchange of land between IAF(MoD) and
AAI (MoCA) as per land barter Matrix is at the stage of inter ministerial
consultation.

The committee note that the Ministry became proactive only after the land
irregularities were pointed out by the Audit. The Committee desire that the land
Barter Matrix between MoD and MoCA be expedited, land restored, lease rent for
the period obtained this being tip of the iceberg and enquiry set up to find out
similar cases of encroachments, land restored and the officials responsible for
allowing such encroachments be awarded exemplary punishments.

The Committee are of the strong view that since computerization has led to
accessibility of records at every level, timelines be fixed for physical verification
of lands, disposing off the cases of requests for leasing of land etc. The
Committee desire that the Ministry may apprise them about the steps being taken

“28-


for streamlining the, procedure of transfer of Defence land from MoD to other
Government Departnients.

[Para-2A]
Action taken

(i) Southern Railways, Chennai: The LMA sought equal value of Railway land at the
Central Railway Station, Chennai or Egmore Railway Station for the purpose of MCO
and Aramgrah in lieu of the defence land measuring 0.7829 acre under occupation of
Railway authorities. However the Ministry of Railway vide their letter dated 12.02.2018,
intimated that the said lands cannot be spared as the same are proposed for
redevelopment of stations and offered land measuring 990.056 Sqm at Meenambakkam
Railway Station.

Further, it is submitted that a offer given by Ministry of Railway in lieu of above
cited land, was conveyed to the local Military Authorities/Station HQ, who informed that
the “Transfer of land measuring 990.056 sq mtr at Meenabakkam Railway Sation is not
required/not recommended, to be taken as the same is of no use for them”. Further,
LMA has again requested to transfer of land in Chennai Central/ Egmore/ Cochin/
Coimbatore/Madurai Railway Stations for MCO/Aramgrah, in lieu of defence land,
encroached by Railways. DEO Chennai vide letter dated 07.09.2018 and 16.10.2018,
has taken up the matter with Senior Divisional Engineer (Coordination) Divisional Office
Chennai. The matter is under consideration with Railway Authorities.

(ii) Exchange of Defence Lands with Air Port Authority of India (AAI) : As regards,
unauthorized commercial use of 4.73 acres of Defence land valuing D17.23 crore by the
Airports Authority of India at Pune since 2007. The subject land transfer is a part of
Land Barter Matrix (LBM) between Indian Air Force(IAF) and Airports Authority of India
(AA!) which includes mutual land transfer at six places i.e. Pune, Ahmedabad,
Gorakhpur, Agra, Trivandrum and Belgaum. The LBM provides for waiving of rentals
and mutual transfer of land between IAF and AAI as per requirements of both the
organizations. A copy of Land Barter Matrix is enclosed as Annexure-2. The said LBM
has approved by Hon'ble Raksha Mantri in October 2017 and also approved by Ministry
of Civil Aviation (MoCA) in May 2018. Head Quarter, SWAC has been directed to
complete Board Proceedings towards transfer of 4.73 acres of land to AA! at Pune.

A Cabinet Note for the proposed ‘land barter matrix’ between IAF(MoD) and
Airport Authority of India (AAI), Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) is yet to be approved

न % oO —


by Cabinet. A copy of the approval of the Cabinet would be furnished as and when
received from Ministry of Civil Aviation.

Further, with the computerization of land record and periodic monitoring of
encroachments at the DGDE/MoD, the cases of encroachments are reported
irnmediately on detection. DEOs and CEOs have been issued strict instructions to
remove encroachments in the earliest possible time. There are certain constraints in
removal of encroachments due to disputes on land title, non availability of police, status
quo orders issued by Courts or admin stays issued by the Govt. 5061 cases take long
time before the encroachments can be removed. As on 31.12.2018. the encroachment
by State/Central Govt. Deptt. are as follows:-

| S.No. | कट ‘Area of encroachment |
(in acres)

‘| Andhra Pradesh — 21.97 |
[27 Andaman 8 Nicobar =
Assam 460.5397

___[ Arunachal Pradesh 87.8141
Bihar 478.974

‘Chandigarh
Chhattisgarh

Delhi
Goa
a yigat 7
Himachal Pradesh — पु
ee &Kashmir | 339.2447
Jharkhand 304.932
opens -_ 131.7923
Kerala 2.6839
Lakshadweep 0.08
Maharashtra 923.5062
| Madhya Pradesh 1639.83
20 | Manipur . हु 6.1308
a1 = हि 11.0855
| 22 Mizoram 0
४ +|Nagaland , ~
(24 | Odisha



25 | Puducherry a “| nn)
26. Punjab मजा ॥ "240.68
27 | Rajasthan | 475.2829
28 | Sikkim. 0.2903
29... Telangana .. 146.2478
30. | Tamilnadu हे 101.2418
31 Tripura 1
32... Uttar Pradesh ~~ 2204.836
33 «| Uttarakhand oo “57.3982
34 ‘| West Bengal ~ _ _ 558.165.
35 | Dadra & Nagar Have nn 0
उ6 िक्राध्ा &्छिप../ै्््<्र्-+ऊझऊञ है|
Total — —— ~ 9622.807

These have been taken up with respective State Governments, on principle of
EVLIEVI, both by DGDE & MoD. However, strict monitoring ensures that new
encroachments are prevented and if detected the same are removed within a short
time.

Vetting Remarks of Audit
MoD reply is vetted subject with following comments:-

The Ministry may apprise the PAC regarding status of land transferred to Local Military
Authorities (LMA) by Railway Authorities as well as approval by Cabinet of proposed
Land Barter matrix between IAF(MoD) and AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation(MoCA).

. The Ministry is sileni'on PAC recommendation of exemplary punishment to officials
tesponsible for allowing encroachment.

. Further, status of encroached land (9622.807 acre) restored has not been provided by
the Ministry in its reply,

. The PAC had desired to be intimated of the steps being taken for streamlining the
procedure of transfer of Defence land from MoD to other Government Departments. .
Ministry reply is silent on this aspect. Ministry may therefore apprise PAC of steps ,
taken in this regard.

Reply of the Ministry to the vetting remarks of Audit

1 The Railways “has not offered any land other than 990.056 sqm of land at
Meenambakam Railway Station. Hence, there is no change in the status. With regard to;
proposed Land Barter Matrix between IAF(MoD) and AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation

- ०० --


(MoCA), it is informed that the Land Barter Matrix is under examination in MoD in
consultation with Air Force HQ.

(2&3) Actions for removal of encroachments are taken as per provisions of Cantonment
Act, 2006 and PPE Act, 1971 by the field officers. Concrete actions have been taken for
early detection and removal of encroachment. Following specific actions including
interventions by use of high end technologies have been initiated for management of

defence land:-

i. Land Management System (LMS): The Land Management System (LMS)
software has been developed by Department of Defence in conjunction with DGDE and
Armed forces. The technical support for this GlS-based system has been provided by
BISAG, India’s premier organization in GIS based informatics. The software, apart from
capturing the textual details of all proposals relating to defence land management,
integrates these textual details with Raksha Bhoomi software as well as other relevant
GlS-layers which include satellite imagery of the area, other amenities etc. The portal is
expected to bring in greater speed, transparency and efficiency into the Land
Management System (LMS) of the Department.

ii Use of drones and satellite imagery: Latest survey technology using drone and
satellite imagery have been adopted to complete survey of defence land in shortest
possible time. Such survey shall help in detection of encroachments.

iii. Change detection software: Change detection software based on thermal
imagery is being developed by DGDE under the guidance of BARC. This software is
expected to detect encroachment on far flung defence land almost on real time basis.

iv. Analysis of open/vacant areas: A software is being developed under the
guidance of BARC to analyse the open/vacant defence land using satellite imagery.
This would help in better management of vacant defence land which is otherwise prone

to encroachment.

v. 3D resolution on hilly terrain: 3D images are being utilized to calculate area of
defence land in hilly terrain.
vi. Threat Matrix: Threat matrix based on eleven (11) objective criteria has been

developed and implemented to detect vulnerability of defence land and take appropriate
steps based on vulnerability assessment.

vii. Construction of Boundary wails/ Pillars/ Fencing: MoD has sanctioned
project for construction of boundary wall, fencing and boundary pillars for protection of
defence land prone to encroachment. Fund has also been allocated for this purpose.

viii. SoPs for real time updation: Detailed SoP for real time updation of defence
land records has been issued to the field offices for efficient management of defence
land.

ix. Land Audit: Regular land audit for all defence land is being undertaken by
Defence Estate Organization at regular periodicity interalia covering encroachments on

KIT


Defence Lands; the extent and reasons thereof and effectiveness of encroachments’
removal actions. Defence land audit is a continuing process which commenced on
2011-12. The land audit reports are circulated to the respective Service HQrs for their
further necessary action.

A total of 1027.9369 acres of defence land has been freed from encroachment in
last 5 years. The state, wise details of such land is enclosed as Annexure 3.

4. Transfer of defence land to other Government Departments/State Government and
its agencies are done as per the provisions contained in Ministry of Defence letters
No.11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated 11.05.2015, 11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated
02.02.2016 amended vide even number dated 21.10.2020 and 03.03.2022 on the basis
of provisioning of Equal Value Land(EVL)/ payment of market value of land/
construction of Equa! Value Infrastructure(EVI) by the Indenting Agency, as the case
may be. The ibid policy letters are enclosed as Annexures 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D.

In addition to this, Ministry has developed a portal (survey.ncog.gov.in/NOC_Land)
through which the Indenting Agencies submit their application for transfer of defence
land for public utility Infrastructure/ projects. All such proposals are now processed
through the portal for approval of the Competent Authority. This has expedited the time
taken for disposal of:such requests received from different Indenting Agencies for
defence land proposed to be used for public infrastructure projects. Besides, an online
portal by the name Land Management System (LMS) has been developed for
monitoring of all such; requests for Working Permission. The ibid portal, apart from
capturing the textual details of all proposals relating to defence land management,
integrates these textual details with relevant GlS-layers which include satellite imagery
of the area, other amenities etc.

3. Misuse of Defence land

The Committee note that in two cases, as reported by Audit, (i) Defence land on
lease since Pre-independence era was not reverted to the DEO on closure of
Clubs instead the Local Military Authorities (LMAs) allowed construction of a girls
hostel by Army Wives Welfare Association (AWWA) and (ii) Similarly, a shopping
complex with CSD Canteen, ATM counter, cloth shop, ice-cream parlour and
electrical shop was unauthorisedly allowed to come up on Defence land without
MoD’s sanction. It was only after being pointed out by the Audit that the Ministry
forwarded the proposal of ex-post facto sanction for the Girls Hostel. In the
second case where a shopping complex was constructed without reclassification
of the land from B-3 to A-1 in gross violation of MoD’s instructions. The
Committee are surprised to note the tall claims of the Ministry as well as the

— z Y a


DGDE about computerization. of the land records, land surveys being conducted,
regular monitoring of land under their occupation and regular updation of the
same in their records and express their serious concern about the functioning of
DGDE. The Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry as well as the
DGDE should revisit the conditions regarding leases granted in perpetuity as
reclassification of B-3 to A-1 Defence lands are only processed on the annulment
of such leases. The Committee further desire that the Defence Shopping
(Maintenance and Administration) Rules, 2006 be amended for regularizing
sanctions to shopping complexes in Cantonment areas to ensure that
revenue/rent earned from such establishments is directly deposited in
Government account. The PAC (2013-14) in their 89" Report (157 Lok Sabha) had
also observed that mis-use of Defence land engaged in commercial activities and
the subsequent non-crediting of income from these lands/properties into
Government account. The Committee feel that the earlier observation and
recommendation regarding the issue in question has fallen on deaf ears and
therefore strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation that complete details of
lesses and revenue generated from all Defence lands/properties by the LMAs be
obtained and appropriate action be taken to ensure that all revenue are deposited
in Government accounts. The Committee desire that computerization of defence
land records be completed within a timeline and misuse of its land prevented
through land surveys, regular monitoring and updation of the records. The
committee are of the view that DGDE has failed to perform as per the mandate
and desire that the organization may be thoroughly revamped after a high level
review.

[Case-3]
Action taken

(i) Girls Hostel by Army wives Welfare Association (AWWA) in Pune.
Construction of Girls Hostel Pune has been regularized by issuing ex-post-facto
sanction dated 19.12.2016 for construction of the girls hostel.

A copy of the sanction dated 19.12.2016 is enclosed as Annexure-5. The Girls
Hostel Kirkee at Pune is being run on ‘No profit no loss” basis.

(ii) Running of Shopping Complex

Govt. sanction for annulment of lease and reclassification of land from B-3 to A-1 in
respect of Bungalow No.34, Survey No.329, Kahun Road, Pune Cantt. has been issued

- oS 7


vide letter dated 05.07.2017. A copy of the said letter dated 05.07.2017 is enclosed as
Annexure-6.

Further, the computerization of land records has been done and records have been
updated, for doing this the following initiatives have been taken in this regard:

a) Computerizatién of Defence land records- Raksha Bhoomi Software:- Bhoomi Software:-

(i) Defence Estates Organization under the Directorate General defence Estates |
(DGDE) maintains two types of important land registers. One register is for lands within
Cantonment and the other register is for lands outside Cantonments. The former
register is called Gereral Lands Register (GLR) and the latter register is called Military
Lands Register (MLR). Both the registers record, survey number-wise, the ownership of
land, its area, who occupies it, any transfer/sale transaction and other summary details.
Both the registers are maintained in every DEO Circle. GLR is maintained in every
Cantonment Board Office also for land placed under the management of Cantonment
Boards. There are 62 Cantonment Board Offices and 37 DEO Circles. The extent of
total recorded defence land in the country is about 17.57 lakh acres.
bs

(ii) Raksha Bhoomi software was envisaged, to store electronically the information
in both these registers in respect of all the Defence Estates Offices and Cantonment
Boards. The features of Raksha Bhoomi are such that land data from various offices
can be consolidated at one place.

(ii) | The data entry, verification and authentication of defence land records in Raksha
Bhoomi Software has been completed in respect of all Cantonment Boards and
Defence Estates Offices.

(iv) Raksha Bhoomi is being constantly upgraded with a view to provide updated
data to the users and additional information required for better land management.

(v) The software, after its development and launch in 2011, has undergone further
changes and up gradation. A stable version 5.0 has been released in a secured
network in 2015, where the data can be updated by authorized users on 24x7 basis.
The online version of RB 5.0 has been hosted on NIC server connected through
secured Network of DGDE called DGDE MPLS-VPN which is a part of NICNET. The
Raksha Bhoomi data is not shared with public due to security reasons. However, the
data is shared annually with the Services. Another version called ‘Distributed Raksha
Bhoomi’ has been released in 2017 which enables the field officers to access Land

Hb



record data on their local server for viewing and printing reports even if the network is
inaccessible or broken down due to any reasons.

b) Digitization of Files and Documents for Protection and Preservation of
Land Records

DGDE has also undertaken an exercise of strengthening their record rooms,
indexing of all files and scanning and digitization of important files, maps and
documents since the management of defence land necessarily warrant proper
maintenance of land records and the maintenance of land records, its preservation and
safety standards were suffering due to high volume, lack of adequate storage space,
lack of the fire safety measures and the problem related to ageing of documents, etc. in
all the 99 field offices i.e. 62 Cantonment Boards and 37 Defence Estates Offices in the
country. All these issues were addressed by way of application of the modern
technology for preservation and protection of documents.

The details of files scanned and converted into PDF format (digitized form)
are given below:-

[ Office | “Phase-|_ ced | seca Se
Selected | Scanned | Selected
78468 73: 79468! 63787) 36081 |
Cantonment i 242496 | 242496; 51860 “49141 |
| Boards ee eee ee _|
Total; 321964 | 321964 | |

rt scanned (Phase-I+ Phase-ll)- 408056

Phase || of the digitization process was started based on guidelines issued by the
DGDE for identifying and taking up all important documents for indexing and digitization.
The process is now a continuing process. Besides, digitized data is sent by the DEOs
and Cantonment Boards in Hard Discs or M-Discs to the Archival Unit & Resource
Centre (AU&RC) of DGDE as back up record which can be accessed even on Local
Area Network. This has enabled the field offices to maintain back up files which are
readily accessible. A computer application also facilitates immediate location of files in
the record rooms which saves precious time.

As regards misuse of defence land and non-crediting of income from these lands,

properties into Govt. account, the LMAs have been directed from time to time to stop
such unauthorized use.

one


Vetting Remarks of Audit
MoD reply is vetted subject with following comments:-

. The Ministry has not provided specific reply to PAC observation regarding complete
details of lessees and revenue generated from all Defence lands/ properties by the
LMAs and revenue deposited in Government Accounts.

. PAC had desired that the Defence Shopping (Maintenance & Administration) Rules
2006 be amended for regularizing sanctions to shopping complex in Cantonment areas
to ensure that revenue/rent earned from such establishments is directly deposited in
Government Account. Ministry reply is silent on this issue.

. The PAC had desired that since DGDE had failed to perform as per mandate, the
organization may be thoroughly revamped after a high level review. The Ministry in,
reply has not specifically elaborated on this issue.

Reply of the Ministry to the vetting remarks of Audit

AHQ has informed that there are no commercial shopping complexes in territorial
jurisdiction of Army. Certain shops/locations are however used for Banks/ATMs where
entire revenue is credited to CFI. The data for financial years 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18
furnished by AHQ, Air HQ and NHQ is at Annexures 7A, 7B and 7C respectively.

. Shopping complexes on defence land where civilians are permitted to shop are governed
by MoD Policy letter dated 04.01.2001 and Defence Shopping Complexes (Maintenance
and Administration) Rules, 2006. As per source of creation of these shopping complexes
50% or 100% of net revenue generated is credited to CFI.

However, the Defence Shopping Complexes (Maintenance and Administration) Rules,
2006 does not apply to Regimental shops which are created exclusively for military.
personnel and their families. As per MoD ID No. A/55780/AG/PS 3(a)/325-S/D(Q&C),
dated 28.07.1976, rebate from Regimental shops are to be credited into regimental fund.
These Regimental shops are unit shops and shopping centre (as per scales of,
Accommodation, 2009) and are not commercial shopping complexes created from non-,
public fund that enjoy considerable patronage from public. 3

Net revenue generated (rebate) and rent and allied charges for both Regimental Shops
and Commercial Shopping Complexes are being deposited as per provisions of respective
policy. 3

Ww
Es
है|


vi.

vii.

vii.

3. Following new Initiatives on management of Defence Land have been taken by
the Defence Estates Organization:

Land Management System (LMS): The Land Management System (LMS) software
has been developed by Department of Defence in conjunction with DGDE and Armed
forces. The technical support for this GIS-based system has been provided by BISAG,
India’s premier organization in GIS based informatics. The software, apart from
capturing the textual details of all proposals relating to defence land management,
integrates these textual details with Raksha Bhoomi software as well as other relevant
GIS-layers which include satellite imagery of the area, other amenities etc. The portal is
expected to bring in greater speed, transparency and efficiency into the Land
Management System (LMS) of the Department.

Use of drones and satellite imagery: Latest survey technology using drone and
satellite imagery have been adopted to complete survey of defence land in shortest
possible time. Such survey shall help in detection of encroachments.

Change detection software: Change detection software based on thermal imagery is
being developed by DGDE under the guidance of BARC. This software is expected to
detect encroachment on far flung defence land almost on real time basis

Analysis of open/vacant areas: A software is being developed under the guidance of
BARC to analyse the open/vacant defence land using satellite imagery This would help
in better management of vacant defence land which is othe:wise prone to
encroachment.

3D resolution on hilly terrain: 3D images are being utilized to calculate area of
defence land in hilly terrain.

Threat Matrix: Threat matrix based on eleven (11) objective criteria has been
developed and implemented to detect vulnerability of defence land and take appropriate
steps based on vulnerability assessment.

Construction of Boundary walls/ Pillars/ Fencing: MoD has sanctioned project for
construction of boundary wall, fencing and boundary pillars for protection of defence
land prone to encroachment. Fund has also been allocated for this purpose.

SoPs for real time updation: Detailed SoP for real time updation of defence land
records has been issued to the field offices for efficient management of defence land.
Land Audit: Regular land audit for all defence land is being undertaken at regular
periodicity interalia covering encroachments on Defence Lands; the extent and reasons
thereof and effectiveness of encroachments’ removal actions. Defence land audit is a
continuing process which commenced on 2011-12. The land audit reports are circulated
to the respective Service HQrs for their further necessary action. Total 1027.9369 acres
of defence land has been freed from encroachment in last 5 years. The state wise
details of such land is enclosed as Annexure-3.

- ७१८


4. Cadre Review of the IDES cadre is under consideration in which the jurisdiction of
existing circles have been rationalized by proposing creation of additional 12 DEO
circles. Similarly, the jurisdictions of Regional offices have been rationalized and 02 new
Directorates have been proposed. The above will help in maintaining and supervising
the field offices in more efficient and meaningful manner.

4, Shortfall of 103.026 acres of land transferred from State Government.

The Committee observe that the transfer of land sanctioned by the Ministry
was without joint measurement/demarcation to verify the actual availability of
land in Arunachal Pradesh in violation of the laid down procedure as accepted by ,
DEO. As per the procedure laid down in Annexure ‘B’ and ‘D’, chapter 29 of the
Cantonment Laws Vol. Il, the DEO is required to collect the site plan of the ©
selected land from the users along with details of Khasra numbers showing the
area. The DEO is also required to inspect the land jointly with the local revenue
staff to ensure accuracy and correctness of the land before submitting the
proposal for obtaining Government sanction. Audit highlighted that a handing
over/taking over report was signed jointly in June, 2010 by the representative of
the State Government, the DEO and the Army without any physical verification/
survey/ map/ demarcation of land. The DEO Jorhat made full and final payment of
Rs.93.46 Lakh for ihe entire land of 230.93 acres in May 2010. During joint
verification of the land by the FRO Jorhat and Dy. Commissioner Tirap in April,
2011 it was found that the land transferred to the Army was 127.904 acres only
instead of 230.93 acres. Lapse on the part of the DEO resulted in excess payment
of D41.69 lakh for 103.026 acres of land which was not handed over. The DC,
Tirap-Arunachal Pradesh had in-principle agreed for refund of transfer value of.
403.026 acres of land and forwarded the proposal to Government of Arunachal ,
Pradesh. However, Army insisted for land instead of refund amount and was
ready to acquire any other suitable land in that vicinity as they were land deficient
in that particular area. The State Government decided to refund D33,92,438 since
it did not have any surplus land. However, the said amount has still not been
refunded to MoD. The Committee are shocked to note that flouting of established .
procedures in collecting the site plan, conducting joint survey to ensure accuracy .
and correct measurement of land before submitting the proposal for obtaining
Government sanction by the Defence Estate Officer and accordingly, sanction by
the Defence Headquarters in the absence of above documents resulting in loss to
the exchequer. The Committee desire to be apprised of the exemplary disciplinary
action taken against the officials concerned within six months to pursue the issue
vigorously and ensure that the refund of money and settle the issue at the
earliest.

- है 62 ह-


[Para 4]
Action taken

The matter regarding recovery/ adjustment of excess amount in acquisition of land
in future/ transfer of land for MoD by State Government has been taken up with State
Government of Arunachal Pradesh on various occasions. A meeting was held on
20.04.2017 at Itanagar under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Chief Minister of
Arunachal Pradesh, wherein it was decided that excess cost paid to the State
Government towards transfer of land measuring 230.93 acres will be adjusted by the
State Government against the cost of land in other acquisition cases. The issue was
again highlighted by Hon’ble Raksha Rajya Mantri in the meeting held on 30.05.2017 at
New Delhi for expeditious resolution of the issue.

There would be no loss to the State Exchequer as the State Government has
accepted the fact of handing over of deficit land and agreed to adjust excess cost.

With regard to fixing of responsibility for the gross violation of iaid down
procedures and loss to the exchequer, it is intimated that the issue has been examined
in consultation with DGDE and Army. Army Headquarters also convened a Board of
Officers to investigate transfer of deficient land and observed that error in taking over
de‘icient land is attributed to inadequacy of land records held by the State Revenue
Authorities. Since Arunachal Pradesh is a non Cadastral State, there was no malafide
intent on the part of Board of Officers during the process of handing over/ taking over
As a step towards rectification, since 2011-12, the Directorate General of Defence
Estates Organization (DGDE) has undertaken survey of all defence land by using
electronic survey equipments. All land in non-Cadastral States in Eastern Command
are being surveyed at the time of Board Proceedings as well as at the time of handing/
taking over of land and in future no such scope for reoccurrence of such cases is there.

Vetting Remarks of Audit
MoD reply is vetted subject with following comments :-
The Ministry may intimate PAC regarding final status of adjustment of excess cost paid
to State Government of Arunachal Pradesh by Army as agreed to by the State

Government to be adjusted against the cost of land in other acquisition cases.

Reply of the Ministry to the vetting remarks of Audit

व ते


The matter has been taken up with Chief Secretary of Arunachal Pradesh/ DC Tirap
respectively, to issue necessary direction to the concerned departments to refund/adjust
the amount of Rs. 41,69,462/- paid in excess for shortfall of land. The response is i
awaited from State Government of Arunachal Pradesh.

5. Conclusion

Even though serious lapses and irregularities in management of
Defence land were repeatedly pointed out by the C&AG in 2007-08, 2008-09 and
twice in 2010-11, no effort was made by MoD or the DGDE to streamline the same.
The Committee observed that the same irregularities persisted as the ex-lessees
continued to occupy prime Defence land unauth orisedly even after expiry of
leases; the DEOs also failed to take advance action for renewal/termination of
leases in utter disregard of the guidelines resulting in outstanding rentals of
approximately Rs. 838.34 crores for as long as periods ranging from four to 46
years in respect of 8 cases pointed out by Audit; encroachment by other
Government Departments and misuse of Defence land by the Local Military
Authorities for unauthorized purposes such as running of hostels, shopping
complexes etc. constructed from non-public funds continued unabated despite ,
existence of clear cut guidelines of the Ministry. The Committee are of the
considered view that since land is precious and a limited resource, serious
efforts are required for its protection and judicious use by the administrative
Minsitry i.e. MoD and the policy implementing wing i.e. DGDE. The Committee
view it as a serious lapse on the part of MoD as repeated cases have been
highlighted by the Audit, continuing unabatedly for many years. The Committee 2
desire that strict action be taken against officials responsible for non-renewal of ;:
leases, failing to prevent encroachment, encouraging the use of Defence land for |
commercial purposes, failing in the basic law of correct and accurate
demarcation/measurement of land while acquiring the same before its final
payment etc. The Committee also desire that a comprehensive survey of all the
Defence land be made once in 10 years to ascertain the actual status. The
Committee find that many cases involving Defence land are pending in courts.
The Committee are dismayed to note that a PSU filing case against a Ministry of
Government of India in the court presents a very sad picture. The court are
already overburdened and therefore the Committee desire that all cases between
the wings of Government of India or those under its aegis be taken to a special
tribunal to be constituted for the purpose to enable fast track decision and
reduction in revenue losses due to long pending court cases. :


Further, the Committee note that the MoD, since 2014 is in process of finalizing
process for leasing of land for sports and recreational purposes due to which it
has not renwed the lease of RCTC, Kolkata from 2007 whose dues are as huge as
Rs. 814 crores. The Committee exhort the MoD to finalise the policy within three
months: Also, the lease policy giving a revised structure for lease rent and
premium forwarded to MoPNG for their views thereof may be followed up and
finalized urgently.

[Case-5]
Action taken

The arrears in respect of RCTC Kolkata amounting to Rs.814 crore is based on
the presumptuous calculation of lease rent suggested by DEO Kolkata. Prior to
01.01.2007, the lease rent was much lower. Since the rates proposed by DEO Kolkata
were not in tune with the earlier rent structure and also differed from lease rent of other
similar Clubs, it was decided to have a uniform policy for all such clubs. Rent recovery
will be made on finalization of the policy.

The points relating to the policy on leases given to “Recreational arid sports
clubs” is under finalization in DGDE. The due rent with arrears can be recovered on
finalization of relevant policy. As regard to renewal of leases for petrol pumps etc., lease
period in r/o leases of Oil Companies for setting up retail outlets was extended upto
30.09.2019 and rentals/premium arrears to the tune of % 4,48,51,360/- have been
recovered, so far. The policy on lease to Oil companies is under consideration of MoD.

As regards survey of land, the same has been surveyed during the first phase
and in the second phase, State revenue authorities have been asked to authenticate the
survey reports or do the re-demarcation with DEOs wherever required. The process is
on at the DEOs level, and is a continuing exercise.

Further, the maps of defence land pockets generated in the recently carried out
lard surveys (2012-13 to 2016-17) are being integrated with satellite maps of National
Remote Sensing Centre under ISRO (NRSC) i.e. BHUVAN for assigning geo-
coordinates. These will be integrated with Raksha Bhoomi 5.0 database (land records
system). हु

For this purpose, the technical staff of 0505 and Programmers of Cantonment
Boards have been trained by the officers of the NRSC in using BHUVAN application.
The process of integration of land survey maps with BHUVAN coordinates has been
started and is expected to be completed within one year. After the geo coordinates are

“Us


assigned to each survey map, the same will be integrated with the Raksha B

record system.

The progress of the survey work is as under:-

1.

2.

“Project activities

ला
Equipment

(i) ETS were procured and provided to
lall DEO/ADEO Circles/ offices. These were}
used by technical staff in land survey.

(ii) Recently, DGPS Systems have also
lbeen procured and provided to all DEOs.

Training of Technical Staff

Survey work

Vetting remarks of Audit

MoD reply is vetted subject with

IETS through 15 training courses that have;
lbeen conducted so far. Training has also)
been given to technical staff in DGPS.

[About 98.62% and 100% survey work has

completed in DEOs and Cantonment
Boards respectively. It has been decided
that henceforth, survey of land will be a
lcontinuing process and 113" of defence
land is to be resurveyed every year, so as
[0 complete the resurvey, after every 3
ears cycle. This has lead to effective
monitoring utilization, as well as prevention

hoomi land

I& removal of encroachments/misuse of

ldefence lands.

following comments :-

due to long pending court cases”.

of Recreational and Sports clubs policy.

G4

Ministry is silent on the PAC recommendation that “all cases between the wings
of Government of India or those under its aegis be taken to a special tribunal to be,

constituted for the purpose to enable fast track decision and reduction in revenue losses

MoD may intin:ate PAC regarding the recovery of rent with arrears on finalization

3


Reply of the Ministry to the vetting remarks of Audit

1. Government of India, Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs vide its OM
No. 334774/DoLA/AMRD/2019 dated 31.03.2020 have issued instructions to Ministries /
Departments of the Government of India, in the past, to avoid -inter-departmental
litigations in any Court of law, including by all CPSEs / Boards / Authorities, etc., under
their Administrative control and to resolve the same amicably or through Arbitration as
per the procedure contained in the ibid OM dated 31.03.2020.

2. Noted for compliance.

Us ८


CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-

_ y ४ .-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
097 August, 2023 August, 2023 Chairperson,
18 Shravan, 1945(Saka) Public Accounts Committee


Tm — Aynenune —

Ministry of Defence
D(Lands)

Cantonments Code leases or 1899 &

Subject:- Exter.sion of expired / expirin
1912 and CLAR 1925 & 1937-1

garding. — ~~~ 3

Please find enclosed herewith a copy of Lok Sabha Secretarit (PAC Branch)
O.M. No. 22/(i)/2/1/2018-19/PAC dated 19.07.2018 forwarding therewith a cyclostyled
copy of the One Hundred and Sixth Report (16 Lok Sabha), of the Public Accounts
Committee (2018-19) on ‘Improper Management of Defence Lands’.

2. In the aforesaid report, with respect to the renewal of lease the committee has
desired the Ministry.to issue instructions to the DEOs that the process of renewal of
lease be started one year before the date of expiry of every lease.

3. In view of the above, it is requested to ensure that.the process of renewal of
lease be started one year before the date of expiry of every lease.

Encl. As above . रे Ge

(Ashok Kumar
OSD, D(Lands)

Addl. DG (Lands), [10085
MoD ID No.11013/2/2016/D(Lands) dated23.09.2019



* LAND] BARTER MATRIX BETWEEN IAF & al

KA land to

IAF Tand to be

S| | Place” -Remarks
1४0. be 5 transferred tos} oo
transferred fo | AAI: *
iAR. |
1 पद 2.86 Land in. occupation eal AAI
: since 1994. J
{ Pune 6:78. |. kand-leased to AAT in 2007 =" i
है न 7 * | lieW of 9.07 ‘acres’ leased to
IAF in Trivandrum-in 1985
:

ie
to JAF in.Feb.17.

3 ‘Land-agreed to be-transt 7a
_ : to JAF. ray
4 Gorakhpur 1.10 Land requested by AAT in
_ हि _ 2016. BOO completed. |
5 Agra 1.00 Land requested by AAI “in;

2016

Belgaum 15 415 Land requested -by AAI’ in

है 2016, AAI to provide 3

“Total *



Total encroachm

! oe
Andhra Pradesh.
4 Binar
Chandigarh
Chattisgarh.
5 | Goa...
| Guiarat
Haryana
Himachal हि
JK मी
Jharkhand |
Karnataka

3 | Maharashtra
| Madhya Prad

Manipur
Meghalaya
| Punjab...

ent removed during the last

Kerala & Lakshadw: 2p ee = .

Area (in acr

Annexured,

“3
2.8162

2.7600 |

“34.9784.
027.9369



Annee a है

No. 11015/2/2012/D(Lands)
Government of India
Ministry of Defence
New Delhi
Dated 11" March, 2015
To चर

i) All Secretaries of the Ministr ies/Departments
(As per list attached)

ii) All Chief Secretaries of the States & UTs
(As per list attached)

an
Sub: Procedure for Drolet oT rausler of Defence land for Publie utilities and Public infrastructure of Defence land for Public utilities and Public infrastructure

brojects. |

Sir, !
The Ministry of Defence has been receiving requests for Defence land from Central
Government departments, State Govemments and organisations controlled by it as also local
bodies , for execution of projects related to creation/up-gradation of public infrastructuré/utilities,
Keeping in view the operational requirement of our Armed Forces no defence: land is normally
permitted to be transferred for non-defence use. However, as an exception to this policy, requests
for Defence land received from Central Government departments, State Jovernments and
organisations controlled by it as also local bodies, for execution of projects related to creation/up-
gradation of public infrastructure/utilities are considered on the-merits of each cele, Such transfers
are normally considered on the basis of exchange of equal yalue land to bel provided by the
indenting Authority. However, where the Indenting Authorify is neither a land ‘owning authority
nor does it have an arrangement with the State/ UT governments for providing tdnd for the project
and is therefore unable.to provide equal value land, transfer is considered-on payment of current
market value. Land is also given on lease/license with premium and rent being fixed on the basis

of nature of the project.

2. Some Central Government departments and State Governments have raised the issue of.
delays in transfer of Defence land/grant of working permission which is adversely affecting their
projects. In this connection it has been noted that many of the projects for which Defence land was
being sought had been undertaken without prior consultation’ with the Ministry of Defence.
Subsequently, Local Military authorities report’security or functional constraints in providing land

which takes time to. rescive. In addition, it has been noted that requests for Defence land is

im


invariably made to the Local Military Authorities (DE Officials without any intimation to MoD
As such the Ministry becomes aware of such requests only after.considerable delay has occurred

in processing the cases at the local level

3. The procedure for processing requests for providing defence land for Public utilities and
Public infrastructure has therefore been reviewed, All Central Government Departments/State
Governments and Organisations under their control as also local bodies will now be required to
follow the following procedure for indenting for defence’ land required for projects related to
creation/up-gradation of public infrastructure/utilities such as roads, flyovers and road over
bridges; airports, railway lines and metro rail projects; petroleum, gas, water, telécommunications

infrastructure except Mobile Towers, electricity and sewerage pipe-lines, etc.

(a) All Indenting Authorities (IAs) seeking transfer of Defence land for public
infrastructure/utilities will carry out prior consultation: with the Ministry of Defence
through their administrative ministries/ respective State Governments. 116 IAs will submit
proposals containing information as mentioned in the format annexed to the Ministry of
Detence at the preliminary/planning Stage for ‘in principle’ approval: with a copy to
concerned Land Managing Authority (viz Army, Navy, Air Force, DGDE etc). Once
approved ‘in principle’ a detailed proposal will have to be sent again for final approval for

working permission or transfer of land, as the case may be.

(b) All proposals for transfer of defence land for public infrastructure/utilities whether
at the in-principie approval stage or at the final approval stage, will be sent by the
indenting Centrai Ministry /Department / State Government to the ‘concerned Joint
Secretary in the Ministry of Defence i.e. the Joint Secretary dealing with the land
managing agency concerned. When the project is to be executed by a PSU, Autonomous
Body of the Central Government or State Government, local bodies and PPP
concessionaire, the proposal will be routed through the concemed administrative Central

Ministry/Department or the State Government.

(c) At the ‘in principle’ approval stage, Ministry of Defence will examine in
consultation with the user Service/Department/Organisation and DG DE, if the proposed
transfer of land will have any adverse security implication and if the land is required for
aay sensitive purpose or essential fimetion or it can besspared. In case, the.transfer of

defence land in question has adverse security implications or the
: 2

nd is being



4,

used/planned to be used for a sensitive Purpose or an essential function and the
installations located thereon cannot be shifted for security or functional reasons, the
Indenting Authority will be advised to change the location/alignment of the public

infrastructure/utility for which the land is required. Likewise, the IA will also explore

viable alternatives which would o wiate the need for defence land. The IA; will also specify
if it or the concerned Governnient is willing/able to fully or partly provide'equal value land
in exchange and if so the possible locations, If after this exercise it is found that land has to
be provided, ‘in principle approval will be given by this Ministry so that the Indenting
Authority can finalise the project proposal and send a formal request for working

permission or transfer of land, as the case may be.

(d) MOD shall accord or deny ‘in principle’ approval: within 03 months of receipt of
the preliminary proposal from the Indenting Authority, after the case has been presented by
both the Indenting Authority and the user Service/Department/Organization of MOD under
whose occupation/management the land is placed. ‘In principle’ approval; shall specify the
mode of transfer of defence land. i

(e) After issue of ‘in principle’. approval,: the indenting agency would send a firm
proposal for working permission or transfer of land; as the case may be, within 6 months of
the grant of ‘in-principle approval to the indenting Central Ministry /Department / State
Government to the concerned Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Defeitce i.e. the Joint
Secretary dealing with the land managing agency concerned with a copy to concemied
Land Managing Authority (viz Army, Navy; Air Force, DGDE etc) for further Processing

the case failing which the approval would be deemed to have been cancelled. MOD shall

accord working permission/final approval expeditiously. but not later than. 08 months of |

receipt of the formal proposal from the Indenting- Authority, after issue! of ‘in principle’

approval.

All proposals received prior to the issue of this letter or are in process with MoD or LMA.

will be processed expeditiously preferably within a period of 8 months in accordance with the

existing policy on transfer of defence land if there are no security and functional constraints,

without requirement of “in principle* approvalt

i.

Attention is also iivited to the following with respect to the general policy with rega‘d to

transfer of Defence land

we



i) Defence land is generally not declared surplus and is normally transferred only for public
infrastructure/utility projects on the basis of exchange of equal value land and the merits of each
case. However, in the case of linear projects where the Indenting Authority is neither a land
owning authority nor does it have an arrangement with the State/ UT governments for providing
land for the project and is therefore unable to provide equal value land transfer is considered on

payment of current market value of the land and the assets existing thereon.

ii) Land may be transferred for Public infrastructure/utility projects by the Ministry after
satisfying itself that it can be alienated without compromising the essential functions of the user
service or by making suitable alternative provisions to enable the user agency to!carry on with its

essential functions smoothly. i

: मं |
iii) Land will ibe considered for transfer only for projects being implemented by Central
Government Departments, State Governments and Organisations under their control as also by
‘Local bodies. In the case of PPP projects transfer of Defence land will be considered only where

the ownership of the larid will remain with the Government.

iv) The mode aind terms of transfer of land for such projects would depend, essentially, upon
the nature of the project, purpose being served, rights sought in the land proposed for transfer,

time frame of the requirement i.e. permanent, long term or short term.

v) For all cases in which defence land is proposed to be transferred or ‘alienated formal

approval of the Cabinei will be sought.

‘Yours faithfully, |]

|. Nags ;
. (Vijay Agrawal):
: Director

T.No. 011-23013173



Forttat of Application fr transfer of land of Application for al of land

1. | Name of the Organization and address

|. Status oFosaS—
{] 2. » Status of organization

(a) Central Government

: (व) State Government

1(8) Private institution / body
| (h) Any other to be indicated’

= Extent of land required for transfer
1(8) Area in acre / hectare

(0) Survey number

(०) Name of village / taluka / district

(४) Sketch /‘site Plan with boundaries

[ ‘Purpose for which the land is required

National / Regional perspective,

land is required,

= for completion of the. pub]

i
authority.

as| State Government / private parties,

by the Indenting Authority or;

Undertaking !

authority ¢

10 provide equal value land,

+ ie i 4
॥ i ॥
i 1
i i
1 —! i
i | HH
| |
! हे
|
(9) Central Government Undertaking / Enterprise | io:
if
i (०) Autonomous body of Central Government i : | il
! i
i I. pu
i (e) State Government Undertaking / Enterprise | : pow
i : है i ia bot
10) Autonomous body of State Goveminent | i fod
{ i i j
H Hl I Poy
if Poy
: hoi
2 tej
1: pot
i pr i
{ : I
i | |
! it
i 1
ae | 1 i ot
Hl 4 j ft
ik if
i | H |
! Df
and its importance from i i !
Hy 4
Details of the public infaskucamongne— public infrastructure/atility project for Which [ : : fo:
ud 1 लत 1
ic infrastructure/atility : | : pot
{ i
: sas ५. पु ९ 1
कांणुंग्न and. the indicative date for transfer of land to indenting H |
i it
Li it
7. | Efforts mad made to obtain the land from alternative sources such [; H | po
i thf ih
| il
a "
+ > ~ पा | पर |
एवथाबताए to provide equal value land suitable to Services | ! i ‘|
yt i i i
i i
| i
g that Indenting Authavity is neititor a land owning i |! |
5 Ve ‘
does it have an Alraiigement with the Seatey UT | | |
हे |
governments fur providing land for the project and is ther j Fr 1 i
5 . i 1
! 1 ||
«५ H i 4
~— a r
5 1 ry
5 i i
~ : 5 +t |
: न ह 1
|
; |
! a


= ——|— Undertaking to merket value fixed by Ministry

and right of Moi) to reciairn / resume ownership of the land on

payment of suitable compensation,

Recommendatiohs of the competent authority of Ministry Se conipetent authority of Ministry / |

Department of Gentral / State Government



efence Estaits
Ordaznce factory Board
Delhi पु

DRDO “T wD

५ Kolicata*

}
i
i
!

Sfer वा enseland for Public wiites and] Defence land for-p -UDlic infrastric

Ublic utilities and Pabiic ing

tictixely
ys
doen

bas béen recetyin
ments, - Ste

५ Tor De:
and Organisations cu;

S1Vé policy pr
equésts thére have
veral Mi
slioned the policy of

cribing terms” ay
been delays

efore, qui

Ministry for providing Defence lind
md procedure foy Providing defenci
fore becn reviewed in Consuliatio;
@ review Procedure for Transfe; f Defence land

Situctuté projects was finalised and was circul:
fais Ministry's later ७: 1706; dated 41.03.2015, to ali J

MMinistries/Departments end all Chie# Secretaties of the States & UTS. ६ cog’

0 besa circulated to’ vetvices and other Defence Organizations vide this Mii;
bfeven munber dated 16.03 2015 >

inorder to complete the Process of foim:

a
ransfer of Define:

and co;



Phe

A,

»

11015/2/2012/0 1 bin
Organisatio;

Permanent 1 J
ould be done.onthe basis of the following principles:

o:

ents and

P. prey

if, however, IA j
है th State /UT Govenime, is for
project wansfer is considered on Payment of current market ६108
Lend is allso Siven on lease/licenge yy: Breminm and redt being
nature, : TOject. हु हु
The moédd and tems of a:
ipon thealsture oF the

for transfel ef

‘OFF

ing served, xi

bh réquesty for iransfei/ali, ation
astuctue projects will be as pecified vid
ds) dated 11.3.2015, “communicated to Service Hars‘and other
vide ID Note ofeven anmber dated 16.3.2015. i

Public Uitilities and Pizbiic

Terms nd ‘Conditions for different modes of Transke er of De:

is required to be trai

hould be doné on the basis

the Ste UT governme:



Governm.

ie

nto
@25% gf value based on (जा,
1s

this is not
the past tif
These =
to the Pub
terms will
the

'e Tequired to
iM Payinent 0:
by adhering to the follows

brojécts being itp
a 173/00,
it Hn
puted jon ‘the. basis of STR, in gase of Defence

Rise be app
foD as ibjth

ch © as y
2, @ lonetine premium will be paid by the Indentin;
calculated a i flows:

Of these 3

ithout the approval

When the land is neither required perm
be tansferre ४ it may be transferred on lease boll
an arizual rent and one me premiim. “Rent हि.
“General ptinciples. पु
ented by the Central or State Go
ies owned ‘oy ly ‘Controlled “by 1६ aud by Joa: aE
HDs, rent की] be caloulated at al tetes‘ie, 9 Ytofly
TR, i ind situated within
Cantonment, 7: at will bgt
/guidelinas tates notified f- ry the Siate Gov

* jean
altul; ¥ taking average aids

cf

fan

For Defence lend [6०866 Ouiside the ¢,

Ole, value of Jan

8 will only be

at le if such projec
of to Defence gailsations Hee gf cost or at conces; (021:
lisd wher face tights-on the land bein,
Case of Unde; ‘ound sections of Metro vroject:

ed by joint’venty
cis being’ execute, in th
joint vent: 88: or priva
थी will be double the £

8, between governm:
PPP mode

re

pi

scr

aaa

more than. 05
30 yo:



Without i:
lenninated
infra

ded afd
| Purposes other then z
leased

em and by Jocal bodies

Ce,



=)

sy

Sat 20806 shalj

"ch the license
tation

Board of Orgeerg oe
£ the Government
“| mal broposal 0

Oy th

© Establig|

Project, pup,

deposited
Execute,

will be

‘hosé m

‘nage,
ewel will be de:
Lic purpose
thment and Og:

it the
stb-parag @

cided on a

Being Seryed,

ntonment. René

tor the public Bi

time of xtensioi!

) and (b) above shi
rd, $i,

with

anagéement



HUE author; j
३/ ४० ०४ equal ‘value basis,
State Revenue auth

“ ;
Hes shall certify thar lands offered ig
im “Acumi . हा

ler ¥
Sales ७०. shall be subniitied t
dations of the Board of Of

bru
antmént HQ iis

to
Be
ae.

i]

8

8

8

8

है i है
Service or command will! als
ma ‘ireétorate General of Deft

erits i tne approprisie thouity of -D;
E e HQ@Depariment Will forward the
- Minisiry after cn nini i
pops. Ths Serv:



SD om ty

ae

Conditions of
the atove the

Hi
bligations 9

sa all concenisd i,
MoUs may [86 dr

nority will 86 aliowed to
thé tiinelines ६३४

ch défence jand is pi

‘Oposed to be tran
ill be sought हु

@&0)



Aaneseme :

No. 11075/2/2012/0 (Lands) (Pi)
Government of India
Ministry of Defence
New Delhi
Dated 21st October, 2020

=
°

The Chief of “Army Staff

The Chief of ,sir Staff

The Chief of Naval Staff

The Director General Defence Estates

The Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata
DG QA, New Delhi

DRDO New Delhi

MOaR wr a

Subject: Transfer of Defence lend for से Jeng for Public. utilities and Public infrastructure

projects,
Sir/Madam,

| am directed to refer to the Ministry of Defence policy letter No.
11015/2/2012/D (Lands) dated’ 27% February, 2016 and to Say that the following
emencdment is hereby carried out in Para 3 (९) and Para 5A(a) of the said policy:-

Para 3(e)

For: Transfer of Defence land is normally on the basis of exchange of equal value t
land to be provided by indenting authority. If, however, IA is neither 8 iand है
owning agency or does not have an arrangement with State /UT Governments

for providing land for the project, transfer is considered on payment of current
market value of land.

Read? Transfer of Defence land is normally on the basis of exchange of Equal Value
Land to be provided by the indenting Authority or creation of Equal Value
Infrastructure (EVi) for the land owning units of Defence by the indenting
Authority. If, however, IA is neither a land owning authority or does not have
an arrangement with state Government for providing land for the project,
transfer is considered on payment of current market value of land or creation

of EVI against the current market value of the land for the land owning units
of the Defence



Para SA (a)

For:

Permanent Transfer of land should be done on the basis of exchange of equal
value land to be provided by the Indenting Authority, However, for linear
projects where the Indenting Authority is neither a land owning authority nor
does it have an arrangement with State/ UT government for providing land
for the project and is therefore unable to provide equal value land partly or
fully in exchange, transfer may be considered on (balance/full) payment of
current market value. Market value of the land will be fixed by the DGDE in
all the cases based on STR or circle/ guideline rates of the State
Government Inter-Departmental rates of land transfer will be used orily
where a Project authority has been specially allowed by the Cabinet to obtain
land on this basis from other Government entities.

Permanent Transfer of land should be done on the basis of exchange of
Equal Value Land to be Provided by the Indenting Authority or creation of
Equal Value Infrastructure (EVI) for the land owning units of Defence by the
Indenting Authority. However, for linear projects where the Indeniing
Authority is neither a land owning authoriiy nor does it have an arrangement
with State/UT Govel nt for providing lard paitly or fully in exchange,
transfer may be considered on (balance/full) payment of curre: ket
value of the land or creation of EVI by indenting Agency against the current
market value of the land for the land owning units of the Defence. Market
value of the land will be fixed by the DGDE in all the cases based on the
STR or Circle/guideline rates of the State Government. The value of the land
so calculated as on date of issue of working permission / handing over of
land will be treated as equivalent value for arriving at Equal Value
Infrastructure (EVI). The cost of the construction of ithe EVI would be
benchmarked to the rates given as per prevailing SSR or benchmarks rates
of the Government executing agencies, whichever is lower. If the cost of the
proposed EVI is less than the curren! market value of the land to be
transferred, the balance amount is to be paid by the IA as cash
compensation. IA will be responsible for the construction/execution of the
work with respect to creation of EVI finalized, Any cost or time over run will
be borne by the IA. Interdepartmental rates-of the land transfer will be used
only where a Project authorily has been specifically allowed by the Cabinet
to obtain land on this basis from other Government entities.



2 The detailed guidelines for the cases of EVI ३18 as under

(a) Process for air recess for assessing the market vaiue of the land:-

Normally Defence Land is divided into two paris:-

i
i) Defence Land Inside notified Cantonment and;
ii) Defence Land Outside notified Cantonment

i) Defence Land Inside notified Cantonment: Land value of defence land Inside
Cantonment is fixed by committee comprising representative of LMA/Stn. Commander,
revenue authority, DEO and rep of adjoining Municipality/ Corporation. The committee
determines the market value of land taking into consideration sales statistics of lands/
buildings, valuation assessed by consultancy experts and any other relevant information
for arriving at a realistic value. The committees meet every year and finalize its
recommendation within two months and send it to the DEO for taking the valuation into
account for preparation of STR. ॥ is clarified that, no further consultation with the
collector is necessary where the values are assessed by the committees.

Further, for cstermining the value of land in Cantonment may be divided into
zones @.g. bungalow, area, civil, shopping and lesser developed areas. Where in a
Cantonment there are! similar private lands in the neighborhood, valuation of Defence
lands can be based of the Sale price of the private lands. In other Cantonments, the
land in various zones should be identified with similar lands in the neighboring Municipal
Area and the sales of the land that have taken place in a particular tegion in the
Municipal Area should determine the value of corresponding land in the Cantonment.
The value of land is 40 times of the STR.

ii) Defence Land Outside notifiect Cantonment:- Land value of defence land outside
cantonment is fixed by collector based on the minimum land value is fixed by the
collector as Mulya Nirdharan Suchi (MNS)/ guideline values/ Circle rates which are fixed
based on the following parameters:-

a) The minimum land value, if any, specified in the Indian stamp act, 1899 for the
registration of sale deeds or agreement ta sell, as the case may be, in the area, where
the land is situated; or

b) The average sale price for similar type of land situated in. the nearest village or
nearest vicinity area.



{b) Calculation of of Equat Value of Land:

Equal value of land is arrived by valuation of land equal to the amount of land which is
proposed 10 be exchange / transfer.

Examp

(i) Suppose a piece of land admeasuring 2000 sqmt. have circie rate of Rs.
20,000/- per Sqmt. then, the value of land is 2,000 x 20,000 = 4,00,00,000/-

(ii) Another piece of land having extent of 1000 sqmt. with market value of Rs,
40,000/- per sqmt. then, the value of land is 4,000 x 40,000 = 4,00,00,000/-.

Therefore, since.the valuation of both the pieces of land ie. (i) & (ii) is Rs
4,00,00,000/-, hence both are of equal value land,

{c) Manner of calculation of the vatue of the land for anner oF calculation of the vaiue of the land for arriving at the value of EVI:

The cost of the defence land will be worked out as per the prevailing STR by
NGDE. The overall area to be handed over to indenting Authority(IA) will be worked oui
by a joint Board of Officers (BOO) as per the practice currently in vogue and muttiplying
this figure with the current land rate (based on prevailing रे ) will give the total value
of land to be transferred . This value of ihe land-will be taken as on date of issue of
\orking permission/ date of hand over of land. The value of the land so calculated will
be treated as equivalent value for arriving at Equivalent Value Infrastructure (EVI). The
14 will be responsible for construction /execution of work for creation of EVI finalized as
per para (8) below. The cost of construction of EVI would be benchmarked to the rates
given as per prevailing SSR or benchmarked rates of the Government executing
agencies, whichever is lower. If the cost of the proposed EVI is less than the current
value of the land to be transferred, the balance amount is to be paid by the IA as cash
compensation. If the cost of ihe proposed EVI in eny case is greater than the
current value of the lend to be transferred, budget of concerned service would be
used,

Value of the land being offered will be calculated as explained. in para-(b) above. IA will
be responsible for construction /execution of work with respect to creation of EVI
finalized. Any cost or time overrun will be taken care by the IA.

EVI would be based on market value of land on date of working permission /
handing over of land and estimated cost on the said date as per prevailing SSRs.



(9) EVI that can by EVI that can be considered under the policy under the palicy —

ie Consiruction of married accommodation or dwelling units for troops , JCOs
i Other Than Married (OTM) accommodation

iii- Barricade:

iv- Checkpo:
v- Service roads

vi- Sheds

vii Barracks forthe troops

vili- Drainage system, STPs

ix- Lighting arrangement

x Boundary Walls and security infrastructures
xi Any other infrastructure with approval of DoD.

Benchmerk for seeking Infrastructure under EVI mode

a. The items should be authorized /scale as per various authority(s) documents like as
per SADS 2009, Scale of Accommodation (SoA), Operational Works and married
accommodaiion Project scales.

aied as Equal Value Infrastructure
NBC) norms / EinC Branch speci

procedure specifications.

9. Specifications of thei

(EVI) will be as
Ci ns /CPWD

E
atio

९6. The proposal will be sanctioned by MoD on the recommendation of Service
Headquarters if the purpose falls in for the transfer of At/analogous to At land
under the management of Service ‘Defence Establishments .For 83 and 84 land
under the management of DEO or cantonment Board in a cantonment , the EVI will
be sanctioned by MoD on the recommendation of the DGDE छः development of
public roads and streets , drainage , STPs, public utility civic amenities and
remunerative projects of Cantonments which wil] benefit both military and civil
Population. As the policy pertains to exchange of land for in ucture, CFA
will be Hon'ble RM in all such cases.

3. DGDE will be responsible for keeping a sysiem for monitoring and accounting
of the proceeds from the transfer of land

4, The other conteni of the above said MoD policy letier dated 02.02.2016 will
remain same.



5

This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence (Fin) vide their U.O.
100 dated 21.10.2020

Copy to:
1. The CGDA, Delhi Canti
2. Minisiry of Defence (Finance DivisionW-i), New Delhi
3. The DGA (D8), L-II Block, Brassey Avenue, New Delhi
4. QMG Branch/ Pig (Lands)
5. D (Air-ll)
6. D (Navy-ill)
7. D(Q&C)
8. D(R&D)
9. D(QA) है हु
10. 0 (65-॥॥) ~ है
11, DMA, HQ IDS
12, DG BRO
13. Dir (Infra), Coasi Guard

Yours falihyully,

Ar

(Pankaj Srivastava)
Director (Lands-l)
Tel: 23013173



Framenure “4D

No, 11015/2/2012/D(Lands)
Government of India
Ministry of Defence
New Delhi
Dated 083 March, 2022
To,
. The Chief of Army Staff
. The Chief of Air Staff
The Chief of Naval Staff
. The Director General Defence Estates
DG QA, New Delhi
DRDO, New Delhi

Pare

Subject: Procedure for transfer of defence land for public utilities and public
infrastructure projects - reg. है

जा / Madam,

| am directed to refer to the Ministry of Defence policy ’ letters No,
11015/2/2012/D(Lands) dated 11.03.2015 and 02.02.2016 and to say that the procedure
indicated in the ibid letters for transfer of defence land for public utilities and public
infrastructure projects is amended to the extent given below :-

(i) Application for requesting transfer / grant of working permission on defence land
shall be submitted by Indenting Authority (IA) through the online portal of MoD
(http://survey.ncog.gov.in/NOC_Land). The applications shall be forwarded to
Stakeholders online and the comments shall also be shared by stakeholders on
NoC portal.

(il) In Principle Approval (IPA) will be required by IAs except Central Govt/State
Govt departments and CPSUs/Autonomous bodies/Statutory Bodies. The IPA
will be conveyed by the Ministry within a period of 30 days from date of receipt
of applications. है

(iii) Service HQrs and 0505 shall furnish their comments to MoD along with
relevant details within 15 days from the date of forwarding such applications on
the online portal. :

(iv) Ministry shall convey its decision regarding grant of working permission or
otherwise within 45 days of the receipt of proposal on the online portal.

(v) The Board Proceedings may be finalized and land handed / taken over for the
purpose of commencement of work within 30 days from the date of according
sanction for working permission,


(vi)

In case an IA desires to give away portion of defence land in barter to other
agencies (except Central Govt bodies) including private individuals to align their
project to a contiguous piece of-land or for any other reason for the benefit of
the project, prior approval of Cabinet shall be taken before grant of working
permission.

का हि OY CL . पु
(vil) In case an IA fails to afer. clarifications to the observations raised by the

2

Ministry within a period of 15 days, the proposal shall be deemed as closed on
the online portal.

The other content of the above mentioned MoD letters No

41015/2/2012/D(Lands) dated 11.03.2015 and 02.02.2016 wil! remain unchanged.

3.

This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence (Finance) vice their

U.O No 15/Fin(W-1)/22 dated 03.03.2022.

Yours faithfully,

KG.

Diréctor (Lands)
Ministry of Defence

Copy to:

1. All Secreiaries of the Ministries / Department of Govt of India.
2. All Chief Secretaries of the States & UTs

3. The CGDA, Delhi Cantt.

4, Ministry of Defence (Finance Division / W-l), New Delhi
5. The DGA (DS), ६-॥ Block, Brassey Avenue, New Delhi
6. QMG Branch / Pig (Lands)

7. D(Air-ll)

8. D (Navy-Ill)

9.  D(Q&C)

10. D(R&D)

41. D(QA)

12... D(GS-III)

13. DMA, HQ IDS

14 DG,

BRO

15. Dir (Infra, Coast Guard)


Government India Amnanu eat

“To im

Ministry of Defence
New Delhi — 110001
Dated 19" December 2016

1. The Chief of the-Ammy Staff,
New Delhi

2. The Director General,
Defence Estates,
Delhi Cantt.

Subject :Regularization : Ex-post-facto sanction for construction of
AWWA Girls Hostel at Bungalow No. 13, GLR Sy. No. 189 at
Kirkee Cantonment, Pune and reclassification of ‘the land
there of.
Sir, पु
|.am directed to convey the ex-post-facto, sanction. of the:Presidéht-of India in
respect of Bungalow.-No, 13 at Survey. No.189 admeasuring 5.03 acres, Kirkee
Cantonment to the following

(i), Resumption’ of the old grant properly from recorded HOR i.e. trustees of
Lady Willington Soldier's: clubs, and: handing. over notional. possession...
thereof to HQ: PSA /90 HQ Kirkée w.e.f. 19.08.1996

(ii) Regularization of: construction of Girls Hostel at Bungalow ‘No; 13,
comprising GLR “Survey. No. 189 of Kirkee.Cantonment and vesting the
entire structures with Government through Local Military Authorities, it being
a welfare activity for the families / children of troops.

(iii) Reclassification of B-3 land to A-1, comprising GLR Sy. No. 189 of Kirkee
Cantonment-under Rule 7 of the CLA Rules, 1937.

_{iv) Change of management from DEO, Pune to QMG

1
i
1
i
|
i

\PONOaROENDs

॥

(५) Consequential amendment to the GLR / GLR Plan and Raksha Bhoomi
Mutation ID by DEO, Pune.

2. This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence (Finance) vide their U.O.
No.8 15/FinAW-1/16 dated 16.12.2016
Yours faithfully,

oo See)

Dy. Director (Lands)

Copy to:

Ministry of Defence (Fin/W-1) Kashmir House, New Delhi

DGA(DS), 1-॥ Block; Brassey Avenue, New Delhi - 11

DGA(DS), Southern Command, Pune

PCDA , Southern Command, Pune

CGDA Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.

LW (South), QMG Branch, AHQ a
Principal Director, DE, Southern Command, Pune

DEO, Pune

CEO, Pune. १



_ No. 1301 9/03/2017 /D(Le ‘ [ore
(75751/1344/Pune/Pal, Anneseane:+6
.Government of India

Ministry of Defence

ds)

Sena-Bhawan, New Deihi
Dated 05" july-2017

. To

1. The Chief of the Army Staff
New Delhi

Se T irector General
efence Estates,
Delhi Cant.

Subject : Annulment of lease and reclassification of the laid from B-3
to 0-1 in rlo 8. No, 34, Sy. No, 329, Kahun Road, Pune
Cantt.

Sir,
| am directed to convey the sanction of the-Competent Authority to take

following measures in respect of Bungalow No. 34 (Wellingdon Soldiers Club)
Kahun Road, Pune at Sy. No. 329, land admeasuring 3.06 acres classified as B-
3 in Pune Cantonment:

(i) Lease Deed dated 21.06.1923 in r/o B. No. 34 (Wellingdon Soldiers Cluls),
Kahun Road, Pune comprising GLR. Sy. No. 329 of Pune cantonment in
Schedule Vill of the CLA Rules, 1925 held in perpetuity by Wellingdon
Soldiers Club in supersession of lease in Form ‘A’ of the Cantonment

ode, 1912 is hereby deterinined. The possession of the said premises be

restored by DEO, Pune

(ii) Further, 8. No. 34 (Wellington Soldiers Club), Kahun Road, Pune
comprising GLR Sy. No, 329 of Pune Cantonment is hereby reclassified
under Rule 7 of the CLA Rules, 1937 from Class B-3 to Class A-1 and is
placed unde? the management of QMG for such defence purposes as are
duly sanctioned by-the competent authority in the Ministry of Defence as
per extant instructions.

(iii) Consequential amendment to the GLR / GLR Plan and Raksha Bhoomi by
DEO, Pune.

2 Since the site has been-put to use as Shopping Centre in the past, QMG
AHQ shall obtain Govt. sanction within 6 months for regularization of Shopping
Centre under the provisions of Defence Shopping Complex (Maintenance and
Administration) Rules, 2006 and due rent with arrears if any, shall be deposited -
into the Consolidated Fund of India through DEO, Pune>->———__————- 5

tof2

as



145 84} 0} paxpaid S| १९१० COT Yay
404 sdous jeruawiBay se SILW/4UER Pll
sasodind 10] pasn Bulag aie ५७०६४००
/sdous ए[९1३० anamoy ‘asodind
|BIDJBWWOD 201 pasn se SBLIB|ING CN

{asodind [2:92२४०५४००
403 pasn Suiag 5 9007- 5०7४
py pue 9०:४४) ०2७१
dscys 3999:90]

uoes2siui

BI-Lt0z| ८-02! _9T-StOz

siead
jefueuy ay? Suiinp 55000 [2०४७३ 9५1 SULNp 58

290९ Duel JO ३५ [शु०49000002 ९४००१ | 708 pul 10 Bsn |९!०४३७४७४०० WoL

3#[329. ७७७३० 10 JUNOWY

292 anuanas 0 JUROWY

|

L

y¥/xUeg) asOdinG [श०2/३५७५४००'
BSN SBUIPIING 10 “ON 1220

©

40!

asodind
[श्‌34३8५७७५४०० 20] 2991 3091
79 DS Ul} 70४1 3299190 1९३०.

गफाए veipul - sesodund jeissauwod 0} pasn 52010008 pue 9081 a2uasag ४० ५४४२७



Lt

(zrprect [६6960 77#६६६8७६ चण्ट8297६ [ट्ट8६5८25
arse] at ted) St-STOz! 8T-Lt0z

13D गण 22079 2 asodind| [079080003

s8uipying pue puej Jo asn | 30०] pasn
७४०3) 9929]00 1U3 19 809१
(५939९

ur} PLET

\ 2ouajad

| [९३०
ng pue 90९७1 ३3००)१0 30 5४४०6

5983 Jy - Sesodind [९0०2०५४५४०० 10;



egzscz__[Zezosz 6t6802 [88/5८2 Tv 0
008577002. 6६६67 िशर8 jo esr कर ठ PSEEELT [0%ऋ/8 9 3
4 520980६ [00 70007 98/55८६ [520980६ iy
OteTzooT Grtesect lozetzovt POSEGEZT |OTLESsoT — 97 |reestozoo
ST-STOZ 8८02  LT-3t0z ar-st02|

Peuscdap ua १० junowy

s8uipying pue एएश 10 asn jessawus0ED i

suead jeueuy ayy Sun

WOZ§ 28399109 ual Jo unOWY

[९०2१0 ०५००

35001

191939-0०७09 401

2987 80:94 (uy 55 ul}
70९१ 5909:०0 [९०१

AABN ०९०0] - Sasa:

ind |४४9५४५७१०७ 20] pasn sBu IING 7०९ Pury ad!

४9190 50 syleiag



Prmeune—$

No. 334774/DoLA/AMRD/2019
Government of India
Ministry of Law & Justice
Department of Legal Affairs

fee

Shastri Bhawan,

Rajendra-Prasad Road, New Dethi-110001.
Dated the 31° Mareh, 2020

OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Subject: Settlement of disputes other than taxation between
Government Ministries / Departments inte se and between
Government Ministries / Departments and ciher Ministries /
Departments / Organisation(s) — Administrative Mechanisin
for Resolution of Disputes (AMRD).

Instructions have been issued to Ministries / Departments of the
Governments of India, in the past to avoid inter-departmental litigations in any
Court of law, including by all CPSEs / Boards / Authorities, ete., under their
Administrative control and to resolve the same amicably or through
Arbitration.

2. In order to provide for an institutionalized mechanism for resolution of
such disputes, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs has vide DO letter No.
332619/338367/LS/2019 dt. 28% February, 2020 (copy enclosed) advised all
Secretaries to the Government of India that the existing Administrative
Mechanism for Resolution of Commercial Disputes(AMRCD), currently
applicable to commercial disputes between CPSEs inter se and also between
CPSEs and Government Departments / Organisations, shall stand extended for
resolution of disputes other than taxation, between Ministries / Departments
inter se and between Ministries / Departments and other Government
Ministries / Departments / Subordinate / Attached offices / Autonomous and
Statutory Bodies under their administrative supervision/control. Details of the
new mechanism, namely, Administrative Mechanism tor Resolution of
Disputes (AMRD), are hereby outlined for guidance.

3. Applicability

AMRD shall apply to any/all dispute(s), other than those related to
taxation, between Central Government Ministries / Departments inter se and
between Central Government Ministries / Departments and other Ministries /

Page 1 ०4


Departments / Organisation(s) / Subordinate / Attached Offices / Autonomous
and Statutory Bodies, etc., under their administrative supervision / control

4. Structure

(i) Disputes, other than taxation, shall be referred at the First level (tier), to
a Committee comprising of Secretaries of the Administrative Ministries /
Departments to which the disputing Parties belong and Secretary, D/o Legal
Affairs;

(ii) The Joint Secretaries (JSs) / Financial Advisors (FAs) (for commercial
disputes) of the two concerned Administrative Ministries / Departments may
represent the issues, related to the dispute in question, before the Committee.

(in) In case the two disputing parties belong to the same Ministry /
Departments the above Committee may comprise of the Secretary of the
administrative Ministry / Departmen: concerned and Secretary, D/o Legal
Alfairs. Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises may be invited in case
the dispute pertains to a CPSE.

(iv) The resolution of such disputes shall be by unanimous decision of the
Committee.

(vy) In case the dispute remains unresolved after consideration by the
Committee, it will be referred at the Second levei (tier), to the Cabinet
Secretary, whose decision will be final and binding on all concerned.

5 Procedure ‘

G) At the First level (tier), the claiming party (Claimant) may be
represented, defore the Committee, by the JS / FA of the administrative
Ministry / Department. The Secretary of administrative Ministry / Departinent
of claiming party will inform in writing the details of the dispute, to the
Secretary of administrative Ministry / Department of responding party
(Respondent) and Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs and request for convening a
meeting. Thereafter meetings may be held to examine the facts and resolve the
€ on merit. The JSs / FAs of the concerned administrative Ministries /
ule in question, before

isp

artments will represent the issues, related fo the disy

above Committee. After the Committee arrives at » decision

it shaii be

ion will be

signed by the. members of the Committee. A copy of the d
y / Departinent of

communicated by the Secretary of the administrative Mini
claiming party to members of the Commutice and to each party 10 the

1९ tor 1;

plementation

Page 2ala


Hl) PATRI dks

7 छाप

HIMISHPaAUVe | SEpErV ist

i

Gi) “the Joint Seeretaries (JS

ned Administrative %

re issues, related io ihe dispute iit पे

IPs

पाई फोफ lang to

Comey comprise of

गई

concerned बात

fivy The 4

Commies,

nails unresalved after

(v) in case the dispute rer

Coraritt ed at the Secoad level (ti

ion vill ve Haul +

ding on asl cone

S 8 Procedure

m

fevel (Her), fhe claimitig party

८ tae Comrnaiites, by the

(iy AR the Fi

of the administrative

repeesenied, oel
riment, The Secretary of administrative Ministry / Department

Ministry / De:

छा clan
Sec
(Resvondent) and Secreta
meeting. Thereafter meetings may he held to exar
dispute on merit. The JSs / FAs of the concerned administrative Ministiies ;
cots will represent the waves, related to the dispute in question, before

rly will inform in writing the details of the dispute, to the
try + Department of respondi party
, Dio Legal Affairs and request for convening a
ine the facts and resolve the

retary of adrair

Depart

above Conmnittee. After the Committee artives al a decision, it shail be
ed by the members of the Commitice. A copy of the decision will be
epartrnent of

communicated by the Secretary of the administrative Ministry /
the claiming party to members of the Committee and to each party to the

dispute for implementation.
Page 2 of a


(ii) The Committee of Secretaries at the First level (tier) shall finalise its
decision within 3 months after having received the reference/notice in writing

regarding the dispute from the concerned aggrieved party.
6... Appexl

Any party aggrieved with the decision of the Committee at the First level
(tier) may prefer an appeal before the Cabinet Secretary at the Second level
(tier) within 15 days from the date of receipt of decision of the Committee at
the First level, whose decision will be final and binding on all concerned.

7. All administrative Ministries / Departments are requested to bring these
guidelines to the notice of all Authorities / Boards / Subordinate / Attached
Offices / Avitonomous and Statutory Bodies, etc., under their administrative
supervision/control for strict compliance.

8. This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.

doer

N

(DR. Rajiv Mani)

Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
Tel. 23384836

Encl. : Copy of the DO letter No. 332619/338367/LS/2019 dated
28/02/2020 issued by Sh. Anoop Kumar Mendciratta, Secretary,
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice. .

To,

Secretary of all Ministries / Departments of the Government of India.

Copy forwarded for kind information to forwarded for kind information to:

G) The Prime Minister’s Office, South Block, New Delhi.
(1) The Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi.
(iii) PS to the Hon’ble Minister of Law & Justice, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
(iv) Secretary D/o Legal Affairs, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
(v) Addl. Secretary(Judicial), D/o Legal Affairs, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
हु (DR. Rajiv Mani)
है Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser
Tel. 23384836

Page 3 of a


fide

TH मील
HINGE रार्कार
SECRETARY,
AL AFFAIRS,

HUSTIOE

बजए Senin Yaa

anoop “umar Mendiraita

No, 3326 19/33836

Dated 28" February 2020

De

cretary

॥ a mesting of Committee of Secratari (CoS) chaired by Cabinet Secretary
on 23.01.2020, the 'ssues relating to instruction to all Governinant
Minsiies/Departments lor the effective: implementation of the existing “Administrative
Mechanism for Resolution of CPSEs Disputes (AMRCD) and extension of ls.
applicability to all the Goverament Departments/Ministies and CPSEs for resotution of
disputes, other than taxation disputes were discussed The CoS mter-atiy
recommended that the existin AMRCD mechanism be made Applicable to disputes
other than those related to taxation, and extenciad to all Ministries/Depanments

2 ॥ hes been the constant 6fforts of this Depariment to reduce Government
litigation in courts so that valuable court tine is spent in resolving other pending cases
it has also been endeavour of th ent 10 see that disputes between vanous
Aulhorities under the adminisiratve contrat of
13 do not go to the Court. in that direction
unckoning through the Department af Pualic Enterprises
resolution: of CPSEs bul / 10 the cf
lncone Tax ad Exese 0D. Simiialy house
॥ 15 workiny in seme othar Depart the Govamrnent ich
5 Aruilrauion and other Ajiernai HONS Mache
S/CPSES Still resort to court proceadi
| ( ets छा छाती ufher F

Bement 0! disputes enti

3 10 give effect 10 the decision taken at the 005 Meeling as per minuies
27 01.2020, Ministags/Deparimants are raquesied io rasolye tha’ inverse
disputes of vanous Wi ries/Oapartments/CPS| other than those relates to
taxation, through &xisting AMRCD mechanism, The Ministries/Departments ore aiso
requesied that whan any such displile is relerred for resolution througiy AMRCO
Sin, a copy of tha same shall alga be enc sed ( this Department and jurthe
es shall be intimated immediately. — Min tries/Departments shall accorsingly
518 Necessary instructions in this regard, to ail CPSEs/Boards/Authorities under their
adnunisiralive control Further, the uel nes in the laid down process of AMRCD va
also adhered to and complied vith

shen rapes

Yours sacers

tel

3 tothe Ge 2rd al inca

1५ Gauba, Cabin hawan Naw Delhi

jeerstary, Rushtiaoal

Page 4 of 4


(APPENDIX — 11)
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos, 1-5
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to Pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

05

Total: 05
Precentage - 100%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%