80

LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO IRREGULAR TAX
EXEMPTION — SOUTH ASIAN UNIVERSITY
(SAU)

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

EIGHTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.- 2310

EIGHTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO
IRREGULAR TAX EXEMPTION -
SOUTH ASIAN UNIVERSITY (SAU)

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 18.12.2023

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 18.12.2023

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT ~
NEW DELHI

December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)

Nap)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE III OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22) ooo. ec eeccccccesesssstesesseeseeseeseseesssecsececsessessesesreeseaseees (vi)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
REPORT
PART- I
| 7 |
| ७0 | INTRODUCTORY
| 29 |
Low | REPORT
PART - Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 10-14
APPENDICES
| | Minutes of the fifth sitting of Sub Committee Ill of the Public
Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 06-04-2022.
| | Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2023-24) held on 14-12-2023.

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

cp



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

9" 74 9 0० # (० ७

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

2. Dr. Faiz Ahmad - Under Secretary

3. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iii


OPN OAR WN

10.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddyt
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

* Shri V. Vijaisai Reddy was elected as Member of Public Accounts Committee w.e.f. 13.12.2022.

Iv


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi*

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara®
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

ON AARON

©

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy”
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi*t

+ Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
§ Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
** Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
v


COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEEE ॥ OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22)

1. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
2. Shri T.R Baalu - Convenor

3. Shri Vallbhaneni Balashowry - Member

4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Member

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal - Member

6. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara - Member

7. Dr. Satya Pal Singh - Member

8. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi - Member

vi


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eightieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on “Loss of Revenue due to irregular Tax exemption — South Asian University
(SAU)” based on Para 5.2 of C&AG Report number 2 of 2021 relating to the Ministry of
External Affairs.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in Rajya Sabha
on 11 August 2021 and in Lok Sabha on 29 November 2021.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The subject was allocated to Sub-Committee II! who took
briefing from Officers of C&AG of India at their sitting held on 07.09.2021. Thereafter,
the Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External
Affairs at their sitting held on 06.04.2022. The Sub-Committee obtained detailed
information in connection with the examination of the subject. The subject was carried
forward for examination by the successive Public Accounts Committee during their
current term i.e. 2023-24. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 14 December, 2023.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the
Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6 The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of External Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

7 The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
14 December, 2023 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vii)


REPORT

Part-I
INTRODUCTORY

This Report is on the subject “Loss of revenue due to irregular tax exemption —
South Asian University (SAU)” based on Para 5.2 of Comptroller and Auditor General of
India's Report No. 2 of 2021.

2. The Sub-Committee - III (Railways, Communications, Jal Shakti & External Affairs)
of. the Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) considered the subject for detailed
examination, took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs and
obtained written replies on the same. The subject was carried forward to subsequent
session (2022-23) and thereafter, the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) examined the
subject based on the oral evidence and written replies provided by the Ministry of External
Affairs.

3. In Para 5.2 of Report No. 2 of 2021, Audit found that a notification dated 15 January,
2009 issued by the Ministry of External Affairs in respect of South Asian University has
wrongly extended privileges to the Registrar of the University for grant of income tax
exemption since it_was clearly set out in the Headquarters’ Agreement signed by the
SAARC countries for the establishment of South Asian University that tax exemption would
be extended to the President and the faculty members of the University only. The reasons
for inclusion of the post of Registrar in the Gazette notification were not on record.

4. An Inter-Governmental Agreement was signed in April 2007 by the eight countries in
response to the Prime Minister's declaration at the Thirteenth South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Summit in November 2005 envisaging that a South Asian
University would be established, with the main campus of the university to be located in
India. The Government of India and the SAARC Secretariat subsequently signed the
Headquarters' Agreement in November 2008 to provide a general framework for the
administration of the University and to govern its relationships with the host nation. The
South Asian University (SAU) Act, 2008 was passed and published in the Gazette on
January 11, 2009, giving the Inter-Governmental Agreement's provisions legal force.

1


5. The taxation of citizens of the Founding States employed by the University shall be
governed in accordance with the national legislation of the respective States, as stated in
Article 4 of the Inter-Governmental Agreement. The employees of the University from
countries other than the host country will be governed by the income tax laws of the home
countries and will not be taxed as per the laws of the host countries.

6. Further, Clause 14 of the SAU Act provides that the University, the President and
the members of the academic staff would enjoy such privileges and immunities as the
Central Government may notify under Section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and
Immunities) Act, 1947. The Headquarters’ Agreement makes detailed provisions for the

said privileges and immunities.

7. Section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 gives power to
the Central Government to confer certain privileges and immunities on other international
organisations and their representatives and officers in pursuance to any international
agreement, convention etc. by issuing notification in the Official Gazette to give effect to

such agreement, convention etc.

8. In accordance with Section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act,
1974 and to give effect to the Headquarters' Agreement, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)
issued Notification on 15 January 2009 according the privileges and immunities to the
University, Project Office & its officials, President, Registrar and faculty members which
inter alia included tax exemption. The Notification inadvertently included the term ‘Registrar’
thereby erroneously extending the privileges and immunities to Registrar.

9. However, Ministry clarified to the University in September 2011 and July 2012 that
the Gazette Notification can only give effect to the Headquarters' Agreement and cannot go
beyond it, and therefore, it was not possible to issue tax exemption certificate to the

Registrar.

10. During the Audit conducted in Dec 2017-Jan 2018, the audit observed that the
notification issued on 15 January 2009 extending privileges and immunities to the Registrar
was irregular and Registrar being an Indian national was subject to the taxation laws of
India. Further, it observed that the irregular tax exemption availed by the Registrar on his


salary resulted in a loss of revenue to the exchequer aggregating to = 90.06 lakh during the
period July 2011 to December 2017.

11. The subsequent communications exchanged with the University revealed that
notwithstanding Ministry’s directions, the University granted tax exemption certificates to
the Registrar. The University insisted on amending the Headquarters' Agreement with
retrospective effect as was recommended by the Third Governing Board Meeting of SAU in
Dec 2012 and reiterated by the Eighth Governing Board Meeting in Feb 2016.

12. In the light of the audit observation and non-compliance of Ministry's direction by the
University, the Ministry decided to amend the principal Gazette Notification. After prolonged
consultations with the Ministry of Law & Justice and the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
External Affairs published an amendment Gazette notification on 13 May 2021 deleting the
term “Registrar” in the principal notification, with retrospective effect from 15 January 2009.

13. The Audit observations show that in this notification the privileges were wrongly
extended to the Registrar of the University for grant of income tax exemption since it was
clearly set out in the Headquarters’ Agreement that tax exemption would be extended to the
President and the faculty members of the University only. Further scrutiny by Audit revealed
that the incumbents on the post of Registrar were Indian nationals who are subject to the
taxation laws of the Government of India. They had not paid income tax aggregating to
₹ 90.06 lakh on their salary income aggregating to = 3.31 crore during July 2011 to
December 2017. Thus, notification of MEA to grant tax exemption to the Registrar of the
University was irregular and led to loss to the Government exchequer to that extent. MEA
accepted (January 2019) the irregularity pointed out by audit and intimated (August 2020)
that the Ministry of Law and Justice has concurred with its proposal to amend the Gazette
Notification of 15 January 2009 with retrospective effect deleting the term ‘Registrar’ from it.

14. | When the Committee sought to know from the Ministry as to whether the Notification
issued on 15 January 2009 was in contravention to the provisions of the Act passed by the

Parliament, in reply, it has been stated that:

"The SAU Act of 2008 provides the enabling provisions to commitments undertaken by India
under two international agreements: i.e, (a) the “Agreement for Establishment of South Asian
University (2007)” signed by all SAARC member states and (b) the related “HQ Agreement


between the South Asian University and Government of the Republic of India (2008)" signed
between India and the SAARC Secretary General. Under Article 14 of the SAU Act, tax
‘exempt status’ was conferred to three legal-personalities within the University namely: “the

University’, “the President”, and the ‘academic staff’.

However in the Gazette Notification (2009) tax exempt status was operationalized for ‘the
University’, “the President”, “the Registrar’ and ‘the faculty members”. In other words while
the Notification of 2009 remains in compliance with all provisions of the SAU Act, it also
extends tax exempt status to the additional person of “Registrar”. This anomaly was noticed
by MEA in 2011 when the University appointed its first “Registrar’, and immediate corrective

action was initiated."

15. When the Committee desired to know the necessity for issuing such Notification and
whether the Notification was vetted by the Ministry of Law and Justice, the Ministry in their

written response mentioned as under:

"The wording of Article 14 of the SAU Act makes it clear that to ‘activate’ the tax exempt
status envisaged for “The University’, “the President” and “the members of the academic
staff, Government should make a notification under the UN(Privileges and Immunities) Act,
1947.

As per the standard process being followed by this Ministry, the draft texts of all subordinate
legislation are vetted by both the L&T Division of MEA and the M/o Law and Justice, before

issuance. "

16. On being enquired by the Committee whether the University had sought clarification
about tax exemption to the Registrar and if so, what was the query and reply of the Ministry

thereto, the Ministry replied as under:-

"The Ministry first became aware of the anomaly in the Gazette Notification of 2009 in 2011
when the University appointed its first Registrar and the individual approached MEA’s Protocol
Division for a diplomatic identity card and tax exemption certificate. This was denied to him.
Subsequently, Ministry also issued a Note Verbale to the University authorities apprising them

of the anomaly and advised them to stop granting tax exemption to the Registrar. This advice


was reiterated once again in 2012 when the University came back to MEA with the request for

a review of its advice.

Notwithstanding MEA's clear advice in 2011 and 2012, the University kept issuing Tax exempt
certificates to the “Registrar” between 2011-20. MEA had proceeded with the assumption that
as a responsible international organization, the University would comply with the formal advice

given to it by the host country (i.e, India)."

17. When the Committee asked the Ministry whether the Gazette notification was also
violative of the provision included in Article 4 of the Inter Government Agreement, they

replied as under:

"The Gazette Notification issued by MEA is in keeping with SAU Act (2008) enacted by
Parliament. The SAU Act provides the enabling provisions for commitments undertaken by
India under two international agreements i.e, (a) the “Agreement for Establishment of South
Asian University (2007)’ signed by all SAARC member states and (b) the “HQ Agreement
between the South Asian University and Government of the Republic of India (2008)” signed
between India and the SAARC Secretary General.

Except for the anomaly of the person of the “Registrar” being granted tax exempt status, all
other elements of the Gazette Notification (2009) are in compliance with SAU Act 2008"

18. During the course of oral evidence, with regard to the issues raised by the Audit, the

Secretary, MEA stated as follows:

“It is unfortunate that the Gazette Notification issued by the Ministry of External Affairs in 2009
included the person of the Registrar along with persons of the University, the President and
the faculty members. We regret this oversight. From the records available it is neither clear
how this anomaly crept into the Gazette Notification, nor why it was not picked up during the
scrutiny and vetting process conducted by two Ministries, that is the Ministry of External Affairs
and the Ministry of Law & Justice. The anomaly in the Gazette Notification first came to our
notice in 2011 when the University appointed its first Registrar and the individual approached
the Protocol Division of the Ministry of External Affairs for a diplomatic identity card and a tax

exemption certificate."


19. | When the Committee enquired from the Ministry whether any action has been taken
by the Ministry in case of the officials issuing the certificate, the Ministry gave the following
reply:

"Sir, going through our record, which we did very thoroughly, our assessment is that there was

no mala fide intent on the part of the processing which took place."

20. On being enquired whether any action against the officials concerned for issuing a
wrong notification and whether any action was taken on the University/concerned Officer
for non compliance of Ministry’s direction, the Ministry stated as under:

"The anomaly in the Gazette Notification of 2009 was discovered by MEA in 2011, and
immediate corrective advice was provided to the SAU University. At the time it was clear that
the anomaly in the Gazette Notification arose out of a genuine error at the time of printing of
the Notification, and there could be no mala fide intention on the part of any officer of the
Ministry. It was felt that as the main ‘beneficiary’ of this wrongly conferred tax exemption could
only be the person of the “Registrar” in SAU university, there was, therefore, no reason to

suspect complicity/conspiracy by any official from MEA.

Also, in view of the institutional architecture of the University, action against its officials for not
heeding advice of the host country can be taken only after consultation and consensus of other
Governing Board members who will direct the President to take action under the University's

internal Rules/Regulations/Bye Laws related to discipline and dereliction of duty. "

21. Upon being asked regarding duration for which the exemption from income tax was
given to the Registrar, the Ministry replied that:

"It is understood that the “Registrar” of the University, on the basis of Tax Exempt certificates
issued by the University between 2011-2020, has been granted exemption from payment of

personal income tax by Indian tax authorities.”

22. When the Committee desired to know the updated status of the recovery of the said
amount from the then Registrar of the University and whether the University and/or Ministry
of External Affairs has proposed to recover the amount along with penal interest, the
Ministry stated as under:


"Following the Gazette Notification of 13 May 2021 amending the anomaly of the earlier
Notification (2009) with retrospective effect, Indian Income Tax authorities have initiated
recoveries from the concerned individual under Section 147 and 148 of the Income Tax Act
1961. Recoveries will be effected by the Income tax authorities as per due legal processes

specified under the Income Tax law. "

23. Upon being asked regarding the nature of powers that MEA exercises over the
University and to give details of the powers that can be exercised by MEA in the event of
the University not heeding their clarification, the Ministry, in their written reply stated as

under:

"The SAU Act of 2008 provides the enabling legislation to give effect to India’s commitments
under the two international agreements that pertain to the setting up of SAU in India. Under
SAU Act, the South Asian University has been conferred the status of an autonomous, self
governing, international university, with its own Rules and Regulations, run with financial
resources provided by SAARC member states. The 8 SAARC member states, nominate two
members to the Board of Governors which is the University's supreme governance body. India
has only 2 nominated members on the 17 member Governing Board. The Board operates on
the basis of the consensus principle. In the present instance of University authorities not
heeding the advice given to it by India (as host country), action can be initiated after
consultation and consensus of other member states on the SAU Governing Board who will
mandate the University to take action as per the University's internal Rules/Regulations/Bye

Laws related to discipline."

24. When the Committee asked whether any action has been taken against the
University or the officer concerned for non-compliance of the Ministry's directions, it gave
the following reply:

"On this front, no penal action has been taken. As far as the notification was concerned, it was

a deviation from what was envisaged in the Act. We have a thorough vetting process."

25. On being asked about the justifications behind including the line “it is hereby certified
that no person is being adversely affected by giving retrospective effect to this notification"

in the amended notification, the Ministry replied that:


"This reflects the final considered legal opinion of Government in respect of the issue of
retrospective application of an amendment that was introduced by Gazette Notification (2021)
removing the anomaly of tax exemption to the Registrar. Government's considered legal view
is that no vested rights were ever created by the mistaken Gazette notification of 2009 as an
instrument of subordinate legislation cannot create vested right for a citizen, in a manner that is
inconsistent with/in contravention of/or in the teeth of, an already standing law of Parliament."

26. When the Committee desired to know the reason as to why the Government of India
chose MEA and not Ministry of Education to represent Government of India in the collective
decision of the Governing Board of the University, the Ministry replied as under:

"Under the law, the SAU University has been conferred the status of an autonomous, self
governing, international university, with its own Rules and Regulations, run with financial
contributions from SAARC member states. SAU Rule 3 (‘The Governing Board’) and SAU
Regulation 1.2 (‘Governing Board") creates the 17 member SAU Governing Board. In
particular, SAU Regulation 1.2 specifies that: “Each SAARC Member State will nominate two
members to the Governing Board, one of them being the Chairperson of the University Grants
Commission/Higher Education Commission or equivalent bodies or a distinguished
academician of that Member State’. In other words, senior professionals of both Ministries (i.e,
Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Education) are already serving on the SAU

Governing Board as Indian members of the Board. "

27. When the Committee desired to know whether MEA has the powers to check the
University from attempting to amend HQ Agreement, the Ministry submitted in their written

replies as under:

“Though the SAU Governing Board has resolved to request the SAARC SG (signatory to the
HQ agreement) to seek an amendment to its HQ agreement with India, the SAARC SG has not
been mandated to do so by SAARC member states.”

28. When asked whether the University sought any advice from the MEA with regard to
amending the HQ Agreement with retrospective effect, the Ministry replied as under:

"Subsequent to the Minutes of 3rd GB Meeting, SAU approached the SAARC Secretariat
seeking amendment to the HQ Agreement. The SAARC Secretariat merely sought the views of

8


Member States on the proposal. India being one of the Member States received such a

communication from the SAARC Secretariat, but has taken no follow up action."

29. When the Committee desired to know whether MEA had the explicit and implicit
concurrence in University’s attempt to amend the HQ agreement retrospectively, the
Ministry replied as under :-

"The proposal to amend the HQ Agreement was placed as one of the Agenda items by the
University on the 3rd GB Meeting of 2012. The Indian member in the GB did not express any
view on this matter. It may be noted that the GB takes all decisions on the basis of consensus."


PART-H
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

INTRODUCTORY

The Committee observe from the audit findings that in pursuance of the
proposal to establish the South Asian University (SAU), a Headquarters' Agreement
was signed by the member nations of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-
operation (SAARC) for providing world-class facilities with a professional faculty to
students and researchers drawn from the SAARC countries. To give effect to the
Headquarters' Agreement, South Asian University Act of 2008 was introduced by the
Government of India vide which the President and other faculty members were to
enjoy such privileges as the Central Government may notify under section 3 of the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 (46 of 1947), which essentially
pertain to the privilege of exemption from paying taxes on their salary. Audit
observed that there was a violation of the SAU Act of 2008 that was traced to the
notification issued by the Ministry of External Affairs on January 15, 2009 for
granting privileges i.e. exempting individuals holding notified offices from paying
taxes on their salary, by erroneously including therein, the office of Registrar
amongst the offices enjoying the privileges. As a result of the erroneous income tax
exemption granted to the Registrar, the exchequer suffered a loss of = 90.06 lakh as
reported by the Audit. The issues contained in the Report have been examined by
the Committee and commented upon suitably in the succeeding paragraphs.

Need for a standard operating procedure

2. From the audit observation, the Committee find that the privileges were
wrongly extended to the Registrar of the University vide the gazette notification
issued in 2009. The Committee also note that the reasons for inclusion of the post of
Registrar in the Gazette notification were not on record. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that Government of India was required to make a gazette
notification under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 for
extending the privileges to the University, the President and the members of the

10


academic staff as envisaged under Article 14 of the SAU Act. As per the Ministry, the
notification was issued on 15 January, 2009 after the due process followed by the
Ministry of External Affairs(MEA) whereby the draft texts were vetted both by the L&T
Division of MEA and the Ministry of Law and Justice before issuing the notification.
The Committee note that the MEA first became aware of the error of including the
office of Registrar amongst the offices enjoying the privileges in the gazette
notification in 2011 when the MEA was approached for a diplomatic identity card and
tax exemption certificate for its first Registrar who was appointed in 2011. The
Committee are perplexed to note that an error crept in despite the notification being
vetted by various departments of Government of India. The Committee are, therefore,
of the view that the procedure followed for the issuance of gazette notification by the
Ministry needs to be reviewed and strengthened, more so for the notifications issued
by the Ministry of External Affairs that may have international ramifications. The
Committee in this regard feel it to be preferable to have a separate ‘Procedural
Standards Cell’ for examining all aspects related to provisions being notified and
published through a gazette notification so as to prevent such aberrations in the

future.

Fixing Accountability
3. The Committee note that the Inter-governmental Agreement signed for the

establishment of the South Asian University by the member nations of the SAARC
states that the Taxation and social protection of the citizens of the Founding States
employed by the University is regulated in accordance with the national legislation
of the respective States. The Committee note from the audit observations that the
incumbents to the post of Registrar were Indian nationals who are subject to the
taxation laws of the Government of India. However, the submission made by the MEA
that the anomaly in the Gazette Notification was a genuine error which occurred at
the time of printing and that there is no mala fide intention on the part of any officer
of the Ministry is neither convincing nor sufficient to completely rule out the
possibility of complicity. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry
investigate the matter in detail and take appropriate action on the officials who may

be found responsible for the lapse.

11


Consultation & coordination

4. The agreement for establishment of South Asian University envisaged that the
Taxation of the citizens of the Founding states employed by the University shall be
regulated in accordance with the national legislation of the respective states.
Accordingly, the Registrar, being an Indian citizen, should have been subject to
taxation in accordance with the rules of the home country. The Committee also
understand that the Headquarters' Agreement between the South Asian University
(SAU) and Government of India requires that the University shall cooperate with the
appropriate authorities of the host Government to prevent the occurrence of any
abuse in connection with the privileges mentioned in the agreement. Consequent to
appointment of the first Registrar by the South Asia University in 2011, the
Committee note that the individual appointed to the post approached the MEA's
Protocol Division for a diplomatic identity card and tax exemption certificate which
was denied. Further, the Committee find that the MEA informed the University of the
anomaly and advised them to not to grant tax exemption to the Registrar and
reiterated the same in 2012. However, notwithstanding MEA’s clear advice in 2011
and 2012, the University kept issuing tax exempt certificates to the “Registrar”
between 2011-20. According to the submission made by the Ministry, it had
proceeded with the assumption that as a responsible international organization, the
University would comply with the formal advice given to it by the host country (i.e.
India). The Committee are surprised by that the South Asian University overlooked
the advice of the Ministry of External Affairs and granted tax exemption certificate to
the Registrar. This disregard led to a substantial loss of revenue to the Government
of India amounting to = 90.06 lakhs from July 2011 to December 2017. The Committee
are of the considered view that the Ministry of External Affairs instead of merely
assuming compliance should have followed up the matter appropriately. The
Committee further opine that there should be constant consultation and
coordination between international organizations and the host Government to
ensure effective management of situations involving international agreements and
regulations thereby fostering a harmonious and mutually beneficial relationship for
both sides.

12


Shared Responsibility

5. The Committee observe that the Governing Board of the South Asian
University resolved that the President of the University should approach the SAARC
SG to seek an amendment of the HQ Agreement for extending the privilege to the
Registrar of the University in 2012, subsequent to which SAARC Secretariat sought
the view of the Member States but no follow up action was taken by the Ministry.
While considering the complexities of international relations and the University's
reputation, it is essential that matters of this nature are approached with appropriate
seriousness and sensitivity, particularly by the Ministry of External Affairs. The
Committee acknowledge the right of the University to seek extension of privileges
but nevertheless the University should have, in the interim suspended the issuance
of tax exemption certificates and pursued the matter further through the Governing
Body (GB) and SAARC Secretary General. The Committee, also note that the
representatives of Government of India chose to remain silent when the GB in its
third meeting resolved to recommend amendment in HQ agreement to include the
Registrar for being given the benefits also when SAARC Secretariat sought
comments on the issue. The Committee, in this regard, would emphasize on the
aspect of shared responsibility of both the University and the Ministry, and urge for
more effective coordination and proactive measures to prevent such irregularities in

the future.

Scrutiny by Income Tax Department

6. The Committee observe that as per the Article VI (5) of the Headquarters’
Agreement, the persons enjoying the privileges and immunities enshrined in the
Agreement shall be provided a special identity card by the protocol division of MEA
which shall identify the holder in relation to appropriate authorities and certify that
the holder enjoys the privileges and immunities in the agreement. The Committee
feel that in case of non issuance of any such special Identity Card, the tax exemption
certificates issued by the SAU, should have been considered void. The Committee
note that there has been lack of vigilant scrutiny by the Income Tax Department in
verifying the eligibility of individuals for tax exemptions and acceptance of such tax

certificates without consultation with MEA. The Committee also find that the Ministry

13


of External Affairs lagged in providing timely information to the Income Tax
Department despite being aware of the status of the wrongly extended tax
exemption. The Committee emphasize the need for more vigilant and thorough
approach in scrutinizing tax exemption certificate applications, more so in case of
international organisations.

Consequent to issuance of the amended notification in 2021 by MEA removing
the post of Registrar from enjoying the wrongly extended privileges and immunities,
the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the recovery carried out by

the Income Tax Department in this case.
Internal Audit mechanism

7. The Committee find that the though there is a system of Internal Audit being
conducted via independent auditor in the South Asian University, the University
issued tax exemption certificates regularly while being aware of the ineligibility of
the Registrar to receive such exemption from 2011-2020 i.e. even after audit made its
observations. The Committee observe that a prudent attitude of the South Asian
University towards the advice from MEA regarding the issuance of tax exemption
certificates could have prevented substantial revenue loss to Government of India.
The Committee strongly advise the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to liaise with
SAU authorities and India's representatives in their Board of Governors to pursue for
strengthening of the existent Internal Audit Mechanism by extending its scope to
cover critical financial and operational areas that affect the interests of the Host
country. The Committee desire to be kept informed about the concrete actions taken

by the Ministry and SAU in response to this recommendation.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
14 December, 2023) Chairperson
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

14