106

AVOIDABLE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION
CHARGES FOR LOW POWER FACTOR - V.O.
CHIDAMBARANAR PORT TRUST

MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

HUNDREDT AND SIXTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO, 2336

HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

AVOIDABLE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION

CHARGES FOR LOW POWER FACTOR - V.O.
CHIDAMBARANAR PORT TRUST

MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) | (v)
INTRODUCTION (vil)
PART-I
REPORT
PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
31-10-2023

| |

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
05-02-2024

*Not appended to the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

PN AA AWN

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Penn

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

*Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray,
MP on 18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Sixth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “AVOIDABLE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION
CHARGES FOR LOW POWER FACTOR - V.O. CHIDAMBARANAR PORT
TRUST” based on para 19.4 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2018 relating to the Ministry
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 04-04-2018

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-24) took oral evidence of ‘the
representatives of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways on 31-10-2023. The
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05- 02-2024.
The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT ON AVOIDABLE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION CHARGES FOR LOW
POWER FACTOR: V.0. CHIDAMBARANAR PORT TRUST BASED ON PARA 19.4 OF
C&AG REPORT NO. 4 OF 2018
PART-I

REPORT

The VOC Port (५.0. Chidambaranar Port Trust) is responsible for distributing power to
over 185 consumers within the Port premises, catering to various Port-related activities,
infrastructure development, and maintenance contractors. Due to the diverse nature of
consumers and the vast distribution area, the power demand and, consequently, the power
factor varied, leading to low power factor issues. To address this, the Port initiated efforts to
improve the power factor, closely monitoring it from November 2012. A Harmonic analysis test
conducted in 2013 prompted the installation of Automatic Power Factor Correction (APFC)
panels at major load centers in 2015.

2. The Committee also found that the Port diligently tracked power factor improvements,
showcasing a gradual enhancement from July 2017 to November 2018. Subsequently, the
installation of an energy monitoring facility by November 2017 further demonstrated consistent
improvements in power factor maintenance from December 2017 to October 2019,
consistently exceeding the prescribed value of 0.9.

3. To enhance energy efficiency, an energy audit conducted by M/s. Petroleum
Conservation Research Association recommended measures such as installing energy-
efficient LED lights, addressing load imbalance in transformers, and upgrading AC units. In
response, the Port implemented changes, including switching to LED lights, balancing
transformer loads, and upgrading old AC units to 5-star rated and inverter AC units.

4. As a result of these initiatives, the VOC Port has successfully maintained a power
factor above the prescribed value since February 2018, thereby eliminating the need to pay
compensation charges. The Port's commitment to energy efficiency is further evidenced by
ongoing efforts to implement energy audit recommendations and continually improve its power
factor.

5. In March 2012, the Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission (TNERC) stipulated

that the Average Power Factor (APF) of consumer installations for High Tension (HT) service

2|Page


connections should not be less than 0.90. Compensation charges would be imposed if the
average power factor fell below the specified limit. The Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC)
also mandated consumers to generate sufficient reactive power to maintain the stipulated
Power Factor (PF) in the network. Furthermore, regulation 13(3) of the Tamil Nadu Electricity
Distribution Code (TNEDC), 2008, obligated consumers to enhance the power factor of their

connected loads in accordance with the code's provisions.

6. The V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust (Port) received 22 KV High Tension (HT) power
supply from a 230/110KV Auto substation near Muthiapuram, Tuticorin, with a maximum
demand of 3500 KVA per month. Starting from November 2012, Tamil Nadu Generation and
Distribution Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO) began imposing compensation charges on the
port as it failed to maintain the stipulated PF level of 0.90. To avoid these charges, the port
conducted a Harmonic analysis test in 2013 through M/s Edge Technologies, Hyderabad. The
test recommended installing active harmonic filters with neutral compensation and avoiding

leading PF.

7. After analyzing the HT bills and the Harmonic analysis test report in February 2014, the
port decided to install compensating equipment at major load centers. Consequently, in
December 2015, the port installed Automatic Power Factor Correction (APFC) Panels with

seven percent detuned harmonics filters at seven locations, incurring a cost of %20.35 lakh.

8. However, an audit revealed that, despite the installation of APFC panels in December
2015, the PF did not improve as expected, ranging between 0.76 and 0.88 from January 2016
to July 2017. The port failed to conduct a performance appraisal of the installed equipment, did
not identify other locations requiring APFC panels, and did not take corrective measures.
Consequently, the port had to pay a penalty of €1.46 crore as compensation charges during

the period from January 2016 to July 2017.

o

3]Pag


9. In August 2017, the Port's reply mentioned various reasons for the reduced PF, such
as increased non-linear loads and variable load due to crane/equipment utilization. The Port
claimed to have taken steps to improve PF and expected improvement based on the
installations of APFC panels. However, the response of the Port was countered with the fact
that maintaining PF at 0.9 was a statutory requirement, and despite conducting tests and
spending %20.35 lakh on APFC panels, there was no improvement in PF. The Port did not
measure the performance of the installed APFC panels, did not identify other locations for
installing more panels, and did not conduct an energy re-audit. The Ministry, in its reply in
November 2017, mentioned that the port had awarded a work order to install energy

monitoring devices to monitor load distribution among port users.

10. The audit in their finding concluded that the Port's failure to comply with the statutory
requirement of maintaining PF at 0.9 resulted in paying avoidable compensation charges
amounting to £1.46 crore. They also noted the reply of the Ministry that the performance of the
energy monitoring devices in maintaining the stipulated PF of 0.90 would be reviewed in future

audits.

11. Explaining their responses on the Audit observations, the representatives of ४.0.

Chidambarnar Port Trust stated as follows:
"Sir, this is basically compensation for low cost factor. The Audit made certain
observations. Post that, the Port Authority has taken a number of steps. One,
they have installed an APFC panel so that there is no such recurrence of this
problem. Secondly, the load distribution among the port users is monitored
closely and power factor has gradually improved. We have also installed energy
monitoring facility in November, 2017. A third-party energy audit has been
conducted through DEE and the Audit recommendations have been complied

with."

4|Page


12. To aquery about the reasons attributed for not adhering to the stipulated powerfactor

(PF) of 0.9 level by VOC Port, the Ministry in its written replies stated as under:

1) "VOC Port is receiving 22KV power supply with maximum demand of

3500KVA from TANGEDCO and distributing the power supply to more than

185 consumers inside the Port premises for Port related works, infrastructure

developments works and contractors in maintenance work.

Even though the Maximum demand is 3500KVA, Port for its own consumption

is utilizing only 246KVA and the remaining KVA are used by the Port users,

PPP operators, contractors, etc.

3) The power demand of different consumers varies in accordance with their

activity, variable demand from time to time and due to the vast distribution

area, the power factor varies.

In the TNERC tariff schedule for low power factor surcharge applicable to HT

consumers, the word ‘0.9lag’ has been modified into ‘0.9. Prior to this

modification in the tariff, compensation charges for VOC Port had not arised
due to maintaining the prescribed power factor. However, immediately after
implementation of this change in the provision, PF compensation charges had
generated in the monthly energy consumption bills for the reasons different
types of consumers and their varying power demands and vast area of the

Port premises. Hence there was low power factor experienced in Port.

5) This has been given serious attention considering different types of
consumers and vast area involved.

6) VOC Port is taking earnest efforts to maintain power factor above prescribed
value with the installed energy monitoring devices, APFC panels, etc., equal
load distribution to the transformers and by insisting the Port Users to install of
corrective equipments’.

2

4

=

13. | When asked as to why the energy monitoring devices were not installed to ensure
that the stipulated power factor of 0.9 level is adhered to, the Ministry in its written reply
stated as under:

“As per TNERC tariff, wherever the average power factor is less than the
stipulated limit, compensation charges have to be levied. In the TNERC tariff
schedule for low power factor surcharge applicable to HT consumers, the
word ‘0.9lag’ has been modified into ‘0.9’. Prior to this modification in the tariff,
compensation charges for VOC Port had not arisen due to maintaining the
prescribed power factor. However, immediately after implementation of this

5|Page


change in the provision, PF compensation charges had generated in the
monthly energy consumption bills for the reasons different types of consumers
and their varying power demands and vast area of the Port premises.

To improve the power factor, the Port has installed energy monitoring devices
in the distribution areas around 10km, to monitor the load distribution among
the Port users. The Port has conducted Harmonic analysis test for the entire
Port electrical network during 2013. Based on the recommendations of
Harmonic analysis test, Port has installed APFC panels at major load centers
during 2015. Port has completed installing energy monitoring facility by Nov
2017. VOCPA is maintaining power factor more than prescribed value and no
compensation charge is paid since February 2018”,

14. When asked whether the Ministry have undertaken any review of the installed
energy as on date and whether the required PF level is now being adhered to, the Ministry
in its written reply informed as under:

1) "Yes. VOC Port is taking efforts to adhere to maintain power factor above
prescribed level. The measures taken / being taken by the Port are
furnished below.

a) Since maintaining of correct power factor is statutory requirement, the port
is insisting all the Port users to install power factor corrective equipments.
Port users are being insisted to use Meters with facility to measure
average power factor both under leadingand lagging condition, The Port
is imposing penalty for Port Users who maintaining power factor lower
than prescribed limit. Loss incurred by the Port were compensated through
revenue generated from penalty paid by the Port users on account of
maintaining low power factor.

b) The Port has installed energy monitoring devices in the distribution areas
around 10km, to monitor the load distribution among the Port users.

c) The Port has conducted Harmonic analysis test for the entire Port electrical
network during 2013. Based on the recommendations of Harmonic analysis
test, Port has installed APFC panels at major load centers during 2015.

d) Load distribution among the Port users is closely monitored.

e) VOCPT conducted energy audit through BEE enlisted firm M/s. Petroleum
Conservation Research Association, Chennai. In the energy Audit report, it
is mentioned the power factor of the Port has increased above 0.9. Based
on the energy audit recommendations, Port has implemented the following:

i) Changed all conventional light to LED lights

6|Page


ii) Equal load distribution of transformers in Port area

iti) Changed old AC units into 5 star rated and inverter AC units

2) Subsequently Port has completed installing energy monitoring facility by
Nov 2017. It is informed that the Port has achieved power factor above
0.9.

3) VOCPA is maintaining power factor more than prescribed value. No
compensation charge is paid since February 2018”.

7|Page


PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee note with concern the avoidable payment of compensation
charges amounting to Rs. 1.46 crore by the ४.0. Chidambaranar Port Trust (Port) due
to its failure to maintain the prescribed power factor level of 0.90. Despite the
installation of Automatic Power Factor Correction (APFC) Panels in December 2015,
the power factor remained suboptimal, ranging between 0.76 and 0.88 from January
2016 to July 2017. The Committee find that lack of a performance appraisal system for
the installed equipment and the failure to identify additional locations for APFC
Panels resulted in the payment of avoidable compensation charges during the
specified period. The Committee would, therefore, recommend a comprehensive
performance appraisal of the installed APFC Panels and establishment of a
continuous monitoring mechanism to ensure sustained compliance with the
prescribed power factor level. The Committee would also like to urge the Port to
identify and install APFC Panels at other locations within its premises, addressing the
toot causes of the suboptimal power factor.The Committee would also like to

emphasise on accountability and efficiency in meeting statutory requirements.

2. The Committee also recommend undertaking a comprehensive energy re-audit
to further enhance energy efficiency and power factor improvement. This. energy
audit should assess the current power factor, the performance of existing equipment,
and explore new technologies or measures for greater efficiency. Collaborative
efforts with Port users, including PPP operators and contractors, should be
strengthened to ensure collective adherence to power factor requirements, with

incentives for compliance and penalties for non-compliance.

3. Keeping in view the above, the Committee would also like to emphasize the

8|Page


need for transparent reporting by the Port .on its power factor performance,
containing, inter alia, details/measures taken to improve the same. This reporting
would ensure accountability and would serve as a crucial aspect of preventing

avoidable compensation charges in the future.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

kK

9|Page