121

DISABILITY PENSION IN INDIAN ARMY

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ONE REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्वमैव wat

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2351

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ONE
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DISABILITY PENSION IN INDIAN

ARMY

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (v)

INTRODUCTION (vii)

PART-I

REPORT

PART - II

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
16-01-2024 है

a

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
06-02-2024

*Not appended in the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTE,

PAN AA AYN

2

11.
12.
13.
14.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

ही ४  :+

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray,
MP on 18.08.2023. है है


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred Twenty oseReport
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “DISABILITY PENSION IN INDIAN ARMY” based on
para 2.3 of C&AG Report no. 6 of 2023 relating to the Union Territory (without
Legislature) Chandigarh Administration.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 11-10-2023.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-24) took oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Defence on 16-01-2024 The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 06-02-2024. The Minutes of the
sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


PART -I
REPORT

REPORT ON DISABILITY PENSION IN INDIAN ARMY BASED
ON PARAGRAPH NUMBER 2.3 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 6 OF 2023

The Committee have learnt that Audit in their Report NO. 6 of 2023 in
Para 2.3 has found that the percentage of Medical Officers receiving
disability pensions was notably higher compared to other officers in the
Indian Army. Furthermore, 22% and 13% of disability pension cases
granted to officers and personnel below officer ranks (PBORs),
respectively, were exclusively attributed to lifestyle diseases. The absence
of crucial information in vital fields of the PCDA (Pension) database has
been identified as a significant hindrance, preventing a meaningful analysis
of the causes of disability among defense forces and potential remedial

measures.

2. It has been revealed by the Audit that defense personnel are eligible
for disability pensions if invalidated due to a disability or upon retirement
with a sustained disability attributable to or aggravated by their service.
According to the Guide for Medical Officers (GMO) 2002, disability is
defined as the actual wound, injury, or disease causing disablement,
leading to a compensation claim. Disability pension comprises two
components: the Service Element, equivalent to the retiring pension, and
the Disability Element, which is 30% of the last drawn emoluments for
100% disability, with a proportional reduction for disability less than 100%.

3. | When asked about the reasons for higher percentage of discharge of
officers with disability element of pension vis-a-vis PBORs, the Ministry in

its written stated as under:

2|Page


“The average age of retirement of an officer is 54 years(54-62Yrs)
whereas, that of PBOR is 35 years(37-45Yrs). Most of the disabilities
encountered during retirement have their onset in later years of life
including Hypertension, Diabetes, Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) etc., as
these are constitutional disorders which occur with increasing age. As a
mode to detect them early, an elaborate system called Periodic Medical
examination (PME) is conducted only after 35 years of age for all ranks.
Since most soldiers retire around this age, the detection of medical

ailments in 40s and 50s is higher in officers.

As per Audit, category wise data in respect of officers and categories in
respect of 2671 PBORs was not indicated by the Ministry which impeded
any meaningful analysis of the causes of disability among the defence

forces and possible remedial measures to bring down such causes.”

4. When asked about the reasons for not bringing out category wise
data in regard to PBORs, and can it be furnished and provided so as the
remedial measures can be taken, also to check disability in the said ranks,

the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:

“Categories showing various circumstances of casualty pensionary awards
to decide type of award was introduced by Government vide MoD letter
dated 31.01.2001. The Defence personnel invalided out with
impairment/disability are entitled for Invalid pension in Category ‘A’.
Disability Pension in Categories ‘B’ and ‘C’ Liberalized Disability Pension in
Category ‘D’ and War Injury Pension in Category ‘E’. Thus, the name of
award itself denotes the type of disability. PPO is an instrument conveying

entitlement. of pension based-on which Pension Disbursing Agencies

3|Page


(PDAs) make payment of pension. As Category has no role in the
calculation and disbursement of disability pension, mentioning the category

in the PPO was not mandatory.

However, since implementation of the Centralized Sanction and payment of
system “System for Pension Administration, Raksha (SPARSH)” from
2021, category of disability is being captured in case of new retirees, and
can be provided by 15.02.2024” Audit has noted that the responsibility for
approving, accounting, and other related matters regarding pensions for
Indian Army personnel lies with the Principal Controller of Defence
Accounts (Pension), Prayagraj (PCDA (P)). An audit has scrutinized the
grant of disability pension from 2015-16 to 2019-20, referencing disability
pension reports for invalidated/discharged service personnel and data
provided by PCDA (P).”

4. Audit findings revealed that the Ministry of Defence (MoD)
established the method for determining pensionary benefits on disability in
January 2001, categorized based on different circumstances. However, the
Audit has also found that incomplete data from PCDA (P) regarding
Officers and PBORs, coupled with the absence of mandatory category
information in the database, has hindered a thorough analysis of the
causes of disability and potential remedial measures within the defense
forces. The higher percentage of officers retiring with a disability pension
compared to PBORs was under inquiry as of February 2021, with a
pending response from the Ministry as of August 2022.

5 In the audit conducted in November 2020, it was observed that

-Medical Officers were granted disability pensions at a higher rate compared

4|Page


to their non-Medical Officer counterparts. Subsequent inquiries from the
Audit in November 2021 seeking information from the Ministry regarding
any.studies or root cause analyses conducted on the elevated percentage
of Officers and Medical Officers receiving disability elements, along with
measures taken to address the situation. However, as of January 2023, the
Audit has reported in their findings that Ministry's response to these

inquiries was still pending.

6. Toa query with regard to the reasons for higher percentage of such
medical officers being granted disability element, the Ministry in its written

reply informed as under:

“The analysis of medical officers having higher percentage of disabilities
due to lifestyle disorders than other officers needs to be compared
realistically as a subset since this composite figure includes officers of the
MNS and non-technical officers. There is an unfounded misconception that
medical officers being in proximity to officers conducting medical boards in
hospitals gain undue advantage. Notwithstanding that, preventive steps
have been taken and a policy has been promulgated that Release Medical
Boards of medical officer will be conducted only in hospitals commanded
by a Brigadier and above and also in a different geographical location
outside the area of responsibility to eliminate any such perception. Medical
officers have irregular working hours and are unable to adopt healthy
lifestyles, something which is well established. Also, Medical officers retire
at a higher age of 58 years; thus they are relatively more prone to
developing lifestyle disorders. In addition, by virtue of domain knowledge,
they report early and are detected in larger numbers. These factors can

also be contributory to a higher percentage”.
5|Page


7. Concerning disability pension for lifestyle diseases, the Audit has
noted that the Ministry's stipulation from September 2005 designates
competent authorities based on rank for deciding attributability/aggravation
and assessing disability. The analysis of disability data provided by PCDA
(P) revealed that a significant percentage of disability pensions for Officers
and PBORS were granted exclusively due to lifestyle diseases like Primary
Hypertension and Diabetes Mellitus (DM-Il). Despite inquiries from the
Audit in March 2021 and November 2021 regarding the absence of disease
information in the database, and whether the issue was analyzed for
remedial measures, the Ministry's response was awaited as of January
2023. The data limitations, particularly the absence of crucial information in
the PCDA (P) database, hinder meaningful analysis of the causes of
disability among defense forces and the exploration of potential remedial

measures to reduce such cases.

8. It was contended by the Ex Servicemen association that the most
important existing rule was that military personnel shall not be called upon
to prove their entitlement and the ‘benefit of reasonable doubt’ will be given
to the claimant. This has remained in existence since a long time. Rule 9 of
Entitlement Rules, 1982) but now has been abrogated in the new rules.
The ex- servicemen association has also stated that it is a matter of
concern that the clause of ‘benefit of reasonable doubt’ remains in force for
the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs).

9. When asked about the specific steps being taken to address the
concerns raised by ex-servicemen regarding the perceived shortcomings of
the revised policies, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:

6|{Page


‘“(a) The Entitlement Rules 1982 referred to in the question were

superseded by the existing Rules issued by MoD in 2008.

(b) As per the rules of 2008, the condition of Entitlement is proven by
circumstances of onset of disease/ injury by clinical examinations and
documentary evidence. The Entitlement is accepted by the Competent
Authority during adjudication based on such evidences. The new rules of
2023 have also reiterated the same procedure and do not envisage calling

upon Armed Forces personnel to prove their Entitlement.

(c) To address the concerns raised by Ex-Servicemen and to clarify all
issues, the Defence Services have undertaken numerous outreach
programs where in regular interactions are carried out with the veterans to
respond to such queries. Such activities are undertaken by the senior
officers to include the CDS, COAS and AG’.

10. As per the new Rule, 7(b), it has been stated that merely because a
disease has manifested during military service does not mean that it is
attributable to service. The ESM association says this is totally opposite to
the existing rules (See Rule 9 of Entitlement Rules, 1982) and contrary to
not only globally existing practices for all militaries but also against rules
applicable to the CAPFs in India and Supreme Court judgments. The
positive presumption clause in the earlier rules has been abrogated. Please
furnish the reasons for this change. When asked about the reasons for
change in the new Rule, 7(b) and the abrogation of the positive
presumption clause in the earlier rules, the Ministry in its written reply

stated as under:

7|Page


“(a) The Entitlement Rules 1982 referred to in the question were
superseded by the Entitlement Rules issued by MoD in 2008.

(b) This clause remains unchanged in the new Entitlement Rules-

2023.

(c) Despite medical advancements, there are certain diseases
which cannot be identified during medical examination at entry
stages since these tests are not exhaustive and are limited to broad
physical examination. Also, certain dormant diseases may not be
detected during enrolment. In addition, certain hereditary,
constitutional and congenital diseases may manifest during service
irrespective of service conditions. Hence, the mere fact that a
disease has manifested during service period does not per se
establish attributability or aggravation by military service. Therefore,
entitlement of attributability/ aggravation is decided by the
Competent Authority based on documentary and clinical evidence”.

In new Rule, it has been stated that diseases will only be considered

attributable to service in case they occur in active operations, high altitude,

extreme physical exertion etc.

It reads as under:

Rule No. 11(b)(2),

Diseases: For acceptance of a disease as attributable to military service,

the following two conditions must be satisfied simultaneously: -

(i) that the disease has arisen during the period of military service, and,

8|Page


(ii) that the disease has been caused by the conditions of employment in
military service like active operations, high altitude, extreme cold/hot
climate, extreme physical exertion and other specified exposures for e.g. to

infections, chemicals and ionizing radiation.

In the earlier rules, the place of deployment was not a condition for the
grant of benefits and rather there was a presumption and benefit of doubt
given in the rules that any disability arising in military service would be
presumed to be connected with service. As per the news article ex-
servicemen association has stated that the Supreme Court has specifically
ruled that disability or death benefits cannot be denied on the ground that

the same had occurred in a peace area.

12. Asked to furnish their comment on the above facts and on the ruling
of the Supreme Court in regard to the disability, the Ministry in a written

reply stated as under:

“Rule 11 (b) (ii) as quoted, elaborates the difficult service conditions
with the emphasis being on conditions and not areas. Hence, it
should not be construed that disability compensation will not be
applicable incase onset of such disability is in peace areas. The rule
specifically mentions conditions of employment like “extreme
physical exertion and other specified exposures” irrespective of the

area”.

13. To a query with regard to the new guidelines that provide heart
diseases etc., in high altitude areas due to extreme physical exertion for
more than 72 hours continuously, and the judgments of Supreme Court
with regard to the same, the Ministry in its written reply informed as under:

9|Page


“The association says the new guidelines provide that heart diseases e.t.c
would only be treated as connected with service in case the same occurs
after a service of more than three months in active operations, high altitude
areas and extreme physical exertion for more than 72 hours continuously.

The earlier rules simply stated that such disabilities are all “affected by
stress and strain of military service’. The association says the newly
inserted conditions are also against Supreme Court judgments which state
that the area of sustaining or incurring disability has no relation with
disability benefits, and any disability even arising in peace areas will be
deemed to be attributable/ aggravated by service unless caused by a

person’s own negligence as mentioned above.

As per GMO 2008, Ischemic Heart Disease (IHD) is considered

attributable to service if-

(a) The disease occurred in close time and relation to service
compulsions involving severe trauma or exceptional mental,
emotional or physical strain, provided that the interval between the
development of symptoms and the incidence is approximately 24 to
48 hrs.

(b) IHD arising while serving in Fd/Cl ops/HAA or during ops.

It is also brought out, as per Para9, Ch |, GMO 2008, before award
can be made for a disability or death claimed to be related to
service, a causal connection between disability and mil service has

to be established by evidence.

10|Page


Cases where neither immediate nor prolonged exceptional stress
and strain of service is evident, disease may be assumed to be a
result of biological factors, heredity and way of life as incl in risk
factors such as smoking. These case would be considered as

neither attributable nor aggravated by service.
As per current GMO 2023,

Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) will be considered attributable to

service if

(a) The onset is while serving in HAA or within 3 months of de-
induction or Onboard Ships for 3 months or Submarines for one

month.

(b) Onset during or within 72 hrs of heavy physical exertion
requiring >7 METS due to service requirements (all battle physical

efficiency/ fitness tests are within it’s ambit).
(c) Onset during active operations.

As per Para 3, Ch Il, GMO 2023, any disease is to be considered
aggravated by military service if the evidence indicates that its onset

was hastened by specific conditions of military service.

As per Para 12, ER 2023, an impairment shall be conceded as
aggravated by military service if its onset is hastened or the course
is worsened by specific conditions of military service such as being
posted to in places with extreme climatic conditions or being
exposed to environment factors that adversely affect any pre-
existing medical conditions. This is applicable for all disabilities.

11|Page


Interpretation —

(a) All service related factors contributing to CAD are considered

in the current GMO.

(b) The time between the extremely stressful incidence and the

onset of disability has been increased from 48 to 72 hrs.

(c) De induction period of 3 month, after posting at HAA, has been
included in the present GMO, which was not a part of GMO 2008.

All the above provisions were not there in the GMO 2008. These
provisions have been introduced in new GMO-2023 and are more
beneficial to the Armed Forces Personnel in terms of determining of

attributability.

(d) Peace or Field areas were not distinguished in the ER -2008 or
GMO-2008. Peace or Field areas are not distinguished in the current
ER-2023 or GMO-2023 also. The criteria of stress are independent
of location viz Peace or Field. Hence, there is no change in the new
ER-2023 and GMO-2023 in this respect”.

14. As per a news article, the Ex- servicemen Association has also stated

that Under the old rules, all cancers except those caused by smoking etc.
were deemed to be aggravated by service in case of worsening during
military service, but now all cancers have been taken out of the list and only

those caused by radiation or exposure to chemicals during service will be
included in the attributable list. The association says all types of diabetes
have been excluded from the attributable/aggravation list whereas the

effect of stress and strain is medically well-known to affect insulin levels.

12|Page


Bronchial asthma, which was always connected with service conditions, is
not in the list anymore. Under the new guidelines ‘primary hypertension’ is
also not linked with service conditions. Even disabilities like PIVD and
spondylolysis have been taken off the aggravation list despite common
knowledge that these disabilities are aggravated by service conditions and

have always been a part of the aggravation clause.

15. When asked about the reasons for exclusion of all diseases like
cancers, diabetes, bronchial asthma in the new entitlement rules and also
the reasons for taking off primary hypertension and disabilities like PIVD
and spondylolysis from the aggravation list, the Ministry in its written reply

stated as under:

“As per MoD letter dated 21.09.2023, w.e.f. 21.09.2023 and in
supersession of all previous orders/rules on the subject, the
Entitlement Rules 2023 (ER-2023) and Guide to Medical Officers
2023 (GMO-2023) shall apply in cases of disablement or death of
service personnel. Hence, the new ER-2023 and GMO-2023 will be
applicable in case of death and disability reported recorded on or
after 21.09.2023. MoD letter dated 21.09.2023 only deals with
Entitlement Rules and Guide to Medical Officers and it has not
superseded/altered any existing Govt. policy/rule determining
pensionary award of Armed Forces Personnel. The approved
policy/rules are still guiding the entitlement of the Armed Forces

Personnel.

The MoD letter dated 21.09.2023 have not superseded any
policy/rules set by Union Cabinet and implemented vide MoD letter

13|[Page


dated 31.01.2001 and constitutional Courts. But the earlier
Entitlement Rules 2008 have been superseded by the new ER-
2023. There has been no change in the entitlement for any category
of death/disability and rates of any death/disability compensation in
the new ER-2023.

ER and GMO, 2023 are the product of extensive deliberations
held among the three Services, DESW, MoD (Finance) and DMA.

There is no material change in the entitlement of cancer cases in
GMO 2023 compared to GMO 2008. ;

Due to advances in medical science the aggravating factors for
Diabetes Mellitus are now well delineated and hence, the specific
factors have been mentioned which could occur at any place
irrespective of field or peace.GMO 2023 objectively defines the
criteria for considering the disease to be aggravated by service and
broadens the same. Hypertension was considered only aggravated
by service. However, as per new GMO-2023, it can also be
attributable to service. Hence, it is more beneficial for the Armed

Forces Personnel in determining attributability/aggravation.

(9) Primary Hypertension - As per Para 43, Ch VI, GMO 2008,
entitlement for attributability was not considered appropriate.
Primary Hypertension was considered aggravated if it occurred
while serving in Field areas, HAA, Cl Ops or prolonged afloat
service.

All the conditions such as HAA, active operation, service on board

ship/submarine that can affect the onset or course of illness have

14|Page


been included in GMO 2023 for granting entitlement for
Hypertension. In addition, any worsening or aggravation in the form
of target organ damage, due to service condition, will be considered
as aggravated by service irrespective of Field or Peace.De induction
period of 3 months after serving in HAA, has been introduced in new
GMO.

The criteria for entitlement of PIVD and Spondylosis have been
reformed and updated in view of latest knowledge in the field of

medicine.

It is once reiterated that any disease, even beyond all the above
mentioned conditions, is to be considered aggravated by military
service if the evidence indicates that its onset was hastened by
specific conditions of mil service, i.e. causal connection is
established, as per Para 3, Ch Il, GMO 2023.

Hence, the new provisions of GMO-2023 are more beneficial for the
Armed Forces Personnel in determining attributability/aggravation”.

Under the old rules, the disability percentage granted for diseases

like heart disease and hypertension aggravated by military service was 30

per cent and now the same has been reduced to 10 per cent and below,

thereby taking it below the minimum percentage required for disability

pension/ impairment relief i.e, 20 per cent. The same has been done with

many other disabilities also. When asked about the reasons for the

reduction in the grant of disability percentage for diseases like heart

disease and hypertension and also the reasons for taking it below the

15|Page


minimum percentage required for disability pension/ impairment relief i.e,

20 per cent, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:

“The assessment criteria for the disabilities have been objectified for
correct assessment of the functional status of the individual. The
subjective nature of the assessment has been done away with. All
the specialist assessing the disability will be required to fill the
assessment sheet and objectively define the functional deficit due to

the disability.

The interpretation of reduction in percentage of assessment is
applicable only if the condition is well controlled and individual has
no sequelae or target organ damage. However, as heart failure or
organ involvement of target organ like Kidney, Heart, Eyes evolve,
the percentage of assessment will increase. In addition, it must be
appreciated that many disabilities due to attributable injuries or
illnesses have been granted higher percentage of assessment in

comparison to earlier compensation in the new GMO 2023’.

16|Page


Part-ll
Observations/Recommendations

The Committee find that Defence personnel is granted disability
pension in case he/she is invalidated out on account of a disability or
retires (discharged) with sustained disability attributable to, or
aggravated by the service. As per the Guide for Medical Officers
(GMO) 2002, disability denotes solely the actual wound, injury -or
disease, the disablement caused by which gives rise to a claim for
compensation. When the disablement is attributable to or aggravated
by Military Service and is assessed at 20 per cent or more, the
concerned defence personnel is granted disability pension. Disability
pension consists of two elements viz. Service Element and Disability
Element. Service element is equal to the retiring pension determined.
Disability Element for 100 per cent disability for various ranks is 30
per cent of emoluments last drawn. For disability less than 100 per
cent, it shall be reduced proportionally. The Principal Controller of
Defence Accounts (Pension), Prayagraj [PCDA (P)] is responsible for
sanctioning, accounting, etc., of pensions of the service personnel of
the Indian Army. Audit examined the grant of disability pension of the
Indian Army during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 and found that
absence of input in vital fields of database of PCDA (P) like category,
disease, etc. with regard to disability impeded any meaningful
analysis; high percentage of Officers and PBORs being granted
disability pension on the ground of lifestyle diseases; significantly
higher percentage of Medical Officers being granted disability
pension as compared to other officers of the Indian Army etc. Based

17|Page


on their interaction with the Ministry and the replies received from
them, the Committee have recorded their observations and
recommendations on issues in the audit para that merit consideration

in the succeeding paragraphs.

1. The Committee note that PCDA (P) did not furnish to the Audit,
category wise data in respect of Officers and 2671 PBORs and
also did not enter the nature of disease in the database. The
Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that the
category was not mentioned in all cases as earlier the category
field was not a mandatory input to be filled in the database.
Further, it was stated that name of disease is blank in the master
database in respect of these cases. The Committee while
opining that absence of input in vital fields of database like
category, disease, etc. with regard to disability defeats the very
purpose of creating a database. In this regard, the Committee

recommend the Ministry to ensure that complete database of
pensioners with all relevant_information is maintained and
validated by senior officers to ensure that data is complete and
available for meaningful analysis on the causes of disability
among the defence forces and possible remedial measures to

bring down such cases.
2. The Committee note that the officers retiring with disability to

the total retirees ranged between 36 per cent and 40 per cent
whereas disability pension in case of PBORs ranged between 15
per cent and 18 per cent during the same period. The Committee
note from the reply of the Ministry that the average age of

18|Page


retirement of an officer is 54 years that of PBOR is 35 years (37-
45Yrs) and most of the disabilities encountered during
retirement have their onset in later years of life including
Hypertension, Diabetes, Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) etc., as
these are constitutional disorders which occur with increasing
age. As a mode to detect them early, an elaborate system called
Periodic Medical examination (PME) is conducted only after 35
years of age for all ranks. Since most soldiers retire around this
age, the detection of medical ailments in 40s and 50s is higher in
officers. Further analysis of disability data as furnished by the
PCDA (P) revealed that 21.69 per cent and 13 per cent disability
pension out of all disability pensions were granted to Officers
and PBORs respectively, exclusively on the ground of lifestyle
diseases viz. Primary Hypertension and Diabetes Mellitus (DM-
Il). The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that as per
the Fifth National Family Health Survey the prevalence of
hypertension in India is 28.1% that of Diabetes Mellitus is 16.1,
however, in the Armed Forces, prevalence of hypertension and
diabetes, according to the data from Indian Navy, is 3.25% and
2.14% and in Indian Air Force is 5% and 3.38%. The Committee,
however, are of the view that 40% officers retiring with disability
and one fifth of these being on the ground of lifestyle diseases
does not speak well for the armed forces where physical fitness
is a mandatory requirement. The Committee desire to be

apprised of the percentage of prevalence of hypertension and
diabetes in Indian Army personnel and the remedial measures
suggested by the Army Medical Corps for checking these life

19|Page


style diseases in order to bring them to the minimum. Further,
the Committee desire that a root cause analysis be undertaken
to remedy this situation.

. The Committee note that the percentage of Medical Officers
granted disability pension was significantly higher as compared
to other officers in Indian Army. The Committee note from the
reply of the Ministry that the Medical officers have irregular
working hours, are unable to adopt healthy lifestyles, and,
therefore, are relatively more prone to developing lifestyle
disorders. Further, by virtue of domain knowledge, they report
early and are detected in larger numbers. The ministry has
further stated that an analysis of medical officers having higher
percentage of disabilities due to lifestyle disorders than other
officers needs to be compared realistically as a subset since this
composite figure includes officers of the MNS and non-technical
officers. However, preventive steps have been taken and a
policy has been promulgated that Release Medical Boards of
medical officer will be conducted only in hospitals commanded
by a Brigadier and above and also in a different geographical
location outside the area of responsibility to eliminate any such

perception. The Committee while noting that the figures as
pointed out by the Audit are composite, desire to be apprised of
the disability data_in respect _of all categories of officers
separately in the Armed Forces along with an analysis of the
disease they are suffering from and the average age of the onset

of these diseases.

20|Page


4. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that the
Entitlement Rules 2023 have strengthened the process of award
of disability compensation, thereby facilitating seamless
processing of entitlements while preventing any misuse,
misinterpretation and dilution of disability compensation
policies/ frame work. These rules aim to encourage personnel to
remain physically and medically fit and at the same time ensure
that all genuine disability cases are suitably compensated as per
Govt. regulations. Further, the new rules do not impact any

widows or war wounded personnel and veterans in any manner.

The Committee while acknowledging the efforts made by the
Ministry to strengthen the process of award of_ disability
compensation recommend that actively engaging with the army engac ing with the arm
personnel will go a long way in addressing their apprehension
for_the new rules and for this, awareness and outreach
programmes _and_ interactive sessions may be conducted to
dispel any doubts in the minds of the Army personnel, serving

or retired.
NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

ऋष मऊ के ऋऊ

21 |? 586