95

POLLUTION CAUSED BY PLASTIC

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND
CLIMATE CHANGE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

NINETY FIFTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2325

NINETY FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

POLLUTION CAUSED BY PLASTIC

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE
CHANGE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iv)
INTRODUCTION (४)
REPORT
= PART-I ~ 7 : रा
INTRODUCTION — 1
"A. | Inconsistencies in assessment of plastic waste generated. “7 a
8. | Lack of uniformity in method ofassessment 7 ee ~
C. | Improper collection, processing & disposal of plastic waste _ —
~~ “D. | Projections of the quantities of plastic waste to be generated ~
है. | Absence of policy for reduction, reuse orrecycle. ~~ ~ a
F. | Non-compliance of PWM Rules 2016 प्र
i. Non-registration of Plastic units .
ii. Delay in application for registration |
iii. Irregular grant of Registration हु
iv. Irregularities in renewal of registrations हे _
6. | Delay in Elimination of Single Use Plastic
H. | Extended Producers Responsibility ~ ~ a
|. | Non-submission of modalities for waste collection by Producers हु ड़
J. | Non-establishment of system for collecting back the plastic | back the plastic waste by
Producers, Importers and Brand Owners
K. | Non-setting up of system for PWM by local bodies ड़
[1 | Absence of clear provisions for penalty for violation of PWM Rule 206 |
; iM. | Monitoring oe a

PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

~ ~~ APPENDICES _

‘1

Minutes of the second sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) | (2023-24)
held on 17-07-2023.

“ul

Minutes of the-tenth-sitting of Public: Accounts Committee (2023-24) held
on 30-10-2023.

AL

Minutes of the seventeenth sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-

1.24) held on 05-02-2024. _

* Not appended to the cyclostyied copy of the Report ~



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

छू 4 90 छा # (० ७

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

4. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.c.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sckhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, ‘Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Pollution caused by Plastic" based on Para Nos. 5.2 of C&AG Report no.
21 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in Rajya Sabha/
Lok Sabha on 20 December 2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Central Pollution Control Board:
Urban Development Departments; Pollution Control Boards of Sikkim & Punjab and
Urban Local Bodies concerned of metro cities (Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata) at their
sitting held on 17 July 2023 The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) further obtained
detailed information in connection with the examination of the subject of Urban
Development Department and Urban Local Bodies of NCT of Delhi at their sitting held
on 30 October 2023. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting
held on 05 February 2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended

to the Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the

Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, CPCBs/SPCBs, Urban
Development Department and Urban Local Bodies for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vi)


REPORT

Part-l

INTRODUCTION

The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that plastic pollution has become one
of the most pressing environmental issues, as rapidly increasing production of
disposable plastic products overwhelms the world’s ability to deal with them.

2. In this sequel, the Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed
examination and report, the subject “Pollution caused by Plastic” based on Para 5.2 of
Comptroller and Audit General Report No. 21 of 2022. This Para pertains to the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Ministry’).

3. Audit conducted an assessment of effectiveness and compliance of the
provisions of Plastic Waste Management Rules, in order to examine their adequacy in
management of plastic waste and to address the risks posed by plastic waste to
environment and health. Eighteen wards from six selected zones of three Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) in Delhi, eight ULBs & thirty Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) from six sampled
districts in Punjab and four ULBs & nine Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) from three
sampled districts in Sikkim during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 were assessed by the

Audit.

4. The Public Accounts Committee during its examination, reviewed the activities

carried out for the management of plastic waste in Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Central Pollution Control! Board (CPCB), State Pollution
Control Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) of the NCT of Delhi,
Sikkim and Punjab provided by the Audit. The Committee also undertook review of
activities of Urban Development Departments (UDDs) of the Major metropolitan cities of
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata as well given the gravity of the subject.

5. The Audit findings have revealed a series of discrepancies and issues in
handling of plastic waste and pollution caused by it and with respect to Plastic Waste
Management Rules, 2016 as enumerated below:

(i) a serious lack of mechanism for assessment of generation of plastic waste, its
collection and safe disposal

(ii) the stakeholders, MoEF&CC, CPCB, SPCBs/ PCCs are not working in tandem to
control generation, putting effective system for collection and safe disposal of plastic

waste

(iii) Plastic Waste Management Rules framed by MoEF&CC lack comprehensiveness to
give thrust to effective implementation and monitoring thereof

1


(iv) Bye-laws of local bodies incorporating provisions of PWM Rules have not been
notified by state urban departments

(v) In absence of uniform methodology for assessment, incomplete and invalidated data
is channelized to the Ministry for decision making

(vi) Lackadaisical approach of CPCB and SPCBs/ PCCs allowed the plastic units to
function without valid registrations

(vii) Absence of action plan in place for effective implementation of the three-pronged
strategy thereby leading to ineffectiveness in the implementation of PWM rules

(vill) Non-framing of a uniform framework of Extended Producer's Responsibility
resulted into non-development of a system of collecting back and processing of plastic
waste with assistance of PIBOs as per PWM Rules

(ix) Deficient system of monitoring rendered the implementation of PWM Rules
ineffective to contribute in abatement of pollution caused by plastic waste

(x) Failure in the safe management of plastic waste has detrimental long term health
and environment concerns and this issue needs to be taken up on a priority basis by the
Government. है

The examination of the audit findings by the Committee have been detailed in
succeeding paragraphs:

A. Inconsistencies in assessment of plastic waste generated

6. MoEF&CC provided the details of plastic waste generated across the country
during 2015-16 to 2019-20 which it received from CPCB. This data reported by CPCB to
MoEF&CC was based on the inputs provided by the SPCBs or PCCs to CPCB,
However, on scrutiny of records of PCBs/PCCs, Audit found that :

« PCBs and PCCs of many states and UTs did not provide data on plastic
waste generation for the period 2016-18 to CPCB.

e During 2018-20, although all the states and UTs provided the data of plastic
waste generation, the reported data did not include plastic waste generated
by all the ULBs and RLBs. There were data gaps due to which CPCB as well
as MoEF&CC did not have complete and comprehensive picture of Plastic
Waste generation in entire country during the period 2015-20.

¢ Audit also observed that the data received from SPCBs and PCCs was not
validated by CPCB to assess its authenticity and correctness.

«All the three sampled ULBs of Delhi-did-not furnish the data of plastic waste -
generated to DPCC every year during 2015-20. The Audit findings show a


7.

8.

variation of 45.97 per cent in the data of NDMC and of 40 percent in case of
SDMC with respect to the data provided to Audit.

¢ The data provided to Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development Company
(PMIDC) by ULBs of Punjab vary from 12.04 per cent to 51.93 per cent from
that with Punjab PCB reported to CPCB during 2015-16 to 2019-20.

¢ Sikkim PCB did not report the plastic waste generated in the years 2015-16
and 2017-18 to CPCB and for the period 2016-17, 2018-19 and 2019-20, the
data reported to Audit was 52.22 per cent in excess to the actual generation.

In their Action taken notes, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“ Previously, from 2015 till 2018 only 14 to 21 SPCBs/PCCs submitted
information to CPCB. After repeated follow-up with State Pollution Control Board
/Pollution Control Committees all 35 SPCBs/PCCs have started to provide
information on plastic waste management.

The SPCBs/PCCs are required to validate the data submitted by the Local
bodies through random sampling /field inspection.

Since the conduct of audit, in order to monitor timely submission of information
by SPCBs/PCCs, the Ministry has operationalized a separate “Reporting Module”
for online data reporting from all SPCBs/ PCCs on the National Dashboard on
Elimination of Single Use Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste Management.
Login IDs and Credentials have been created for all SPCBs/PCCs. Steps have
also been taken for online annual reporting on plastic waste management by
local body to SPCB / PCC.”

The Committee desired to know from MoEFCC whether there is an online system

for compiling/ submitting the data pertaining to plastic waste management to each level
of the hierarchy i.e., MOEFF&CC / CPCB/ SPCBs / PCCs / Local Bodies / Plastic Waste
Recycling/ Processing Units. In this regard the Ministry through a written reply submitted

as under:

" As per Rule 17 of Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules 2016, plastic waste
processing facility provides information to local bodies vide Form IV till 30" April
of every year. Local bodies are mandated to submit information vide Form V to
State Urban Development Department with copy to SPCB/ PCC till 30" June of
every year. CPCB compiles information submitted by SPCBs/PCCs vide Form VI
till 317 August of every year for preparing annual report on use and management
of plastic waste. At present, the report is compiled through offline mode.

Since the conduct of audit, in order to monitor timely submission of information
by SPCBs/PCCs, the Ministry has operationalized a separate “Reporting
Module” for online’ data reporting from all SPCBs/ PCCs on the National
Dashboard on Elimination of Single Use Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste
Management. Login IDs and Credentials have been created for all SPCBs/PCCs.

3


9.

Steps have also been taken for online annual reporting on plastic waste
management by local body to SPCB / PCC. Through the Reporting Module shift
is being made from manual-multistep system to IT enabled system. The Online
annual reporting proforma for plastic waste management has data fields for
collection, segregation, recycling and disposal separately. Online system will
ensure timely reporting, monitoring and avoid delays."

In view of the gaps pointed by Audit in the data, the Committee enquired about

the prescribed method by which plastic waste generation is to be assessed by the Local
Bodies which are the first agency to gather this basic data and if any deviations have
been noticed from the prescribed procedures. The Ministry in their written replies

submitted as follows:

“There are standard methods available for assessment of_and quantification of
plastic waste at dump sites. One of the internationally acceptable methods is
ASTM Method (D5231-92) method for assessment and quantification of plastic
waste at dump sites, used by CPCB in their report on “Assessment &
Characterization of Plastic Waste Generation in 60 Major Cities". The
methodology was adopted to assess batch/samples of known weight of fresh
Municipal Solid waste (MSW) arriving at dumpsites on different days from
different sources in vehicles. From the sampled Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)
the various types of plastics like PET, PE Based (LDPE/HDPE), PVC, PP, PS/
OTHER are sorted out and segregated. Finally, the segregated plastics are
weighed and quantified.

The ASTM Method describes procedures for measuring the composition of
unprocessed municipal solid waste (MSW) by employing manual sorting. This
test method applies to determination of the mean composition of MSW based on
the collection and manual sorting of a number of samples of waste over a
selected time period covering a minimum of one week. This test method includes
procedures for the collection of a representative sorting sample of unprocessed
waste, manual sorting of the waste into individual waste components, data
reduction, and reporting of the results. This test method may be applied at landfill
sites, waste processing and conversion facilities, and transfer stations.

The comprehensive study of CPCB covering 60 cities spread across the north,
south, east, west and central regions of the country had been used to provide the
national level picture on presence and composition of plastic waste in municipal
solid waste. As per CPCB, SPCBs/PCCs are required to validate data through
random sampling and field inspection as per the aforementioned methodology.

The Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual published under Swachh
Bharat Mission for use by local bodies has a methodology for waste
quantification and assessment of waste composition. The Manual was prepared
by Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization
(CPHEEO), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. As the quantum and
composition of waste is influenced by factors such as population, area, level of
urbanization, each local body undertakes their own assessment on quantum and

4


10.

composition of municipal solid waste, which is then used as benchmark value for
planning and management at the city level.

The Comprehensive Action Plan developed by States / UTs for elimination of
single use plastics and effective plastic waste management includes assessment
of plastic waste as an activity. The Guidelines on Extended Producer
Responsibility (EPR) on plastic packaging notified on 16" February 2022, has
also mandated SPCBs/PCCs to undertake compositional survey of collected
mixed municipal waste to determine the share of plastic waste as well as
different categories of plastic packaging material."

The Committee desired to know from the Ministry the mechanism in place in

CPCB to validate the data on plastic waste generation received from SPCBs/ PCCs/

Local Bodies/ Plastic Waste Recycling/ Processing Units, on which the Ministry gave

the following reply:

11.

"Local bodies are mandated for solid waste management including plastic waste
management. As such collection of data on waste generation by local bodies is
required for management of solid waste including plastic waste. Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affairs has brought out Solid Waste Management Manual for
use by urban local bodies under Swachh Bharat Mission Urban. It may be seen
from inputs received from urban local bodies of four metro cities that local bodies
have commissioned studies from technical institutions for waste characterization
and waste quantification. The data provided by local body is submitted in
prescribed form to SPCB/PCC.

As per CPCB, the SPCBs/PCCs are required to validate data submitted by the
local bodies through random sampling / field inspection.

Further, as per Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic
packaging, CPCB/SPCB/ PCC mandated to carry out a compositional survey of
collected mixed municipal waste to determine the share of plastic waste as well
as different categories of plastics packaging material on a half-yearly basis.

2043 Plastic Waste Processors are registered on the centralized online EPR
portal for plastic packaging. These PWPs are mandated to submit online returns.
The information provided by registered PWPs is on the centralized online EPR
portal is verifiable."

The Committee enquired from the Ministry if any penal provisions been

prescribed for agencies not providing the requisite data and how the-compliance of the
Rules was being ensured. The Ministry provided the following reply in response in this

regard :

"Vide Rule 18 of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, as amended,

environmental compensation shall be levied based upon polluter pays principle,

on persons who are not complying with the provisions of these rules, as per
5


guidelines notified by the CPCB. The Guidelines provide details of Environmental
Compensation to be levied, rule — wise and the action take to be taken for non-
compliance.

As regards, timely filing of annual returns by producers, importers and brand
owners and plastic waste processors, environmental compensation regime has
been prescribed. The Central Pollution Control Board pursues with SPCBS/PCCs
for timely filing of annual reports. Earlier, CPCB has also taken steps available
under. law to ensure submission of annual reports by SPCBS/PCCs including
through issuance of Directions under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986, to SPCBs/PCCs. Steps have also been mooted for levying of
Environmental Compensation on local bodies for not providing requisite
information through annual reports.

B. Lack of uniformity in method of assessment

12. Audit further found that there is no uniform method for assessment of plastic
waste generation within a State. The data of plastic waste generation reported by ULBs
was based on assumptions without any sound rationale. In Delhi, East Delhi Municipal
Corporation (EDMC) and NDMC assumed the plastic waste generation to be 10 per
cent of the total municipal solid waste. On the other hand, SDMC calculated it at the
rate of 4.4 to six per cent of the total waste generated. In Punjab, PMIDC provided the
quantum of plastic waste generation computed at seven per cent of total municipal
waste generated. CPCB admitted that it was not aware of the methodology being

adopted by ULBs for calculation of quantity of plastic waste generated by them.

13. In their Action taken notes, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“Methodology for assessment and quantification of plastics waste has been
detailed in the Report on "Assessment Characterization of Plastic Waste
Generation in 60 Major Cities" prepared by CPCB.

CPCB had used internationally acceptable ASTM Method (D5231-92) method for
assessment and quantification of plastics waste at dump sites. The methodology
was adopted to assess batch/samples of known weight of fresh Municipal Solid
waste (MSW) arriving at dumpsites on different days from different sources in
vehicles.

From the sampled Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) the various types of plastics like
PET, PE Based (LDPE/HDPE), PVC, PP, PS/ OTHER has been sorted out and
segregated. Finally, the segregated plastics are weighed and quantified.

The ASTM. Method describes procedures for measuring the composition of

unprocessed municipal solid waste (MSW) by employing manual sorting. This test

method applies to determination of the mean composition of MSW based on the

collection and manual sorting of a number of samples of waste over a selected
6


time period covering a minimum of one week. This test method includes
procedures for the collection of a representative sorting sample of unprocessed
waste, manual sorting of the waste into individual waste components, data
reduction, and reporting of the results. This test method may be applied at landfill
sites, waste processing and conversion facilities, and transfer stations.

The comprehensive study of CPCB covering 60 cities spread across the north,
south, east, west and central regions of the country had been used to provide the
national level picture on presence and composition of plastic waste in municipal
solid waste.

For use by local bodies, the Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual
published under Swachh Bharat Mission uses the quatering and coning technique
for waste quantification and assessment of waste composition.

As the quantum and composition of waste is influenced by factors such as
population, area, level of urbanization, each local body undertakes their own
assessment on quantum and composition of municipal, which is then used as

benchmark value for planning and management at the city level.”

14. The Committee desired to know if the data on generation of plastic waste is -

collected in a uniform manner by the Local Bodies for all States/ UTs, to which the

Ministry furnished the following reply:

"There are standard methods available for assessment of and quantification of
plastics waste at dump sites. One of the internationally acceptable methods is
ASTM Method (D5231-92) method for assessment and quantification of plastics
waste at dump sites, used by CPCB in their report Report on "Assessment &
Characterization of Plastic Waste Generation in 60 Major Cities" prepared by

CPCB.

The Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual published under Swachh Bharat
Mission for use by local bodies also has a methodology for waste quantification
and assessment of waste composition. The Manual was prepared by Central
Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO), Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affairs. As the quantum and composition of waste is
influenced by factors such as population, area, level of urbanization, each local
body undertakes their own assessment on quantum and composition of municipal,
which is then used as benchmark value for planning and management at the city
level. Generally, the data on plastic waste generation is collected by technical

institution for the ULB."

15. The Committee further enquired regarding on the frequency of assessment of
actual plastic waste being generated in a municipal area and if any specific guidelines
_ or standards were in place for the assessment of plastic waste, such as the types of

plastic considered. The Ministry provided the following response in their written replies:


"The frequency of assessment of actual plastic waste being generated in a
municipal area is determined by the local bodies concerned based upon ground
situation and requirement.

As mentioned earlier, the methodology for assessment and quantification of
plastics waste detailed in the CPCB Report on "Assessment & Characterization of
Plastic Waste Generation in 60 Major Cities" is internationally acceptable
ASTM Method (D5231-92) method for assessment and quantification of plastics
waste at dump sites. The Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual
published under Swachh Bharat Mission for use by local bodies has a
methodology for waste quantification and assessment of waste composition.

As per Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging,
CPCB/SPCB/ PCC mandated to carry out a compositional survey of collected
mixed municipal waste to determine the share of plastic waste as well as different
categories of plastics packaging material on a half-yearly basis."

C. Improper collection, processing & disposal of plastic waste

16. The Committee learnt that Under Rule 6 and 7 of PWM Rules, 2016, the
responsibilities of Local Bodies (LBs) and Gram Panchayats are defined for setting up,
operationalization and co-ordination of the waste management system in their areas.
Regarding availability of data on plastic waste collection, recycling, co-processing and
its ultimate disposal, SPCBs and PCCs every year provide the data regarding status for
implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 in Form VI to CPCB, which
compiles the same and submits a consolidated report to MoEF&CC. Form VI comprises
of data fields like estimated Plastic waste generation, Action Plan for collection &
disposal of Plastic waste, number of registered Producers, Importers, Brand Owners
etc. The Audit findings point to non availability of data fields of plastic waste collected,
uncollected and utilized in Form Vi. To this effect, CPCB pointed out the deficiencies
and requested MoEF&CC for revision of Form VI by including the desired data fields.
The revisions were not adopted by MoEF&CC, as suggested by CPCB, till 2021.

17. In the context of the three sampled states, the following discrepancies were

highlighted by audit :

+ Punjab - collection of 100 per cent plastic waste generated by ULBs during
2015-20 was reported without any documentary evidence in support. No status of the
70 per cent of plastic waste which was predominantly non-recyclable was found while
25 to 30 per cent fraction of recyclable plastic, all of which was picked and segregated


by the informal sector viz., rag pickers, junk dealers etc., and channelized to recyclers
directly.

+ Sikkim - Collection of 65.31 per cent (i.e. 998.38 tonnes) of the total plastic
waste generated during 2015-20 was reported. The collected plastic waste was
segregated by scrap vendors at landfill sites and recyclable fraction of plastic waste was
sent to Siliguri, West Bengal. Sikkim PCB stated that there are no recycling or
processing units in the state.

+ Delhi - Data of plastic waste generation, collection and utilization during 2015-
18 was found unavailable. Audit findings show only 20 per cent of the collected plastic
waste was utilized during the period 2018-20.

18. In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“A separate “Reporting Module” for online data reporting from all SPCBs/ PCCs
has been operationalized on the National Dashboard on Elimination of Single Use
Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste Management.

The reporting module for online data reporting from all SPCBs/ PCCs has data
fields related to (i) Collection, (ii) Segregation, (iii) Recycling, and (iv) Disposal.
Plastic packaging waste is an important component of plastic waste being
generated in the country. Extended Producer Responsibility of plastic packaging
ensures environmentally sound management of plastic packaging by producers,
importers and brand owners who introduce plastic packaging in the market.

As per the Guidelines for extended producer responsibility on plastic packaging
notified on 16" February 2022, a centralized online postal on extended producer
responsibility on plastic packaging is operational. Producers, Importers and Brand
Owners of plastic packaging and Plastic waste processors are obligated entities
under EPR who have to register on the centralized online EPR portal.

Around 21,000 PIBOs are registered on the online EPR portal, having an EPR
liability of 3 million tonnes for the year 2022-23, which is a significant proportion of
plastic waste generated in the country.

As EPR liability is fulfilled by PIBOs, through EPR certificates generated by
tegistered plastic waste processors, complete details forplastic packaging waste
collected, recycled or sent for end of life disposal is available.

As this information is made available through centralized online EPR portal in a
transparent and verifiable manner by obligated entities themselves, reliable data
on management of plastic packaging waste will be available after filing of annual
returns by PIBOs and PWPs after 31st October 2023, the last date of filing of
returns as per Plastic Waste Management Rules.”

19. The Committee enquired from the Ministry whether waste management systems
have been operationalized in all areas under the Local Bodies/ Gram Panchayats in all
the States/UTs in the country and the difficulties being faced by the Local Bodies in
setting up, operationalization and co-ordination of the waste management system in

those areas. The Ministry furnished the following reply in response:
9


20.

"Sanitation is a state subject. Local Bodies and Gram Panchayats are mandated
for solid waste management. The Central Government is providing Additional
Central Assistance for solid waste management including plastic waste
management through Swachh Bharat Mission Urban 2.0 and Swachh Bharat
Mission Grameen Phase Il, for urban and rural areas of the country.

The Guidelines for Extended Producer Responsibility on plastic packaging have
put a market based EPR mechanism in place. The EPR Guidelines provide a
clear mechanism for local bodies to engage with PIBOs and PWPs. The
implementation of the EPR in plastic packaging will further strengthen the plastic
waste management infrastructure including collection, segregation, processing
and environmentally sound end of life disposal.

The mechanism provided under EPR Guidelines for development of plastic waste
management system is given below.

v Clause 11.7 of EPR Guidelines provide that the local authorities can get
EPR certificates from registered PWPs for the plastic packaging waste provided
by local body for waste processing. These certificates can then be exchanged
with PIBOs. This would allow revenue generation opportunity for the local bodies.

v Clause 14.1 (c) of EPR Guidelines provide that PIBOs may develop
collection and segregation infrastructure of plastic packaging waste, as required,
based on implementation modality by offering for collection and waste processing
through engagement with local bodies.

As regards information provided by SPCBs/PCCs to CPCB, a total 2962 out of
3724 ULBs have set up waste management system which is approx. 80% of total
no.of ULBs."

The Committee asked the Ministry as to how it was ensuring that the action plan

for collection and. disposal of Plastic waste is formulated and actually implemented
within the specified time frame, to which the Ministry in a written reply stated as follows:

"The National Task Force constituted by the Ministry vide office order dated 250
June 2021 oversees the implementation of comprehensive action plans
developed by States/UTs. Four meetings of the National Taskforce have been
held. Further, States/UTs have been asked to update the progress made in the
implementation of Comprehensive action plan on the national dashboard.

IT based technologies have been put in place for effective monitoring

v CPCB centralized online EPR portal for plastic packaging
(www.cpcbeprplastic.in)

v National Dashboard for elimination of identified SUP items and effective
implementation of PWMR, 2016 (www.suppwmdashboard.in)

v CPCB Monitoring Module for Compliance on Elimination of Single Use
Plastic (www.cpcbplastic.in/sup) हि ह

v SUP Grievance Redressal App (https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/SUPApp.pdf)

10


21.

In addition, specific focus has also been given to plastic waste management in
SBM U 2.0 and SBM (Grameen) Phase II. Swachh Sarvekhan also captures
activities for elimination of single use plastics and plastic waste management.

Plastic packaging waste which is a significant component of plastic waste is
covered under EPR of PIBOs. As such environmental sound management of
plastic packaging waste is ensured in a time bound manner as environmental
compensation will be levied on PIBOs for non-fulfilment of EPR targets.

Already, around 22631 PIBOs are registered on the online EPR portal. The EPR
liability for the year 2022-23 is 3 million tonnes, which is a significant proportion
of plastic waste generated in the country. The PIBOs have to fulfill the EPR
liability for 2022-23 by purchasing EPR certificates generated by registered
PWPs and file annual return by 311 October 2023. Already EPR certificates for
2.9 million tonnes have been generated by registered plastic waste processors
showing 2.9 million tonnes of plastic packaging waste has been processed in an
environmentally sound manner. Out of the EPR certificates for 2.9 million tonnes,
1.75 million tonnes of EPR certificates have been procured by PIBOs to fulfill
their EPR obligations. In case PIBOs do not fulfill their EPR obligations within the
stipulated time they become liable for levy environmental compensation.

As such, implementation of EPR on plastic packaging ensures environmentally
sound management of plastic packaging waste in a time bound manner. The
progress made in the implementation of EPR can be seen in a transparent
manner on the dashboard on centralized online EPR portal for plastic packaging.
There is a Committee under the chairpersonship of Chairman CPCB, which
oversees the implementation of EPR on plastic packaging. "

Further, as per the information furnished by the Ministry regarding the present

status of plastic waste collected, not collected and utilized in the country, plastic waste
generation in the country is approx. 3889280 TPA as per information provided by
SPCBs/PCCs to CPCB for FY 2021-2022. Out of this approximately, total 1401521.9 T
of plastic waste has been processed in FY 2021-22 which amounts to 36.03 percentage

of the total plastic waste generation.

22.

In view of data gaps on plastic waste as seen in the sampled bodies and as

evident from lack of data fields in the form for reporting the data, the Committee desired
to know from the Ministry if it is carrying out effective planning for managing plastic
waste. The reply furnished by the Ministry in this regard is as follows:

“The comprehensive study of CPCB covering 60 cities spread across the north,
south, east, west and central regions of the country had been used to provide the
national level picture on presence and composition of plastic waste in municipal
solid waste. The Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual published under
Swachh Bharat Mission for use by local bodies has a methodology for waste
quantification and assessment of waste composition. Data will also flow from
EPR portal in respect of plastic. packaging waste. The amendments have been

11


brought since 2021 for reducing pollution caused by littered and unmanaged
plastic waste through single use plastic ban and notification of guidelines for
extended producer responsibility on plastic packaging. Measures have been
taken for effective reporting as well. This would further aid in effective planning
for managing plastic waste

Further, CPCB has received Action Plans on plastic waste management from
SPCBs/PCCs which had data for plastic waste generation, collection, processing
including recycling for the years 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21, and 2021-22

(except Manipur).

The improvements carried out since 2021 have transformed the plastic waste
management ecosystem. Progress has been made on elimination of single use
plastic and implementation of EPR on plastic packaging

The use of following IT based tools for monitoring and implementation has

been put in place: _
v CPCB centralized online EPR portal for plastic packaging

(www.cpcebeprplastic.in)

v National Dashboard for elimination of identified SUP items and effective
implementation of PWMR, 2016 (www.suppwmdashboard.in)
v CPCB Monitoring Module for Compliance on Elimination of Single Use

Plastic (www.cpcbplastic.in/sup)
v SUP Grievance Redressal App (https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/SUPApp.pdf)

The strategy adopted by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
to tackle unmanaged and littered plastic waste has two pillars viz. placing ban on
single use plastic items which have high littering potential and low utility
(Reduction in plastic waste generation), and effective implementation extended
producer responsibility on plastic packaging (quantitative target for recycling of
plastic waste and reuse of rigid plastic packaging). In order to reduce littered and
unmanaged plastic waste, a ban has already been imposed on identified single
use plastic items, which have high littering potential and low utility, with effect from
1st July 2022, across the country. With respect to recycling of plastic waste and
reuse, the Extended Producer Responsibility Guidelines on plastic packaging
notified on 16th February 2022, provide mandatory quantitative targets for
recycling plastic waste and reuse of rigid plastic packaging by producers,
importers and brandowners in a phased manner.

Further, the States/UTs have been asked to develop comprehensive action plans
for elimination of single use plastics and effective plastic waste management. The
action plan covers ten thematic areas covering forty eight activities. Twenty four
States/UTs have communicated their Comprehensive Action Plans to the Ministry.
All States/UTs have constituted special taskforces under the chairpersonship of
Chief Secretary to review the implementation of comprehensive action plan.
Twelve Central Ministries have also developed their comprehensive action plans
for undertaking activities under identified thematic areas in order to support
elimination of single use plastics and effective-plastic waste management. The
States / UTs and concerned Central Ministries have been asked to update the
progress made on comprehensive action plans on the National Dashboard on

12


Elimination of Single Use Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste Management. Four
meetings of the National Task Force have been held to oversee and coordinate
action on elimination of single use - plastics and effective plastic waste
management.”

23. The Committee asked the Ministry of the details of the actions that have been
taken to ensure validation of data collected and ensuring collection of proper data. The

Ministry in this regard furnished:

"As per CPCB, SPCBs/PCCs are to validate data collected by ULB on a sample
basis. As submitted earlier, the Ministry has taken steps from transitioning from
manual multi-step procedures to IT based tools for transparency, accountability
and ease of doing business.

Under the EPR Guideline, both PIBOs and PWPs are mandated for filing returns
with respect to fulfillment of EPR obligations. The data available on centralized
online EPR portal on plastic packaging is collected directly from obligated entities
and is verifiable. Further relevant documents uploaded on the EPR portal have
auto check features for compliance.”

D. Projections of the quantities of plastic waste to be generated

24. Waste generation projects leads to waste policy formulation and is an
indispensable process in waste management planning. The dominant parameters
influencing the quantum of waste generated need to be described and evaluated. No
projection, on the growth in plastic waste to be generated in future was available based
on population size, geographical size of the area, economic growth, increased demand

for consumer goods and change in manufacturing methods etc.

25. In the context of projections of the quantities of plastic waste to be generated, in

their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“Assessment of plastic waste generation, requirement of waste management
infrastructure, gap analysis and strategy for development plastic waste management
infrastructure at District and State level have been included as an activity in
Comprehensive Action Plans of States / UTs for elimination of single use plastics
and effective plastic waste management.

Waste management function is a municipal function and lies with the third tier of
Government at the local body level.

The concerned local bodies undertake projection of the quantity of waste generated
for development of waste management infrastructure in the area under their
jurisdiction keeping in view future growth taking into account population size,

13


geographical size of the area, economic growth, increased demand for consumer
goods etc. Delhi and Sikkim had undertaken projection of data.

At the national level, a detailed study on “Assessment and Characterization of Plastic
Waste generation in 60 cities spread across the country was carried out by CPCB
in 2015.

A reasonable estimate at the national level was obtained based upon the study on
the proportion of plastic waste in solid waste and the plastic waste being recycled in
the country.

Further, the trend in solid waste generation and plastic waste generation is also
available based upon the Annual Reports submitted by Central Pollution Control
Board based upon previous years’ reported data.”

E. Absence of policy for reduction, reuse or recycle

26. The Audit observation points to the silence of MoEF&CC on the policy for plastic
waste reduction, reuse and recycling. However, the Ministry has adopted a three-
pronged strategy for effective implementation of PVM Rules that includes (i)
behavioural change, (ii) strengthening of institutional system for collection, segregation
and recycling of plastic waste and (iii) engagement with producers, importers and brand
owners through Extended Producer’s Responsibility. It also came to light from Audit
observations that the Ministry does not have any action plan in place for effective
implementation of the said strategy during the period 2015-20. The preparation of a
comprehensive action plan was initiated in May 2021 and is still underway (October
2021). The lack of action plan/policy/ strategy for reduction, reuse or recycle of plastic

waste was similarly found in the sampled states.

27. The Committee have found that Pollution Control Boards are mandated to
provide technical assistance and guidance to carry out, sponsor investigations and
research relating to water and air pollution and prevention, control or abatement of air
and water pollution. However, Audit found the only piece of work done to identify the
effects of plastic waste on environment and health was undertaken in December, 2015
when CPCB conducted a study ‘Impact of Plastic Waste Disposal on soil and water
quality at Lucknow dumpsites’. In the study, it was recommended that dumping of
plastic waste should not be allowed as it deteriorates soil and underground water quality
due to leaching of additives, colours, stabilizers and fillers present in different categories
of plastic products. However, CPCB accepted to have not conducted the assessment of

pollution of plastic waste in air and human health for the entire country, so far. In the

14


sampled States, Department of Environment, Government of NCT Delhi and Punjab
PCB admitted that no such study has been undertaken till date.

28.

29.

In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“The strategy adopted by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
to tackle unmanaged and littered plastic waste has two pillars viz. placing ban on
single use plastic items which have high littering potential and low utility (Reduction
in plastic waste generation), and effective implementation extended producer
responsibility on plastic packaging (quantitative target for recycling of plastic waste
and reuse of rigid plastic packaging).

The States/UTs have been asked to develop comprehensive action plan for

"elimination single use plastics and effective plastic waste management. The action

plan covers ten thematic areas covering forty eight activities.

States/UTs have communicated their Comprehensive Action Plans to the Ministry.
All States/UTs have constituted special taskforces under the chairpersonship of
Chief Secretary to review the implementation of comprehensive action plan.

Four meetings of the National Task Force have been held to oversee and
coordinate action on elimination of single use plastics and effective plastic waste
management.

Twelve Central Ministries have also developed their comprehensive action plans for
undertaking activities under identified thematic areas in order to support elimination
of single use plastics and effective plastic waste management.

The States / UTs and concerned Central Ministries have been asked to update the
progress made on comprehensive action plans on a National dashboard on
Elimination of Single Use Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste Management.

In order to reduce littered and unmanaged plastic waste, already a ban has been
imposed on identified single use plastic items, which have high littering potential
and low utility, with effect from 1st July 2022, all across the country.

With respect to recycling of plastic waste and reuse, the Extended Producer
Responsibility Guidelines on plastic packaging notified on 16th February 2022,
provide mandatory quantitative target for recycling plastic waste and reuse of rigid
plastic packaging by producers, importers and brandowners in a phased manner.
The implementation of the EPR guidelines is done in a transparent and verifiable
manner through a centralized online EPR portal on plastic packaging which is
already under operation. The progress achieved can be seen on Dashboard of the

EPR portal.”
The Committee asked the Ministry of details of any projections that may have

been made of plastic waste generation, to which the Ministry provided the following

reply:

"Assessment of plastic waste generation, requirement of waste management
infrastructure, gap analysis and strategy for development plastic Waste
management infrastructure at District and State level have been included as an

15


activity in Comprehensive Action Plans of States / UTs for elimination of single
use plastics and effective plastic waste management.

Waste management function lies with the local body. The concerned local bodies
undertake projection of the quantity of waste generated for development of waste
management infrastructure in the area under their jurisdiction keeping in view
future growth taking into account population size, geographical size of the area,
economic growth, increasing demand for consumer goods etc.

A reasonable estimate at the national level was obtained based upon the CPCB
study on the proportion of plastic waste in solid waste and the plastic waste being
recycled in the country. Further, the trend in solid waste generation and plastic
waste generation is also available based upon the Annual Reports submitted by
Central Pollution Control Board based upon previous years’ reported data.

Most importantly, with the policy changes effected through EPR Guidelines
wherein SPCBs/PCCs have been mandated for undertaking compositional survey
of municipal solid waste and PIBOs to provide data on actual plastic packaging
being introduced in the market, the quality of data will further improve. Under the
online proforma for reporting by local bodies and SPCBs/PCCs steps have been
taken to include projections on plastic waste generation."

F. Non-compliance of PWM Rules 2016

i. Non-registration of Plastic units

30. Rule 13 of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 provide for registration of
producers, importers and brand owners and plastic waste processors. The registration
of PIBOs and PWPs during the period 2015-2020 is low. A limited number of Producers,
Importers and Brand owners had registered under the Rules during the period of 2015-

2020.

31. Rule No. 13(1) of PWM Rules, 2016 provided that no person shall manufacture
carry bags or recycle plastic bags or multi-layered packaging without obtaining a
registration from the State Pollution Control Board or the Pollution Control Committee of
the Union Territory concerned, as the case may be, prior to the commencement of
production. Producers or brand owners operating in more than two states or UTs need
to apply to CPCB for the purpose of registration and renewal in terms of Rule 13(2).
Audit observed that during 2018-20, 88 brand owners and four producers were granted

registrations by CPCB.

‘32. The Committee have found that Punjab PCB registered only 27.70 per cent of

the total plastic units identified by it till March, 2020. Delhi PCC initiated the registration
16


process in 2018-19 only (i.e. after two years of issue of PWM Rules) and could register
only 12.20 per cent identified plastic units as of now. Sikkim PCB has not yet identified
plastic units functioning in the state. In response, Punjab PCB had assured to make the
efforts to register the plastic units; while Sikkim PCB has informed to have initiated
Extended Producer's Responsibility (EPR) registration activity online.

33. In response, the Ministry submitted the following in their ATNs:-

“The Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging was
notified on 16th February 2022.

For ease of doing business and faster processing of applications of registration, the
EPR Guidelines mandate online registration of producers, importers and brand
owners and plastic waste processors (https://eprplastic.cpcb.gov.in/#/plastic/home).
EPR Guidelines notified in February 2022 lays down a clear framework for
implementation and on account of effective implementation, till date 21672
Producers , Importers and Brand Owners (PIBOs) and 2003 Plastic Waste
Processors (PWPs) have registered on the centralized EPR portal developed by
CPCB, as opposed to 300 in 2021.”

ii. Delay in application for registration

34. Rule 9(4) of PWM Rules, 2016 states that the producer, within a period of three
months from the date of publication (18 March 2016) of these rules shall apply to SPCB
and PCC, for grant of registration. Rule 13 of PWM Rules 2016 amended in March 2018
requires Producers and Brand Owners (PBOs) operating in more than two States or
UTs to register with Central Pollution Control Board. Test check of records of 45 PBOs
registered with CPCB during the period 2018-20 disclosed that these units were in
operation at the time of notification of rules. Further, they had applied for registration

with a delay ranging nine days to more than a year.

35. In sampled states, Punjab PCB granted registrations to 83 producers during
2016-20 which had applied for registration, with a delay ranging from four months to
over 3.7 years. Delhi PCC registered 77 producers during 2019-20 but the records
relating to their registration were not provided to Audit, citing unavailability of the same.
As a result, delays, if any, in applying for registration couldn't be assessed in Audit.
However, claim of Delhi PCC of non- availability of data was unjustified, as being the
only authority for registration of plastic units in Delhi, it should have possessed these

records.

17


36. Further, producers had to register within a period of three months from the date
of publication of Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016 (18 March 2016). The
producers which registered with CPCB and SPCBs/PCCs during the audit period did so
beyond the stipulated time period.

37. Punjab PCB granted registrations to 83 producers during 2016-20 which had
applied for registration, with a delay ranging from four months to over 3.7 years. Delhi
PCC registered 77 producers during 2019-20 but the records relating to their
registration were not available. The producers which registered with CPCB and

SPCBs/PCCs during the audit period did so beyond the stipulated time period.
38. In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“The Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging was
notified on 16th February 2022.

The EPR Guidelines provided a clear framework and methodology for fulfillment of
EPR obligations and also prescribe role and responsibilities of Producer, Importer
and Brand owners, Plastic waste processors, State Pollution Control Board/Pollution
Control Committees and Central Pollution Control Board.

The EPR Guidelines provides methodology for fulfillment of EPR obligations.

The provision for verification, audit and monitoring of PIBOs and Plastic Waste
Processors (PWPs) has also been made.

The clarity given in EPR Guidelines has resulted in substantial increase in
registration of PIBOs and PWPs on the online EPR portal. PIBOs have extended
producer responsibility targets for environmentally sound management of plastic
packaging introduced in the market by them.”

iii. Irregular grant of Registration

39. Further, Rule 13(5) of PWM Rules, 2016 provides the State PCBs and PCCs
shall not issue or renew registration to plastic waste recycling or processing units unless
the unit possesses a valid consent under the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. Audit
observed that Punjab PCB in contravention of provisions ibid, granted registration or
renewal of registration to seven producers and three recyclers beyond the validity
period of their consents, under the Water and Air Acts. On being pointed out, Punjab
PCB assured that the plastic units would be persuaded for renewal of their Air and
Water consents. Delhi PCC did not provide the records relating to date of registration

and consents to Audit.

18


40. Punjab PCB granted registration or renewal of registration to seven producers
and three recyclers beyond the validity of their consent period.. Dethi PCC was not able
to provide records related to date of registration.

41. In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“The EPR registration has been simplified and made online for PIBOs through the
centralized online EPR portal, through EPR guidelines notified on 16" February
2022.

The EPR Guidelines mandate online registration of producers, importers and brand
owners and plastic waste processors(https://eprplastic.cpcb.gov.in/#/plastic/home).
All the relevant documents are to be uploaded on the portal itself. The portal has an

auto check feature to confirm compliances.”
iv. Irregularities in renewal of registrations

42. Rule 13(11) of PWM Rules, 2016 provided that every application for renewal of

registration shall be made at least one hundred twenty days before the expiry of the
validity of the registration certificate. Test check of records relating to renewal of
registration of PBOs registered with CPCB disclosed that the registration of 14 PBOs
had already expired as of March 2020, yet they did not apply for renewal; while, the
applications for renewal in 33 PBOs whose registrations had expired before March 2020
are pending with CPCB till date. Although CPCB served show cause notices to the
PBOs who did not apply for renewal of registration, it did not offer any comments on the
issue of pendency of applications for renewal of registration of Brand Owners. In
Punjab, 24 plastic units whose registration had expired during the period 2018-20 did
not apply for renewal of registration as of March 2020. Moreover, ten plastic units
applied for renewal with Punjab SPCB during 2017-20, with a delay ranging from 04
months to over 1.3 years. In case of Delhi, PCC did not provide the information
regarding renewal of registrations of the plastic units functioning in its jurisdiction.

43. The PIBOs did not apply for renewal registration before the expiry of registration
period. The SPCBs/CPCB did not process the renewal for registration applications in a

timely manner. Pendency of applications was noted.

44. In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

19


45.

“In order to have ease of doing business and while ensuring environmental
protection, Rule 13 (9) of Plastic Waste Management Rules has been amended vide
notification dated 27'"April 2023.

The Producers, Importers and Brand Owners will not have to renew the registration
certificate, until the information provided while registering has changed.

In case of plastic waste processors, where invariably Consent to Establish and
Consent to operate is required, registration granted will be valid for one year and
shall subsequently be for a period of three years.”

In their background note, the Ministry have submitted that they notified the

Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging vide Plastic
Waste Management (Amendment) Rules, 2022, on 16th February 2022. The Committee
desired to know the reasons for delay in and low registration of Plastic Manufacturing

Units. The Ministry gave the following reply:

46.

"As per Rule 13 of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, as amended, the
following entities are to be registered under the rules

. Manufacturer of carry bags or recycle plastic or multilayered packaging
(through EPR portal by the concerned State Pollution Control Board or Pollution
Control Committee of the Union Territory, if operating in one or two states or
Union territories; or the Central Pollution Control Board, if operating in more than
two States or Union Territories)

. Producer or importer or brand-owner of plastic packaging (through EPR
portal by the concerned State Pollution Control Board or Pollution Control
Committee of the Union Territory, if operating in one or two states or Union
territories; or the Central Pollution Control Board, if operating in more than two
States or Union Territories)

. Plastic waste processors (through EPR portal by concerned SPCB/PCC)

. Manufacturer of plastic raw material (by CPCB)

Plastic product manufacturing units are not mandated for registration under
Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, as amended.

Earlier the registration of producers, importers and brand owners was manual
and required engagement of 2805 with multiple Government agencies. Due to
the clear framework laid down in Guidelines on Extended Producer
Responsibility for plastic packaging and registration through centralized online
EPR portal, as on date around 25953 Producers, Importers and Brand owners
(PIBOs) are registered on the online EPR portal as against 300 in 2021."

Upon being asked of the number of units registered after the notification of

Guidelines on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging, ‘the Ministry

replied as under:

20


“For ease of doing business and faster processing of applications of registration,
the EPR Guidelines mandate online registration of producers, importers and
brand owners and plastic waste processors. Till date 25953 Producers, Importers
and Brand Owners (PIBOs) and 2043 Plastic Waste Processors (PWPs) have
registered on the centralized EPR portal developed by CPCB.”

47. The Committee enquired regarding the penal provisions prescribed in case of
non-registration. The Ministry in this regard furnished:
"Vide Plastic Waste Management (Second Amendment) Rules, 2022, Rule 18 for
imposition of environmental compensation has been introduced in the PWM
Rules. Vide Rule 18, the environmental compensation shall be levied based upon
polluter pays principle, on persons who are not complying with the provisions of
these rules, as per guidelines notified by the CPCB. The Guidelines provide
-details of Environmental Compensation to be levied, rule — wise and the action
take to be taken for non-compliance.

The EC for non-registration as per Guidelines is given below:

EC to be levied @ Rs.5000/- per ton (@ Rs.10000/- per ton for 2nd time and @
Rs.20000/- per ton for 3rd time). EC can be carried forward up to 3 year.

The EC levied for non-registration is equivalent to non-fulfillment of EPR target on

weight basis.
The penal provisions laid down under section 15 of Environment (Protection) Act,

1986, is applicable as per law. "
48. Rule 9(4) of PWM Rules, 2016 states that the producer, within a period of three
months from the date of publication (18 March 2016) of these rules shall apply to SPCB
and PCC, for: grant of registration. Rule 13 of PWM Rules 2016 amended in March
2018 requires Producers and Brand Owners (PBOs) operating in more than two States
or UTs to register with Central Pollution Control Board. Test check of records of 45
‘PBOs registered with CPCB during the period 2018-20 disclosed that these units were
in operation at the time of notification of rules. Further, they had applied for registration
with a delay ranging from nine days to more than a year. Delhi PCC registered 77
producers during 2019-20 but the records relating to their registration were not provided

to Audit, citing unavailability of the same.

49. Rule 13(5) of PWM Rules, 2016 provides the State PCBs and PCCs shall not
issue or renew registration to plastic waste recycling or processing units unless the unit
possesses a valid consent under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. Audit observed that
Punjab PCB, in contravention of provisions ibid, granted registration or renewal of

registration to seven producers and three recyclers beyond the validity period of their

21


consents, under the Water and Air Acts. On being pointed out, Punjab PCB assured
that the plastic units would be persuaded for renewal of their Air and Water consents.
Delhi PCC did not provide the records relating to date of registration and consents to
Audit.

G. Delay in Elimination of Single Use Plastic

50. On the World Environment Day in 2018, the Government announced to pledge
to phase out Single Use Plastic (SUP) by January 2022. However, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoEF&CC) failed to implement this pledge, with the SUP
items only identified in July 2021. The MoEF&CC did not devise any comprehensive
action plan for phasing out SUPs till October 2021. In the sampled states, Audit
observations highlight that Sikkim introduced amendments in 1998 to ban the delivery of
goods or materials in plastic wrappers or bags. Punjab did not ban the manufacturing,
stocking, distribution, recycling, and sale of one-time use products made from
thermacol, and these were easily available in the market. In 2012, Delhi Govt. imposed
a ban on the manufacturing, sale, storage, and use of all types of plastic carry bags in
the National Capital Territory, which was reaffirmed by the Hon'ble National Green
Tribunal. The Delhi government's actions were not comprehensive and did not fully

address the issue of SUPs.

51. The Committee desired to know if the Ministry has made any analysis to gauge
the impact of reduction in actual use of single use plastic (SUP) items after one year of

it being banned. The reply furnished by the Ministry is as follows:

"Last one year of implementation of single use plastic ban has showcased that
involvement of all stakeholders including citizens, youth, students, startups and
innovators, industry and Government, has generated many replicable and
scalable success-stories for elimination of single use plastics. The single use
plastic ban has triggered the development of innovative eco-alternatives, new
business models, increase in the manufacturing capacity and uptake of eco-
alternatives. The introduction and use of alternatives to banned single use plastic
items have led to generation of new employment opportunities in sustainable
green ventures. State Governments and local authorities have launched
innovative programmes on moving.towards eco-friendly alternatives.

Already, startups and manufacturers are manufacturing eco-alternatives such as
cutlery made bagasse and rice and wheat bran, straws made from dried coconut
leaves, straws made from paper. As per available information, 198
manufacturers/producers of eco-alternatives have been given Consent to
Establish/Consent to Operate by SPCBs/PCCs, indicating rapid development at

22


52.

commercial level. In keeping with the development of eco-alternatives, Bureau of
Indian Standard has notified Indian Standard 15 18267 for Food Serving Utensil
made from Agri By-Products.

Pan India enforcerient campaigns have been undertaken for implementation of
ban on identified single use plastic items since July 2022 by CPCB,
SPCBs/PCCs and local authorities. As per available information, during
enforcement campaigns, a total of 853832 inspections have been carried out, of
which violations were detected in 344689 cases, approximately fine of Rs.
19,05,13,471/- was imposed and 19,49,535 kg. of plastic was seized.

States and Union Territories have been asked to undertake regular enforcement
drives to implement ban on identified single use plastic items and on plastic carry
bags having thickness less than oné hundred twenty microns covering fruit and
vegetable markets, wholesale markets, local markets, flower vendors, units
manufacturing plastic carry bags etc. Further, CPCB/SPCBs/PCCs have been
asked to give specific focus on items, which are being sold as alternatives to
banned SUP items but which are actually covered under SUP ban, such as
paper plates covered with plastic sheets.

Further, for effective monitoring of ban on identified single use plastic items and
plastic waste management in the country the following online platforms are in
operation (a) National Dashboard for monitoring of implementation of
comprehensive action plan (b) CPCB Monitoring Module for Compliance on
Elimination of Single Use Plastic, and (c) CPCB Grievance Redressal App.

Already, States/UTs have been asked to undertake studies on the availability of
eco-alternatives and impact of ban on identified single use plastic items through

surveys."

As the National Task Force is reviewing measures taken by the Government on

elimination of SUPs and effective implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules,
2016, the Committee desired to know the analysis by National Task Force of the impact
of the various measures taken for plastic waste management and whether it has

identified any glaring issues that require utmost priority. The reply of the Ministry is

furnished as below:

“The Terms of Reference of the Task Force are given below:

. To prepare a Comprehensive Action Plan for implementation of Plastic Waste

Management Rules, 2016 and phasing out of identified Single Use Plastic items,
with identified activities and timelines and synergizing efforts and resources of
various Ministries/Departments/Agencies of Government of India as well as
States/UTs.

. To monitor and guide development and implementation of Comprehensive Action

Plan for implementation of PWMR, 2016 and phasing out of identified SUP items
at State/UT level.

23


९.

d.

e.

on

h.

Assess plastic waste generated in the country with respect to collection, recycling
and end of life disposal and identify gaps in plastic waste management (Reduce,
Reuse and Recycle) - policy, implementation, enforcement, infrastructure etc.
Strengthen policy, regulatory, institutional mechanisms/structures for the
implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules (PWMR), 2016 and phasing
out of identified Single Use Plastic (SUP) items, design appropriate management
strategies and allow for allocation of financial resources for Plastic Waste
Management including leveraging of funds from Swachh Bharat Mission.

Develop policies for supporting the adoption of alternatives to identified single
use plastic items prohibited under PWMR, 2016, as amended.

Take measures for effective monitoring of implementation of elimination of
identified SUP items as well as of PWM Rules, 2016, as amended.

To get prepared and implemented detailed road map for activities to build
awareness and outreach among public on plastic waste management and
reduction in the use of SUP items. :
Develop strategy for building a strong public movement for mitigation of plastic
pollution by involving education institutions (schools, colleges, universities), NCC,
NSS, Scouts, Youth clubs, Eco clubs, NYKs, Opinion makers and voluntary
organizations, with a detailed action plan in this regard.

Any such other measures as may deem appropriate for elimination of identified
single use plastic items and effective tackling of plastic pollution in the country.

The action points identified during the fourth NTF meeting are given below

In addition, the completion of the following actions, in respect of different
stakeholders, wasreiterated and recommended.

States/UTs

S.NO. [ITEM

1. Constitution district level taskforce and for million plus cities (All
States/UTs

2. Regular meetings of STF (All States/UTs

3. Preparation of Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) (Remaining
states

4. Implementation of CAP as per timelines (All States/UTs

5. Updating progress on National Dashboard (All States/UTs)

fe | Enforcement of Ban on identified Single Use Plastic (SUP) items
w.e.f 1९ July 2022 (All States/UTs

fe Awareness Generation towards prohibition of identified single use
plastic items(All States/UTs)

|. | Action taken for reducing/elimination of single use plastic items in
Government offices (All States/UTs
Accelerated penetration of Eco-alternatives (All States and UTs

10 Organization of Expo / fairs and development of state-specific
database of eco-alternative manufacturers

11 Providing incentives for manufacturing of Eco-alternatives

12 Procurement of Eco-alternatives for Government

24



offices/institutions/bodies

13 Promotion of alternatives to prohibited SUP items

14 Capacity building of MSMEs

Extended Producer Responsibility on plastic packaging and
development of recycling infrastructure (All States and UTs

15 Mobilization and registration of Producers, Importers, Brand Owners
PIBOs) and Plastic Waste Processors (PWPs
16 Measures to bring PWPs and PIBOs under EPR regime, who have
been operating without valid CTOs through special interventions
17 Setting up of clusters of MSME recyclers / informal sector
18 Skill development to be done for manpower operating recycling units
(i) Central Ministries

Development of plastic waste management infrastructure— IMoHUA, DDWS
MRF etc.
Incorporation of plastic ban provisions in bye-laws of ULBs for |MoHUA
levy of fine
Targeted IEC activities in Mission mode under SBM 2.0 on IMoHUA, DDWS

the following:
o elimination of banned SUPs and

o promotion of alternatives

Technical and financial assistance to MSMEs to IMoMSME |
manufacture alternatives to banned SUP item
Assistance for development of recycling sector with IDCPC
respect to different plastic types in the country
Promotion on innovation and development of DBT, DST,
CSIR, NITI,

alternatives to single use plastics
DPIT

Development of standard for biodegradable plastics DoCA, DCPC
a मिनी

Targeted activities for developing a public movement

KVS, NVS, Schools Department of

Universities and HEIs

NCC

NYK, NSS

Celebrity Endorsement, publicity

25


monitoring of plastic waste in marine, terrestrial and

Innovative ways of inventorisation, tracking and ; MoES, DST
freshwater ecosystems

CPCB/SPCB/PCC

1 है Enforcement of ban on identified single use plastic items

Strengthening of institutional mechanism for implementation of PWM Rules
3 State-wise quarterly assessment with reference to Single Use Plastic items
and

prohibited SUP on sample survey basis by selected institutions

4 Timely action on complaints/grievances received on online portal / App with
respect to implementation of PWM Rules at Central and State Level
Awareness generation and capacity building

Mobilization and registration of Producers, Importers, Brand Owners
(PIBOs) and Plastic Waste Processors (PWPs)

7 Measures to bring PWPs and PIBOs under EPR regime, who have been
operating without valid CTOs through special interventions

The availability and use of alternatives to banned single use plastics has
increased in last one year. BIS has brought out an industry standard for making
cutlery from agri-waste and plastic products. The State/UT Governments have
taken measures for rapid penetration of alternatives. "

53. The Committee asked the Ministry regarding action taken to persuade the
remaining States Governments/ UTs to prepare their action plans, to which the Ministry

gave the following reply:

"Since 2021, MoEF&CC has been continuously and intensively engaged with the
States/UTs for constituting special taskforce under chairpersonship of Chief
secretary of State / UT and development and implementation of comprehensive
action plan for elimination of single use plastics and effective plastic waste

management.

In this regard ten DO letters had been written to Chief Secretary/ Principal
Secretary (Environment) of States / UTs Governments between March, 2021 till
to date. In addition, three Office Memorandums were also issued to State / UT

Governments.

The list of dates is given below.

S.No. Date
1 25" March 2021
2 08" April 2021
3 137 April 2021
4 117 May 2021

26


5 157 November 2021
[ 6 | 157 February 2022
7 10" May 2022
[8 |
f 9 |
40

207 June 2022
177 August 2022
27" December 2022

Dates of O.M.s

हैः: िओ
1 16" April 2021
2 087 July 2021
3 120 July 2021

Due to continuous persuasion, all States/UTs have constituted Special
Taskforce under Chairpersonship of Chief Secretary of State / UT Governments
and twenty four State / UT Governments have prepared Comprehensive Action
Plan and implementing the same. The National Taskforce oversees and
coordinates the activities at the national level for elimination of single use
plastics and effective plastic waste management. Four meetings of the National

Taskforce have already been held. "

H. Extended Producers Responsibility

54. It has been found that extended Producer's Responsibility (EPR) is shifting of the

responsibility of the end-of-life management of products and materials to their
respective producers. Its objective is to establish a system reducing the burden of
municipalities and placing a shared physical and/ or financial responsibility for waste
management on producers and providing incentives for manufacturers to design
resource efficient and low impact products. Rule 3(h) of PWM Rules, 2016 further
defines Extended Producer's Responsibility as responsibility of a producer for the
environmentally sound management of the product until the end of its life. In their
background note, the Ministry have submitted that they notified the Guidelines on
Extended Producer's Responsibility for plastic packaging vide Plastic Waste
Management (Amendment) Rules, 2022, on 16” February, 2022.

55. The country has numerous brand owners and producers, but there is no uniform
framework for defining inter-linkages between stakeholders for effective fulfillment of
EPR liability.-This lack of a uniform framework hinders SPCBs/PCCs from addressing
responsibilities and liabilities in plastic waste management. The PWM Rules, 2016

mandate producers to develop waste collection systems within six months from the date
27


of publication of these rules, involving State Urban Development Departments. Despite
144 registered producers with Punjab PCB and Delhi PCC, none have submitted their

modalities for waste collection.

56.

Non-submission of modalities for waste collection by Producers

Rule 9(1) of PWM Rules, 2016 provided that the producers, within a period of six

months from the date ‘of publication of these rules, shall work out modalities for waste
collection system based on Extended Producer’s Responsibility (EPR) and involving

State Urban Development Departments, through their own distribution channel/through

the local body concerned, as per guidelines issued under these rules from time to time.

57.

Till March 2020, 144 producers were registered with Punjab PCB and Delhi PCC.

However, none of them had submitted the modalities for waste collection to their

respective PCB or PCC, so far.

58.

In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“In order to streamline the implementation of extended producer responsibility by
producers, importers and brand owners Rule 9 (1) has been amended on 6" July
2022 to state as follows

“The Producers, Importers and Brand Owners shall fulfil Extended Producers
Responsibility for Plastic Packaging as per guidelines specified in Schedule -II.”
Schedule ॥ of the Plastic Waste Management Rules provides the “Guidelines on
Extended Producer Responsibility on plastic packaging”. As per the Guidelines,
the producers, importers and brand owners have to fulfil EPR obligations by
obtaining EPR certificates for different categories of plastic packaging, as
applicable, from registered plastic waste processors after they have processed /
recycled plastic waste.

The EPR certificates can be generated by registered plastic waste processors
category —wise after their plant have been physically verified by the concerned
SPCB/PCC on the ground. The EPR certificates are unique and ensure
transparency and accountability in processing of plastic waste.

Generation of EPR certificates ensures that the plastic waste is not only collected
but it is also processed and recycled in an environmentally sound manner.

The generation and exchange of EPR certificates between producers, importers
and brand owners and plastic waste processors need to be done through the
centralized online portal for EPR on plastic packaging. This ensures a complete
digital trail of transactions is maintained from plastic waste collection to
processing plastic waste and subsequent EPR certificate generation and transfer
to PIBOs for fulfilment of EPR obligations.

As on date, already EPR certificates of around 22 lakh tonnes equivalent of
plastic waste processed has been generated and around 13 lakh tonnes of EPR

28


certificates have been exchanged between registered plastic waste processors
and producers, importers and brand owners.

It may be noted that of the total EPR obligations for the year 2022-23 is 30 lakh
tonnes of which already EPR certificates have been generated for 22 lakh
tonnes. The last date for fulfilment of EPR obligations is 311 October 2023. A
large proportion of plastic waste has not only been collected and processed in an
environmentally sound manner with complete accountability and traceability.”

J. Non-establishment of system for collecting back the plastic waste by

Producers, Importers and Brand Owners

59. The primary responsibility for collecting used multi-layered plastic sachets,
pouches, or packaging lies with brand owners, importers, and producers. They must
establish a system for collecting plastic waste generated by their products and submit
_ the plan of collection to the SPCBs for approval. Those registered with CPCB must
submit an Action Plan. CPCB received the Action Plan from all 92 registered PIBOs
during 2018-20, but found it inadequate. Directions for renewal, levying Environmental
Compensation, and serving show cause notices were issued. A test-check of 45 PBOs
revealed that 15 did not provide progress reports, 14 submitted intermittent progress
reports, and 11 could not collect back entire plastic waste. Nine PBOs were renewed by
CPCB, but they either did not submit progress reports or submitted them intermittently.
None of 77 registered producers submitted their system of collecting plastic waste to
Delhi PCC, and only seven Brand Owners could submit their plan of collection to Punjab

PCB.

60. As per Rule 9(2) of PWM Rules 2016, the primary responsibility for collection of
used multi-layered plastic sachet or pouches or packaging is of brand owners, importers
and producers, who introduce the products in the market. Further, they need to
establish a system for collecting back the plastic waste generated due to their products.
This plan of collection is to be submitted to the SPCBs while applying for Consent to
Establish or Operate or Renewal. Similarly, those registered with CPCB in terms of rule
13(2) of PWM (Amendment) Rules, 2018 need to submit the Action Plan to CPCB.

None out of 77 registered producers had submitted their system of collecting back the
plastic waste caused by their products to Delhi PCC. Only seven Brand Owners, out of
total 87 registered PIBOs could submit their plan of collection .to:Punjab PCB.

61. In their ATNs, the Ministry submitted the following:-

29


“Rule 9 relates to responsibilities of producers, importers and brand owners. The
fulfilment of extended producer responsibility on plastic packaging vide Rule 9 (1)
ensures that collection of plastic packaging including used multilayered plastic
sachet or pouches or packaging happens.

The Guidelines on EPR for plastic packaging, notified on 16" February
2022mandate that EPR obligations of producers, importers and brand owners can
only be fulfilled by EPR certificates generated by registered plastic waste
processors after processing of plastic waste. This in effect ensures that plastic
packaging waste including flexible plastic packaging is collected for processing.

Mulitlayered plastic sachet or pouches are covered under flexible plastic packaging
as per EPR Guidelines.

The EPR Guidelines provide a market based mechanism for the collection and
processing of plastic packaging including flexible plastic packaging. As per clause
10.2, the action plan of producers, importer and brand owner is the taking of annual
EPR target, category-wise, which is linked to the plastic packaging introduced in the
market by the producers, importer and brand owner.

The mechanism of fulfilment of EPR target through EPR certificates provide a clear
mechanism to ensure the objective of Sub-rule (1) and sub rule (2) of rule 9.

Further in case producers, importers and brand owners in order to develop a
separate waste stream for collection of plastic packaging waste directly by operating
schemes such as deposit refund system or buy back or any other model. This will
prevent mixing of plastic packaging waste with solid waste, as per clause 10.5 of the
EPR Guidelines.

Vide clause 14 of the EPR Guidelines, the producers importer and brandowners can
also separately, collection and segregation infrastructure for plastic packaging
waste, as required fulfilling Extended Producer Responsibility obligations, the
Producers, Importers & Brand-Owners.

In order align Plastic Waste Management Rules with EPR Guidelines, vide Plastic
Waste Management (Second Amendment) Rules 2022 notified on 6" July 2022.
Rule 9 (2) was amended to remove the following clause “This plan of collection to
be submitted to the State Pollution Control Boards while applying for Consent to
Establish or Operate or Renewal.”

Further, the item 11 of Form 1 which stated earlier “Action plan on collecting back
plastic waste” has been amended to “Action plan in line with the guidelines specified
in Schedule -॥" (EPR Guidelines are given in Schedule ॥).

Fulfillment of statutory EPR obligations by producers, importers and brand owners
will lead development of waste management infrastructure and supply chain for
collection and processing of plastic packaging waste.

As on date already 2003 plastic waste processors have registered on the
centralized on EPR portal for plastic packaging.

EPR certificates of 22 lakhs tonnes of plastic packaging waste have been generated
by registered plastic waste processors against the EPR target of 3 lakh tonnes for

the year of 2022-23.”
30


62. The Committee enquired from the Ministry if the guidelines adequately address
the concerns raised by Audit, namely, non-submission of modalities for waste collection
by Producers and non-establishment of system for collecting back the plastic waste by
Producers, Importers and Brand Owners. The Ministry provided the following reply:

"The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change notified the Guidelines
on Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging vide Plastic Waste
Management (Amendment) Rules, 2022, on 16th February 2022.

The key highlights of the Guidelines on Extended Producers Responsibility
(EPR) on plastic packaging are as follows.

(i) mandatory registration of Producers, Importers, and Brand Owners (PIBOs)
and Plastic Waste Processors (PWPs) through centralized online portal.

(ii) coverage of four categories of plastic packaging viz. rigid packaging, flexible
packaging, multi-layered plastic packaging, and compostable plastic packaging.
(iii) clearly defined targets for EPR.

(iv) mandatory targets for reuse of rigid plastic packaging, minimum level of
recycling of plastic waste and use of recycled plastic content in plastic packaging,
(v) centralized online portal to support implementation of EPR

(vi) provision sale and purchase of surplus EPR certificates,

(vii) levy of environmental compensation for non-fulfilment of EPR obligations,
(viii) provision for verification, audit and monitoring of obligated entities.

The Guidelines for Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) on plastic packaging
was introduced for the environmentally sound management of plastic packaging
till end of its life by producers, importers and brand owners, who introduce the
plastic packaging in the market. For ease of doing business the EPR framework
is implemented through a centralized online portal.

As regards, non-submission modalities for waste collection by producers, Rule

9(1) of Plastic Waste Management Rules was amended on 6" July 2022,
wherein, PIBOs are to declare the EPR targets only, there is now no
requirement for submitting modalities for waste collection by producers. The
relevant rule position is quoted below.

“The Producers, Importers and Brand Owners shall fulfil Extended Producers
Responsibility for Plastic Packaging as per guidelines specified in Schedule -II.”

As per the Guidelines, PIBOs have to fulfil EPR obligations by obtaining EPR
certificates for different categories of plastic packaging, as applicable, from
tegistered PWPs. Generation of EPR certificates ensures the plastic waste is
collected & recycled in an environmentally sound manner.

Further, with respect to non-establishment of a system for collecting back, Rule 9
(2) of Plastic Waste Management Rules was amended to omit the following text

‘This plan of collection to be submitted to the State Pollution Control
Boards while applying for Consent to Establish or Operate or Renewal’. Further
Form | prescribed under Rule 13 (2) has also been amended to replace ‘Action
plan on collecting back the plastic wastes’ replaced with ‘ Action plan in line with

the guidelines specified in Schedule —Il’.
31


As per EPR Guidelines, the action plan of PIBOs is the taking of annual EPR
target, category-wise, which is linked to the plastic packaging introduced in the
market by the PIBOs. Further Clause 10.5 of EPR Guidelines, states that PIBOs
may operate schemes such as deposit refund system or buy back or any other
model in order to develop a separate waste stream. According to Clause 14 of
the EPR Guidelines, the PIBOs may develop separately, collection and
segregation infrastructure for plastic packaging waste, as required for fulfilling
EPR obligations."

K. Non-setting up of system for PWM by local bodies

63. The Committee have also learnt that Rule 6(3) of PWM Rules 2016 stipulates
that the local body shall set up system for the plastic waste management by seeking
assistance of producers and such system shall be set up within one year from the date
of publication of these rules, ie., by 17 March 2017. Audit observed that the selected
ULBs in Punjab and Sikkim did not set up a system for the plastic waste management
by seeking assistance of producers, as they were not aware of the producers
functioning under their jurisdiction. It was observed that in Delhi, the selected ULBs
stated to have set up their own infrastructure. However, no documentary evidence in
support of this comment was provided to Audit. On being pointed out, ULBs in Sikkim
and Punjab replied that the details of producers would be obtained from their respective
PCBs and efforts would be made to ensure setting up of system, for the plastic waste

management with produce.

64. The Committee asked the Ministry regarding the current status of setting of the
plastic waste management systems in the Delhi, Punjab and Sikkim and the other three
metro cities. The Ministry furnished the following through a written note:

"The Guidelines on EPR for plastic packaging notified on 16" February 2022,
provide a mechanism for local bodies to engage with producers, importers and
brand owners and through this engagement develop a system of plastic waste
management. Rule 6 (3) provides for the engagement with producers. The
mechanism may be developed by ULBs. As per Clause 11.7 of the EPR
Guidelines the local authorities can get EPR certificates from registered plastic
waste processors for the plastic packaging waste provided by local body for
waste processing. These certificates can then be exchanged with PIBOs. This
would allow revenue generation opportunity for the local bodies. Further, as per
clause 14.1 (c), PIBOs may develop collection and segregation infrastructure of
plastic packaging waste, as required, based on implementation modality by
offering for collection and waste processing through engagement with local
bodies. है

The centralized online EPR portal for plastic packaging has been developed
incorporating the above provisions. As such the EPR Guidelines provide a clear
32


market-based mechanism for engagement between PIBOs and Local
authorities. In addition, under Swachh Bharat Mission additional central
assistance is also provided local authorities for solid waste management
including plastic waste management in both urban and rural areas."

65. Rule 5(1)(a) of PWM Rules, 2016 envisages that the plastic waste, which can be
recycled, shall be channelized to registered plastic waste recycler by the Urban Local
Bodies and recycling of plastic shall conform to the Indian Standard: IS 14534:1998
titled as Guidelines for Recycling of Plastics, as amended from time to time. Audit found
that in Punjab and Sikkim, ULBs were not involved in the process of segregation and
channelization of plastic waste and the same was done by the rag pickers, informal
sectors, junk dealers. Hence, these ULBs could not ensure whether the segregated
recyclable plastic waste of 0.16 million tonnes was being channelized only to registered
recyclers complying with the Indian standard. Moreover, Sikkim does not have recycling
or processing units in the state and recyclable fraction of plastic is being sent to waste
dealers in Siliguri, West Bengal. In Delhi, sampled ULBs did not provide any records

regarding channelization and recycling of plastic waste.

66. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry how the ULBs are ensuring
compliance of PWM Rules 2016 where in plastic waste is to be channelized to
registered plastic waste recycler. The Ministry has furnished the following reply in

response :

"Local bodies are establishing Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) to segregate
dry waste into various components which includes plastic waste. The plastic
waste segregated at MRFs is channelized for further processing.

Establishment of MRFs by ULBs is an eligible component for support under
Swachh Bharat Mission Urban. MoHUA has established “Sansaadhan"” a digital
monitoring platform that enables national, state, and city level agencies to
regularly monitor the progress of material recovery facilities (MRFs) under their
jurisdiction. Sansaadhan is a platform to link local bodies to recycling markets.
Already established MRFs are being linked to the platform.

As more MRFs' are established and linked to Sansaadhan platform, real time
information of plastic waste segregated and channelized to waste processors will
become available. Already through under EPR Guidelines on plastic packaging,
around 2043 plastic waste processors which includes 1866 plastic waste
recyclers are registered on centralized online EPR portal for plastic packaging.

These plastic waste processors including recyclers have provided their complete
recycling process details including plastic waste recycled and outputs generated.
All the registered recyclers have valid consent to operate. The quantitative details

33


67.

of the plastic waste procured by registered recyclers; the quantity of product
manufactured after recycling is provided by the registered recyclers directly on
the EPR portal on a quarterly as well as annual basis.

The registered plastic waste processors have already generated EPR certificates
for 2.9 million tonnes of plastic packaging waste. The details of plastic waste
processors through the EPR portal for each state/UT is accessible to concerned
SPCB/PCC. In addition, the reporting module on the National Dashboard for
online date reporting data by local bodies captures data on (i) Collection, (ii)
Segregation, (iii) Recycling, and (iv)
Disposal."

Audit found all the three sampled ULBs of Delhi claimed to have complied with

the Solid Waste Management Rules in disposal of inert from recycling or processing

facilities; however no evidence was provided to audit to back up this claim.

68.

Audit observed that the selected ULBs of Punjab did not utilize the plastic waste

for road construction or energy recovery or waste to oil etc. during 2015-20. Sikkim
could utilize the plastic waste for road construction only once in 2020, whereas Gangtok
Municipal Corporation handed over 500 kgs. of plastic waste to National Highways &
Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. (NHIDCL) for road construction. ULBs in
Delhi utilized 4,83,625 tonnes of plastic waste in the production of Refused Drive Fuel to

be used in waste to energy plant during 2015-20.

69.

The Committee asked the Ministry whether any assistance is provided by the

MOEFF&CC/CPCB to the states to enable them to utilize plastic waste for various
activities. The following reply was provided by the Ministry in this regard:

70.

“The Action Plan template for Ministry of Road Transport Highways, the nodal
Ministry for construction of national highways in the country, includes an activity
for utilization plastic waste in road construction. The Regional Offices of MoRTH
have been asked assist the Dept of Environment, Urban Development
Departments and ULBs of all states/UTs, to enable use of plastic waste in road
construction. States/UTs have been asked for taking assistance from Central
Road Research Institute for use of plastic waste in road construction. MoHUA
and DDWS were asked to undertake capacity building of local bodies for
effective utilization of plastic waste in road construction through better
segregation."

PWM Rule 9 under sub-rule (1) directed the PIBOs who introduce multi-layered

plastic (MLP) in the market. to phase out manufacture and use of non-recyclable
multilayered plastic, if any. CPCB provided year-wise data of 1187 producers involving
in manufacturing of MLP registered with SPCBs or PCCs across the country during

34


2015-20. However, it acknowledged that it was not aware of those producers who had
completely stopped or phased out manufacturing of non-recyclable MLP. Delhi PCC
denied the existence of PIBOs involved in manufacture or use of non-recyclable multi-
layered plastic in the state. In Punjab, the information of the PIBOs involved in
manufacturing or using no recyclable MLP was not provided by PMIDC. In Sikkim, PCB
and ULBs are not aware of the producers, if any operating in the state.

71. The Committee wanted to know whether the CPCB now maintain data of
producers who have completely stopped or phased out manufacturing of non-recyclable
MLP?

"As per Plastic Waste Management Amendment Rules 2108 “multilayered plastic

which is non-recyclable or non-energy recoverable or with no alternate use”
would be phased out and not multilayered plastic which is not recyclable.”

L. Absence of clear provisions for penalty for violation of PWM Rule 2016

72. Audit noticed that PWM Rules lacked clarity on the issue of penalty for
violation of PWM Rules 2016, because these rules neither prescribed any penal
provision for violations nor made any reference to the provisions contained in
Environment (Protection) Act for the purpose. Later, CPCB framed an Environmental
Compensation Regime (ECR) for violators of PWM of PWM Rules in December 2020
when directed by NGT in September 2020. However, this regime came into force in
October 2021 only with the notification of EPR. Thus, lack of clarity on imposition of
penalty in the PWM Rules not only allowed the violators of these rules to let off

unpunished.but also mitigate the effectiveness of these rules.

73. The Committee asked the Ministry whether appropriate clauses for penalty
on violation of these rules have been framed now, to which the Ministry stated as under:

"Vide Plastic Waste Management (Second Amendment) Rules, 2022, Rule 18 for
imposition of environmental compensation has been introduced in the PWM
Rules. Vide Rule 18, the environmental compensation shall be levied based upon
polluter pays principle, on persons who are not complying with the provisions of
these rules, as per guidelines notified by the CPCB. The Guidelines provide
details of environmental compensation to be levied, rule - wise and the action
take to be taken for non-compliance.

With respect to non-fulfillment of EPR targets, the payment of environmental
compensation shall not absolve the Producers, Importers & Brand-Owners of the
obligations set out in these guidelines. The unfulfilled Extended Producer

35


Responsibility obligations for a particular year will be carried forward to the next
year for a period of three years. This ensures that PIBO gets the plastic waste
processed equivalent to the unfulfilled EPR target in an environmentally sound
manner.

In case, the shortfall of Extended Producer Responsibility obligation is addressed
within three years. The environmental compensation levied shall be returned to
the Producers, Importers & Brand-Owners as given below, namely

(i) Within one year of levying of EC: 75% return;

(ii) Within two years 60% return;

(iii) Within three years 40% return,

After completion of three years on environmental compensation getting due the
entire environmental compensation amount shall be forfeited. This arrangement
shall allow for collection and recycling of plastic packaging waste by Producers,
Importers & Brand-Owners in later years as well."

74. CPCB accepted to have not conducted the assessment of pollution of plastic
waste in air and human health for the entire country, so far. In the sampled states,
Department of Environment, Government of NCT, Delhi and Punjab PCB admitted that

no such study has been undertaken till date.

75. The Committee desired to know the reason due to which the MoEFCC/CPCB did
not prioritized the task of identification of these risks to environment and human health

and the steps taken to address the issue. The Ministry gave the following written reply:

"The Central Pollution Control Board conducted a study ‘Impact of Plastic Waste
Disposal on soil and water quality at Lucknow dumpsites. It was observed in the
study that dumping of plastic waste may deteriorate soil and underground water
quality due to leaching of additives, colours, stabilizers and fillers present in
different categories of plastic products. Additive chemicals and microplastics
teleased from unmanaged and littered plastic waste can cause pollution of

environment.
A status report has been prepared by a joint Committee comprising CPCB,

ICMR, Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology
(CIPET), NCSCM, under the nodal coordination of CPCB on the newspaper
report “Detecting microplastics in human blood”.

Scientific reports, on microplastics as yet, have not been able to establish a

causal relationship with health effects.
The status report is already available in public domain for wider dissemination

and use by stakeholders."
M. Monitoring
76. Audit findings’ show that the PWM Rules, 2016 are silent on identification of a

nodal department or body for overall monitoring of implementation at Central level.

36


Further, each State/UT were directed by MoEF&CC in March 2021 to constitute a
Special Task force for preparation of a comprehensive Action Plan for implementation of
PWMR 2016 and phasing out of SUPs, with identified activities and to prepare a
Comprehensive Action Plan for implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules,
2016. A National Task Force was also constituted for phasing out of identified Single
Use Plastic items. The Audit found that National Task Force has not yet produced an
action plan for the purpose so far and only 23 states and UTs have formed their

respective task forces.

77. The Audit findings further show absence of guidelines and standards for
monitoring of plastic pollution. CPCB has not prepared any guidelines or standards or
any body for the purpose of monitoring of plastic pollution in surface water, soil and
“micro plastics in air. Punjab PCB also admitted to have not taken any step in this
tegard. Delhi PCC is stated to have neither prepared guidelines/ standards for
monitoring of plastic pollution in surface water, soil and microplastics in air nor

constituted a body for the purpose so far.

78. Audit found that regarding the assessment of quantum of plastic waste generated
and processed, the responsibility of maintaining the inventory of Producers, Importers,
Brand Owners (PIBOs) lies with CPCB, SPCBs and PCCs, as they are the registering
authorities as per MoEF&CC. Further CPCB admitted regarding non maintenance of the
annual inventory of Producers, Importers, Brand Owners, manufacturers and recyclers.
CPCB later provided a list of 1419 recyclers in 31 States and UTs based on the
information uploaded on the websites by respective SPCBs and PCCs.

79. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry regarding the contours of the
National task Force set up for monitoring the implementation of plastic waste
management rules 2016 as amended from time to time. The written reply furnished by

the Ministry is as under:

“India is committed to phase out identified single use plastic items, which have
low utility and high adverse environment impact by 2022. In this regard, the
States/UTs have been requested to constitute a Special Task Force for taking
measures to eliminate single use plastics and to prepare a comprehensive action
plan for. implementation....in . mission . mode. Concerned . central
Ministries/Departments have also béen requested to develop comprehensive
action plan for elimination of identified single use plastic items.

37


2. Elimination of identified single use plastic items by 2022 requires effective
coordination and collaboration between concerned
Ministries/Departments/Agencies and State/UT governments. Accordingly, a
National Task Force for taking measures to eliminate identified Single Use
Plastic in mission mode is hereby constituted with the following composition:

(i) Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate\Chairman
Change
(ii) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of Joint/Member
Secretary), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs |
(iii) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of Joint{Member
Secretary), Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
iv) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of Joint|Member
Secretary), Department of Commerce
(४) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointiMember
Secretary), Department for Promotion of Industry and Internall
Trade

(vi) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointlMember
Secretary), Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways
(vii) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointMember
Secretary), Ministry of Earth Sciences
(viii) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointMember
Secretary), Department of Consumer Affairs

(ix) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointMMember
Secretary), Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation

(x) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointMember
Secretary), Department of Science and Technolog

(xi) Representative of Secretary (not below the rank of JointIMember

Secretary), Department of Chemical and Petrochemicals
(xii) Representative of Chief Secretary/Administrator (AdditionallMember
Chief Secretary / Principal Secretary of Nodal Department]
identified by the State / UT governments) of State / UT|

governments

The Terms of Reference of the Task Force are as given below:

a) To prepare a Comprehensive Action Plan for the implementation of Plastic
Waste Management Rules, 2016 and phasing out of identified Single Use Plastic
items, with identified activities and timelines and synergizing efforts and
resources of various Ministries/Departments/Agencies of the Government of
India as well as States/UTS.

b) To monitor and guide the development and implementation of a
Comprehensive Action Plan for the implementation of PWMR, 2016, and phasing
out of identified SUP items at State/UT level.

०) Assess plastic waste generated in the country with respect to collection,
recycling, and end of life disposal and identify gaps in plastic waste management
(Reduce, Reuse,, and  Recycle)-policy, implementation, enforcement,
infrastructure, etc.

d) Strengthen policy, regulatory, and institutional mechanisms/structures for
the implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules (PWMR), 2016 and

38


phasing out of identified Single Use Plastic (SUP) items, design appropriate
management strategies, and allow for the allocation of financial resources for
Plastic Waste. Management, including leveraging of funds from the Swachh
Bharat Mission.

e) Develop policies for supporting the adoption of alternatives to identified
single-use plastic items prohibited under PWMR, 2016, as amended.

f) Take measures for effective monitoring of the implementation of
elimination of identified SUP items as well as of PWM Rules, 2016, as amended.
9) To get prepared and implemented a detailed road map for activities to
build awareness and outreach among the public on plastic waste management
and reduction in the use of SUP items.

h) Develop a strategy for building a strong public movement for the mitigation
of plastic pollution by involving education institutions (schools, colleges,
universities), NCC, NSS, Scouts, and Youth clubs. Eco clubs, NYKS, Opinion
makers, and voluntary organizations, with a detailed action plan in this regard.

Any such other measures as may deem appropriate for the elimination of
identified single use plastic items and effective tackling of plastic pollution in the

country."

39


Part -B

Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee

Plastic products have become an integral part of our daily life as a result of
which the polymer is produced at a massive scale worldwide. Once plastic is
discarded after its utility is over, it is termed as plastic waste. It is a fact that
plastic waste never degrades, and remains on landscape for hundreds of years
unless recycled. It is estimated that approximately 70% of plastic packaging
products are converted into plastic waste in a short span. Plastic products
pollution due to littered and mismanaged plastic waste is a global environmental
issue that needs to be addressed with due seriousness and urgency. It has
adverse impacts on ecosystems in general and marine ecosystems in particular (
80% of plastic waste originates from land sources. 9.2 billion tons of plastic has
been produced since 1950, of which 7 billion tons of waste has been generated.
Each year, 400 million tons of plastic is produced, of which one-third is produced
for single use products and around 10 million tons is dumped into the ocean).
MoEF&CC under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (EPA
1986), notified the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011. To
implement these rules more effectively and to give thrust on plastic waste
minimization, source segregation, recycling, involving producers, manufacturers,
importers, brand owners, waste pickers, recyclers and waste processors in
collection of plastic waste, amended Plastic Waste Management Rules (PWM),
2016 was notified and has been amended many times the last being in April, 2023.

The Committee note that Audit assessed effectiveness and compliance of
the provisions of Plastic Waste Management Rules in order to examine their
adequacy in management of plastic waste and to address the risks posed by
plastic waste to environment and health.

The Committee also note that 18 wards from six selected zones of three
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in Delhi, eight ULBs & thirty Rural Local Bodies:
(RLBs) from six sampled districts in Punjab and four ULBs & nine Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) from three sampled districts in Sikkim were selected for review
of records pertaining to the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.The Committee find that

40


Audit covered the activities carried out for the management of plastic waste in
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB), State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control
Committees (PCCs) of the selected states, Panchayati Raj Institutions, Gram
Panchayats (GPs) and Urban Development Departments (UDDs) of the selected
states. The Committee jnter-alia observe from Audit findings that Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC) had no action plan for
implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016, as a result of which the
same could not be implemented effectively and efficiently.

Based on their interaction with the Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), State
Pollution Control! Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) and
Urban Development Departments (UDDs) of the selected states and metro cities
and the replies received from them, the Committee have recorded their
observations and recommendations on issues contained in the audit report that

merit consideration in the succeeding paragraphs.

Assessment of generated plastic waste

1. The Committee note that Rule no. 17 of PWM Rules 2016 stipulates that
every recycling/ processing unit, local body, PCB/ PCC and CPCB is to provide
the information on use and management of plastic waste annually to the next

higher authority in hierarchy viz. plastic waste recycling/ processing units to
Local Bodies to PCBs/ PCCs to CPCB to MoEFCC. The Committee observe from
Audit findings that many SPCBs/ PCCs did not provide data on plastic waste
generation for the period 2016-18 to CPCB. Further, between 2018-20, data
provided by SPCBs / PCCs did not include plastic waste generated by all the
ULBs and RLBs. The Committee also note that data received from SPCB/PCC was
not validated by CPCB and in certain cases, there were inconsistencies in data
shared by ULBs with SPCB/PCC and variations were observed in the data of
plastic waste generation as provided to Audit and as reported to SPCBs/PCCs by
local bodies from 12% to 45 % which is indicative of unreliability of the data being
reported. The Committee note from the ATNs submitted by the Ministry that after
repeated follow-up, all 35 SPCBs/PCCs have started to provide information on

41


plastic waste management. The Committee also observe that the Ministry has
operationalized a separate “Reporting Module” and steps have been taken for
local bodies to annually report data online and the SPCBs/PCCs to validate data
submitted by the local bodies through random sampling/ field inspection for
online data reporting on the National Dashboard on Elimination of Single Use
Plastics and Effective Plastic Waste Management. :
The Committee while opining that having reliable assessment of amount of
plastic waste being generated is the first step towards managing it effectively and
- efficiently recommend that a robust monitoring mechanism for ensuring reqular monitoring mechanism for ensuring regular
and continuous collection, validation and sharing of data may be developed and
implemented in letter and spirit and thereby enable effective decision making.

The Committee, further, recommend that reporting of data online on the national
dashboard may be made mandatory and while reporting the data online at the
first_level_and_ for validation of the data_so reported, local bodies and
SPCBs/PCCs may upload photographs/ videos of the process (assessment in rocess (assessment in
case of local bodies and validation in case of SPCBs/PCCs) along with GPS

location, on monthly basis. Further, the general public may also be encouraged to
upload photos/ videos of the dumps that remain unreported/ unnoticed.

Method of assessment of plastic waste not uniform waste not uniform
2. The Committee note that there has been no uniform method for

assessment of plastic waste generation within a state and that the data of plastic
waste generation reported by ULBs was based on assumptions and lacked any
sound rationale. Shockingly, the CPCB admitted that it was not aware of the
methodology being adopted by ULBs for calculation of quantity of plastic waste
generated by them. The Committee are aware that the Municipal Solid Waste
Management Manual published under the Swachh Bharat Mission for use by
Local bodies has a methodology prescribed for waste quantification and
assessment of waste composition. The Committee further observe from the reply
of the Ministry that one of the internationally accepted methods for assessment
of plastic waste is ASTM Method which may be adopted to assess batch/ samples
of known weight of fresh Municipal Solid Waste arriving at dumpsites on different
days from different sources in vehicles. The Committee while noting that as the

42


quantum and composition of waste is influenced by factors such as population,
area, level of urbanization etc, each local body undertakes its own assessment on
quantum and composition of municipal solid waste, recommend that respective
ULBs in coordination with SPCBs/ PCC in their State decide upon usage of any of in coordination with SPCBs/ PCC in their State decide upon usage of any of
the aforesaid methodologies for _assessment_and quantification of waste
including plastic waste and thereafter establish benchmark values for planning
and management of the waste at the city level; and upload the methodology management of the waste at the city level; and upload the methodolo
followed_and_ the benchmark values on the national dashboard, which would

enable monitoring by the next higher. authority.

Projections of the quantities of plastic waste to be generated
3. The Committee are aware that future projections of waste generation are

indispensable for a comprehensive waste policy formulation and waste
management planning. Hence, to make realistic projections about the growth of
waste in the future, the dominant parameters should be identified and their
expected influence on the waste amounts should be described and evaluated.
The Committee note that the Ministry carried out a study on “Assessment and
Characterization of Plastic Waste generation in 60 major cities” undertaken by
CPCB in January 2015 wherein the assessment of plastic waste was carried out at
dumpsites to suggest the roadmap and make recommendations for plastic waste
management in the country. However, the Committee note that there were no
projections on growth in plastic waste based on the results of this study. CPCB
also admitted before the Committee to have not made any projection of the
plastic waste generation based on population size, geographical size of the area,
economic growth, increased demand for consumer goods and change in
manufacturing methods etc. The Committee, while expressing disappointment at
the lackadaisical approach of the CPCB in handling the problem of pollution
recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with CPCB/SPCBs take concrete
steps_for making projections of waste generation for formulating a
comprehensive _waste_management policy. Further, the Committee note that
Urban Local Bodies have commissioned studies from technical institutions for

waste characterisaton and quantification and recommend here that such studies

may also include future projections of waste generation, particularly keeping in

43


mind, population size and type, geographical size of the area, economic growth,
type of consumer goods being sought and changes in manufacturing as well as

packaging methods.

Absence of a policy and action plan for plastic waste reduction, reuse or recycle

4. The Committee note that MoEFCC is the nodal agency in the administrative
structure of the Central Government for planning, promotion, co-ordination and
overseeing the implementation of India’s environmental policies and
programmes. Yet, the MoEFCC remained silent on the existence of a policy for
plastic waste reduction, reuse and recycling. However, the Ministry has informed
to have adopted a three-pronged strategy for effective implementation of PWM
Rules that includes (i) behavioural change, (ii) strengthening of institutional
system for collection, segregation and recycling of plastic waste and (iii)
engagement with producers, importers and brand owners through Extended
Producer’s Responsibility. The Committee note that MoEFCC did not have any
action plan in place for effective implementation of the said strategy during the
period 2015-20. The preparation of a comprehensive action plan was initiated only
in May 2021. The Committee further note that in all the three sampled States, no
action plan was found in place for management of plastic waste, except in Punjab
and that too only for urban areas since April, 2019. The Committee observe from
the submission of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change that it
has now adopted a twin pronged strategy of placing ban on single use plastic
items which have high littering potential and low utility (Reduction in plastic
waste generation), and effective implementation of extended producer
responsibility on plastic packaging (quantitative target for recycling of plastic
waste and reuse of rigid plastic packaging).The Committee also note that
Comprehensive Action Plans (CAPs) have been prepared by all States/ UTs and
special taskforces have also been constituted under the Chief Secretary to review
the implementation of comprehensive action plans. A National Task force has
beed constituted by the Ministry in June 2021 to oversee the implementation of
the CAPs of the States/UTs. The States/ UTs. are required to update progress

made on comprehensive action plans on the National Dashboard. The Committee

44


recommend that the National Task Force as well as the Task Forces at the
State/UT level may review the action taken at regular intervals and put their
remarks against the updates uploaded by the States/ UTs on the national
dashboard. While taking note of the host of initiatives taken by the Ministry, the
Committee nevertheless, observe that plastic can still be seen strewn across all
the urban and rural areas of the country indicating that the agencies have not
been able to enforce ban on production of single use Plastic or non-recyclable
plastic. The Committee are of the considered opinion that a comprehensive policy
is required for containing pollution caused by plastics as finding a cost effective
and _dependable alternative to plastic is 3 pre requisite for its elimination. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that_identification and development of

environmentally friendly alternatives to single-use plastic products, taking into
account the full life cycle implications of those alternatives may be encouraged
and accordingly producers designing alternatives to single-use plastics may be alternatives to single-use plastics may be
incentivized. The Committee are of the considered opinion that immediate and
effective steps, in addition to the Extended Producers Responsibility, including
Spreading awareness about the eco-friendly alternatives and ill-effects of single-
use plastics, providing for funds for R&D on finding alternatives, making the
implementing agencies accountable, promoting use of recycled plastic content agencies accountable, promoting use of recycled plastic content
and _increasing the recycling facilities to process the amount of plastic that is

being produced may be taken to efficaciously enforce the ban on single use
plastics on ground.

Registration of Producers, Importers, Brand Owners, manufacturers and
recyclers .

5. Audit has highlighted various irregularities in the process of registration of
producers, importers, brand owners, manufacturers and recyclers. The
Committee observe that Rule No. 13(1) of PWM Rules, 2016 provided that no
person shall manufacture carry bags or recycle plastic bags or multi-layered
packaging without obtaining a registration from the State Pollution Control Board
or the Pollution Control Committee of the Union Territory concerned, as the case
may be, prior to the commencement of production. Producers or brand owners
operating in more than two states or UTs need to apply to CPCB for the purpose

45


of registration and renewal in terms of Rule 13(2). The Committee observe that
only a limited number of producers, importers and brand owners registered under
the rules during 2015-20 and the producers which registered with CPCB and
SPCBs/ PCCs during the audit period did so beyond the stipulated time period.
The Committee further note that Rule 13(5) of PWM Rules, 2016 provides the State
PCBs and PCCs shall not issue or renew registration to plastic waste recycling or
processing units unless the unit possesses a valid consent under the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. While Punjab PCB granted registration or renewal
of registration to 7 producers and 3 recyclers beyond the validity of their consent,
Delhi PCC did not provide records related to date of registration. Further, the
Committee observe that Rule 13(11) of PWM Rules, 2016 provided that every
application for renewal of registration shall be made at least one hundred twenty
days before the expiry of the validity of the registration certificate and that the
21805 did not apply for renewal registration before the expiry of registration
period. The SPCBs/CPCB did not process the renewal for registration
applications in a timely manner and there was pendency of applications.The
Committee note from the response of the Ministry that the Guidelines on
Extended Producer Responsibility for plastic packaging was notified on 16th
February 2022. These guidelines mandate online registration of producers,
importers and brand owners and plastic waste processors and provide a clear
framework and methodology for fulfillment of EPR obligations and also prescribe
role and responsibilities of Producer, Importer and Brand owners, Plastic waste
processors, State Pollution Control Board/Pollution Control Committees and
Central Pollution Control Board. The Committee note that 21672 Producers,
Importers and Brand Owners (PIBOs) and 2003 Plastic Waste Processors (PWPs)
had registered on the centralized EPR portal developed by CPCB, as opposed to
300 in 2021. While noting that EPR registration has been simplified, the
Committee would like to know the resultant reduction in the time being taken for
PIBOs to register, and_also for renewals. The Committee are of the considered
view that in order to enforce the extended responsibility of the producers, it is

imperative that the Ministry have a clear idea of the number of such producers in
the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the mechanism by which

46


the Urban Local Bodies identify the producers in their areas including those who
are reluctant to register and the targets and the timelines that have been set by

the Ministry to register _all the existing small and large PIBOs on the portal and
the steps being taken to expedite registrations and renewals as well as provision .

of incentives, if any, for small_producers.

Extended Producer’s Responsibility

6. The Committee note that Rule 3(h) of PWM Rules, 2016 defines Extended
Producer’s Responsibility as responsibility of a producer for the environmentally
sound management of the product until the end of its life. The Committee note
that Rule 9(1) of PWM Rules, 2016 provides that the producers, within a period of
six months from the date of publication of the rules, shall work out modalities for
waste collection system based on Extended Producer’s Responsibility (EPR) and
involving State Urban Development Departments, through their own distribution
channel/ through the local body concerned, as per guidelines issued under the
rules from time to time. The Committee observe from Audit findings that till March
2020, 144 producers were registered with Punjab PCB and Delhi PCC. However,
none of them had submitted the modalities for waste collection to their respective
PCB or PCC. The Committee also note that as per Rule 9(2) of PWM Rules 2016,
the primary responsibility for collection of used multi-layered plastic sachet or
pouches or packaging is of brand owners, importers and producers, who
introduce the products in the market. Further, they need to establish a system for
collecting back the plastic waste generated due to their products. This plan of
collection is to be submitted to the SPCBs while applying for Consent to
Establish or Operate or Renewal. Similarly, those registered with CPCB in terms
of rule 13(2) of PWM (Amendment) Rules, 2018 need to submit the Action Plan to
CPCB. The Committee observe that none out of 77 registered producers had
submitted their system of collecting back the plastic waste caused by their
products to Delhi PCC. Only seven Brand Owners, out of total 87 registered
PIBOs could submit their plan of collection to Punjab PCB. The Committee note
from the reply of the Ministry that as per the Guidelines, the producers, importers
and brand owners have to fulfil EPR obligations by obtaining EPR certificates for
different categories of plastic packaging, as applicable, from registered plastic

47


waste processors after they have processed / recycled plastic waste. This
includes multi-layered plastic sachet or pouches. The EPR certificates can be
generated by registered plastic waste processors category-wise after their plants
have been physically verified by the concerned SPCB/PCC on the ground. The
EPR certificates are unique and ensure transparency and accountability in
processing of plastic waste. The Committee note that the total EPR obligations
for the year 2022-23 is 30 lakh tonnes of which EPR certificates had been
generated for 22 lakh tonnes. The Committee also note that, as per clause 10.5 of
the EPR Guidelines, in case of producers, importers and brand owners there is a
possibility to develop a separate waste stream for collection of plastic packaging
waste directly by operating schemes such as deposit refund system or buy back
etc. While noting that separate waste stream will prevent_mixing of plastic
packaging waste with solid waste, the Committee recommend that the producers waste with solid waste, the Committee recommend that the roducers

may be encouraged to develop separate waste stream for collection of plastic
packaging waste directly to reduce the time taken in recycling the plastic waste.

The Committee also desire to know whether the annual targets were achieved in

issue of EPR certificates for the balance 8 lakh tonnes.

Non-setting up of system for PWM by local bodies

7. The Committee note that despite the stipulation of Rule 6(3) of PWM Rules
2016 that the local body shall set up system for the plastic waste management by
seeking assistance of producers within one year from the date of publication of
the PWM Rules, i.e., by 17 March 2017; the selected ULBs in Punjab and Sikkim
did not set up a system for the plastic waste management by seeking assistance
of producers, as they were not aware of the producers functioning under their
jurisdiction. In Delhi, the selected ULBs are stated to have set up their own
infrastructure, however, no documentary evidence in support thereof was
provided. The Committee note that the EPR Guidelines provide a clear market
based mechanism for engagement between PIBOs and Local authorities.
However, the Committee are disappointed to note that when asked about the
status of the setting up of plastic waste management systems in Delhi, Punjab,
Sikkim and the three other metro cities; there was no clear response from the
Ministry on whether PWM systems have been developed by the ULBs. The

Committee are of the opinion that providing for mechanisms will not resolve the
48



issue unless followed up by continuous monitoring by the Ministry and the
CPCB/SPCBs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the national dashboard

may also reflect the PWM systems so developed by the ULBs under all the States/

UTs. The Committee also desire that best practices followed by various ULBs
may be compiled by the CPCB and uploaded on the dashboard to enable other
ULBs_to_implement_the same. The Committee also recommend that penal
provisions for not setting up the PWM systems by all the Urban Local Bodies may
be made for and imposed by the concerned requlatory authorities.

In this context, the Committee observe from a statement made by
representatives of MoHUA that across the country, 22 crore Million Tonnes (MT)
of legacy dumpsites lie in the form of different ‘mountains of waste’. Out of this
22 crore MT of waste, in the Phase-I of Swachh Bharat Mission, four crore MT of
waste has been cleared and 17 crore MT of work order has been awarded.
However, the Committee also consider it to be prudent to point out there are
regretful instances of dumpsites being present in the middle of cities/towns such
as Murshidabad which may cause extreme health hazards such as
cholera/typhoid and hoards of pulmonary diseases with the children residing in
the nearby areas being the most vulnerable. Had the Local Bodies made their
PWM systems in time, such a problem of legacy waste would not have arisen. The
Committee recommend that the MoEFCC in collaboration with the MoHUA and
ULBs may take necessary steps to ensure that such legacy waste dumpsites are
not created in the middle of habitation and existing dumps are cleared on an

urgent basis.

Discrepancies in recycling of plastic waste
8. The Committee note that Rule 5(1)(a) of PWM Rules, 2016 envisages that

the plastic waste, which can be recycled, shall be channelized to registered
plastic waste recyclers by the Urban Local Bodies and recycling of plastic shall
conform to the Indian Standard: IS 14534:1998 titled as Guidelines for Recycling
of Plastics, as amended from time to time. The Committee note that in Punjab and
; Sikkim, ULBs were not involved in the process of segregation and channelization
of plastic waste and the same was done by the rag pickers, informal sectors and
junk dealers. Hence, these ULBs could not ensure whether the segregated

49 |


recyclable plastic waste of 0.16 million tonnes was being channelized only to
registered recyclers complying with the Indian standards. The Committee also
note that Sikkim does not have recycling or processing units in the state and
recyclable fraction of plastic is being sent to waste dealers in Siliguri, West
Bengal. Shockingly, the Committee note that in Delhi, sampled ULBs did not
provide any records regarding channelization and recycling of plastic waste. The
Committee are of the considered opinion that even before channelizing plastic

waste to registered recyclers, a comprehensive action plan has to be made to

create plastic waste recycling facilities commensurate with the amount of plastic

waste being generated currently as well as to cater to plastic waste that may be
generated in the future. The Committee accordingly, recommend that a structured

roadmap _may_be made in collaboration with all the States/ UTs to create

commensurate plastic waste recycling facilities in the country to cater to current

-and future needs.

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that Local bodies are
establishing Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) to segregate dry waste into
various components which includes plastic waste. The plastic waste segregated
at MRFs is channelized for further processing. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that involvement of the informal sector including rag pickers
and_junk dealers for collection and segregation of plastic waste may be

encouraged to create employment opportunities/ earning avenues and expedite
the process of segregation.

The Committee further observe that the UN Environment Program identifies
three market shifts to bring about change to the legacy which plastic has left -
reuse, recycle, and re-orient and diversify and that these three shifts would result
in an 80 per cent decrease in plastic pollution and could lead to the net creation
of 700,000 additional jobs by 2040. In this direction, the Committee recommend
that efforts may be made for phasing out plastics and replacing by reusable
products based on a circular economy approach. The Committee recommend that
solutions for tackling this issue may be identified to bring new opportunities for

innovation, competitiveness and job creation.

50


Monitoring

9. The Committee observe from Audit findings that there was a need for
identification of nodal department or body for overall monitoring of
implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules at Central level. The
Committee note from the response of the Ministry that the monitoring of
implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rules at the Central level has
always been overseen by the Ministry with assistance from Central Pollution
Control Board and SPCBs/PCCs through the mechanism of Annual Reporting and
continuous engagement with stakeholders including State and Local
Governments, industry and citizens, as required. The Committee ‘note that a
National Taskforce on elimination of single use plastics and effective plastic
waste management has held four meetings to oversee and coordinate the
activities at the national level; state Task Forces have been constituted and
digital and IT based technologies have been extensively utilized. The Committee
also note that a committee under the chairpersonship of Chairman, Central
Pollution Control Board to recommend measures to Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change for effective implementation of Extended Producer
Responsibility including amendments to Extended Producer Responsibility
guidelines has also been created. The Committee can apparently see from the
oral evidence rendered before them that there is lack of coordination amongst the
agencies concerned with the resolution of related issues. They, therefore, resolution of related issues. They, therefore

recommend that a unified effort in combating the problem may be undertaken by

all_stakeholders. The Committee further recommend that clear responsibilities

may be assigned, coordination mechanism may be provided for and informed to

all the stakeholders such as Ministries, PCBs/PCCs and ULBs, PIBOs etc. and the

details thereof may be uploaded on the National dashboard and strict compliance

of the same be ensured.

Identification of sources of air pollution in Delhi

10. The Committee feel that this subject is particularly crucial at this juncture
as many cities in India, particularly the National Capital Region of Delhi are

51


reeling under extremely high levels of pollution. Since air pollution is_playing
havoc with the health and lives of residents of Delhi, the Committee are of the
view that 4 study may be urgently conducted to identify the sources of air
pollution in Delhi. The Committee would like to_be apprised of the terms of
reference and findings of the said study and the action proposed to be taken on
the findings of the study. The Committee are of the firm view that_a robust and
fiercely active pollution control mechanism is required to be urgently developed
by the Government to mitigate the excruciating suffering of the common man and
the degradation of the enviroment. It should be the collective endeavour of the
entire country to ensure that the tag of one of the most polluted countries may be
removed as speedily as possible.

ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
Chairperson
Public Accounts Committee

NEW DELHI:

06 February, 2024 _.______
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)

52