70

FAILURE TO [IMPLEMENT MINISTRY OF RAILWAY’S
ORDERS RESULTED IN DAMAGE TO RAILWAY
CABLES: SOUTH EASTERN RAILWAY AND WEST
CENTRAL RAILWAY

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2299

SEVENTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

oy TO IMPLEMENT MINISTRY OF
RAILWAY’S ORDERS RESULTED IN DAMAGE
TO RAILWAY CABLES: SOUTH EASTERN
RAILWAY AND WEST CENTRAL RAILWAY

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August 2023/ Sravana 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (i)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (ii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB COMMITTEE-II OF PAC (2022-23) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
REPORT
PART- |
| Overview 01
I Findings of the Audit 02
iit Guidelines, Order, Agencies, Requirements regarding Cable Damage 04
1४ Activities and arrangements regarding damage of Cable 05
Vv Costs and Penalty Imposition 07
Vi Zone wise violation of JPO Guidelines 09
vil Review of JPO 09
Vill = Standard Tender Document and Work Order 10
Xl Learning from Peers 10
PART -॥
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 11-14
APPENDICES

Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee — II of Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held
on 13.12.2022.

Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee — II of Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held
on 22.02.2023

Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 09.08.2023.


OPNOARWN

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.

18

19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITIC N OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

hri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

hri Subhash Chandra Baheria

hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Jagdambika Pal

hri Vishnu Dayal Ram

hri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

hri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
hri Brijendra Singh

hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
r. Satya Pal Singh

hri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

an

NHRONNHHNAHRAWNnN

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K. Laxman
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Tiruchi Siva
Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Addl. Secretary
Shri Santosh Kumar - Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

9” 7३ 99 ७ # (० ७

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABEA

Shri Subhesh Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Shri C.M. Ramesh

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
Vacant”

* Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya
Sabha on 21st June, 2022.


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE - Il OF PAC (2022-23)

ANOAKRWDND wz

. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Pratab Chandra Sarangi

. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

. Dr. Amar Patnaik

Chairperson
Convenor
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this 707 Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on “Failure to Implement Ministry of Railway’s Orders resulted in Damage to
Railway Cables: South Eastern Railway and West Central Railway” based on
C&AG Report No. 22 of 2021 relating to Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The C&AG Report No 22 of 2021 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India was laid on the Table of the House on 6 April, 2022.

3. Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the aforesaid subject and
allocated the same to Sub Committee-!I for examination and report.

4. The Sub Committee-ll of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) was
briefed on the subject oy the Audit on 13 December 2022 and they took oral
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Railways on 22 February 2023. The
Sub-Committee-ll of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) obtained information
in connection with the examination of the subject.

5. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and adopted this
Report at their sitting held on 9 August 2023. The Minutes of the sittings are
appended to the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

8 The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering the evidence before them and
furnishing requisite information to the Sub Committee-ll of the Public Accounts
Committee (2022-23) in connection with the examination of the subject.

9. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
09" August, 2023 Chairperson,

18 Shravan, 1945(Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT ON FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT MINISTRY OF RAILWAY'S ORDERS
RESULTED IN DAMAGE TO RAILWAY CABLES: SOUTH EASTERN RAILWAY AND
WEST CENTRAL RAILWAY BASED ON C&AG'S REPORT NO. 22 OF 2021

Overview:

Railways play a crucial role in transportation of people and goods across vast
distances. The smooth functioning of the. railway system depends heavily on the
integrity of its infrastructure including cables used for signaling, electrical and
telecommunication purposes. However, Railways, in general, and the South Eastern
Railway (SER) and West Central Railway (WCR), in particular, have faced significant
challenges in implementing orders relating to cable protection, resulting their damages
and subsequent disruptions. This report based on C&AG Report No. 22 of 2021 aims to
shed light on this particular issue of damage of Railway Cable and matters connected
thereto.

2. Various engineering works, such as gauge conversion,
doubling/tripling/quadrupling of lines, are carried out by construction units under Chief
Administrative Officer/Construction (CAO/C), Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL), Indian
Railways Construction Company Limited (IRCON), RailTel Corporation of India Limited
(RCIL), Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL), and other
relevant organizations. These works involve extensive digging in close proximity to the
working signaling and telecom cables, as well as electrical cables supplying power to
cabins, Assistant Station Master (ASM) rooms, Route Relay Interlocking (RRI) Cabins,
Intermediate Block Huts (IBH) and other related facilities. In the process, the executing
agencies often cut the cables, causing disruptions in train operations. The cables
belonging to the Telecommunication, Signaling and Electrical Departments are
predominantly laid below the ground along railway tracks. The execution of various
engineering projects by above organizations, for gauge conversion, new lines,
doubling/tripling and others, involve extensive digging work near above cables. The
contractors engaged by the executing departments often fail to coordinate the activities
with various agencies, leading to cable damage. This, not only results in increased
costs but also impacts the performance of the communication system and disruption in
train operations. The damages caused to cables, especially Optical Fiber Cables (OFC),
have far-reaching consequences. Each cut in the OFC network results in additional
losses in the communication system. Excessive cuts and subsequent joints lead to
under-performance and necessitate the replacement of the OFC. Moreover, cable
damage poses a risk to train safety and functioning, emphasizing the need for a
standardized procedure to minimize such incidents.

3. In light of above and response to a significant accident on the Northern Railway
in 2004, which exposed the consequences of careless working practices, a Joint
Procedure Order (JPO) under the authority of the Indian Railways Act, 1989 and the

॥ Page


Railway Safety Act, 1989was issued at the Board level to address cable protection. The
JPO outlined guidelines for undertaking digging work near signaling, electrical and
telecommunication cables. The purpose of the JPO was to establish a procedure for
undertaking digging work in the vicinity of Signaling, Electrical, and Telecommunication
cables. The JPO aimed to ensure coordination among departments and contractors to
avoid cable cuts, which can result in reduced cable life, degraded service quality and
financial losses. It also emphasized the need for strict adherence to the JPO provisions
and the realization of penalties from contractors in case of violation. The Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) in a written reply has stated that the JPO, initially issued in
2004 has undergone modifications over the time. The current version, dated
24.06.2013, titled “Procedure for undertaking digging work in the vicinity of Signaling,
Electrical & Telecommunication Cable" outlines the necessary measures to protect
railway cables during engineering works. It introduces penalties as a deterrent measure,
imposing a flat penalty of = 100,000 on contractors for cable cuts. As per the guidelines
for protection of cables while doing work in its vicinity, notified vide Teiecom Circular No.
09/2023 dated 12.06.2023 from Executive Director (Telecom Development), the
following are the penalties to be imposed for damages to cable :

SI. No. Cable Damaged Penalty per Location
1 Only Quad cable or Signaling cable = 1.0 Lakh
2. Only OFC % 1.25 Lakh
__ 3. Both OFC & Quad = 1.5 Lakh
_ 4 Electrical Cable ____ = 1.0 Lakh

The imposition of penalties for cable cuts is not intended to generate revenue but rather
to act as a deterrent against careless digging by executing agencies, thereby reducing
instances of cable cuts. The JPO stipulates that contractors would be held liable for
penalties for damaging cables, subject to fulfilling certain pre-conditions such as the
provision of a detailed cable route plan, alignment of cable tallies with contractor,
maintaining a minimum cable depth of 800 mm from the ground level and the presence
of a representative from the Signal and Telecommunication department or RailTel at the
work site by the respective agencies/Departments.

Findings of the Audit: e

4. Audit in their report found the failure of the South Eastern Railway (SER) and
West Central Railway (WCR) administrations to implement the conditions outlined in the
Joint Procedure Order (JPO) regarding digging work near Signaling, Electrical and
Telecommunication Cables. As a consequence, penalties totaling = 7.11 crore could not
be imposed on contractors in 537 cases of cable damage. The C&AG report highlights
the specific instances of cable cuts and deficiencies in meeting the JPO conditions for
both the railway administrations of SER & WCR.

2|Page


South Eastern Rzilway (SER): During the review period from March 2017 to
March 2020, a tota! of 223 locations were identified by the Audit with instances of
cable cuts within the SER division. Audit found that the administration failed to
fulfill the pre-cond, tions specified in the JPO before handing over the site to
contractors for digging work. Additionally, despite the provision of a penalty
clause in the JPO, the SER administration did not include a suitable penal clause
in the work orders of the contractors. Consequently, penalties amounting to %2.49
crore for cable cuts could not be imposed on the contractors. The SER
administration was contacted regarding the matter in December 2020, but no
response was received as of November 2021.

West Central Railway (WCR): For the period from 2014-15 to 2019-20, a total of
314 locations within the WCR division experienced cable cuts. Similar to SER,
the WCR administration too failed to meet the JPO conditions in these instances.
As a result, penalties amounting to हैं 4.62 crore could not be imposed on the
contractors. In August 2020, the matter was brought to the attention of the WCR
administration and they acknowledged the objections raised by the audit. They
subsequently issued instructions to ensure the verification of the cable route plan
at the work site before commencing any digging work. However, as of November
2021, no reply was received from the Ministry of Railways (MoR) regarding the
matter.

5. The C&AG's report for the year ended 31st March 2020 thus highlighted
instances of cable damage in South Eastern Railway (SER) and West Central Railway
(WCR). The report stated that the SER and WCR Administrations failed to ensure
compliance with the conditions stipulated in the JPO. As a result, the Zonal
Administrations were unable to impose penalties amounting to = 7.11 Cr on contractors
in 537 cases (233 in SER and 314 in WCR) of cable cuts for the period of Audit. The
Ministry has not disputed the amount of loss of % 7.11 crore calculated as per audit
report in 537 cases. The Ministry of Railways in their updated Action Taken Note dated
28" June, 2023 has furnished that a penalty of = 98 lakhs towards 79 cable cut cases
has been recovered. Further, recovery for 98 cases is under process. No recovery is
admissible in 145 cases as per JPO provisions and remaining cases are under further
scrutiny. It is noteworthy that the Audit has provided additional comments regarding the
Ministry's efforts in recovering penalties. As of 31°! March 2023, the Ministry has
successfully recovered a total penalty of = 132.67 lakhs (SER - 20.67 lakh + WCR -
112 lakh

6. Similar to the findings of the Audit regarding losses incurred by South Eastern
Railways and West Central Railways, Audit in their recent Report no. 25 of 2022, (Para
3.8), again reported similar findings that guidelines laid down in Joint Procedure Orders
2013 were not adhered to, resulting again in a loss of % 6.43 crores from Southern
Railways. The Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated that Railway's efforts have
3] Page


always aimed to avoid cable cuts, and periodic meetings at zonal and divisional levels
are held to discuss specific issues, including cable cut cases. Sensitization of
executives is also carried out. In many cases, permissions from the concerned
departments are sought. However, Audit reports have repeatedly highlighted non-
adherence to the JPO guidelines across various zones of the railways.

Guidelines, Order, Agencies, Requirements regarding Cable Damage:

7. The following Guidelines, Order, Agencies, Requirements regarding Cable
Damage would highlight the issues raised in above Audit:

(a) Local guidelines vis-a-vis Joint Procedure Order (JPO): JPO distinguished
itself from the local guidelines with respect to conditions and amount of penalties
to be recovered from erring executing contractors.

(b) Relationship between JPO and General Conditions of Contracts (GCC): The
Penalty Clause indicated in the JPO does not supersede or render ineffective the
Penalty Clause in the GCC. The GCC enables the recovery of losses but does
not specify the penalties to be imposed. The JPO supplements the GCC by
specifying the working method near the track and the amount of penalty to be
imposed.

(c) RailTel's role in cable repairs: RailTel provides joints for the repair of OFC
cable cuts at the site. However, the details of OFC cables replaced by RailTel at
the site and the associated costs therewith could not be ascertained as it is
considered a routine exercise. Hence, annual cost of joinirg, repairing, and
replacing cables due to damage or other reasons could not be ascertained.

(d) Deployment of Officials: RailTel/S&T Department officials are deploying their
personnel according to the guidelines of the JPO to take preventive and
corrective actions at major project sites.

(8) Non-Inclusion of penal clause in work orders: Non-inclusion of a suitable
penal clause in the work orders of the contractors during award of the digging
work within the vicinity of railway tracks is also causing cable cut/damage. The
Ministry stated that penal clauses exist in the GCC and the JPO specifies the
procedure to be followed for working near tracks and the conditions and amount
of penalties to be levied.

(f) Provision of cable route plans to contractors: The C&AG has pointed out
failure of Railway Administration in providing the cable route plan to the

4|Page


contractor in time. The Railways Administration thereon has claimed to have
provided cable route plans to contractors, if available, in all cases where
permission for work was sought. They have further stated that if the plan is not
available, the cable route is located and the agency is informed. Plans are also
being uploaded on zonal railway websites and local instructions have been
issued based on the JPO. Audit has reported that there have been
unsubstantiated claims of joint survey with the concerned department and the
contractor for showing cable route plan in CKP and KGP Division of SER Zone of
Indian Railways.

(9) Cable damage in limited working space: The Ministry has informed that
S&T/RCIL staff mark the cable path, and earthwork contractors are advised to
work away from the marked area to prevent cable damage. Additionally,
supervisors from S&T/RCIL are deputed to the site as per availability. The
Ministry has also issued instructions based on international best practices, such
as laying S&T cables in high-quality prefabricated/precast cable ducts and
utilizing Horizontal Directional Drilling (HDD) methods where suitable. They have
informed that necessary instructions have been issued by the Gati Shakti Unit of
the Ministry of Railways in this regard.

(h) Accidents and Damages to cables: Since the cable damages are potential
causes of accidents, the update about the recent railway accident was sought.
The Ministry have replied that the recent derailment of Train No. 12841
Coromandal Express on 02 June 2023 for the Kharagpur Division of South-
Eastern Railways, which may have resulted from cable damage, has been
completed by CRS and is currently under investigation by CBI.

(i) Common Duct Policy: In developed countries, there is provision for providing
the common duct for all utilities and future provisions. Similar provision is being
planned in India by DoT. Draft of the Common Duct Policy is available on DoT’s
website. The Gati Shakti Unit of Railways have also issued advisory dated 29"
March 2023 to the Railway Zones to provide proper quality pre-fabricated/
precast cable ducts to avoid cable cuts in future

(6) Revision of JPO: The recent increase in infrastructure works and staff
shortages have necessitated the proposed revision of the JPO. However, the
Ministry clarified that staff shortage is not considered the primary factor affecting
the implementation of JPO provisions. Efforts to address staff shortages are
being made in accordance with existing rules.

Activities and arrangements regarding damage of Cable:

5] Page


8. The type of engineering works that require digging up near cables include major
works such as the construction of ROB/RUB/LHS, doubling and third line work, girder
replacement, building work, and provision of boundary walls for 160 Kmph work. The
minor works involve activities such as soil filling, drain construction, water supply boring,
road construction and ground leveling with minimal or no digging involved. The
mandatory permissions for digging up works are required from the S&T and Electrical
departments. The Joint Procedure Order (JPO) specifies the timeline for granting
permissions. As per the JPO, the concerned departments should provide written
permission within seven days of the request for major works and within three days for
minor works. Work orders issued to contractors include penalty clauses in case of
damage to railway property. However, the imposition of penalties is subject to the
conditions mentioned in the JPO. If contractors have taken adequate measures and still
the cable gets cut, penalty may not be levied. The Ministry stated that the JPO was
issued to ensure coordinated digging by contractors engaged by the executing
department. However, all cable damages are not due to a lack of coordination. Cable
damages also occur due to theft, works by state government agencies, farmers burying
dead animals and limited working space along the track. The damage is also due to
undertaking digging work without proper authority, improper mechanized digging work,
deviations from the provided cable route map. The Zone-wise Cable Cut Details from
Year 2017-18 to 2022-23 has been furnished by the Ministry as under:

| No. Railway No. of Cable Cut cases in the Zone
1. Central Railway 820
2. Eastern Railway 372
“3. | East Central Railway ey 3930 कर
"a \ East CoastRailway == s—=~™YSsti<S*sé‘z;™*‘S
“5. | Northern Railway 4 ~~ 3076 है!
6. | North Central Railway 800
7 North Eastern Railway 662
8 Northeast Frontier Railway 382,
9. North Western Railway 1509
10. Southern Railway 1176
11. South Central Railway 1721
12. South Eastern Railway aT?
43. South East Central Railway 394



3 {ee Weste =o Railway ~ 1049

15. | Western Railway _ "| 1874 ~~
~~ 16. | West CentralRailway = S| 75
जाया न Railway” —— rr _
po Cota oo 19700

Costs and Penalty Imposition:

9. The Ministry of Railways further stated that when cables have multiple cuts
leading to under-performance of the OFC communication system, the number of joints
in the cable is taken into consideration. If the losses exceed the permitted threshold,
patch replacement of the cable is planned. The factors determining losses reaching the
permitted thresholds include maintaining loss parameters below 0.4 dB/km for OFC and
0.25 dB/km for Quad cable. The decision for patch replacement is made at the
Divisional level. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) outlined in the Signal
Engineering Manual and Yelecom Manual, such as transmission loss tests, cross-talk
tests, insulation resistance tests, and loop resistance tests, are followed to determine
losses beyond the permitted thresholds. If patch replacement is carried out correctly
with quality components, the functionality of the OFC is restored within acceptable
parameters. /n situations where the OFC remains cut and alternate mechanisms are not
available, the systems experience down time and manual procedures are implemented.
When asked to furnish the costs incurred in replacement of cables damaged due to
cable cut by digging works, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated that when
cables are damaged, RailTel, responsible for maintaining the OFC network, undertakes
tepairs by providing joints. Replacement becomes necessary only when there are
excessive joints leading to degraded communication system performance. However,
penalties are imposed on contractors for cable cuts to discourage such incidents and
recover costs incurred. Bulk of cable cuts are due to ongoing Railway works. Cable cut
by other agencies in WCR is by JVNL-RSEB and GAIL. A cost of = 1,00,000 and
%10,400 incurred due to their activities respectively. Penalty has been imposed on
JVNL-RSEB and a FIR has been registered by Railway against GAIL = 48,000/- has
been deposited against the penalty of = 1,00,000/- by GAIL on the orders of Hon'ble
Court.

10. The penalty by contractors is liable to be paid subject to the following conditions:
(i) Provision of a detailed cable route plan by Railways.

(ii) Alignment of cable tallies with the information provided to the contractor.
(iii) Depth of cable should be at least 800 mm from normal ground level.

The


(iv) A representative of the signal and telecommunication department/RailTel
should be available at the site.

11 In this regard, the Audit acknowledged that despite the diligent efforts made by
Zonal Railways to recover penalties, the complete recovery has not been possible in
certain cases due to the partial implementation of JPO (Joint Procedure Order).In
response to a query on the list of cases where contractor escaped imposition o
penalties for cable cut on grounds that all precautions were taken, the Ministry furnished
as under:

| &. ४०. Railway No orci vatinpose
1 Central Railway 243
2. Eastern Railway 152,
5 East Central Railway si "448 |
"G-"VEastCoastRaiway |... & |||||1|1ऑऔय_
pe Northern Railway 2805
6. North Central Railway 341
7, North Eastern Railway 158 7
| 8. Northeast Frontier Railway |. गज [।
[ 9. North Western Railway 1042
10. Southern Railway 540
| वा, South Central Railway 675
42. South Eastern Railway 0
13. | South East Central Railway 7 172 हर ~
“44. [South Western Railway 316 न
यह | Western Railway |. 7 730 “|
16. West Central Railway 174
17. Metro Railway 0
Total 7940

42. The Ministry of Railways have stated that work orders are issued to contractors
as per tender conditions. The penalty clauses stipulated in the JPO are not included in
the work order because joint notes are prepared after cable cuts occur and penalties
are determined based on the contractor's measures taken. However, in order to prevent

BP age


similar incidents from happening in future, the Civil Engineering Directorate has taken
proactive measures. On 18th April 2023, they issued comprehensive instructions to
Zonal Railways, urging them to include the provisions of JPO in all tender documents
for works specifically pertaining to activities such as digging near Railway signaling,
telecom, electrical, and other cables. The Audit has suggested that by incorporating
these provisions in the tender documents, Zonal Railways can legally hold contractors
accountable for any damages caused due to above activities. This measure ensures
that penalties can be recovered in cases of cable cut incidents resulting from the
contractors’ careless work based on the provisions of the JPO 2013.

Zone wise violation of JPO Guidelines:

13. The telecom circuits continue working through protection paths and the Railways
prioritize rectifying cable cuts as routine maintenance activities. Responsibility has been
fixed for damage to cables. In 11,760 cases, contractors were found responsible, while
766 cases involved Railway/Railway Staff responsibility. Zone-wise violations of the
guidelines laid down in the-Joint Procedure Order (JPO) 2013 are provided below:

| 51 No. — Railway No. of cases where JPO guidelines
1. Central Railway 577
2. — Railway = ~ 0 a
3, East Central Railway 7 3482
4. East Coast Railway ~ 667 |
5... Northern Railway 1, | ||
6. | North CentralRailway "459
7. | North Eastern Railway | 504 |
16.7 7] Northeast Frontier Railway | हु 382 |
। 9 । North Western Railway 467 |
P40. | = 636
| 41. "| South Central Railway SSCS 10460
जड़ | South Eastern Railway AT2 || :
13. | South East Central Railway 219 हु
14. | South Western Railway 733 —
15. | Western Railway 84...
16... | West Central Railway ee BAT ओओ



= जकछ-7ए7| Metro Railway हि 0
Total 11760

Review of JPO:

14 Questions were raised about the need to revisit the guidelines issued in
2013.The Railways acknowledged the need to revise the guidelines in the Joint
Procedure Order (JPO) issued in 2013.The review of the JPO guidelines was also
prompted by an increase in cable-cut incidents across Zonal Railways and practical
difficulties faced in implementing certain provisions due to the rise in infrastructure
works and staff shortage. A committee of SAG officers was constituted by the Board to
revisit the JPO and suggest practical modifications without affecting the pace of
infrastructure works. The committee recommended that Zonal Railways formulate their
own JPOs, incorporating provisions for imposing penalties. These instructions were
issued by the. Ministry of Railways through Telecom Circular No. 09/2023, dated
42.06.2023 and are in supersession of the 2013 JPO. The Civil Engineering Directorate
of MoR also issued instructions, dated 18.04.2023, to include JPO provisions in the
terider documents of Zonal Railways.

Standard Tender Document and Work Order:

15. Railways in a written reply assured that the Indian Railways have established
standard tender documents and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for work orders
in the engineering department. These documents ensure thai: contractors take
necessary precautions to protect railway property during their operations.

Learning from Peers:

16. When asked to furnish whether Indian Railways have learnt from the instances of
cable cut due to digging by oil and gas companies or road construction companies, the
Indian Railways in a written reply stated that considering that cable cuts can also occur
due to activities by other organizations, such as Oil and Gas Companies or Road
Construction companies, Indian Railways are studying the procedures implemented by
these organizations to avoid such incidents. Additionally, a common duct policy is being
drafted by the Department of Telecommunications to prevent cable cuts. Relevant
clauses from these sources will be adopted to enhance cable protection on Indian
Railways.

10| Page


RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee find credence in the Audit findings that there has been a
lapse in adhering to the Joint Procedure Orders relating to the digging work in
the vicinity of Signalling, Electrical & Telecommunication Cable. South Eastern
Railway (SER) and West Central Railway (WCR) Administrations must take
responsibility and be held accountable for their failure to ensure compliance with
the conditions stipulated in the Joint Procedure Order (JPO). Negligence on the
part of Railways has resulted in significant damage to the cables. The Committee
feel that it is imperative for the SER and WCR Administrations to promptly
respond to the concerns raised in the C&AG's report and take corrective actions
to rectify the damage daused by their failure in implementing orders. Further,
C&AG's report should be taken as an indication for the entire railway system,
urging all stakeholders to prioritize the protection of railway cables and ensure
proper implementation of guidelines and procedures. Delayed or absence of
responses undermine the accountability and transparency of the railway system
and hinder efforts to improve operational efficiency and safety. Failure to
address the issues highlighted by the Audit will not only lead to financial losses
but also jeopardize the’/safety, efficiency, and reliability of the Railway. The
Committee would emphasize on the Ministry of Railways ensuring timely action
on the audit findings. ~ .;

Implementation of JPO:

2. The Committee note that the claim of the Ministry that tender documents
issued to contractors are on standard lines is not convincing. Apparently there is
lacuna in the work orders issued to the contractors and also a visible lack of
willingness on part of the Railway Administration in imposing and recovering
penalty on account of violation of the provisions in JPO. While the penalty clause
is inserted in Tender Documents/Work Order in some cases, no such clause is
included in several others. The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) should take
immediate action to enforce strict adherence to the JPO and ensure that ‘Penalty
Clause’ is inserted in each Tender Document and Work Order so that all
contractors are aware of their liabilities and responsibilities regarding cable
damage. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railways Administration
should invariably include suitable penal clauses in the work orders of contractors
to ensure their accountability for any damage caused during digging work. This
will serve as a strong deterrent against indiscriminate digging and cable cuts.

3. The Committee find that pre-conditions such as detailed cable route plans,
aligning cable tallies with contractor information, ensuring that the depth of
cables is not less than 800 mm from normal ground level and having a
representative of the Signal and Telecommunication department/RailTel present
at the site, were not fulfilled. Further, due to lack of coordination, neither prior

11 |


information to S&T department for deployment of staff before digging was made
nor marking of cables could be completed. This has resulted in cable damages
and further dislocations. Also, Joint Survey, in case of non-availability of cable
route plan, could not be substantiated before Audit. It is quite unacceptable that
the site is handed over to contractors for digging work without fulfilling pre-
conditions mentioned in the Joint Procedure Order (JPO). The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry must enforce strict adherence to these
pre-conditions, including the provision of detailed cable route plans, alignment
accuracy, depth requirements, and the presence of Signal and
Telecommunication department/RailTel representatives at the site.

4. The Committee note that there has been visible lack of coordination among
the various departments of the Railways and many times the Railway
Administration has not provided Cable Route plans to the contractors ultimately
resulting in damage to Cables. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Railway
Administration should invariably provide cable route plans to contractors before
initiation of work. Any delay or failure in providing the plans should be
thoroughly investigated, and appropriate actions should be taken to rectify the
situation and prevent future occurrences. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should ensure effective coordination among all agencies
involved in infrastructure works near railway tracks, including the Railways, State
Government agencies, and contractors. Regular meetings asd consultations
should be held to address specific issues, such as cable cuts, disruptions etc.
and take necessary preventive and corrective actions in time.

Shortage of Staff:

5. The Committee note from the replies furnished to them that the Railways
could not effect strict implementation of JPO due to shortage of staff. Though
this cannot be taken as justifiable plea, however, the Committee feel that the
Ministry should allocate sufficient resources and manpower to address the
growing infrastructure works and staff shortage across the Railways. Adequate
staffing will ensure timely implementation of guidelines, effective monitoring and
enforcement of penalties.

6. The Committee note that from 2017-18 to 2022-23, there has been a total of
19700 cases of cable cut in all Zones. Out of this, penalty was not imposed in
7940 cases, whereby it became implicit that there were still 14760 cases of JPO
violations involving more than = 100 crores when penalty was calculated at the
minimum of @ & 100,000 per case. The Committee further note that the Ministry’s
reply is not forthcoming in this regard and no efforts have been made by the
Ministry of Railways to review the implementation of JPO in all zones. Besides,
attributing the problem to shortage of staff is unacceptable as responsibility of
implementing the guidelines rest on the Railways. It is crucial for the railway

12| Page


administrations to prioritize the proper implementation of JPO and thus ensure
protection of railway cables. This includes allocating sufficient resources,
investing in advanced cable laying techniques, and promoting a culture of
accountability and adherence to established procedures The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Rai'ways should closely monitor the implementation of JPO
across all railway zones to prevent further instances of cable damage. This can
be achieved by conducting regular audits, enforcing penalties, and providing
necessary training and resources to railway administration to ensure compliance.
The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry of Railways should
establish a robust system for monitoring and reporting instances of cable
damage across all railway zones. This will enable timely intervention and
applying corrective measures to minimize disruptions in train operations and
prevent financial losses due to cable cuts. RailTel, being a Railway PSU, should
also be involved to maintain accurate records of the expenditure incurred on the
replacement of cables darnaged during digging work.

Revision of JPO:

7. A committee of SAG officers was constituted by the Board to revisit the
JPO and suggest practical modifications without affecting the pace of
infrastructure works. This Committee has recommended that Zonal Railways
formulate their own JPOs, incorporating provisions for imposing penalties. These
instructions have been issued by the Ministry of Railways to Zonal Railways. The
Civil Engineering Directorate of MoR has also issued instructions to include JPO
provisions in the tender documents of Zonal Railways. The Committee desire that
Ministry of Railways should go through the findings and recommendations of the
above Committee of SAG Officers and implement the same in letter and spirit.
They may also conduct a comprehensive review of existing local guidelines and
identify the gaps and shortcomings that have led to the failure in preventing cable
damage.

International best Practices:

8. The Committee note that in developed countries a common duct is
maintained for all utilities. They also note that a proposal for common duct policy
has been prepared by DoT. The Committee, therefore, desire that Railways should
plan for a common duct for all Signal, Electrical and Telecommunication systems
of the Railways, which will go a long way in minimizing cable cut cases and
ensuring the safety of the Rail network. The efforts of the Indian Railways should
not be limited to issue of advisories in this regard. The Committee therefore
recommend that the use of proper quality pre-cast cable ducts/ pre-fabricated
ducts should be made compulsory henceforth in all Railway Zones so as to avoid
cable cuts in future. ”*

13 |


9. In light of the potential accidents that could arise due to cable cuts, the
Committee emphatically urge the Ministry to prioritize the protection and
maintenance of the OFC communication system. As an example, the recent
derailment of Train No. 12841, Coromandal Express, the Committee feel, serve as
a stark reminder of the serious consequences such incidents may have. The
Committee observe that to mitigate such risks, the Ministry mi:st take immediate
action and invest in advanced technology for proactive fau!: detection. They,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should invest in upgrading and replacing
damaged cables to ensure seamless functioning of the communication system.
The Ministry of Railways should also provide clear guidelines and parameters for
replacing cables that have been repaired with joints but still result in degraded
performance of the communication system. By establishing specific criteria for
replacement, the Ministry can ensure optimal performance and prevent further
degradation of the communication infrastructure.

10. The Committee desire that the Ministry should provide an update on the
recovery of penalties in the 85 cases that have already been initiated. It is crucial
that the penalties are imposed and the Ministry takes appropriate action to
recover the same. Further, the Committee feel that the Ministry should clarify the
level at which the cause of cable cuts has been ascertained during the review
process in the 113 cases. It is essential to have a well-defined and transparent
procedure for reviewing cable cut incidents to identify the parties responsible
and take appropriate actions to prevent future occurrences. In light of the recent
Audit Report No. 25 of 2022, which once again highlights the non-adherence to
JPO guidelines resulting in significant financial losses, the Committee strongly
recommend a complete review of similar cases by the Ministry in all railway
zones. It is crucial for the Ministry to analyze the root causes of these issues and
implement corrective actions to ensure strict compliance with guidelines across
the entire railway network. The recurring audit reports pointing to similar findings
from other Railway Zones, serve as a clear indication that immediate action and
fundamental changes are necessary. The Committee, therefore, stress the
importance of conducting a thorough review and implementing robust measures
to address these longstanding concerns.

11. The Committee note that zonal railways failed to impose penalties totaling
to हैं 6.7 crore in 263 cases of cable cuts between March 2017 and March 2020. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that these cases be investigated so as to find
shortcomings in enforcing the conditions stipulated in the JPO on account of
which penalties could not be levied. Lessons learnt should be utilized to prevent
similar cases in the future.

14| Page


DRAFT.
Confidential

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I| OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 13 DECEMBER, 2022.

The Sub-Committee-II met on Tuesday, the 130 December, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to

1615 hrs. in Committee Room '2', Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New

Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Satya Pal Singh
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Amar Patnaik

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar
Shri Tirthankar Das

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi

Convenor

- Additional Secretary
- Director

Deputy Secretary


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms. lla Singh - Deputy C&AG
2. Shri Bivash Ranjan Mondal - Director General
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General
4. Shri Navneet Gupta - Director General
5. Ms. Rashmi Aggarwal - Director General
6. Shri Avinash Chavan - Director General
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-I] welcomed the Members and the

officials from C&AG office to the sitting of the Sub-Committee-I convened to have briefing on
the subjects; (i)"Failure to implement Ministry of Railways orders resu’tsd in damage to
railway cables: SER & WCR” based on Para 3.11 of C&AG Report No. 22 of 2021 and (ii)
“Performance Audit on efficacy of Auxiliary Vessels in Indian Navy” based on Chapter Il

of C&AG Report No. 1 of 2020.

3. The Convenor, then, asked the officers of Audit to first brief the Committee on the
subject "Failure to implement Ministry of Railways orders resulted in damage to railway cables:
SER & WCR" and the main findings of the Audit as requested by them, status of the action
taken replies by the concerned Ministries/Departments on the Audit findings, and
recommendations proposed by Audit to address the issues on the subject under examination.

The Convenor also asked them to brief the Committee on the next subject, subsequently.

4. After seeking permission from the Chair, the Audit officers made a Power-Point

Presentation, highlighting the findings of the audit on the subject, “Failure to implement Ministry

[s-


of Railways orders resulted in damage to railway cables: SER & WCR’ . The Audit officers

briefed the Committee mainly on the following issues:-

(a) Both the zonal railways i.e. SER and WCR have not adhered to Joint Procedure Order
(JPO) on “Procedure for undertaking of digging work in the vicinity of Signaling,
Electrical and Telecommunication Cable" which was issued by Railway Board with the

objective of controlling and minimizing the instances of cable cut.

(0) SER and WCR administrations had not fulfilled the pre-conditions mentioned in the JPO
before handing over the site to the contractor for digging work.

(c) Despite the provision of penal clause in the JPO, the zonal railways have not included a
suitable provision in the contract/work order as a result of which they could not impose

penalty amounting to Rs. 7.11 crore on the contractors for damaging cables.

(a) Audit had found instances of cable cut in 223 locations at various divisions in SER and
in 314 locations at WCR due to lapse of ensuring the conditions stipulated in JPO
administered by the Railway Board.

(e) It was also found that out of 537 cases of cable cut at both Zonal Railways, 113 cases
have been under review for ascertaining the cause of cable cut and 263 cases were

found where penalty could not be imposed due to non-adherence to JPO provision.

(f) Audit observed the. WCR administration have accepted the objections raised by Audit
and instructions to ensure verification of cable route plan at site before starting the work

but SER administration and even Ministry of Railways had not yet submitted ATNs.

5. Thereafter, Members of the Sub-Committee-II sought certain clarifications regarding the
status of undertaking of digging work in the vicinity of Signaling, Electrical and
Telecommunication cables prior to March 2017 to March 2020 as the JPO was framed in
2013. Members also discussed with the Audit officers, whether the scope of the subject also
included the status of the total expenditure incurred by Zonal Railways in repairing/replacement

of the cables damaged curing digging work as well as reasons furnished by the Ministry of

/)-


Railways for non-imposing of penalty on contractors to Audit. The Sub-Committee-I desired
that Audit should collect the information relating to cost involved in replacement of cables and
thus inform the Committee regarding the total cost involved. They also desired that Audit may
also find out if such lapses occurred in other divisions of Railways. The Members of the Sub-
Committee-I! also desired to know whether Audit has come across instances of accountability
fixed for the lapse in this regard. The Members further desired to seek clarifications on various
issues from the Railway Board before convening the next sitting of the Sub-Committee-Il, on
the subject.
6. The officials of the C&AG of India, thereafter, briefed the Members on the Chapter-
॥ of Audit report No. 1 of 2020 on the subject “Performance Audit on efficacy of Auxiliary
Vessels in Indian Navy” by way of Power Point Presentation.
7. Explaining the role of Auxiliary Vessels, the Dy. C&AG stated that Auxiliary
Vessels are designed not only to operate in support of combatant ships and other naval

operations but also to have some limited combat capacity. Audit officers further explained

the shortcomings and audit findings during the course of examination of the subject,

which might have affected the Indian Navy adversely, as under:

(a) The Indian Navy was forced to exploit vintage ships with limited capabilities due to

lag in achieving the desired force levels of Auxiliary Vessels.

(b) The Ministry of Defence attributed the delays to low timeline provided in the
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). Consequently, Navy nad to resort to
redeployment of the existing fleet, without giving them time for regular

maintenance, and engage ships from trade.
(० In view of the proposed decommissioning of the existing vessels, and timeframe

involved in completion of the proposed acquisition, the Navy may be adversely
affected due to non-availability of required Landing Platform Dock (LPD).


(d) The Indian Navy was able to survey only 3.91 million sq.km. (21%) of total
demarcated survey area of 18.78 million sq.km. due to deficiency in number of

Survey Vessels

(e) In the absence of Survey Training Vessel (STV), most of the practical training was
being imparted by utilizing Survey Motor Boats, restricted to the limits of Goa
harbor, and the. trainees are unable to gain practical experience in real time

shipborne operations.

(f) Due to delay in.acquisition of different Auxiliary Vessels such as Landing Craft
Utilities (LCUs), “Diving Support Vessel (DSV), Cadet Training Ships (CTS), Multi-
Purpose Vessels (MPVs) and Yard Crafts, Indian Navy might be facing critical
shortage of dedicated training ships for their training squadron and is adopting
interim measures like hiring of ships or conversion of other warships to meet their
training needs.

(g) Audit also noticed various issues relating to maintenance of the available force
level of Auxiliary Vessels deployed and to the maximum exploited them beyond
operational constraints limiting their stability endurance and functioned with design

deficiencies.

8. The Members of Sub-Committee-il expressed their reservations about the
preparedness of the Incian Navy in view of the Audit findings. The Members raised the
issue of deficient availability of Auxiliary Vessels resulting in the Indian Navy being forced
to redeploy or exploit ageing/obsolete ships with un-serviceability or design deficiencies
and operational constraints limiting stability and endurance of the ships. The Members
also expressed concen for abnormal delay in acquisition/procurement of required
Auxiliary Vessels, non-combat vehicle which provide support with a nature of self
defence, as Fleet Tankers, Landing Platform Dock, Survey Vessels, Survey Training

Vessels, Deep Water Multi Beam (DWMB) systems, Diving Support Vessel, Cadet

(qe


Training Ships and many more on account of non-adherence to the prescribed timelines
at each stage of acquisition.

9. The Members also queried about the maintenance of the available auxiliary
vessels with Indian Navy. The Members also queried about expenditure incurred on
outsourcing of auxiliary services. The Members were surprised at the quality of training
imparted to the trainees, at a time when the Indian Navy is facing critical shortage of
dedicated training ships and is adopting interim measures like hiring of ships or
conversion of other warships.

10. | Members of the Sub-Committee-II noted that the Action Taken Notes from the Ministry
of Defence on the Audit Para was still awaited even though the Audit Report was tabled in the
House in September, 2020. The Members also suggested to the Audit to ask for updated
information from Ministry of Defence and Indian Navy and intimate the same to the Sub-
Committee-ll through PAC Secretariat. The Members of the Sub-Committee-II also
suggested to collect relevant materials regarding review meetings purportedly to mitigate
issue i.e. deficient availability of Auxiliary Vessels between Ministry of Defence and
Indian Navy.

14. The Convenor, then, thanked the officers of the Office of C&AG of India for briefing the
Committee on the said subjects.

The Sub-Committee-II then adjourned.

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has been

kept on record.

जन Ver


Confidential

MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-Il OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 2277 FEBRUARY, 2023.

The Sub-Committee-I] met on Wednesday, the 2200 February, 2023 from 1500 hrs.
to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Satya Pal Singh - Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2, Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
3. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

RAJYA SABHA
4. Shri Amar Patnaik

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA —

1. Ms. Ila Singh - Deputy C&AG
2, Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General
3. Shri Subu R - Director General

ety >


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

1. Shri Roop N. Sunkar - Member (Infrastructure) &
Ex. Officio Secretary to the Govt. of India
2. Ms. Aruna Singh - Additional Member (Telecom)
3. Shri Rahul Agrawal - Additional Member (Signal)
4. Shri Anil Kumar Khandelwal - Principal Executive Director/GS
2 At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-Il welcomed the Members and the

Officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the Sub-
Committee-I! convened to have an oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) in connection with the examination of the subject “Failure to implement
Ministry of Railways orders resulted in damage to railway cables: SER & WCR” based on
Para 3.11 of C&AG Report No. 22 of 2021.

3. The Convenor then asked Dy: C&AG to further brief the Sub-Committee on the action
taken by the Ministry on the shortcomings pointed out and suggestions made by the Audit on

ihe aforesaid subject.

4, After briefing by the Audit Officers on the subject, the representatives of Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) were called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting.
impressing upon the witnesses to treat the proceedings of the Committee as confidential, the
Convenor asked the representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to brief the Sub-

Committee by giving an overview of the necessity of issue of Joint Procedure Order (JPO) in

eye?


year 2013 and reasons for the non inclusion of the provisions of the JPO in the work order of
the contractors leading 1210 penal action in the event of cable cuts.

5. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways sought permission to give a detailed
overview of the various issues through a Power Point Presentation. During the
presentation, various aspects were covered which inter-alia included the non-adherence to
the pre-conditions mentioned in the JPO before handing over the site to the contractor for

digging work in close vicinity of railway track, instances of accountability fixed on some of the

officers concerned for the lapses in this regard, status of the total expenditure incurred by
Zonal Railways in repairing/replacement of the cables damaged during digging work etc.

6. The Convenor and Members of the Committee raised some specific questions which
inter-alia include the rationale to issue Joint Procedure Order (JPO) on the undertaking of

digging work in the vicinity of railways tracks, justification to penalise the contractors for

damaging the underground cables; number of instances of issue of notices for recovering the
penalties from the defaulting contractors; details of expenditure incurred by Railways on
repair/replacement of cables, action taken by Indian Railway Administration against the officers
responsible in the Zonal Railways for not imposing the penalty amount, convening of the
quarterly review meeting at the Zonal level for addressing the issue; mechanism to ensure co-
ordination among the various departments involved in the digging work; provision of blacklisting
the defaulting Contractors etc..

7. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railways Board) furnished reply to
some of the queries posed by the Members and sought permission to furnish information to the
remaining queries subsequently in due course.

8. After some deliberations, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-II permitted the representatives

of the Ministry of Railways to furnish the information that was not readily available with them.

9. The Convenor also asked the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway

Board) to furnish written replies to the queries raised by the Members as well as to the list of


points provided by the Committee Secretariat within 15 days, The Convenor also thanked the
officers of the Ministry of Railways for appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing

valuable information. The Convenor, Sub-Committee-I| also thanked the officers of the office of

C8&AG of India for briefing the Sub-Committee on the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

The Sub-Committee-ll then adjourned.

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept on

record.