18

INEFFECTIVE MONITORING BY APEDA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-third Report (16 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

EIGHTEENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT.
NEW DELHI


ane


2199

EIGHTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

INEFFECTIVE MONITORING BY APEDA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-third Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
| NEW DELHI

September, 2020/Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTERI Report

CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES

1 Minutes of the Fourth sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2020-21) held on 287 August, 2020.

ul Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha).

कब

PAGE

(iii)

(v)

16

24

22

28

32


ee NAAR WN

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury -

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
ri Bhartruhari Mahtab
hri Ajay (Teni) Misra
hri Jagdambika Pal
ri Vishnu Dayal Ram
hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

ti Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
r. Satya Pal Singh

ri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant
Vacant

2 ८९ ०९ ५९ ५? NH

2y

SECRETARIAT

Shri. T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri. M.L.K. Raja i - Director

Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - —- Additional Director

Chairperson


os


INTRODUCTION

हे |, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Ineffective Monitoring by APEDA’ relating to the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry (Department of Commerce).

2. The One Hundred and Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabhajlaid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 20 March,
2020. The Committee considered. the draft Report on the subject and thereafter
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 28 August, 2020. Minutes of the sitting form
appendix to the Report. है

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government - on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty-third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-il. है

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

| ‘| September, 2020 September, 2020 Chairperson

2b Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


ae,


CHAPTER -I
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in ,
their One Hundred and Twenty-third Report (167 Lok Sabha) on’ "Ineffective monitoring
by APEDA" relating to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce).

2. The One Hundred and Twenty-third Report which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 18" December, 2018 contained six Observations/Recommendations. The Action’
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) and are categorized as
under:

i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1,2 and6

Total: 03

Chapter — Il
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

NIL

Total: NIL

Chapter - Ill
ili. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3,4 10 5
: Total: 03
" Chapter —IV

iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of Ministry of Commerce and _ Industry
(Department of Commerce), Agriculture and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority (APEDA) and Spices Board (SB) which included inter-alia issues
of non-inclusion of important clauses in Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) executed
between APEDA and SB; Absence of monitoring mechanism; Recovery of unutilized
funds with penal interest @ 10 per cent; Incorrect utilization of funds/Deviation of
project; Failure to monitor the project at Spices Park, Guna; and Implementation of
Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE).

4. The final Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this
Report. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on their

Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department
of Commerce) to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter | within six months of the

presentation of the Report to the House.

Absence of monitoring mechanism

(Recommendation No. 2)

6. The Committee noted that APEDA released second instalment to SB in contravention
of the provisions of clause 4 of the MOU which stipulated that the funds or facility shall
not be diverted or utilized for the purpose other than for which it was sanctioned. The
Committee were of the opinion that APEDA should have been careful in scrutiny of UC
and more proactive in the way of monitoring the utilization of the funds by designating
an officer to oversee the execution of the project. The Committee were also of the view

that absence of provisions for submission of periodical progress report by SB in the


MOU gave them a free hand to utilize the funds at its disposal as per its whims and
fancies. Although APEDA made repeated communications to the SB for submission of
periodical progress reports, it proved futile. The Committee were further appalled to note
the casual response of APEDA that though the MOU between APEDA and SB did not
specifically contain any clause for physical inspection, as per prevailing practice APEDA
conducted physical verification. The Committee were disappointed to note that ASIDE
Scheme did not provide for physical inspection of the project before releasing further
instalment. The Committee. while noting that ASIDE Scheme provides for annual
appraisal by an independent agency desired to be apprised of the details of yearly
appraisals conducted by the independent agency in respect of the project under ASIDE
scheme since its inception. The Committee also desired ४०01 to scrutinize whether
ASIDE guidelines were followed in execution of all the projects.

7. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Dept. of Commerce) in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-
“Under the Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES), which was launched
after discontinuation of erstwhile ASIDE Scheme, Price Waterhouse. Coopers
(PwC) has been engaged as Project Monitoring Agency (PMA) to assist in
implementation of TIES. One of the Terms of Reference of PwC is to map the
infrastructure created under the erstwhile ASIDE scheme. As part of this, PwC is
assessing the functional/operational status of the assets created and modus
operandi of maintenance of assets. The exercise is expected to be completed by
March 2020.”

8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Ministry has not replied on the Committee’s opinion for designating an officer to

oversee the execution of the project for careful scrutiny of UC and monitoring
qd

the utilization of funds. :

In respect of ASIDE Scheme, the Ministry replied that they had engaged PwC to
map infrastructure created ‘under. the erstwhile ASIDE Scheme during the

implementation of TIES (new scheme). Further, Audit observed that no proper


monitoring mechanism was found to be developed to watch the proper utilization
of grants before releasing subsequent instalments. Furthermore, no reply has
been given by the Ministry on the desire of the Committee to scrutinize whether

ASIDE guidelines were followed in execution of all the projects.”

9. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under:-
“As per the monitoring and review mechanism laid out in the guidelines of the
(erstwhile) ASIDE Scheme, Nodal Officers/Assisting Officers were appointed in
the Department of Commerce for monitoring and reviewing the progress and
physical inspection of the projects sanctioned under the ASIDE scheme, The
State/UT Agency/Central Agencies were required to submit a quarterly report to
enable the Department to review the progress of utilization of funds released and
this report also formed the basis for further release of funds by the Ministry. The
progress of the Scheme was also reviewed by the Empowered Committee

periodically.”

10. The Committee, in their Original Report, noted that Agriculture and Processed
Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) released second
instalment to Spices Board (SB) in contravention of the provisions of the MOU.
The MOU inter alia stipulated that the funds or facility shall not be diverted or
utilized for the purpose other than for which they were sanctioned and opined
that APEDA should have been careful in scrutiny of Utilization Certificate and
more proactive in the way of monitoring the utilization of the funds by
designating an officer to oversee the execution of the project. The Committee
observe that the Ministry has neither accepted the lapse of wrongful utilization of
the funds pointed out by the audit nor given their response on the suggestion of
designating an officer to oversee execution of the projects. The. Committee
reiterate that action has to be taken on the officials responsible for such lapses
and a senior level officer in the Ministry, not below the level of Divisional Officer

designated to monitor progress and. completion of the projects. The Committee

—4-


were also of the view that absence of provisions for submission of periodical
progress report by SB in the MOU gave them a free hand to utilize the funds as
per their discretion. The Committee also noted that ASIDE Scheme did not
provide for physical inspection of the project before releasing further installments
and desired to be apprised of the details of yearly appraisals conducted by the
independent agency in respect of the Project under ASIDE scheme since its
inception. The Committee also desired the Ministry to scrutinize whether ASIDE
guidelines were followed in execution of all the projects. The Committee note
from the reply of the Government that as per the monitoring and review
mechanism laid out in the guidelines of the (erstwhile) ASIDE Scheme, Nodal
Officers/Assisting Officers were appointed in the Department of Commerce for
monitoring and reviewing the progress and physical inspection of the projects
sanctioned under the ASIDE scheme. The State/UT Agency/Central Agencies were
required to submit a quarterly report to enable the Department to review the
progress of utilization of funds released and this report also formed the basis for
further release of funds by the Ministry and the. progress of the Scheme was.also
reviewed by the Empowered Committee periodically. The Committee would like to
_ be apprised of the findings/ reports of the Nodal officer/ Assisting Officer
appointed for the monitoring and reviewing the progress and physical inspection
of the Spices Park in Guna and the quarterly reports submitted by the agencies
concerned which formed the basis for further release of funds to the Spices
Board; and the reports of the review by the empowered committee. The
Committee also wish to be informed about the specific action taken by the
Ministry to address the concern raised by Audit regarding the need for a proper
‘mechanism for monitoring utilization of grants before releasing. subsequent
instalments. The Committee, further, reiterate that a comprehensive review of all
the projects under the ASIDE Scheme may be made to ascertain whether all
guidelines were followed in executing the projects so as to ensure that the same
lapses are not repeated and improvenients are made to strengthen the ongoing

Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES).

— जा


Recovery of unutilized funds with penal interest @ 10 per cent

(Recommendation No. 3)

11. The Committee noted that in compliance with the directions of MOCI, APEDA
approved in its 715' meeting held on 24.06.2011, financial assistance of Rs. 6.12 crore td’
SB for setting up of cold storage of 3000 MT. For execution of the project, APEDA
released total amount of Rs. 5.79 crore to SB. Subsequently, SB informed APEDA (July,
2016) that a cold storage of 374 MT capacity, instead of the mandated 3000 MT had
been set up. Considering pro-rata cost of the storage capacity, so created, as Rs. 0.80
crore, APEDA requested SB to refund the balance amount of Rs. 4.99 crore. However,
SB refunded (November, 2016) only Rs. 3.84 crore to APEDA. APEDA was unable to
recover penalty of Rs. 0.87 crore from SB and also sustained a loss of Rs. 1.77 crore
due to non-inclusion of a clause in the MOU regarding levying of interest @10% per
annum on the unutilized grant refunded by SB. The Committee noted with concern that
APEDA overlooked the clear directions of MoC! on insertion of penal and interest
clauses and therefore, suffered financial loss. Though APEDA had asked (18 July, 2018)
SB to refund the entire amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh alongwith 10% interest per annum, it
was clear that APEDA acted only after the matter being pointed out by the Committee.
The Committee, therefore, desired that APEDA should recover the entire amount with
10% interest per annum for the delayed period and apprise them within two months of

the presentation of this report.

412. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Dept. of Commerce) in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-
“The entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh has been recovered by APEDA.
As both APEDA and Spices Board are autonomous organisations under the
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, largely dependent on the Government grants
for their operational needs, the payment of interest by the Spices Bgard may not

be insisted upon. ” . ~


13. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-
“Reply is factually incorrect as only Rs. 399.36 lakh has been recovered as of
31.03.2019 from Spices Board and not Rs. 578.96 lakh as stated in the reply.

Further, no penal interest of 10% p.a. has been recovered.”

14. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:- :
“Spices Board had refunded the entire unutilized amount of Rs. 399.36 lakh,
which had not been used for construction of cold storage. However, it was
erroneously reported to the PAC. that the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96
lakh had been recovered from the Spices Board. The error is deeply regretted.
Spices Board have refunded the balance amount of Rs. 179.60 lakh on
20.11.2019 and the entire principle amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh now stands
refunded.

As regards penal interest, it is submitted that both APEDA and Spices Board are
autonomous organisations under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, largely
dependent on the Government grants for their operational needs. Payment of
penal interest may, therefore, kindly not be insisted upon as it would cut into the

funds required for operational needs of the Spices Board. ”

15. The Committee in their Original Report noted that Agriculture and
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) overlooked the
clear directions of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCl) on inserting penal
and interest clauses in the MoU with the SB. Financial loss was suffered as it
was unable to recover penalty of Rs. 87 lakhs from Spices Board (SB) and Rs.
1.77 crore due to non-inclusion of clause regarding levying of interest @ 10 per
cent per annum on the unutilized grant. The Committee had, therefore, desired
. that APEDA should recover the entire amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh with interest @
10 per cent per annum for the delayed period. The Committee note that the
Ministry erroneously submitted that the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh
was recovered by APEDA. Only'Rs. 399.36 lakh had been recovered till 31.03.2019

—d-


as pointed out by the Audit and this was later on accepted as correct by the
Ministry. The Committee are disappointed over the callous attitude of the Ministry
in furnishing. the reply to the Committee. The Committee, while noting that the
entire amount was recovered later, take a serious view on the lapse on the part of
Ministry and desire that the replies/ details that are submitted to the Committee
may invariably be verified by the senior most officer of the Ministry before such
information is forwarded to the Committee. Further, the Committee note from the
submission of the Ministry that as both APEDA and Spices Board are
autonomous organisations under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, largely
dependent on the Government grants for their operational needs, it has been
desired that payment of penal interest may not be insisted upon as it would cut
into the funds required for operational needs of the Spices Board. The
Committee note that APEDA had released Rs 5.79 crore to the SB between
February 2012 and March 2013: of which only Rs .80 crore was utilized by the SB
for creation of a warehouse of 374 MT capacity instead of 3000MT as intended,
and refunded Rs 3.84 crore in November, 2016. The Committee do not agree with
the contention of the Ministry that payment of penal interest may not be insisted
upon as SB would have earned interest on Rs 4.99 crore which was lying with it
for more than three years. Moreover, as Spices Board has erred by way of
diverting the money given by APEDA and creating truncated capacity as well,
imposing penal interest will act as a deterrent and will ensure that such lapses
are not repeated. The Committee, ‘therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that 10% interest per annum may be paid by the SB on the

unutilized grant.

Incorrect utilization of funds/Deviation of project

(Recommendation No. 4)
16. The Committee found that after release of first instalment of Rs. 305.88 lakh,
APEDA wrote several letters to SB and other concerned authorities in Madhya Pradesh
for spéedy implementation of the project. APEDA released the 2" instalment of Rs.
273.08 lakhs (on 31 March 2013).on receipt of UC and running bills from SB mentioning


that the fund had been utilized for the purpose of establishment of warehouses/cold
storage for which it was sanctioned. However, during the physical verification conducted
by APEDA (August 2013) it was found that no cold storages were established by SB
and instead warehouses were built. APEDA sought clarification from SB on this
deviation and also asked SB to create the infrastructure as per MoU. The SB (May
2016) informed APEDA that they had only created a cold storage with a capacity of 374
MT instead of 3000 MT for an expenditure of Rs. 179.60 lakh. The Committee were
appalled to note that SB not only diverted the funds for creation of warehouses but also
kept APEDA/MoCl in the dark by constructing warehouses instead of cold storages. The
Committee strongly condemned the arbitrary attitude of SB for violating the provisions of
MOU, furnishing incorrect UC (March, 2013) and not responding to repeated
communications of APEDA. It was only after much persuasion SB was able to create a
cold storage of just 374 MT capacity. It was nothing but a mere cover-up of the issue,
after being pointed out by C&AG in September 2014. The creation of cold storage of just
one-tenth of the intended capacity would definitely not serve the desired purpose as it
would fail to meet the storage requirements of the local farmers. The Committee noted
that SB failed to accede to the request of APEDA (18 July 2018) seeking refund of the
entire amount of Rs. 578.96 lakhs along with 10% interest per annum. The Committee,
therefore, were of the view that MoCI should direct SB to furnish clear reasons for
violating the provisions of MOU with APEDA and fix responsibility for diversion of funds,
wrong submission of UC, delayed execution of project with creation of truncated

capacity of cold storage and for full refund sought by APEDA.

17. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Dept. of Commerce) in their Action Taken

Notes have stated as under:-
“The Spices Board have informed that in the district of Guna, the total production
of coriander, which is the major spice grown in that region, is in the range of
15000-20000 tonnes per year. After meeting both export and domestic demand,
the carry over stock is around 20% of the total production. Therefore, the
estimated quantity available for warehousing is ‘in the order 3000-4000 tons per
year for which the Board has already constructed warehouses for more than

_ 3000 tons.


Hence, if additional cold storage was constructed, the utilization would have been
very less and the Board would have been forced to meet the recurring costs. All
these details were discussed in a stakeholders meeting and’ as per the decision
taken in the meeting, it was decided to go for the warehouse first and to establish
cold storages in a phased manner, depending on the expansion of production in

that area.

It is submitted that the decision to not construct the cold storage capacity was
taken on the basis of feedback received from the stakeholders. There was no
mala fide intention behind the decision. However, it is accepted that Spices Board
erred in diverting funds received from APEDA, which were meant specifically for
construction of cold storage, towards construction of warehouses. Spices Board
has since refunded the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh to APEDA.”

18. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

19.

as under:-

“Ministry has accepted that funds were diverted by Spices Board. Ministry failed
to reply on the question raised by the Committee regarding reasons for violating
the provisions of MoU apart from fixing responsibility for diversion .of funds,

wrong submission of UC and delayed execution of project.

Spices Board refunded only Rs. 399.36 lakh instead of Rs. 578.96 lakh as stated

in the reply.

In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated

“The Spices Board have clarified that the deviation, of building warehouses
instead of cold storage, was based on the request of stakeholders. The total
production of Coriander, the major spice in that region, is in the range of 15000 —
20000 tons per year. After meeting the demand for both export and domestic
consumption, the carry over stock would be 15-20% of the total production.
Therefore, the maximum estimated quantity available for warehousing would be
3000 — 4000 tons per year. As the harvesting season of coriander is very short
and limited to maximum 45 ‘days, the quantity of material requiring storage for

long duration would be. very less as per the production level. Had the Board

—[o-


constructed the cold storages of higher capacity, the utilization would have been
very low and the Board would have been forced to meet the recurring
maintenance cost.The Board has submitted that there was no diversion of funds

with any malafide intentions and the audit findings have been duly taken note-of,

for guidance in all future projects. The Board has requested that the Ministry may F

condone and ratify the action taken by the Board.

Spices Board had refunded the entire unutilized amount of Rs. 399.36 lakh,

which had not been used for construction of cold storage. However, it. was.

erroneously reported to the PAC that the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96
lakh had been recovered from the Spices Board. The error is deeply regretted.
Spices Board have refunded the balance amount of Rs. 179.60 lakh on
20.11.2019 and the entire principle amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh now stands
refunded.”

20. The Committee in their Original Report noted that Spices Board (SB) not
only diverted the funds for creation of warehouses but also kept APEDA/Ministry
in the dark by constructing warehouses instead of cold storages. The Committee
had taken note of the fact that the SB had adopted an arbitrary attitude by
violating the provisions of MOU, furnishing incorrect UC (March, 2013) and not
responding to repeated communications of APEDA. The Committee, therefore,
desired that Ministry should direct SB to furnish clear reasons for acting contrary
to the provisions of MOU with APEDA and fix responsibility for diversion of funds,
wrong submission of UC, delayed execution of project with creation of truncated
capacity of cold storage and for full refund sought by APEDA. The Committee
note from the reply of the Ministry that the decision of the Spices Board to not to
construct cold storage was taken on the basis of feedback received’ from the
stakeholders. The Committee further note that though the Ministry has admitted
that the Spices Board had erred in diverting funds received from APEDA, which
were meant specifically for construction of cold storage, towards construction of

" warehouses, it has not initiated any action against those responsible in the

Spices Board.for diversion of funds and creation of truncated capacity, that too ‘


after prolonged delay, without. informing either the APEDA or the Ministry. The
Committee do not agree with the contention of the Ministry that since there was
no malafide intention the action may be ratified. The Committee, in this regard,
opine that the organizations largely dependent on the Government grants for their
operational needs cannot take decisions regarding utilization of those grants
without the approval of the Government. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation that the responsibility for diversion of funds, wrong
submission of UC, delayed execution of project with creation of truncated
capacity of cold storage may be fixed and action initiated against those found

responsible.

Eailure to monitor the project at Spices Park, Guna:

(Recommendation No 5)

21. The Committee found that despite the MOU between APEDA and SB to set up
cold storage in Spices Park, Guna, MP, SB failed to create the desired cold storage
capacity. of 3000 MT, diverted the funds to construct warehouses instead of cold
storages and caused loss to. the Government exchequer. The Committee were of the
opinion that when SB deviated from MOU and constructed warehouses on pretext of
stakeholders interests, it should have sought clear directions from the MoCl and kept
APEDA informed about the same. The fact that after being flagged by C&AG
(September, 2014), ADEPA had to seek intervention of MOCI (DoC) to direct the SB for
implementation of the projects as per MOU spoke volumes about the whimsical attitude
of MoClI in monitoring the project. Further, the inaction of Monitoring Committee (MC)
comprising the representatives of SB, APEDA and other stakeholders was deplorable.
The Committee were astonished to note the reply of the Ministry that the role of MC was
only to oversee the efficient functioning of the facility and play advisory role once the
facility was set up. They were unhappy to note that the MoCl chose to be a mute
spectator as the Government nominee on APEDA/SB Boards did not bring to the notice
of MoC!I about the diversion of funds/delays in the project. Further, the Committee did

not agree to the view of MoCl that the loss computed by C&AG was only a ‘notional

a


loss'. Notably, the farmers who would have been the actual beneficiary, had the project
been completed as intended, were deprived of the facility because of the casual
approach of agencies involved. The Committee were, therefore, of the considered
opinion that misuse, ‘diversion’ or non-utilisation of public money should be viewed
seriously and financial misappropriation cannot be Hidden under the pretext of a mere
‘notional loss’. The admission of MoClI for lack of oversight in monitoring the project was
enough for it to act swiftly and take exemplary disciplinary action against officers
responsible in Ministry as well as APEDA and SB, for failure to protect the taxpayers

money.

22..The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Dept. of Commerce) in their Action Taken

Notes have stated as under:-

“The Spice Park, Guna project was primarily funded through ASIDE scheme.
However, the component for construction. of cold storage was funded through
APEDA. Due to unique nature of funding of the project and multiplicity of the
agencies involved, the oversight and monitoring of the project was not adequate.

The decision to limit the construction of cold storage was taken by the Spices
Board on the basis of feedback received from stakeholders and was seemingly
based on sound logical grounds. However, it is accepted that Spices Board
should have kept MoC&l and APEDA in. loop while effecting a major change in
the project and should have immediately refunded the funds received from
APEDA, which were specifically meant for construction of cold storage. Spices
Board has since refunded the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh to
APEDA.”:

23. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Ministry has accepted that Spices Board should have informed MoCl and
APEDA while effecting a major change in the project.


However, the Ministry was silent on the action taken on the issues desired by the
Committee on taking exemplary disciplinary action against officers responsible in

Ministry as well as APEDA as SB, for failure to protect the taxpayer's money.”

24. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under:-

“It is submitted that there was no malafide intention behind construction of
warehouses instead of cold storage by the Spices Board. The Spices Board have
clarified that the deviation, of building warehouses instead of cold storage, was
based on the request of stakeholders. The total production of Coriander, the
major spice in that region, is in the range of 15000 - 20000 tons per year. After
meeting the demand for both export and domestic consumption, the carry over
stock would be 15-20% of the total production. Therefore, the maximum
estimated quantity available for warehousing would be 3000 — 4000 tons per
year. As the harvesting season of coriander is very short and limited to maximum
45 days, the quantity of material requiring storage for long duration would be very
jess as per the production level. Had the Board constructed the cold storages of
higher capacity, the utilization would have been very low and the Board would

have been forced to meet the recurring maintenance cost.”

n view of the above, it is requested that the action taken by Spices Board may
be ratified. The officers involved in handling of the case have since retired.
However, APEDA has initiated action and issued show cause notices to all the
concerned officers.

Department of Commerce is committed to ensuring systematic improvement to
bring in efficiency in monitoring projects and overall functioning of the
Department by making systems online and reducing human interface. These

“

steps are likely to result in greater efficiency and better monitoring of projects.”

ite

Fee


25. The Committee, in their, original report, inter alia, noted the inaction of
Monitoring Committee (MC) comprising the representatives of SB, APEDA and
other stakeholders. They were unhappy to note that the Ministry chose to be a
mute spectator as the Government nominee on APEDA/SB Boards and did not
bring to the notice of the Ministry the diversion of funds/delays in the project. The
Committee were of the considered opinion that misuse, diversion or non-
utilisation of public money should be viewed seriously and_ financial
misappropriation cannot be hidden under the pretext of a mere ‘notional loss' and
recommended that exemplary disciplinary action may be taken against officers
responsible in Ministry as well, for failure to protect the taxpayers money. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that though it has accepted that
Spices Board should have kept Ministry and APEDA in loop while effecting a
major change in the project and should have immediately refunded the funds
received from APEDA, which were specifically meant for construction of cold
storage facility, it has not taken any action against the officers responsible in the
Ministry for being mute spectators in the APEDA/SB Boards and has also not
responded on the aspect of inability of the Monitoring Committee to point out the
lapses. The Committee are of the view that due to lack of oversight in monitoring
by the Ministry, the organizations under its aegis were either lackadaisical or
disdainful towards the Ministry. The Committee are of the view that strict
exemplary action against those responsible for allowing such. misuse of
taxpayers’ money will go a long way in ensuring discipline amongst those giving
and receiving the Government grants and those responsible for monitoring them.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that exemplary
disciplinary action against officers responsible in Ministry as well as APEDA and

SB, for failure to protect the taxpayers money may be initiated.



CHAPTER II
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation

- Non-inclusion of important clauses in MoU:

The Committee took note of the omissions in the MOU on the part of
APEDA viz., failure to include provisions for periodical follow-up of the project,
penal clause for ensuring timely completion of the project and levying interest on
unutilized grant. The Committee observed that failure to include these provisions
in MOU actually led to diversion of funds, non-completion of project and financial
loss to APEDA.

The Committee noted that as per the terms of payment in the MOU, out of
the total assistance of Rs. 6.12 crore, APEDA released (February, 2012) an
advance amount of Rs. 3.06 crore for the FY 2011-12. For the remaining grant of
Rs. 3.06 crore for the FY 2012-13, Spices Board (SB) was required to submit
running bills along with UC (Utilisation Certificate) to APEDA. The SB furnished
the UC and running bills for an amount of Rs. 273.08 lakh in March, 2013
mentioning that the fund had been utilized for the purpose of establishment of
warehouse/cold storage for which it was sanctioned. Based on this, APEDA
released the 27 instalment on 31 March, 2013. The Committee further note that (i)
During physical verification of the project, APEDA came to know (August, 2013)
that no cold storages were established by Spices Board and instead warehouses
were built; (ii) MoCI directed APEDA to include a penal clause in the contract so
that the project is completed within the time frame. However, APEDA failed to
include the same in the MOU which resulted in APEDA being unable to recover
the penal interest of Rs..87 lakh from SB; and (iii) MoCl's order for release of
grant for creation of capital assets clearly stated that ‘in the event of APEDA
failing to comply with terms and conditions of the sanction, it shall be liable to
refund the whole or part of the grant with interest @ 10 % per annum thereon’.
APEDA, however, did not include an identical clause in the MOU signed with SB
and sustained a loss of Rs. 1.77 crore.

The Committee were shocked to note the non-serious attitude of APEDA in
releasing second instalment of Rs. 2.73 crore in March 2013 to SB without
physically verifying that whether the intended purpose i.e. construction of cold
storage of 3000 MT had been undertaken or not. They are further dismayed to
note that inspite of clear directions from the MOCI, APEDA failed to incorporate
penal provisions in the MOU with SB resulting jn non-payment of penal interest @
10% by SB for the balance unutilized amount of Rs. 4.99 crore. The Committee
desired that strict disciplinary action be taken against the officers responsible for
the above lapses.

[Observation/Recommendation Nos. 1 of the 123 Report of Public Accounts
Committee (167 Lok Sabha)]


Action taken by the Ministry |

As both Spices Board and APEDA are autonomous organisations under the
administrative control of Ministry of Commerce & Industry, inclusion of penal clause was
not deemed necessary by APEDA at the time of entering into the MoU. There was no
mala fide intention behind non-inclusion of the penal clause. This act of omission by
APEDA may be condoned. The observation of Hon'ble Public Accounts Committee
(PAC) will be kept in mind for further guidance.

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Ministry replied that the observation will be kept in mind for further guidance.
However, no such guidelines to insert all the important clauses including penal clauses
at the time of entering into any contract, were made available to audit. Also, Ministry has
not replied on the disciplinary action taken against the officers responsible.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

While DoC has not issued any standard guidelines in this regard as MoUs are
drafted keeping in view the provisions of General Financial - Rules.
Instructions/suggestions issued by the Ministry of Finance and the Audit, from time to
time, are also incorporated in the MoUs. The Government agencies are supposed to be,
and are fully aware of existing rules, regulations and instructions issued by the Ministry
of Finance from time to time to observe financial prudence and discipline. After the
deficiency of not including the penal clause was pointed out by the Audit, APEDA
started including the penal clause in MoUs signed with the grantee agencies.

Department of Commerce had already submitted that there was no mala fide
intention behind non-inclusion of the penal clause. As both Spices Board and APEDA
are autonomous organisations under the administrative control of Ministry of Commerce
& Industry, inclusion of penal clause was not deemed necessary by APEDA at the time
of entering into the MoU.

It is submitted that all the senior officers of APEDA, who were responsible for
implementation of the project, have retired from service on attaining the age of
superannuation. However, APEDA has initiated action against them and has issued
show cause notices to all the concerned officers.

It is also submitted that Department of Commerce is committed to and is putting
all its efforts to bring about a systematic improvement, to avoid lapses and bring in
efficiency by the way of bringing technological interventions, raking transparent system
of online functioning of various schemes, switching over to e-file/e-office system etc.
These steps are expected to result in greater efficiency and better monitoring of aided
projects.

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
- O.M. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.lV) dated 20.03.2020]

—|te


Observation/Recommendation

Absence of monitoring mechanism:

The Committee noted that APEDA released second instalment to SB in
contravention of the provisions of.clause 4 of the MOU which stipulated that the
funds or facility shall not be diverted or utilized for the purpose other than for
which it was sanctioned. The Committee were of the opinion that APEDA should
have been careful in scrutiny of UC and more proactive in the way of monitoring
the utilization of the funds by designating an officer to oversee the execution of
the project. The Committee were also of the view that absence of provisions for
submission of periodical progress report by SB in the MOU gave them a free
hand to utilize the funds at its disposal as per its whims and fancies. Although
APEDA made repeated communications to the SB for submission of periodical
progress reports, it proved futile. The Committee were further appalled to note
the casual response of APEDA-that though the MOU between APEDA and SB did
not specifically contain any clause for physical inspection, as per. prevailing
practice APEDA conducted physical verification. The Committee were
disappointed to note that ASIDE Scheme did not provide. for physical inspection
of the project before releasing further, instalment. The Committee while noting
that ASIDE Scheme provided for annual appraisal by an independent agency
desired to be apprised of the details of yearly appraisals conducted by the
independent agency in respect of the project under ASIDE scheme since its
inception. The Committee also desired MoCl to scrutinize whether ASIDE
guidelines were followed in execution of all the projects.

[Observation/Recommendation No. 2 of the 123" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (167 Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry

Under the Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES), which was launched
after discontinuation of erstwhile ASIDE Scheme, Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC)
has been engaged as Project Monitoring Agency (PMA) to assist in implementation of
TIES. One of the Terms of Reference of PwC is to map the infrastructure created under
the erstwhile ASIDE scheme. As part of this, PwC is assessing the
functional/operational status of the assets created and modus operandi of maintenance
of assets. The exercise is expected to be completed by March 2020.

1 Vetting Comments of the Audit

Minjstry has not replied on the Committee’s opinion for designating an officer to
oversee the execution of the project for careful scrutiny of UC and monitoring the
utilization of funds. है

In respect of ASIDE Scheme, the Ministry replied that they had engaged PwC to
map’ infrastructure. created under the erstwhile ASIDE Scheme during the
implementation of TIES (new scheme). Further, Audit observed that no proper
monitoring mechanism was found to be developed to watch the proper utilization of

ee


grants before releasing subsequent instalments. Furthermore, no reply has been given
by the Ministry on the desire of the Committee to scrutinize whether ASIDE guidelines
were followed in execution of all the projects.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

As per the monitoring and review mechanism laid out in the guidelines of the
(erstwhile) ASIDE Scheme, Nodal Officers/Assisting Officers were appointed in the
Department of Commerce for monitoring and reviewing the progress and physical
inspection of the projects sanctioned under the ASIDE scheme, The State/UT
Agency/Central Agencies were required to submit a quarterly report to enable the
Department to review the progress of utilization of funds released and this report also
formed the basis for further release of funds by the Ministry. The progress of the
Scheme was also reviewed by the Empowered Committee periodically.

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
O.M. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.IV) dated 20.03.2020]
Observation/Recommendation

implementation of Assistance to States for Development of Export Infrastructure. of Assistance to States for Development of Export Infrastructure
and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme:

The Committee noted that the Government of India launched ASIDE
Scheme in March, 2002 with an objective to involve the States in the growth of
export by providing incentive-linked assistance to the State Governments and to
create appropriate infrastructure for the development and growth of exports. In
line with the objective of ASIDE, MOCI sanctioned a project for setting up of
Spices Park, Guna, Madhya Pradesh. The Committee noted from Para 13 of ASIDE
Guidelines (12 FYP (2012-17)) on ‘Monitoring and Review’ that though an in-built
mechanism existed for the projects executed under ASIDE, the MoCl failed to
bring the agencies on board for following the guidelines and successful
implementation of project. The Committee observed that, in the instant case,
financing agency was unaware of the delay, diversion of fund, non-utilisation of
money for the intended purpose. The Committee were of the view that the
Ministry should play the pivotal role by strengthening the monitoring mechanism
wherein delay/diversion/cancellation of the’ sanctioned projects under the
Scheme should be automatically taken-up for review. by the Empowered
Committee (EC) headed by Commerce Secretary. As Audit is only a test check,
the Committee desired that ४०001 review all projects under the Scheme and
evaluate overall performance of the same. The Gommittee further understood that
as a successor to ASIDE Scheme, ४०९०1 has launched TIES (Trade Infrastructure
for Export Scheme) for three years from 2017-18 to 2019-20. They, therefore,
desired the Ministry to fine tune the present Scheme by putting robust monitoring
and review mechanism. : : है


[ Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of the 123° Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16" Lok Sabha) ]

Action taken by the Ministry

The present Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES) has a provision for
engaging a professional agency as Project Monitoring Agency to asSist the Department
in implementation of the Scheme. Accordingly, Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC) has
been engaged as PMA under TIES and tasked with the work of monitoring.

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Ministry is silent in its reply on the Committee’s desire that MoC! should review
all projects under the Scheme and evaluate overall performance of the same.
Further, Ministry has stated that they have engaged PwC as Project Monitoring Agency
under TIES.

Thus, from the above points; it is observed that the Ministry has not taken actions
as proposed by the Committee and has not given reply as desired by the Committee in
most of the cases.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

As regards the observation of PAC for review of projects under the ASIDE
Scheme, the inputs given w.r.t S. No.2 ; Part Il of the 1237 Report of PAC (167 Lok
Sabha)-Absence of monitoring mechanism, may please be referred to.

Scheme guidelines provided for a mid®term evaluation of the scheme.
Independent evaluations of the scheme were thus also done.

On the observations regarding fine-tuning the present Scheme, namely TIES, it is
stated that a robust monitoring and review mechanism has been put in place for
effective evaluation and monitoring of projects under TIES. This includes appointment of
a Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) for each project approved under TIES with a
representative from the Department of Commerce and appointment of Nodal Officers in
the Department of Commerce for various States/UTs to monitor progress of projects
approved undér TIES, in addition to engaging a professional agency as Project
Management Agency to assist the Department in implementation and monitoring of the
Scheme. The Empowered Committee also reviews the progress of the approved
projects.

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
O.M. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.IV) dated 20.03.2020]


CHAPTER Ili
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

- NIL -

0? |—


CHAPTER- IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

Recovery of unutilized funds with penal interest @ 10 per cent of unutilized funds with penal interest @ 10 per cent

The Committee noted that in compliance with the directions of MOCI,
APEDA approved in its 717 meeting held on 24.06.2011, financial assistance of
Rs. 6.12 crore to SB for setting up of cold storage of 3000 MT. For execution of
the project, APEDA released total amount of Rs. 5.79 crore to SB. Subsequently,
SB informed APEDA (July, 2016) that a cold storage of 374 MT capacity, instead
of the mandated 3000 MT had been set up. Considering pro-rata cost of the
storage capacity, so created, as Rs.-0.80 crore, APEDA requested SB to refund
the balance amount of Rs. 4.99 crore. However, SB refunded (November, 2016)
only Rs. 3.84 crore to APEDA. APEDA was unable to recover penalty of Rs. 0.87
crore from SB and also sustained a loss of Rs. 1.77 crore due to non-inclusion of.
a clause in the MOU regarding levying of interest @10% per annum on the
unutilized grant refunded by SB. The Committee noted with concern that APEDA
overlooked the clear directions of MoCI on insertion of penal and interest clauses
and therefore, suffered financial loss. Though APEDA had asked (18 July, 2018)
SB to refund the entire amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh alongwith 10% interest per
annum, it was clear that APEDA acted only after the matter being pointed out by
the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desired that APEDA should recover the
entire amount with 10% interest per annum for the delayed period and apprise
them within two months of the presentation of this report. हे

[Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of the 123" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (167 Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
The entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh has been recovered by APEDA.
As both APEDA and Spices Board are autonomous organisations under the Ministry of
Commerce & Industry, largely dependent on the Government grants for their operational
needs, the payment of interest by the Spices Board may not be insisted upon.
, Vetting Comments of the Audit
Reply is factually incorrect as only Rs. 399.36 lakh has been recovered as of

31.03.2019 from Spices Board and:not Rs. 578.96 lakh as-stated in the reply. Further,
no penal interest of 10% p.a. has béen recovered .

ede


Final Action taken by the Ministry

Spices Board had refunded the entire unutilized amount of Rs. 399.36 lakh,
which had not been used for construction of cold storage. However, it was erroneously
reported to the PAC that the entire principal amount of Rs.. 578.96 lakh had been
recovered from [१४ Spices Board. The error is deeply regretted. Spices Board have
refunded the balance amount of Rs. 179.60 lakh on 20.11.2019 and the entire ptinciple
amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh now stands refunded. :

As regards penal interest, it is submitted that both APEDA and Spices Board are
autonomous organisations under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, largely
dependent on the Government grants for their operational needs: Payment of penal
interest may, therefore, kindly not be insisted upon as it would cut into the funds
required for operational needs of the Spices Board.

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
O.M. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.IV) dated 20.03.2020]

Observation/Recommendation

Incorrect utilization of funds/Deviation of project utilization of funds/Deviation of project

The Committee found that after release of first instalment of Rs. 305.88
lakh, APEDA wrote several letters to SB and other concerned authorities in

1 Madhya Pradesh for speedy implementation of the project. APEDA released the

277 instalment of Rs. 273.08 lakhs (on 31 March 2013) on receipt of UC and
running bills from SB mentioning that the fund had been utilized for the purpose
of establishment of warehouses/cold storage for which it was sanctioned.
However, during the physical. verification conducted by APEDA (August 2013) it
was found that no cold storages were established by SB and instead warehouses
were built. APEDA sought clarification from SB on this deviation and also asked
SB to create the infrastructure as per MoU. The SB (May 2016) informed APEDA
that they had only created a cold storage with a capacity of 374 MT instead of
3000 MT for an expenditure of Rs. 179.60 lakh. The Committee were appalled to
note that SB not only diverted the funds for creation of warehouses but also kept
APEDA/MOoCI in the dark by constructing warehouses instead of cold storages.
The Committee strongly condemned the arbitrary attitude of SB for violating the
provisions of MOU, furnishing incorrect UC (March, 2013) and not responding to
repeated communications of APEDA. It was only after much persuasion SB was
able to create a cold storagé of just 374 MT capacity. It'was nothing but a mere
cover-up of the issue, afterjbeing pointed out by C&AG in September 2014. The
creation of cold storage of just one-tenth: of the intended capacity would
definitely not serve the desired- purpose. as it would fail to meet the storage
requirements of the local farmers. The Committee noted that SB failed to accede
to the request of APEDA (18 July:2018) seeking refund of the entire amount of Rs.
578.96 lakhs along with 10% interest per annum. The Committee, therefore, were
of the view. that MoCl should direct SB to furnish clear reasons for violating the

gs


provisions of MOU with APEDA and fix responsibility for diversion of funds,
wrong submission of UC, delayed execution of project with creation of truncated
capacity of cold storage and for full refund sought by APEDA.

[Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of the 123 Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16" Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry

The Spices Board have informed that in the district of Guna, the total production
of coriander, which is the major spice grown in that region, is in the range of 15000-
20000 tonnes per year. After meeting both export and domestic demand, the carry over
stock is around 20% of the total production. Therefore, the estimated quantity available
for warehousing is in the order 3000-4000 tons per year for which the Board has already
constructed warehouses for more than 3000 tons.

Hence, if additional cold storage was constructed, the utilization would have been
very less and the Board would have been forced to meet the recurring costs. All these
details were discussed in a stakeholders meeting and as per the decision taken in the
meeting, it was decided to go for the warehouse first and to establish cold storages in a
phased manner, depending’on the expansion of production in that area.

It is submitted that the decision to not construct the cold storage capacity was
taken on the basis of feedback received from the stakeholders. There was no mala fide
intention behind the decision. However, it is accepted that Spices Board erred in
diverting funds received from APEDA, which were meant specifically for construction of
cold storage, towards construction of warehouses. Spices Board has since refunded the
entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh to APEDA. है

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Ministry has accepted that funds were diverted by Spices Board. Ministry failed to
reply on the question raised by the Committee regarding reasons for violating the
provisions of MoU apart from fixing responsibility for diversion of funds, wrong
submission of UC and delayed execution of project.

Spices Board refunded only Rs. 399.36 lakh instead of Rs. 578.96 lakh as stated
in the reply. हर

Final Action taken by the Ministry

The Spices Board have clarified that the deviation, of building warehouses
instead of cold storage, was based on the request of stakeholders. The total production
of Coriander, the major spice in that region, is in the range of {5000 — 20000 tons per
year. After meeting the demand for both export and domestic*consumption, the carry
over stock would be 15-20% of the total production. Therefore, the maximum estimated
quantity available for warehousing would be 3000 - 4000 tons per year. As the
harvesting season of coriander is‘very short and limited to maximum 45 days, the
quantity of material requiring storage for long duration would be very less as per the

=24-


production level. Had the Board constructed the cold storages of higher capacity, the
utilization would have been very low and the Board would have been forced to meet the
recurring maintenance cost. The Board has submitted that there was no diversion of
funds with any malafide intentions and the audit findings have been duly taken note of,
for guidance in all future Projects. The. Board has requested that the Ministry may
condone and ratify the action taken by the Board.

Spices Board had refunded the entire’ unutilized amount of Rs. 399.36 la h,
which had not been used for construction of cold storage. However, it was erroneously
reported to the PAC that the entire principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh had been
recovered from the Spices Board. The error is deeply regretted. Spices Board have
refunded the balance amount of Rs. 179.60 lakh on 20.11.2019 and the entire principle
amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh now stands refunded,

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
O.M. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.IV) dated 20.03.2020]

Observation/Recommendation

Failure to monitor the project at Spices Park, Guna to monitor the project at Spices Park, Guna

The Committee found that despite the MOU between APEDA and SB ‘to set
up cold storage in Spices Park, Guna, MP, SB failed to create the desired cold
storage capacity of 3000 MT, diverted the funds to construct warehouses instead
of cold storages and caused loss to the Government exchequer. The Committee
were of the opinion that when SB deviated from MOU and constructed
warehouses on pretext of stakeholders interests, it should have sought clear
directions from the MoCl and kept APEDA informed about the same. The fact that
after being flagged by C&AG (September, 2014), ADEPA had to seek intervention
of MOCI (DoC) to direct the SB for implementation of the projects as per MOU
spoke volumes about the whimsical attitude of MoCl in monitoring the project.
Further, the inaction of Monitoring Committee (MC) comprising the
representatives of SB, APEDA and other stakeholders: was deplorable. The
Committee were astonished to note the reply of the Ministry that the role of MC
was only to oversee the efficient functioning of the facility and play advisory role
once the facility was set up. They were unhappy to note that the MoCl chose to be
a mute spectator as the Government nominee on APEDA/SB Boards did not bring
to the notice of MoCI about the diversion of funds/delays in the project. Further,
the Committee did not agree to the view of MoCI that the loss computed by C&AG
was only a ‘notional loss’. Notably, the farmers who would have been the actual
beneficiary, had the Project been completed as intended, were deprived of the
facility because of the casual approach ‘of agencies involved. The Committee
were, therefore, of the considered Opinion that misuse, diversion or non-
utilisation of - public money should be viewed seriously and_ financial
misappropriation cannot be hidden under the pretext of a mere ‘notional loss'.
The admission of MoCl for lack of oversight in monitoring the Project was enough
for it to act swiftly and take exemplary disciplinary action against officers

- बाद

1


responsible in Ministry as well as APEDA and SB, for failure to protect the
taxpayers money.

[Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of the 123" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16" Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry

The Spice Park, Guna project was primarily funded through ASIDE scheme.
However, the component for construction of cold storage was: funded through APEDA.
Due to unique nature of funding of the project and multiplicity of the agencies involved,
the oversight and monitoring of the project was not adequate.

The decision to limit the, construction of cold storage was taken by the Spices
Board on the basis of feedback received from stakeholders and was seemingly based
on sound logical grounds. However, it is accepted that Spices Board should have kept
MoC&l and APEDA in loop while effecting a major change in the project and: should
have immediately refunded the funds received from APEDA, which were specifically
meant for construction of cold storage. Spices Board has since refunded the entire
principal amount of Rs. 578.96 lakh to APEDA.

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Ministry has accepted that Spices Board should have informed MoCl and APEDA
while effecting a major change in the project

However, the Ministry was silent on the action taken on the issues desired by the
Committee on taking exemplary disciplinary action against officers responsible in
Ministry as well as APEDA as SB, for failure to protect the taxpayer's money.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

It is submitted that there was no malafide intention behind construction of
warehouses instead of cold storage by the Spices Board. The Spices Board have
clarified that the deviation, of building warehouses instead of cold storage, was based
on the request of stakeholders. The total production, of Coriander, the major spice in that
region, is in the range of 15000 — 20000 tons per year. After meeting the demand for
both export and domestic consumption, the carry over stock would be 15-20% of the
total production. Therefore, the maximum estimated quantity available for warehousing
would’ be 3000 - 4000 toris per year. As the harvesting season of coriander is very short
and limited to maximum? 45 days, the quantity of material requiring storage for long
duration would be very léss as per the production level. Had the Board constructed the
cold storages of higher capacity, the utilization would have been very low and the Board
would have been forced to meét the.recurring maintenance cost.


In view of the above, it is requested that the action taken by Spices Board may
be ratified. The officers involved in handling of the case have since retired. However,
APEDA has initiated action and issued show cause notices to all the concerned officers.

Department of Commerce is committed to ensuring systematic improvement to
bring in efficiency in monitoring projects. and overall functioning of the Department by
making systems online and reducing human interface. These steps are likely to result in
greater efficiency and better monitoring of projects.

[Diwakar Nath Misra, Joint Secretary, Department of Commerce
0.0. No. 10/1/2019-EP (Agri.IV) dated 20.03.2020]

->फ-


CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

NIL
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__ September, 2020 : Chairperson
Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) . : Public Accounts Committee

—38- |


MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)
HELD ON 287 AUGUST, 2020.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 28" August, 2020 from 1500

6

95

fo OP NOR WN

10.
11.
12.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

LOK SABHA

Shri T.R Baalu

Shri Subash Chandra Baheria
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

5

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Gujral
Shri C.M Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri T.G Charidrashekhar -
Shri MLK Raja : -
Shri Paolienlal Haokip -

(ol,

Members

hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

- Chairperson

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND

AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

41. Ms.Shubha-Kumar - Dy.cCAG

2. Shri K. Srinivasan - DG

३... Shri Sanjay Kumar - DG

4. > Ms.Ritika Bhatia - PD

5. Shri S.V. Singh - PD

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

PART-I

1. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson, welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of

India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the Members

on the following Draft Reports:-

tke

(a) oreee Preres
(b) poeres eke creer
(c) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
हे of the Committee contained in their 123 Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on

the subject, “Ineffective Monitoring By APEDA"

(a) cerned feeees ferred
(te nn seen

2. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any

modifications/changes. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the

reports in light of factual verification/vetting comments, if any and present.the same to

Parliament on behalf of the Committee. -

—Zo-

&


axe

es

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives of the
Office of the C&AG of India for assisting the Committee’in the examination of the

subjects.

PART-II

tee ke . thee

The Committee then adjourned.

—3l{-


APPENDIX-II

(Vide Paragraph 5 of the Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN;THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH
LOK SABHA) '

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos.1, 2 and 6
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 3,4 and 5
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim

replies/no replies:

-Nil-

52“

06

Total : 03
Percentage: 50%

Total : 0
Percentage:0%

Total : 03
Percentage:50%

Total : 00
Percentage: 0%

Tees

”