39

FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT SCHEME
OBJECTIVES ON DISBURSEMENT OF CAPITAL
SUBSIDY

MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

THIRTY NINTH

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2247

THIRTY NINTH

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT SCHEME

OBJECTIVES ON  DISBURSEMENT OF
CAPITAL SUBSIDY

MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

Son.

सत्यपेव जयते
Presented to Lok Sabha on: o&| 2 | 2०2 |

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: tt HR 12e2]

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2021/Shravana, 1943 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

PART -।
Introductory

(i) Irregularities in disbursement of Capital Subsidy Scheme
(ii) Audit Observations

(ili) Investigation of the Case

(iv) Status of recovery of Subsidy and penalty

(v) Irregularities in implementation of Jute Park Scheme
(vi) Structural problems in the scheme

(vii) Involvement of Chartered Accountants

(viii) Fixing Accountability & Responsibility

Promoting Jute Cultivation and Jute Products

(i) Decrease in Jute Production and Productivity

(ii) Production of Jute goods and diversification

(iii) R & 0 and Training

(iv) Promotion and Export of Jute products

(v) Increasing Export of Jute products

(vi) Involvement of farmers, Artisans, SHGs, NGOs and MSMEs
PART -॥

Observations/recommendations of the Committee

APPENDICES
L Minutes
IL. Minutes
ANNEXURE

Page
No.


oN ® 7 AWN

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2018-19)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge = - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh
Shri Gopal Shetty
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shwait Malik

Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

Shri 0. M. Ramesh’
Shri Bhupender Yadav’

1 Elected w.e.f. 6 August, 2018 for filling vacancies.


SN Oak WN

16.

18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pa!
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri P. Bhattacharya?

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

Shri Bhupender Yadav

* Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar
Kalita from Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.


16.
17

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury ss - Ss Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22

Nv

CRN DA Aw

pes

WwW BR ७2

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury = ——sChairperson Adhir Ranjan Chowdhur = Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi*

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara**

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohli

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Dr. M Thambidurai

Vacancy #

Vacant ##

Elected w.e.f 29.07.2021 vice Smt.Darshana Jardosh who ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent to her
appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

Elected w.c.f 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Teni Mishra who ccased to be a member of the Committee consequent to his
appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

Shri Rajcev Chandrasekhar cased to be Member of the Committee consequent to his appointment as Minister in the Union
Cabinet on 07.07.2021

Shri Bhupender Yadav ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent to his appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet
on 07.07.2021



SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar
2. Shri $.R Mishra

3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip
4. Shri Pankaj K.Sharma

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director

Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2021-22), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty Ninth Report (Seventeenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Failure to implement scheme objectives on disbursement
of capital subsidy’ based on Chapter XX of C&AG Report No.12 of 2017
relating to the Ministry of Textiles.

2. The C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 was laid on the Table of the House on 21
July, 2017.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) (2018-19) selected Chapter XX of
C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 on ‘Failure to implement scheme objectives on
disbursement of capital subsidy’ for examination and the subject continued to
be examined during the years 2019-20 and 2020-21.

4. The Committee took oral evidénce of the representatives of
Ministry of Textiles on 03.10.2018, 28.01.2020 and 28.08.2020. The subject was also
discussed by Public Accounts Committee during their Study Visit to.Berhampore in
January, 2021.

5. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) considered and adopted the
Report at their sitting held on 09 August, 2021. Minutes of the sittings form
Appendices to the Report

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the
Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Textiles for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
__ August, 2021 Chairperson

Shravana, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

PART -।
A. INTRODUCTORY

The Jute industry occupies an important place in the national economy of India
and the demand for jute is increasing due to its environment friendly qualities. It is one
of the major industries in the Eastern Region, particularly in West Bengal. Jute, the
‘golden fiber’, meets all the environmental standards for ‘safe’ packaging in view of
being a natural, renewable, biodegradable and eco-friendly product. It is estimated that
the jute industry provides direct employment to about 0.37 million workers and supports
the livelihood of around 4.0 million. farm families. Around 0.14 million people are
engaged in the tertiary sector and allied activities supporting the jute economy. In
addition, a large number of persons are engaged in the trade of jute. Besides jute is a
huge earner of foreign exchange (Rs. 2424 crore approx.) through exports.

2. Installed Spinning & Weaving Capacity of the Jute Mills - as on 1st January 2020,
the total number of looms installed in jute industry stood at 47,942 consisting of 16,461
Hessian looms, 24,593 Sacking looms, 483 CBC and others at 6405. The installed
spindles in jute mills other than 100 % export oriented units were 7,39,200 comprising of
6,01,092 fine spindles and 1,38,108 coarse spindles. The maximum installed capacity in
jute mills other than 100% export oriented units (on the basis of 305 working days per
year) is estimated to be 26.9 lakh metric tons per annum.

3. As informed by the Ministry, there are 98 composite jute mills out of which the
State of West Bengal has 72 jute mills with Andhra Pradesh having 12 mills, Uttar
Pradesh 3 mills, Bihar 3 mills, Orissa 3 mills, Assam 2 mills, Chhattisgarh 2 mills and
Tripura 1 Jute Mill. Ownership-wise 6 mills are under the Government of India, 1 mill
each is owned by the Government of Tripura and Orissa respectively, 1 mill in Assam is
in the cooperative sector and the rest 89 are privately owned.

4. The Jute Technology Mission (JTM) was implemented with four Mini Missions
(during 2007-14). Under MM IV “Acquisition of Plant and Machineries (capital subsidy)”
was a scheme with a proposed outlay fund of Rs.100 Crore. As per the scheme Jute
Mills would be eligible for subsidy of 20% of the procurement cost of new plant and
machinery. NJB disbursed subsidy amounting to Rs.104.36 Crores to 120 Jute units
(including 85 composite jute mills, 28 yarn, twine and weaving units and 7 JDP
manufacturing units) during the period 2007-08 to 2013-14 on this scheme.


(i) Irregularities in disbursement of Capital Subsidy Scheme

5. The thematic audit was started in June 2014 and the field inspection of 8 no. of
jute mills were conducted in March — April 2015. Hence, all the actions taken by the NJB
only after the inspection/field audit and not before that. The office of Principal Director of
Commercial audit & Ex-officio Member, Audit Board-l, Kolkata, the sole Auditor,
conducted a thematic audit on “Fulfillment of objectives of NJB" by forming a joint team
consisting of members from audit party and the officials from the O/o Jute
Commissioner and NJB for conducting physical inspection at Jute Mills.

6. The team conducted a joint inspection (during March-April 2015 and July-August
2016) of 21 jute units which had received Rs.24.21 crore as subsidy between 2007-08

and 2013-14. Audit found that payment of subsidy of Rs.3.80 crore to 16 jute units was

in violation of scheme guidelines. Audit found discrepancies like release of subsidy to
old machines, non-existence of subsidized machines on mill floor, disbursement of
subsidy to non-jute producing machines etc.

7. Based on the findings of C&AG Audit (Chapter XX of C&AG Report No. 12 of
2017) in respect of failure to implement scheme objectives on disbursement of capital
subsidy the Committee took up the afore-mentioned Audit Para for detailed
examination.

8. The Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) selected the subject for detailed
examination and the subsequent Public Accounts Committees took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministries of Textiles and obtained written replies on the subject.

(ii) Audit Observations

9. C&AG observed that subsidy of Rs. 3.80 crore provided to the 16 jute units by
National Jute Board was in violation of Acquisition of Plants and Machineries (Capital
Subsidy Guidelines). The Committee noted that the guidelines have been violated over
the years as mentioned in a note furnished by the Ministry in this regard.

10. From the note supplied by the Ministry, the Committee noted the following major
findings of the audit (The Principal Director of Commercial Audit, Kolkata):

(a) Subsidy paid for old machines
Audit in their Report had highlighted that in 10 out of the 21 inspected
units, subsidy amounting to Rs.1.92 crore was released on age old machines

based on fraudulent certification by NJB inspectors who visited the plant prior to
sanctioning capital subsidy.


(0०) Subsidised machines not found on mill floor

Audit in their report had highlighted that as per the scheme, jute mills
would not be allowed to dispose of the machineries on which subsidy had been
disbursed, within a period of five years from the date of receipt of subsidy. The
joint inspection of 21 units revealed that 34 machines on which subsidy

amounting to Rs.0.88 crore had been released were not found on the mill
premises.

(c) Subsidy disbursed on non-jute producing machines

Audit had also highlighted that in one case, it was found that the firm had
received capital subsidy amounting to Rs. one crore in March 2008 even though

it produced only cotton yarn, and all the machines on the premises were used for
production of cotton yarn only. Despite this, NJB inspectors had certified the
machines under the scheme. Further, in another case, it was found that except

one machine, all the other machines on which subsidy of Rs.6.32 lakh was

disbursed were synthetic fabric producing machines and not jute producing
machines. NJB in their response in this regard stated (June 2015) that the
subsidies had been released based on the certificates of the concerned
inspectors. The Ministry in their background note mentioned that it was clear that
the inspection team violated the conditions of the scheme which clearly
mentioned that capital subsidy should only be used for Jute goods producing
machinery only in the jute mill.

(d) Repeated Subsidy on same machine

In one of the units viz. Nilkantha Jute Processing Pvt. Ltd., subsidy was
released on machines which appeared to be old by more than 10 years, raising
serious questions on the authenticity of earlier inspections that disbursement was
not in conformity with the scheme. The promoter of the company changed the
name of the unit to Mahabir Jutex and again applied for subsidy for the same
machines and inspection team of NJB again fraudulently certified those rusted
and old machines as new and recommended for approval for disbursement of the
subsidy once again.


(iii)
11.

(e) Mismatch of vendor and manufacturing number of machine.

The audit noted that there was time gap between the date of installation
and date of inspection and improper vendor's manufacturing number and serial
numbers. Subsidy was released where in vendors who supplied machines were
different than one certified by the inspection team.

(f) Related Parties Transactions:

It is observed that for Bank finance cases in availing subsidy the financial
banks which issued credit facilities were same as Jute Mills (their sister concerns
etc) and were managed by their related parties

(g)_Shaktigarh Textiles Jute Park:

The Jute Park was developed availing subsidy of Rs 7.5 Crores from NJB
and was producing B-Twill bags. As per scheme the units under Jute Park 2
were to produce Jute Diversified products other than traditional products such as
Twill bags, Hessian and Yarn etc.

(h) Centre for Jute Machinery Development (CJMD):

As per the scheme 6.2 of “Jute Machinery Development” of MM-IV under
JTM, CJMD was formed with a cost of Rs.14.74 Crores (Gol contribution
Rs.11.40 Crores and Private party contribution Rs.3.34 Crores). It is seen that
instead of developing and producing Jute related machineries, large numbers of
ploughing machines were manufactured by CJMD for supply to Shaktiman
Tractors and were lying on the floor.

Investigation of the Case

The Principal Director of Commercial Audit- Kolkata informed the Secretary, Govt

of India, Ministry of Textiles vide letter dated 02.02.17 that “Irregularities in
disbursement of capital subsidy under Mini mission-IV Scheme by NJB” is approved for
inclusion in the Audit report. The audit report took the following into consideration:

1. Subsidy disbursed on age old machines
2. Subsidized machines not found on the mill's floor;

3. Subsidy disbursed on cotton producing machines etc.


On this basis it stated that it is imperative that the management verify all
disbursements under this scheme to derive assurance that government funds have not
been misappropriated.

12. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Textiles had deputed some of its
officers for preliminary enquiry and they found the following:

a) Role of IRA Personnel: The person from JIRA who was with Shri Jayanta
Sarkar, Ex-employee of NJB had a critical responsibility of techno-economic
examination. But his services were doubtful. Now, his services have been
discontinued.

b) Issue of recovery of undue subsidy paid to beneficiary units: On account of
faulty guidelines and application process, these units have challenged /
contested the NJB notice. Hence, it has been advised to NJB to obtain legal
opinion as to whether the case has to be dealt with in the civil jurisdiction for
recovery of the funds of the disentitled subsidy or for registration of cases under
criminal jurisdiction.

13. | The Committee also noted from the notes furnished by the Ministry that only after
Audit recommended that Management may investigate the matter in detail and
responsibilities may be fixed on irregularities and action be taken to recover subsidies
that the Ministry/NJB took some ineffective action as the blame was placed on the
system and not on officers handling the matter.

14. The Committee noted that one officer was holding four crucial posts in NJB and
all the frauds detected by Audit were apparently committed with his knowledge. In this
regard, when the Committee enquired further, the Ministry admitted that Financial and
accounting systems were inadequate and there was no internal control system as most
the works were centralized with one official (Shri N. Sengupta) who was holding the
charge of four different posts. 1.6. Asst. Secretary, CFO (Chief Finance Officer),
Vigilance Officer and Chief Public Information Officer and also the post of Secretary
during the temporary vacancy of the post of Secretary of National Jute Board. During
oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles agreed that the matter was not merely
a systemic lacuna but there was criminal conspiracy to connive with jute mills and
misappropriate public money and suitable action can be taken in the matter.

15... The Ministry also mentioned that there was a grey area, wherein the scheme was
operated under bank finance in addition to own source finance. In the bank finance
cases, it is noticed that majority were from NBFC’s which were owned by some Jute
Mills for whom subsidies were released. Thus, there was no control over the aspects of
extension of bank loan and issues of conflict of interest. Further, under the bank finance
mode, the Jute mills were allowed to procure machinery from any vendor unlike the own

5


source mode which called for procurement of machinery from the enlisted vendors.
There was also no maximum cap for any particular category of machines being sourced
under this scheme.

16. The Committee also noted that the Scheme had a provision for
embossing/engraving identification code on each machine for which subsidy has been
provided. There were instructions issued by the Jute commissioner vide letter No.: Jute
(T)-6/1/139/JTM(6.4)/09-IV Dated 08th September 2009, wherein it was clearly stated
that all settlements of subsidy claims under scheme 6.4 of MM-IV under JTM may be
made only after availability of manufacturers nameplate and serial number affixed /
engraved on the machines. Unfortunately, the Committee noted that this matter was
ignored and overlooked.

17. The Ministry also pointed out that some of the jute mills claimant units have
challenged/contested the NJB notice of recovery of the observed amount by the audit
stating that the observations of the audit inspection teams are old and inspection teams
during those periods have verified and physically checked the machines. Audit teams
have given reports which are erroneous and misleading.

(iv) Status of Recovery of subsidy and penalty

18. When enquired about the details of the recovery of subsidy released to the
defaulting units, the Ministry in their reply submitted as under:-

“Out of the total 15 defaulting mills/units (covering 21 cases) involving defaulted
amount of subsidy claims of Rs. 3.76 crores (approx..) under JTM Capital
subsidy Scheme, Rs. 3.23 Crores (approx..) have been recovered so far
including interest. Efforts are underway to recover the balance amount for which
money suits have been filed. All the cases have also been given to the ACB/CBI
for carrying out investigation against the defaulting cases. As on date recovery
status of those cases is appended below:-

SI. [Name of the | Subsidy Amount recovered (’) Total
No |Mill/Company amount to be __ Recovered
Recovered Principal Interest till date ()
()
1 | Ambica Jute Mills | 36,72,000 36,72,000 ॥19,59,652 | 56,31,652
Ltd.
2 | Saroda Textiles 12,96,000 2,900 [ -- | 2,900
3 | Alliance Mills 2,28,000 2,28,000 | | 2,28,000
(Lessee) Ltd.



4 | Ganges Jute Pvt. | 81,53,000 81,53,000 666,410 | 1,38,19,410
Ltd.

5 | Ganges Mfg. Co. | 9,79,000 9,79,000 44,332 14,23,332
Ltd.

|| Baranagar Jute 5,50,000 | | |_ | | |
Factory

7 | Kamarhatty Co. 2,59,000 2,59,000 |_ | 2,59,000
Ltd.

8 | MREL (Unit) 13,54,000 Nil | Nil
Hastings
Jute Mill

9 | MREL (Unit) India| 7,32,000 Nil | | | |
Jute Mill

10 | Bally Jute Co. Ltd.| 15,20,000 15,20,000 8,79,823 | 23,99,823

11 | MREL (Unit) 21,74,000 6,65,971 -_ 6,65,971
Barshul
Tex

12 | Nilkantha Jute 57,56,000 Nil || Nil
Processing Pvt.
Ltd.

13 | Sunbeam Vanijya | 3,93,000 Nil | Nil
Pvt.
Ltd.

14 | UMA Spinners 2,80,000 Nil So |
Pvt.
Ltd.

45 | MFL Corpn. Ltd. 4,02,45,000 78,40,310 | _ | 78,40,310
(Usha Corpn.)

L Total 3,75,91,000 2,33,20,181 |89,50,217 | 3,22,70,398

19. To a query regarding the status of proceedings in cases of defaulting mills, the
Ministry replied that money suits in respect of 18 defaulting mills for an amount of
Rs.2,79,39,847/- is pending in courts and the process is being delayed on account of
the ongoing pandemic and the Ministry is hopeful that these cases would be taken up
when normal proceedings start.

20. When the Ministry was asked about penalizing the defaulting mills the Ministry in
their post evidence reply mentioned as follows:


“The recovery process with interest is ongoing against the defaulting mills/units
and subsequently all the cases have been handed over to the CBI for enquiry.
CBI/ACB has recommended to blacklist one company from availing benefit under
NJB Schemes and examining other cases which are in advanced stage of
investigation.”

21. The Committee noted that NJB is coordinating with CBI for expeditious disposal
of cases. Further, to penalize the defaulting mills/ units for certain period under the
revamped scheme in the meantime, the claims of the defaulting mills/units are withheld
till such time they repay their defaulted amount with interest.

22. The Committee further enquired whether all the pending dues can be recovered
in the next six months. The Ministry, in this regard stated that due to COVID- 19, normal
functioning of Courts has not been started. However, in 8 cases full amount has been
recovered and in case of 3 Units partial recovery has been achieved. The Ministry also
mentioned that amount recovered so far is more than the money suits value and efforts
are being made towards complete recovery.

23. On a query regarding rejected cases for non -compliance with the scheme
guidelines the Ministry informed that the claims of the defaulting units are withheld till
such time they repay their defaulted amount with interest. The Ministry referred to three
cases on which JITs have sought clarification, the Ministry is cross verifying with the
Office of Textile Commissioner to ascertain whether subsidy under the Amended
Technology Up-gradation Scheme (ATUF) scheme has been availed or not by the mills
under examination in order to take a decision about eligibility for subsidy from NJB or
otherwise. When the Ministry was specifically asked how Rs. 36 lakh was received from
the jute mills, one officer of the Ministry informed that the mills were to receive some
legitimate amount from another subsidy scheme.

24, Pursuant to the intervention of the Committee on inspection of all Jute Mills/Units
the Committee were informed that Joint Inspection Teams (JITs) completed inspection
of all the 124 Mills/Units covering 429 cases and found irregularities in 4 claims and
have completed recovery against 2 claims and balance recovery against 2 claims is in
process. From the replies of the Ministry the Committee found that before the
examination of the matter by PAC only 21 mills and units were inspected and following
the PAC taking up the Audit observation(s) for examination, 103 units/mills involving
348 claims have been inspected.


(v) lrreqularities in implementation of the Jute Park scheme

25. Asked about the Jute Park scheme, the Ministry mentioned that the Jute Parks
were set up through Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for the purpose and were owned
by private firms. As per the Jute Park Scheme, ownership title lies with the SPV only as
60% of investment was made by the SPV itself. NJB role was limited to ensuring
development of common infrastructure like plant & machinery, and building for
production/support facilities depending on the needs of the Jute Park.

26. When asked as to what action has been taken by the Ministry and NJB for
enabling 100 percent of the targeted units to start production in the four Jute Parks and
why only 25% of the targeted units have started production, the Ministry in their post
evidence reply stated as follows

“Out of the 10 targeted Jute Parks, only 4 Jute Parks could be set up as other
Parks could not be taken up due to non-allotment of desired land by the State
Government, lack of interest for setting of SPV etc. Due to problem in acquiring
land and its further transfers, most of the SPVs could not progress further. 3
SPVs even refunded the initial installments released to them. Finally 4 Jute parks
including one in NER had been set up”.

27. The Committee noted that during inspection of Principal Director of Commercial
Audit one of the irregularities found was in a Jute Park ie. Shaktigarh Textile Jute Park.
It was mentioned in the reply of the Ministry that this Park was developed by availing
subsidy of Rs. 7.5 crores from the NJB and was producing B-Twill bags. As per the
subsidy scheme the units under the Jute Park were to produce Jute Diversified products
such as Twill bags, Hassian and yarn etc.

28. When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry and NJB are taking any
effort to increase the number of Jute Parks across the country the Ministry in their
written submission mentioned as under:

“As the Jute Park Scheme does no longer exist, there is no such proposal for
setting up of Jute Parks for the present”.

(vi) Structural problems in the Scheme

29. The Ministry also submitted that there was a grey area, wherein the scheme was
operated under bank finance in addition to own source finance. In the bank finance
cases, it is noticed that majority were from NBFC’s which were owned by some Jute
Mills for whom subsidies were released. Thus there was no control over the extension
of bank loan and there was conflict of interest. Therefore, compulsory 10% Bank


Finance from a nationalized bank clause was included under the Scheme to keep an
extra check through nationalized banks on the machinery and claims.

30. Under the bank finance mode, the Jute mills were allowed to procure machinery
from any vendor unlike the own source mode which called for procurement of
machinery from the enlisted vendors. Under bank finance, machinery can be purchased
from any source. There was also no maximum cap for any particular category of
machines being sourced under this scheme.

31. The Committee noted that some Jute mills have disposed of machines
purchased under the subsidy scheme. While objection was raised on this matter and the
Committee suggested that the GST payments of such machinery can be linked with
GST returns of the vendors so that the movement of such machinery can be traced, the
Ministry, in the post-evidence reply stated as follows:

“The suggestions/directions of the Hon'ble PAC have been duly noted for
compliance. The ISAPM scheme is being revamped and suitable provision of
linking GST payments of the subsidized machinery with GST returns of the
Vendors will be incorporated in the Scheme's Guidelines”.

(vii) Involvement of Chartered Accountants

32. During oral evidence the Committee enquired on the details of action taken
against errant Chartered Accountants who had issued wrongful certification based on
which subsidy was released to ineligible beneficiaries. The Committee had also
suggested that errant CAs may be debarred from getting any further Government work.

33. With regard to action taken against Chartered Accountant firms for wrongful
certification in the subsidy claims of jute mills/units, the Ministry had submitted the
following:

“Names of the following Chartered Accountant Firms have been forwarded to
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) where irregularities were
noticed. ICAI through their letter dated 11.09.2020 have admitted all the cases,
except 3 cases, as detailed below and allotted the Acknowledgement number to
the complaints as indicated against the complaints:-

SI. Name of the CA/ Name of the Firm Acknowledgement no.
INo. allotted by ICAI
4 | M. Lahoti & Co. MRN - 056687 PR/G/258/2020

10


1. N. Todi & Co. MRN - 056687 PR/G/259/2020
Srimal Jain & Co. MRN- 61264 PRIG/261/2020
Dugar & Company MRN - PR/G/262/2020
060345

5 Dugar & Company MRN - PR/G/263/2020
060345
Rathin Kumar Ray MRN - 53253 PR/G/253/2020
SandipAsopa MRN — 065514 PR/G/252/2020
Tapan Mukhopadhyay ~ & PR/G/255/2020
Associates MRN — 58758

9 Somani Surana& Co. Not admitted by ICAI as no
1-103 Phase - Il, 493/C/A, G.T. merit was found by. that
Road (S), Howrah — 711102 Office in this cases

10 Dinesh Sarda& Associates MRN Pe
- 326327E

11 Vv. K. Mal Pani & Co. MRN - PR/G/254/2020
060823

12 Srimal Jain & Co. MRN- 61264 PR/G/260/2020

13 Dugar & Company MRN — Not admitted by ICAI as no
060345 merit was found by that

office in this cases

14 Vidya& Co.MRN - 50138 PR/G/267/2020

15 Vidya& Co. MRN - 50138 PR/G/266/2020

16 Vidya& Co. MRN — 50138 PR/G/265/2020

17 Dugar& Company MRN — PR/G/264/2020
060345

18 | Mitra, Kundu & Basu MRN - PR/G/256/2020
051391

19 | Mitra, Kundu & Basu MRN — PR/G/257/2020
051063

20 | Mitra, Kundu & Basu PRIG/251/2020
MRN - 051063

21 Manabendra Bhattacharyya PR/G/250/2020
MRN-50714

11



34. Subsequently, ICAI had asked NJB to submit case-wise complaints in a specified
Proforma devised by the ICAI which have since been submitted by NJB to ICAI for
processing the complaints against the erring CA Firms.

35. The Ministry of Textiles vide letter dated 15.10.2020 has also taken up the matter
with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, for doing the needful to pass necessary
instructions to the concerned authorities for debarment of the erring Chartered
Accountant (CA) Firms who have given false certification in the subsidy claims of the
defaulting Mills/Units. M/o Corporate Affairs vide letter dated 20.10.2020 has instructed
ICAI to take prompt action to ensure that the delinquent Chartered Accountant Firms
responsible in the irregularities may not get any further Government work.”

(viii) Fixing Accountability and Responsibility

36. During oral evidence, the Committee observed a serious administrative lapse in
the management of National Jute Board where an officer was given the charge of four
different crucial posts, namely, Assistant CFO, Vigilance Officer, Chief Public
Information Officer and Secretary, NJB and highlighted the obvious compromise on the
check and balance mechanism.

37. The Ministry admitted that Financial and accounting systems were inadequate
and there was no internal control system as most the works were centralized with one of
the official (Shri N. Sengupta) who was holding the charge of four different posts. i.e.
Asst. Secretary, CFO (Chief Finance Officer), Vigilance Officer and Chief Public
Information Officer and also the post of Secretary, National Jute Board during the
temporary vacancy of the post. Therefore, responsibilities/charges of Vigilance Officer,
CPIO and Administration (Previously Assistant Secy.) were removed from the charge of
Shri N. Sengupta and he was made to look after the charge of only CFO and other
charges were given to 3 different Officers. Shri Sengupta was given responsibility of
CFO only. Further. all the capital subsidy cases were handled by him and his reporting
Accounts Officer, who mostly used to conduct both the inspection from NJB's side and
processed / recommended the subsidy release for the Jute Mills. Therefore, the Capital
subsidy Scheme was fully transferred to the Technical Division/Officers and Joint
Inspection Teams because the Scheme was framed involving officers of cross Divisions
and cross organizations, viz; Officers from Technical, Marketing, Finance &
Administration of NJB, Technical Officers from O/o Jute Commissioner, JIRA, DJFT
and TRAs, under the Ministry.

12


38. During oral evidence, the Ministry was asked about the ad-hocism being followed
in the appointment of Jute Commissioner who was also assigned charge of Secretary,
NJB. The Ministry, in their written reply, mentioned that one officer from Railway Board
was appointed to the post of Secretary, NJB. However, due to Vigilance Directorate,
Railway Board did not permit him to go on deputation. The Ministry has again requested
DOPT for appointing a suitable officer to the post.

39. The Committee noted that there are instructions of the Jute Commissioner for

settlement of subsidy claims only after ensuring the availability of manufacturers’

nameplate and serial number affixed/ engraved embossing/engraving identification code -
on each machine. The Ministry admitted that these instructions were ignored and have

been viewed seriously by the NJB. Shri Jayant Sarkar, Ex-AO, NJB involved in handling

the scheme has been charge sheeted by the Disciplinary Authority, NJB. Further, Shri

Gautam Chattopadhyay, consultant JIRA, who was involved in the inspection of the

JTM cases wherein deviations were noticed has been registered in 3 FIRs. FIR has also

been lodged against Shri 0. Bandhopadhyay, Ex-Consultant in NJB.

40. During oral evidence, the Committee noted that NJB has been giving
appointment to crucial positions on contract and there is no penalty clause in the
contract due to which no penal action could be taken by NJB against such erring
officers. The Ministry disclosed the fact that NJB has hired various contractual staff
through outsourcing agencies and Consultants as well. These outsourced staff and
Consultants are not covered under Conduct Rules of NJB. In view of this, only FIRs
have been lodged against Shri Jayant Sarkar, Ex-AO, NJB and Shri D. Bandhopadhyay,
Ex-Consultant in NJB. The Committee also noted that NJB has no recruitment policy
and there is huge shortage of staff specially in technical category.

41. While the Committee took strong objections on hiring outsourced people who are
neither covered under the Conduct Rules of NJB nor there is any penal provision in the
contracts made, the Ministry, in their post evidence reply mentioned as follows:

“The directions given by Hon'ble PAC regarding incorporating a penalty clause in
the Agreements/Contact letter of outsourcing Agencies & Consultants have been
duly noted”.

Regarding progress of Inspection, one officer of the Ministry mentioned that there
is no formal report till date.

42. On enquiry about the measures and actions taken by the Ministry towards
revamping and improving the scheme and introducing procedural improvements in the
Incentive Scheme on Plant and Machine Acquisition (ISAPM Scheme), the Ministry
informed the Committee as under:-

13


“The various loopholes and operational gaps which were noticed in this

old scheme were duly taken care in the ongoing ISAPM scheme (Incentive
Scheme on Plant and Machine Acquisition) and to avoid such irregularities,
following steps / procedural improvements are made:

(i)

(ii)
(iii)

(iv)
(v)

(vi)
(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)
(xi)
(xii)

(xiii)

The vendors of the core jute machinery were enlisted de-novo by
engaging IJIRA. The core jute machinery to be purchased only from the
enlisted vendors. And there is a cap on maximum price against particular
category of machine irrespective of machinery vendors.

This was applied for both modes i.e own source and bank finance cases.
NBFCs cases under bank finance were discontinued and restricted to
scheduled banks.

A minimum of 10% credit linkage from scheduled banks has been made
mandatory for all cases to ensure institutional due diligence.

All the machines purchased should prominently exhibit the machine
manufacturing number allotted by the manufacturers.

On-line submission of applications and claims were introduced for
improving the governance and transparency.

Also, application format revised with PoA/Pol and a single window system
was introduced by NJB in association with IJMA for receiving complete
claim applications in person.

Claim inspection has been made transparent and accountable by involving
more NJB officials and staff during inspection and file processing.
Disbursement of the claims are made online etc. and in majority of the
cases the inspection team/official were not involved in the claim
processing which reduces the scope of manipulation and conflict of
interest which was one of the major lacunae in the old scheme.

Time to time the progress and process improvement is being reviewed by
Technical Committee headed by Jute Commissioner.

During pre-installation stage, jute mills are insisted for sending details of
the machineries being installed from time to time.

As an alternative measure we have introduced Chartered Engineer
Certificate as a proof of date of installation date. Also we are asking mills
to intimate NJB in advance before receipt and installation of the machinery
at their premises.

During the inspection, availability of the past 5 years
subsidized/incentivized machineries is also being assessed by the
inspection team and a display board department-wise is placed showing
statement of machinery against which the mills have received subsidy
under the scheme.

14


(xiv) The inspection team is also furnishing the photographs of the Plant &
Machinery being inspected and these details are to be archived
subsequently.

(xv) Also while processing the claims, a cross check with accessible TUF's
database is ensured to avoid duplicity of payments.

(xvi) Orders were issued not to engage the same member of inspection team
while processing claim disbursement and during the inspection the team
shall furnish photographs of the machines being inspected.

(xvii) Further, to penalize the defaulting mills/units to ensure compliance to
scheme guidelines in future, suitable provisions have been proposed for
debarring such defaulting mills/units for a certain period, in the revamped
Scheme. in the meantime, the claims of the defaulting mills/units, are
withheld till such time they repay their defaulted amount with interest.”

43. The Committee noted that NJB failed to follow the existing systems and
procedure. The Scheme has a provision for embossing/engraving identification code on
each machine for which subsidy has been provided. And also there were instructions
issued by the Jute commissioner vide letter no: Jute (T)-6/1/139/JTM(6.4)/09-IV Dated
08" September 2009, wherein it was clearly stated that all settlements of subsidy claims
under scheme 6.4 of MMIV under JTM may be made only after availability of
manufacturers nameplate and serial number affixed/engraved on the machines.
However, this matter was ignored and overlooked. Therefore, compulsory
embossing/engraving of identification code on each machine had been introduced. The
Committee found that the rule has been deliberately violated.

44. 1४३8 has sent letters to some jute mill claimants for refunding the subsidy claims.
The claimant units have challenged / contested the NJB notice of recovery of the
observed amount by the audit stating that the observations of the audit inspection teams
are old and inspection teams during those periods have verified and physically checked
the machines. Audit teams have given reports which are erroneous and misleading.
However, stern action has been taken against such defaulting mills for recovery of
subsidy amount.

45. Disciplinary action has been taken against the erring officers of NJB. The
Accounts Officer has been dismissed and his terminal benefits withheld. The CFO had
been suspended who has retired while under suspension. His terminal benefits have
also been withheld pending finalization of disciplinary proceeding. Appropriation
disciplinary actions against the inspecting offices from WIRA and O/o Jute
Commissioner have also been initiated.

15


8. PROMOTION OF JUTE CULTIVATION AND RELATED INDUSTRY

46. Jute plant is an unique plant so far as its environment friendliness is concerned.
The leaves of the plant are used as a food item like any other vegetable. One can
consume the tender leaves of the jute plants. Falling leaves of the Jute Plants helps the
ground to be more fertile and it has huge carbon dioxide assimilation capacity. One acre
of jute cultivation can sink six metric tons of carbon dioxide and release more than four
metric tons of oxygen. The Committee feel optimistic that India as a large producer of
such an environment friendly crop has immense possibility to achieve environment
related goals and creating more jobs for the people in agriculture and other related
industries.

47. During the course of examining the audit paras the Committee looked into the
status of Jute industry as a whole in the country. The Committee felt the urgent need
to promote the jute industry and bring diversified jute products at par with the jute
products of neighboring country like Bangladesh and pointed out the varied benefits in
terms of generating employment, biodegradable and environment friendly, a viable
replacement to plastic material in packaging etc. The Committee also noted with
concern the shrinking area of jute production, less productivity, problem of obsolete
retting practices and machinery, poor quality seeds, and poor quality jute products,
non-sharing/promotion of technology by IJIRA widely among people.

(i) Decreasing Production of Jute and productivity

48. The Committee noted that within a decade i.e from 2009 -10 to 2019-20 the area
of jute cultivation has decreased from 9.05 lakh hectares to 6.75 lakh hectares i.e about
25% reduction. It was explained to the Committee that this is due to farmers shifting to
other cash crop cultivation and the timing of jute cultivation is same as that of paddy.
During the oral evidence the Committee sought explanation of the Ministry about the
decreasing production of jute. In this regard, in their post evidence reply, the Ministry
admitted that the production of Jute Goods has decreased from 13.24 lakh MT in 2009-
10 to 11.65 Lakh MT in 2019-20 (-12%). The Ministry, in its written reply further,
mentioned that this reduction in production is mainly due to reduction in acreage of land
under jute cultivation, resulting in reduction in raw jute production from 118 lakh bales in
2009-10 to 99 lakh bales in 2019-20 (-16%).

49. The Committee also noted that in contradiction to the reply of the Ministry the
productivity of jute is going down. To a query on the reasons behind the reduction in
productivity of jute, a representative of the Ministry during oral evidence stated as
under:-

“One of the problems of reducing productivity is there is a huge spurious street
market in West Bengal. So, we are trying to improve. At that level, we are trying

16


to do these two strategies. One is to improve the seed variety and ensure that in
the next two-three years, we completely give high quality seeds and remove all
spurious. JCI] has been asked to do a commercial operation along with NSC to
see that good quality seeds are pushed into the system.”

50. During evidence the Committee discussed the availability of seeds/good quality
seeds to the farmers and it was found that farmers are being compelled to purchase
seeds at 2/3 times of actual price and the Ministry and other concerned agencies were
ignorant of this.

51. The Ministry, in their reply, also attributed declining trend in production of jute
goods to the following reasons:-

i) Poor and average quality of raw jute and lack of standardization

ii) Fluctuation in price of raw jute

iii) Rising cost of production and competition from cheaper substitutes

iv) Obsolete machineries being used in jute mills, restricting
production of value added products.

vy) Shortage and absenteeism of skilled labours

vi) Under utilization of production capacity

52. The Committee were informed that in last 3 years number of Jute Mills have
gone down from 93 to 75. The Ministry also informed that 70 Mills have 100 years old
machines and they do not have any motivation to change.

(ii) Production of Jute Goods and diversification of Jute products

53. The Committee noted that diversification of jute products and boosting export of
jute products are crucial for survival of jute industry in the country. In this connection the
Committee find that NJB has been implementing Jute Integrated Development (JID)
Scheme since 2016-17. Diversified jute products have a big potential market because
people are gradually preferring the natural fibers. The Committee came to know during
the course of oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry that Food Industry is
not getting jute bags as required and India is importing jute from Bangladesh

54. The Ministry however, expressed its optimism that with the implementation of a
host of interventions by the NJB like ICARE, ISAPM, EMDA, Diversification,
Modernization and Market/Export promotion, decrease in production of jute and jute
goods has been proportionately less than the decrease in area under cultivation. This
decrease in area has also been compensated by improvement in productivity as a result
of the various efforts of the Govt. as the productivity during the reporting period has
been improved to 2640 Kgs/hec from 2353 Kgs./hec.

55. To a query regarding schemes and programmes to develop and promote

diversification of jute products, the Ministry mentioned that the following schemes /
activities have been implemented for development and promotion of jute diversification:

17


¢ Incentive Scheme for Acquisition of Plants and Machinery for JDP —
MSME sector
Facilitating the JDP - MSME units to install high tech machineries for
production of JDPs

° Retail Outlet Scheme
Facilitate the JDP - MSME units to sell jute diversified products to
public for mass consumption through retail outlets/showrooms.

¢ Jute Integrated Development (JID) Scheme
Facilitate jute diversification activities through imparting basic,
advanced and design development training programmes to the new
budding jute entrepreneurs for production of JDPs for self sustenance.
e Jute Raw Material Bank (JRMB) Scheme
Facilitate the jute entrepreneurs to acquire jute raw materials viz fabric
/ yarn from the bank at mill gate price for production of jute diversified
"products.

e Export Market Development Assistance (EMDA) Scheme Facilitate the

registered jute exporters to participate in international fairs for boosting
exports of jute diversified products.

¢ Market promotion activities being implemented by NJB for promotion /
sale of jute diversified products.

56. The Committee feel that use of jute in geo-textile sector has wide prospects. The
Ministry in a written reply mentioned that after a long persuasion with the stakeholders
of the Geo-Textiles sector, NJB has been finally able to penetrate in the Jute Geo-
Textile segment for road construction, slope protection and controlling soil erosion by
using JGT as an alternative / replacement of synthetic/plastic products. Based on the
extensive R&D work followed by successful field applications under the direct support
and technical guidance of NJB, Jute Geo-textiles and Jute Agro-textiles are accepted as
most potential products for their use in the field of geotechnical engineering, agriculture,
horticulture & forestry by the following national bodies:-

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

i)
ii)
ili)

RD &SO, Ministry of Railways

Indian Road Congress

PWD, Govt. of West Bengal, Govt. of Assam & Meghalaya

BRO and all the 17 divisions of Indian Railways

The Ministry also informed that BIS has also approved the following
standards for JGT and JAT:
1S14986:2001

IS 14715 Part 1 &॥ :2016

IS 16089:2013

Indian Road Congress has also published the IRC Code on JGT — IRC:SP: 126-
2019 which is now available nationwide.

18


57. Regarding replacing plastic with jute , NJB has undertaken various initiatives for
dissemination of R&D, diversification and market promotional activities such as running
of Smart India Heckathon (SIH) 2019 for development of an unified online portal for
market of JDPs manufactured by Jute MSMEs; Textile Grand Challenge 2019 for
development of low cost-low weight jute bags as alternative to plastic carry/shopping
bags; Development of Jute based sanitary pads for health and hygiene; Development of
jute cellulose/starch based non- woven jute bags; development of activated carbon from
jute stick; development of jute denim; development of jute plant based viscose yarn &
fibre etc.

58. The Ministry has further added that with imparting training programmes under the
scheme, there have been more than 1200 budding entrepreneurs who have been
engaged in jute diversification activities and have become self-reliant. This has
positively contributed towards proliferation of jute diversification activities through-out
the country.

59. The Committee noted that IJIRA is developing various technologies and enquired
from the Ministry on how it is transferring these technologies to the small artisans and
self-help groups.

60. In this connection, the Ministry informed that IRA conducts R&D for
development of the entire jute sector including jute farmers, decentralised sector as well
as centralised jute mills. While many of IJIRA's developments have been translated to
the jute mills, JIRA has also successfully transferred many technologies to the
decentralised sectors like small artisans and self-help groups. Usually, technologies are
transferred to the prospective users through seminars, training, field demonstrations,
etc. The Committee, expressing concern for the migrant labourers suggested to the
Ministry to consider number of migrants who have lost jobs and are living in villages
while promoting small entrepreneurs under start-up India scheme.

(iii) Research , Development and Training

61. The Ministry have also mentioned that all the recent developments have been
shared with the entire jute sector, irrespective of centralised jute mills or decentralised
sector mills, in the last five years which have been useful particularly for the
decentralised sector. These are as follows:-

i. Accelerated retting technology for farmers

JIRA has developed a microbial consortium for accelerated retting in a water
limiting condition. It has been observed that using this retting technology, farmers
can achieve better quality jute which is remunerative to the farmers. Field
demonstration of developed technology has been made in 4 jute growing states
covering approximately 30000 farmers in last four years.

ig


ii, Demonstration of hand-spinning and braiding of jute to the artisans

Handspun jute yarn and braided products are used for manufacturing of
decorative items for artisans. IJIRA has provided such trainings for manufacturing
of better quality hand spun jute yarn and jute braids in different parts of West
Bengal.

iii. Dyeing of hand-spun jute yam which are predominantly used for handmade floor
mattings

It was observed that artisans based in Cherthala, Kerala faced issues in quality
dyeing of hand spun jute yarn. IJIRA had given demonstrations to the artisans for
achieving better quality dyed hand spun yarn.

iv. Durable aroma finish on jute textiles

Using micro-encapsulation technology IJIRA has developed durable aroma finish
on jute textiles especially for Home textiles applications. Various types of
fragrances were used in this technology and it was observed that fabric retains
the fragrance even after 10 cycle of washes. Several demonstrations to the
interested small scale entrepreneurs were given.

v. Functional finishing on diversified jute products

Nano-finished (Titania particle) jute-based textile materials with multiple
functional properties such as water repellence, self-cleaning, antimicrobial and
UV-protective property have been developed mainly for shopping/fancy/school
bags and outdoor textiles like tents. The developed technology has been
disseminated to small entrepreneurs and displayed in various fairs and Jute
woven and nonwoven treated with JIRA developed bio-resin formulation have
been converted to sheet material with improved strength and aesthetic looks.
From such sheets, fancy bags have been developed which have been displayed
in multiple fairs and exhibitions where visitors have shown their due interest.

vi.Natural dyeing of textiles for North-Eastern region

Using extracted dyes from various dye yielding resources of the NER, various
textiles fabrics such as jute, cotton, silk and art silk have been dyed with
improved fastness properties. Trials had been carried out with Rubiacordifolia
(Indianmadder), Parkiaspeciosa (khorial), Bixaorellena (annatto seeds),
Clerodendrum bracteatum (kuthap leaves), etc. Pilot scale trials and multiple
awareness programmes on natural dyeing had been conducted at IJIRA-NERC.

vii. Jute-based sanitary napkin production methodology for small entrepreneur and
training to self-help groups

20


62.
high

{JIRA has developed low-cost jute-based sanitary napkin with minimum chemical
intervention. This low-cost but comparably functional napkin can revolutionize the
women hygiene management in India. To facilitate training to the Women Self-
help Groups for manufacturing of jute-based sanitary napkins, a Training-cum-
Incubation Centre, inaugurated by the HMoT, is functional at IWJIRA. The
technology has been transferred to the five entrepreneurs including a Krishi
Unnnayan Samiti. Presently, twelve R&D projects sponsored by the Ministry of
Textiles are undergoing at IJIRA out of which a few are useful for decentralised
sector (the details of the project has been given in Annexure- 1). During
dissemination of the outcome of these projects small entrepreneurs will be -
invited, and any of such entrepreneurs interested to adopt any of such
technologies IJIRA will transfer the technology following usual formalities as laid
down in the project sanction order issued by the Ministry of Textiles. IRA will
also intimate the Ministry of Textiles about such progresses from time to time.

To a query regarding importing winter clothing of Army personnel deployed in
altitude areas, the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles mentioned that these are made

of hand woven material which the government policy has choked but he expressed
hope that very soon, winter clothing for army would be available indigenously.

(iv) Promotion & Export of Jute Products

63.

Asked about the plans of NJB to promote and proliferate jute diversified activities

in every nook and corner of the country through MSME units / Self Help Groups and Co-
operative Societies to empower them. the Ministry mentioned as under:

64.

"328 has been making vigorous efforts in implementing various schemes /
activities for promotion and proliferation of jute diversification activities throughout
the country with the involvement of MSME/Self Help Groups, Cooperative
Societies & NGOs, wherever applicable. Some of the beneficiaries oriented
schemes viz; Jute Integrated Development Scheme, Jute Raw Material Scheme
and Retail Outlet Scheme are implemented with the involvement of such groups.
Participation of such groups is also provided under various market promotion
activities of NJB like fairs, exhibitions, BSMs, Workshops etc”.

Further, the Ministry mentioned that NJB has been implementing a series of

promotional activities /schemes to further promote jute diversified products. The
activities / schemes are:

(i) Organisation of Exhibitions/Fairs at Regional/National/International levels
facilitating participation of jute entrepreneurs/exporters for display and
promotion of jute products.

(ii) Implementation of Retail Outlet Scheme, to facilitate the Jute entrepreneurs
for display and promotion jute diversified products through retail outlets in
Metro cities, State Capitals, Tourist places etc.

(iii) Reimbursement of expenditure for JDP Showroom for the 1st year is @ 30%

21


of actual sales, 25% for the 2nd year and 20% for the 3rd year, subject to
max. reimbursement Rs.50,000/- per month and one time support for
decoration & display ie. 50% of actual subject to max. of Rs.1.00 lakh /
Rs.50,000/- is provided.

(iv) Organisation of workshops/awareness programmes/interactive meetings —
Buyer Seller meets with active participation of jute entrepreneurs/exporters
for renewal of existing contacts and establishing new trade channels.

65. The Committee noted that the National Jute Board (NJB) as an apex body of the
Ministry of Textiles, Govt. of India is responsible for promotion of jute and jute products
in India and abroad. The National Jute Board is established under National Jute Board
Act, 2008 and is responsible for development of the cultivation, manufacture and
marketing of jute and jute products and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.

66. NJB through the Export Market Development Assistance Scheme (EMDA)
facilitates registered jute exporters for participation in foreign fairs/ BSMs and Trade
delegation for enhancing exports of jute products. The scheme provides reimbursement
of expenditure subject to max. of Rs.3.75 lakh on Space rent + Decoration: max.
Rs.2.50 lakh (being 50% of actual) and Air fare + Hotel staying: max. 1.25 lakh (being
50% of actual).With implementation of the scheme and extending support to the jute
exporters, exports of jute diversified products has shown a remarkable increasing trend
from Rs.508.57 crore in 2014-15 to Rs.963.43 crore in 2019-20. The overall exports of
all jute goods has also increased from Rs.1813.81 crore in 2014-15 to Rs. 2423.84
crore in 2019-20.

67. The Committee, expressing concern about the growing competition from other
jute producing countries asked the Ministry on how the constraints of the Indian jute
industry can be removed and bring the industry at par with jute products of other
countries. The Ministry, in their post evidence reply mentioned as follows:

“Govt. of India has been supporting the Jute Industry through various measures
such as External Market Assistance Scheme, Supporting participation of
exporters in the overseas market promotional events etc. to provide them
continuous opportunities for export promotion at subsidized cost. Further,
Ministry of Finance has imposed the Anti-dumping duty on imports of subject
goods from Bangladesh and Nepal under Notification dated 57 January, 2017.
After the imposition of Anti-dumping duty, an additional demand of 2 lakh Metric
Tons were generated in the domestic market for the jute industry which has led
to the reopening of more than 10 jute twine mills located in Andhra Pradesh,
benefitting 20,000 workmen directly and indirectly”.

68. NJB is implementing Improved Cultivation and Advance Retting Exercise
(ICARE) programme to improve the quality of domestically grown jute and make good
quality raw material available to the JOP manufacturers/exporters. Scheme to introduce
package of scientific packages for jute cultivation and retting exercises for improving

22


fibre quality and productivity and reducing the cost of jute production, the scheme has
been implemented in association with CRIJAF & JCI. With Registration of farmers,
Supply of certified seeds, seed driller, nail weeder and CRIJAF Sona, and.
demonstrating usage of mechanized tools and retting exercise etc. are main activities
being implemented under the programme. Under the scheme, 1,06,934 Hectares land
has been covered in 72 blocks of jute growing states. Further, 2,43,549 farmers have
been benefitted under the scheme so far.

69. 116 Ministry had also informed that the Government of India has been supporting
the Jute Industry through various measures such as External Market Assistance
Scheme, supporting participation of exporters in the overseas market promotional
events etc. to provide them continuous opportunities for export promotion at subsidized
cost. Further, Ministry of Finance has imposed the Anti-dumping duty on imports of
subject goods from Bangladesh and Nepal under Notification dated 57 January, 2017.
After the imposition of Anti-dumping duty, an additional demand of 2 lakh Metric Tonnes
were generated in the domestic market for the jute industry which has led to the
reopening of more than 10 jute twine mills located in Andhra Pradesh, benefitting
20,000 workmen directly and indirectly.

(v) Increasing Export of Jute Products

70. The Export Market Development Assistance Scheme (EMDA) facilitates
registered jute exporters for participation in foreign fairs/ BSMs and Trade delegation for
enhancing exports of jute products. The scheme provides reimbursement of expenditure
subject to maximum of Rs.3.75 lakh on Space rent + Decoration: max. Rs.2.50 lakh
(being 50% of actual) and Air fare + Hotel staying: max. 1.25 lakh (being 50% of actual).

71. With the implementation of the scheme and extending support to the jute
exporters, exports of jute diversified products has shown a remarkable increasing trend
from Rs.508.57 crore in 2014-15 to Rs.963.43 crore in 2019-20. The overall exports of
all jute goods has also increased from Rs.1813.81 crore in 2014-15 to Rs. 2423.84
crore in 2019-20.

72. NJB has been implementing series of promotional activities /schemes to further
promote jute diversified products. The activities / schemes are :

(i) Organisation of Exhibitions/Fairs at Regional/National/International level
facilitating participation of jute entrepreneurs/exporters for display and
promotion of jute products.

(ii) Implementation of Retail Outlet Scheme, to facilitate the Jute entrepreneurs
for display and promotion jute diversified products through retail outlets in
Metro cities, State Capitals, Tourist places etc.

(iii) Reimbursement of expenditure for JDP Showroom for the 15 year is @ 30%
of actual sales, 25% for the 2nd year and 20% for the 3rd year, subject to
max. reimbursement Rs.50,000/- per month and one time support for

23


decoration & display ie. 50% of actual subject to max. of Rs.1.00
lakh/Rs.50,000/- is provided.

(iv) Organisation of workshops/awareness programmes/Interactive meetings —
Buyer Seller meets with active participation of jute entrepreneurs/exporters
for renewal of existing contacts and establishing new trade channels.

73. The Committee expressed concern about growing competition from other jute
producing countries and enquired about the steps being taken by the Ministry and NJB
to remove the constraints of the Indian jute industry. In this regard, the Ministry
mentioned that during last 10 years, India’s exports of jute goods has been maximum at
Rs. 2,424 crore in 2019-20, as reported by DGCI&S Kolkata. As may be seen from the
above statement, India’s export has been increasing continuously. It has increased from
Rs. 859.46 croes in 2009-10 to Rs. 2423.84 crores in 2019-20 with an annual average
growth of 18%.

74, From the reply of the Ministry. the Committee find that Export performance of
JDPs has been witnessing increasing growth. JDPs constituted 40 per cent and
traditional products, viz Hessian, Sacking, Yarn constitute 60 per cent of total value of
exports of jute goods. Export of Jute Diversified Products (JDPs) is almost consistently
increasing. Its export persistently increased from Rs. 231 crore in 2009-10 to Rs.963
crore in 2019-20 (increased by 317 per cent), constituting 40 per cent of India’s total
Jute goods exports. Floor coverings and Shopping Bags are the two major components
which together account for 98 per cent of total JDPs exports. USA is the Single biggest
market which accounts for 38 per cent of total export value of jute diversified products
followed by UK, Australia, Spain. All these 4 countries together accounted for 66 per
cent of total JDP export during 2018-19

75. Keeping in view the export performance, NJB has been making vigorous efforts
to boost exports through implementation of export promotion activities in existing
markets and facilitating the registered jute exporters to renew their business contacts.
Also, NJB organizes various export promotion activities in emerging countries to
establish new trade channels. NJB has also been implementing Export Market
Development Assistance (EMDA) Scheme, to facilitate registered jute exporters for
participation in foreign fairs/ BSMs and Trade delegations for enhancing exports of jute
products. The scheme provides reimbursement of expenditure subject to maximum of
Rs.3.75 lakh on Space rent + Decoration: maximum Rs.2.50 lakh (being 50% of actual)
and Air fare + Hotel staying: maximum 1.25 lakh (being 50% of actual).

76. All these export promotion measures are being implemented by NJB with active
participation of jute exporters which will result in boosting exports of jute goods from the
present level of Rs. 2,424 crore.

24


77. The Committee noted that as part of its mandate, NJB has been
implementing various activities/schemes with a view to removing constraints of jute
industry and extending support for overall development in production, process and
market development of jute and jute products. The schemes being implemented by NJB
are:-

(a) Improved Cultivation and Advance Retting Exercise (ICARE) for
jute agriculture.

In order to improve the quality of domestically grown jute and make good quality
raw material available to the Jute Diversified Product (JDP)
manufacturers/exporters, NJB has been implementing ICARE Scheme to
introduce package of scientific packages for jute cultivation and retting exercises
for improving fibre quality and productivity and reducing the cost of jute
production, the scheme has been implemented in association with CRIJAF & JCI.
With registration of farmers, supply of certified seeds, seed driller, nail weeder
and CRIJAF Sona, and demonstrating usage of mechanized tools and retting
exercise etc. are main activities being implemented under the programme. Under
the scheme, 1, 06,934 hectares land has been covered in 72 blocks of jute
growing States. Further, 2,43,549 farmers have been benefitted under the
scheme so far.

(b) Incentive scheme for acquisition of plants and machinery.

To facilitate modernization and up gradation of technology in existing/ new
jute mills and JDP units, incentive @ 20% for Jute Mill and 30% for 307 - MSME
units subject to a maximum of Rs. 2.50 crore per unit during the scheme period is
considered under the scheme subject to the investment of at least 10% credit
linkage from scheduled banks.

(c) Retail Outlet Scheme

To facilitate the Jute entrepreneurs for display and promotion of jute
diversified products through retail outlets in Metro cities, State Capitals, Tourist
places etc., the scheme has been implemented. Reimbursement of expenditure
for JDP Showroom for the 1" year is @ 30% of actual sales, 25% for the 2" year
and 20% for the 3"year, subject to max. reimbursement Rs.50,000/- per month
and one time support for decoration & display ie. 50% of actual subject to
maximum of Rs. 1.00 lakh / Rs.50,000/- is provided.

(d) Export Market Development Assistance (EMDA)Scheme.

To facilitate registered jute exporters for participation in foreign fairs/
BSMs and Trade delegation for enhancing exports of jute products, the scheme
provides reimbursement of expenditure subject to maximum of Rs.3.75 lakh on
Space rent + Decoration: maximum Rs. 2.50 lakh (being 50% of actual) and Air
fare + Hotel staying: max. Rs. 1.25 lakh (being 50% of actual).

25


(e) Jute Integrated Development (JID) Scheme

To create new / skilled work force for production of value added JDPs and
to provide self-employment opportunity facilitating backward and forward linkage
to the existing and new entrepreneurs, the scheme provides basic, advanced and
design training and training cum production centers, raw material banks, retail
outlets and participation in exhibition and fairs for production and promotion of
jute products.

(f) Jute Raw Material Bank (JRMB) Scheme

To supply jute raw materials to MSME units and artisans engaged in
production of jute diversified products at mill gate price, incentive @ 15% of total
sales in1 &2 > year, 12% in 3 year and 10% in 4" year, subject to a maximum
of Rs.15.12 Lakhs/annum, is provided under the scheme.

78. Enquired whether NJB is producing market worthy new designs and new
products with the involvement of NID and NIFT, the Ministry informed that National Jute
Board has sponsored a design development project to the Innovation Centre for Natural
Fibre (ICNF) of National Institute of Design, Gandhinagar. The objective of the project
was to develop new and innovative Jute Shopping Bags and Lifestyle Accessories
through Design and Technology Intervention for Value Addition etc. Four Jute producing
units and 15 jute bag exporters were involved with the Jute Design cell of NID and have
developed more than 100 different designer and utility jute bags under the project.
Further, NJB engages NID / NIFT and other resource persons in its design development
projects and activities.

79. Realizing the potential of Jute in geo-textiles for soil erosion control, soil
stabilization and road construction it was enquired as to why the Ministry of Textiles has
not take up the matter with the other user Ministries such M/o Road Transport
Highways, Railways, Defence etc. for usage of jute geotextiles. The Ministry in this
regard informed that NJB has already taken up the use of Jute Geotextiles (JGT) by
different Ministries like, MoRTH, Railways, Defence and MoRD.

(vi)_Involvement of Farmers, artisans, Self help Groups (SHGs), Women and

NGOs and MSMEs

80. The Committee noted that the jute sector involves wide section of population and
they are depended on this sector for their livelihood and further, the sector has immense
potential to provide work and employment.

81. Regarding involvement of NGOs in the diversification of the Jute products, the
Ministry mentioned that NJB has been making vigorous efforts in implementing various
schemes/activities for promotion and proliferation of jute diversification activities
throughout the country with the involvement of MSME/Self Help Groups, Cooperative

26


Societies & NGOs, wherever applicable. Some of the beneficiaries oriented schemes
viz, Jute Integrated Development Scheme, Jute Raw Material Scheme and Retail Outlet
Scheme are implemented with the involvement of such groups. Participation of such
groups is also provided under various market promotion activities of NJB like fairs,
exhibitions, BSMs, Workshops etc.

82.

Asked about steps taken for tangible improvement in jute sector for alleviating

the sufferings of the jute farmers the Ministry in their reply stated as under:

83.

“NJB in association with JCI and CRIJAF has been implementing very
successfully the ICARE project for last 6 years to improve the quality and yield of
jute fibre through better agronomic practices, thereby increasing the income of
jute farmers from jute cultivation. High yielding varieties of certified jute seeds are
provided by NJB to the farmers at 50% subsidized rates. In addition, CRIJAF
Sona (retting accelerator), seed drills, Nail weeders are also provided to the
farmers. From Financial year 2020-21 onwards, NJB has included a component
of construction of clean water in-situ retting tanks for the benefit of the jute
farmers under which 46,000 such clean water retting tanks are planned to be
constructed in all jute growing blocks/States of the country. The Scheme is being
implemented in convergence with MNREGA and PMKSY Schemes of the
Government and through which employment of 46 lakhs man-days would be
generated under MNREGA. All these inventions would result in improvement of
productivity atleast by 15%, quality improvement by 1 grade and increase in
Farmers’ income atleast by Rs. 10,000/hectare. In addition, in order to expand
the distribution of certified jute seeds and to eliminate the spurious seeds from
the market, Jute Corporation of India (JCI) has entered into an MOU with the
National Seeds Corporation (NSC) for procurement and supply of 10,000 quintals
of High Yielding Varieties of certified jute seeds to the Jute Farmers during crop
year 2021-22. This will also add to the benefits of farmers by way of productivity
and quality improvement and increase in farmers’ income as well, similar to the
benefit of ICARE intervention.

In addition, NJB has been implementing series of market promotion activities,
facilitating participation of jute entrepreneurs / artisans / WSHGs engaged in
production of jute diversified products in various exhibitions/ fairs (regional /
national) for display, promotion and sale of jute diversified products. Also, NJB
organizes participation in the international fairs, BSMs with active participation of
registered jute exporters to boost exports of jute goods.”

Asked about the major challenges facing Jute industry in India and the steps

needed to be taken for the industry to outgrow the need for subsidy the Ministry stated
as follows:

“The major challenges faced by the Indian Jute Industry is low capacity
utilization by the Mills (about 65% capacity utilization), shortage of skilled
manpower, absenteeism; high capital cost, low modernization and less
diversification etc. With a view to carry out paradigm transformation in the Jute

27


Industry, Govt. of India through various schemes would lay greater emphasis on
productivity and quality improvement, process and product diversification,
modernization particularly for Jute based Technical Textiles and Jute
Diversified Products(JDPs) & backward and forward linkages for the Jute
MSMEs, artisans, weavers, Women Self Help Group, etc.”

28


PARTII
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS.
IRREGULARITIES IN DISBURSEMENT OF CAPITAL SUBSIDY TO JUTE MILL

The Committee note that under the National Jute Policy 2005, the Jute
Technology Mission (JTM) was operationalised through four Mini-Missions (MM)
during 2007-14, with Acquisition of Plant and Machineries (Capital Subsidies)
being a scheme under the Mini Mission (MM) — IV with an outlay of ₹ 100 crore.,
Mini Mission (MM)-IV was implemented with the main objective of modernizing
the Jute industry. As envisaged under the scheme, Jute mills were eligible for
subsidy of 20 percent of the procurement cost of new plant and machinery.
Under the scheme, the NJB disbursed subsidy amounting to Rs.104.36 Crores to
120 Jute units during the period 2007-08 to 2013-14. The Committee note that a
thematic audit was carried out in 2015, suspecting irregularities in implementing
the scheme. A Joint inspection team consisting of members from audit party and
officials from O/o Jute Commissioner and National Jute Board conducted a
physical inspection of the Jute Mills in 2015. The irregularities that came to light
as a fall out of the inspection, included inter-alia, disbursal of subsidy for : old
machines, cotton producing machines, repeatedly extending subsidy on the
same machines, machines purchased with the aid of subsidy not being found on
the Mill’s floor, etc. The Committee are dismayed to note that besides these
irregularities, the objectives of the capital subsidy scheme could not be achieved
due to lack of monitoring by NJB. They are surprised to note that the
irregularities went unnoticed at different levels of administrative hierarchy. There
was no system of Internal controls to check the mismanagement of Government

29


funds and misappropriation despite having a Chief Vigilance Officer for National
Jute board. There was also no system to cross check and counter check the
violations at the apex level, 1.6९. at the level of the Ministry. The Committee would
like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that such instances of
irregularities and mismanagement do not recur in future. The Committee, in this
regard, would, in particular, recommend the Ministry/National Jute Board (NJB) to
put in place a strong mechanism of internal controls and remove the deficiencies
in the system by making systemic changes and incorporating appropriate
modifications in the guidelines of the scheme. The Committee would like to be

apprised of the details of the remedial action taken in this regard.

Action against Officers

2. The Committee note with surprise that investigation of the issue by the
Ministry in the year 2017 found only one person, an outsourced contractual
employee from IJIRA (Indian Jute Industries Research Association) which
provides technical services to Jute mills who was said to be holding a position of
critical responsibility to be guilty. What the Committee find distressing to find is
that the case is not limited to technical aspects. Fraudulent certificates were
issued by a team of officers, subsidy extended to non-working/ non-existent
machinery, on more than one occasion on the same machines, for purchasing
ploughing machines for supply to a tractor company, and to privately owned Jute
parks which yielded no result. Yet, these were not looked into by the officials of
the Ministry. The Committee find it surprising to note that these irregularities

went unnoticed at different levels of the administrative hierarchy. There was no

30


system of internal controls to check the mismanagement of Government funds
and misappropriation, despite having a separate Chief Vigilance Officer for the
National Jute board. There was also no system to cross check, identify and
counter check the violations at the apex level, i.e. at the level of the Ministry. The’
Committee feel extremely disappointed to note that the Ministry/NJB was ignorant
of the frauds occurring on regular basis and NJB was alerted of the matter only in
2015, that too owing to some unspecified reason. This, as indicated by the
Committee during the course of examination of the subject, calls for a complete
overhaul of the systems and procedures so as to keep a check on such malafide
activities, and punitive action taken on the errant and guilty. The Committee
accordingly desire that appropriate measures be taken to identify the guilty and
stringent action taken against them. They would like to be apprised of the

measures taken in this direction.

Ad-hocism in deploying manpower

3. The Committee are of view that owing to shortage of staff, entrusting one
officer with the responsibility for different crucial activities had practically shut
the doors for scrutiny. The Committee have learnt that there is no recruitment
policy as such in the NJB and the officers and staff are drawn to the organisation
from SIDBI, and by way of outsourcing. The Committee also find it surprising as
well as distressing to note that a crucial senior level post was filled by way of
outsourcing on contract, and without any ‘penalty clause’ incorporated in the
contract for any “wrong-doing”. The Ministry, while making ‘one’ person in-

charge of duties attached to various posts’ should have weighed the onus of

31


repercussions of such an action. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
reasons as to why one person was associated with duties assigned to different
posts, and inform the Committee of the measures initiated towards discontinuing
such practices. As emphasized upon, the recruitment policy for NJB needs to be
concretized and the Ministry has to duly recognize the role and importance of
NJB in the jute sector and in the country’s economy as a whole. Taking the plea
that deployment of manpower was not given much importance, because of the
policy being promotional in nature is neither tenable nor acceptable. The
Committee also recommend that the post of Secretary, NJB and that of Jute

Commissioner should not be allowed to be kept vacant.

4. As informed to the Committee, preliminary enquiry was held on the
irregularities pointed by Audit and working Committees were formed comprising
of officers from various organizations for making an assessment of the quantum
of irregularities and collecting facts/documents relating to the cases of
disbursement of subsidy. Also, First Information Reports (FIRs) have also been
filed, and about 15 cases have been handed over to ACB-CBI for further
investigation. The CBI is said to have started the process of investigation into
these cases. The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status and
outcome of the investigation/cases. It has also been informed that disciplinary
proceedings have been initiated against one Accounts Officer in National Jute
Board for mismanagement of Government funds, who has finally been dismissed
from Government service, while another officer has been placed under

suspension. The Committee are dismayed to take note of the extent and nature of

32


mismanagement in the National Jute Board. The same person was holding charge
of the posts of Chief Finance Officer and Vigilance Officer, and also functioned as
the Secretary, National Jute Board. The Committee are of the view that this was
one of the reasons for continued irregularities and misappropriation of funds.
Had these positions been held by different individuals, misappropriation of
Government funds, as witnessed, would have possibly been checked. The
Committee also express surprise on the absence of any checks and control at the
highest echelons of National Jute Board and the Ministry. The Committee cannot
also help taking note of the fact that taking action against only two officials
following the audit observations is inadequate and does not, in anyway, address
the problem. The Committee note that cases against the jute mills concerned are
with CBI and no senior or responsible officer of NJB or the Ministry has been
booked or held responsible. This inaction seems to be prevalent in spite of the
fact of the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles expressing agreement with the opinion
that it was a case of criminal conspiracy to misappropriate public funds. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend initiating strict criminal action against
all the people involved in the matter; and a new paradigm of fixing accountability

may be set so as to prevent recurrence of such incidents.

Legal Action against Jute Mills

5. The Committee note that following the audit observations, NJB/Ministry of
Textiles has taken legal action against the Jute Mills for recovering the subsidy
amount wrongfully drawn under the “Acquisition of Plant and Machinery (Capital

Subsidy)” under the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) Mini-Mission-IV. Some of the

33


Jute mills have refunded the amount. The National Jute Board has also filed 18
money suits against the other mills as per the directive of the Public Accounts
Committee. Regarding the time frame for recovery of Rs.2,79,39,847/- involved,
the Committee have been informed that Court proceedings have been delayed
due to the pandemic and these would be taken up after normalcy returns. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the money suits filed. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the latest status and final outcome of
all the First Information Reports (FIRs) filed against all the mills by the CBI. The
Committee have also been informed that Joint Inspection Teams (JIT) have been
constituted for undertaking physical verification and inspection of all 124 jute
mills which received subsidy. The Committee would like to know the details of the
final report of the Joint Inspection Teams. The Committee recommend that all the
Jute Mills/Units and their Directors/Promoters who have been found to be
involved in the irregularities related to capital subsidy be blacklisted from

availing any benefit under any scheme of the Government in future.

Action against Chartered Accountants

6. The Committee had, during the course of oral evidence also addressed the
issue of wrongful certification by Chartered Accountants as being a reason for
releasing subsidy to ineligible beneficiaries and called for action being taken
against them. The Committee had also suggested debarring such errant
Chartered Accountants. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken note of
the suggestions and has written to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and ICAI in

this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual action taken

34


against the Chartered Accountants concerned.

RESTRUCTURING JUTE SECTOR RELATED ORGANISATIONS

7. National Jute Board (NJB) was constituted vide National Jute Board Act,
2008 (12 of 2009) which became effective from 1™ April 2010, after merger of
erstwhile Jute Manufacture Development Council and National Centre for Jute
Diversification. NJB has been implementing the scheme for modernization of Jute
industry for more than a decade. The Committee are distressed to see that NJB
has not been successful in achieving its objectives. The Jute Industry as a whole
is suffering from many problems, and the desired results are not being yielded.
The Committee feel that this is mainly owing to the fact that NJB itself is beset
with many problems, as well as issues such as shortage of staff, particularly
technical staff, lack of accountability, ad-hocism, administrative inefficiency, lack
of internal controls and monitoring and out-sourcing of crucial posts. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that a review of the organisational structure
and functioning of NJB be conducted to streamline the functioning of NJB, so
that it fulfils its intended role in spearheading the expansion, growth and revival
of Jute industry. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry must look into
the policy loopholes that have come to notice over the last decade, and as
indicated in the on-going inspection/ audit reports. The Committee would also lay
emphasis on the role and quality of human resources that plays a pivotal role in
the success of any policy and of the organisation. The Committee recommend
that NJB should induct, at every level, professionals with requisite experience

and qualifications rather than requisition manpower from SIDBI and appoint

35


personnel with questionable credentials and without proven integrity by way of

outsourcing.

8. The Committee find that various organisations/authorities/
bodies/institutions like National Jute Board (NJB), Jute Corporation of India (JCI),
Office of Jute Commissioner, Indian Jute Industries Research Association:
(JIRA), Centre for Jute Machinery Development (CJMD) etc. are operating in the
Jute sector. The roles and functions of these entities overlap and also conflict
with each other. The role of some organisations has become redundant with the
passage of time, performance of some organisations has not been satisfactory,
and there are also issues of shortage of personnel, budget, etc. Some of these
institutions are not structured to adapt to the changing scenario and are not
responsive to the evolving demands. Accordingly, the Committee recommend the
Ministry to take necessary measures to evaluate the relevance of these
institutions and realign and reorient their role so as to be in consonance with the

present requirements.

9. The Committee find that at present the Jute sector is dominated by
composite Jute Mills, which are 98 in number. The Government of India owns 6
mills, the Government of Tripura and Orissa own 1 mill each, 1 mill in Assam is
operating in the co-operative sector, and the rest 89 are in private hands. A
significant number of mills are considered inefficient, use obsolete technology
and are purportedly also involved in manipulating the subsidy system for reaping
benefits fraudulently. On the other end of the spectrum, jute growers/farmers also
face many problems. They do not get remunerative price for their produce.

36


Sometimes there is no demand for raw jute in the market, and they face problems
associated with price fluctuation, non- availability of inputs, lack of training, etc.
Similarly, entrepreneurs and small units engaged in production of jute products
do not get quality raw material readily. There is a need to place India’s jute
development programmes in the hands of jute growers, entrepreneurs and other
professionals in an organised co-operative framework, wherein inputs, seed
banks, retting plants, manufacturing units/mills, marketing network, etc. are
maintained and controlled by the Jute farmers/producers. Jute cooperative
societies need to be formed by the Jute producers at the village level. The
Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry should take the initiative in
developing a de-centralized cooperative model with the active involvement of
voluntary groups which have been successfully operating in the area such as the
Bharat Seva Sangh, so that farmers and the marginal workers can earn their

livelihood without facing the uncertainty of market forces.

10. The Committee were apprised that the jute industry, with 70 mills, is
meeting 100 percent of the demand, and at times, the demand exceeds supply.
The Committee note that this situation is prevalent owing to the centralized
nature of the jute industry in a few hands, who not only get the benefit of the
Production capacity of the Mills, but also the incentive of subsidy from the
government. The Ministry too has admitted that there are no fresh entrants into
this sector due to lack of motivation and also, absence of incentives. The
Committee, in this regard, are surprised to see that though the Ministry is aware

of the structural problems, no concrete action is being taken to address the

37


related issues. The Committee would therefore, once again emphasize on the
need for building and operationalising a perspective plan for the development of

the Jute sector.

Deficiencies in Capital subsidy scheme

11. On other aspects of the structural loopholes in the jute sector, the
Committee have noted that some Jute mills own NBFCs, receive loans from the
banking companies, which are paid back by availing subsidy from the NJB. By
taking bank loans, they are in a position to procure machines from any vendor.
The Committee note in this regard that the Ministry has initiated remedial
measures to counter such activities which are included in the ‘modified scheme’.
The Committee also find that though embossing numbers on machines is to be
followed as per rule, this is being followed in the breach. The Committee in this
regard, desire to apprised of the outcome of the process of the remedial

measures initiated. .

12. The Committee note that there are cases where the Jute mills have
disposed of the machinery purchased under the subsidy scheme but no punitive
action has been taken. The Committee, in this regard, have suggested that GST
payments made for such machines can be linked with the GST returns of the
vendors so as to enable in tracing the movement of the machines - a proposal
which has been agreed to by the Ministry by way of committing to include a
suitable provision on the issue in the ISAPM guidelines. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the details of action taken, inclusive of the guidelines

framed and issued/to be issued in this regard.

38


13. The Committee find that the Jute mills have been availing subsidy from
different Government schemes. As per the information furnished by the Ministry,
following the clarification sought by JIT, three cases have been referred to the
Office of the Textile Commissioner for ascertaining whether the Mills concerned
have availed subsidy under the Amended Technology Upgradation Scheme
(ATUF) scheme as well, so as to decide on their eligibility for grant of subsidy
from the NJB or otherwise. The Committee are also surprised to note that the
Jute mills have been refunding their dues to NJB by using the subsidy amount
availed from other government subsidy schemes. The Committee strongly urge
the Ministry to identify cases where the Jute Mill owners have benefited from two
or more related subsidy schemes and frame suitable rules for cross checking
before extending the subsidy. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action

taken in the matter within a month of the presentation of this report to Parliament.

14. The Committee, upon examining the issues pointed out by Audit’on the
subsidy scheme termed, MM IV “Acquisition of Plant and machineries (capital
subsidy) scheme” are compelled to conclude that the scheme has only worked to
the benefit of Jute mill owners who availed the subsidy despite making profits
from the business, used questionable means for availing the benefit and there is
hesitancy in pursuing the wrong-doing and taking punitive action against those
involved. The Jute farmers have not reaped any benefits under the scheme and
the subsidy amount in dispute is not earning any bank interest which is an added
loss to the government. The Committee also note that the audit has gone into

only one scheme and found that there was large scale mismanagement of funds.

39


The Committee fear that this may only be an indication of a larger malice. The
Committee, therefore, urge that other schemes pertaining to the Jute sector too

need to be gone into thoroughly and remedial action, as needed, taken.

Abandoned Jute Parks Scheme

15. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry has abandoned the
Jute Parks Scheme without giving any explicit reason. The Committee note that
there was a target for setting up 10 Jute parks, and as per the scheme, the State
Government allots lands for these parks. Further, the Committee note that these
parks which are privately owned receive subsidy from NJB. For instance, the
Ministry has informed that Rs. 7.5 crore was given as subsidy to the Shaktigarh
Textile Jute Park. From the information furnished by the Ministry it is found that
NJB has a role in the development of the parks by way of ensuring building
common infrastructure like plant and machinery and buildings for production
support facility depending on the requirements of the jute park. The Committee
fail to understand the reasons for abandoning this scheme which is intended for
development of diversified jute products and under which the State Government
has been allotting land and NJB extending subsidy and support for all
requirements of the jute parks. Aspects relating to the status of the land allotted
by the State Government, subsidy extended by NJB and expenditure incurred
from the budget of NJB for providing other required benefits to the private Jute
park owners need to be made clear. The Committee desire for a detailed report in
this regard from the Ministry, which may be furnished within a month of

presenting this report to Parliament.

40


REVITALIZING THE JUTE SECTOR - “OPERATION GOLDEN FIBRE”

16. The Jute industry occupies an important place in the national economy,
more significantly in achieving environment friendly goals. Termed as the
‘Golden fibre’, Jute meets all the standards required for ‘safe’ packaging. Being a
natural, renewable, biodegradable and eco-friendly product, demand for jute will
only increase in future, especially as an alternative to plastics/synthetic materials.
The Committee, in this regard, note that the jute industry provides direct
employment to about 0.37 million workers in the organized mills and in diversified
units including the tertiary sector and allied activities, and supports the livelihood
of several lakhs of farm families. The total turnover of jute industry is around Rs.
10,000 crore, with approximately 40 lakh farmers engaged in Jute farming and the
country contributing about 70 percent of the World’s jute production and
products. The key to success and growth of the jute industry is modernization
and diversification. Quality jute has to be produced, capacity has to be built,
cultivators have to be incentivized and the demand for raw jute has to be met
successfully. The Committee visualize and aspire for a robust jute sector in future
with diversified jute products, increased exports as well as domestic
consumption of this environment friendly product. Shrinking land under jute
production is a matter of concern for the Committee. The Committee therefore,
advise the Ministry to take necessary steps with a futuristic perspective by
bringing more land under jute production, educate people through various means
to adopt jute cultivation and promote the market for the products. The entire Jute
sector, including the NJB need to be restructured to meet these goals. It is

imperative on the part of the Ministry to draw a perspective plan for increasing

41


the area under Jute production, improving productivity and net profits in the
hands of farmers, close the door for fly-by-night operators and diversify usage of
jute products. The Committee, therefore, specifically recommend launching
‘Operation Golden Fibre’ on lines similar to ‘Operation Flood’. As already
emphasized upon, the Ministry needs to take action to involve local
organisations, Co-operatives, NGOs, Self-help Groups, and Women’s
organisations in various allied works in the sector so that the entities concerned
are enabled in carrying out their operations in trouble free manner and the
programme is successful. The Committee would await the details of action taken

by the Ministry in the matter.

17. Regarding supply of seeds to the farmers, the Committee have been
informed that farmers are supplied seeds at 2/3 of market rate. The Ministry in
this regard have admitted that supply of subsidized seeds is only to the extent of
500-600 metric tons whereas the demand for the seeds is in excess of 3500 metric
tons. The Committee would emphasize on the aspect of availability of good
quality seeds being one of the most important inputs that would contribute to
productivity of jute. Easy availability of good quality seeds to farmers would help
in protecting them from the middle men. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the modalities for supply of seeds to the farmers may be worked out in such
a way that the supply is executed through Co-operatives and Self-help groups.
The Committee also desire that subsidy on purchase and supply of seeds may be

continued.

42


Promotion of Jute and Diversified Jute products

18.. The Committee note that the ‘Jute Technology Mission’ was launched with
the intent of contributing to the overall development of the jute industry and to
bring about growth in the Jute sector. Diversification has been one of the thrust
areas of all the policies and programmes related to development of Jute sector.
However, the Jute sector has been on a decline. Rampant exploitation of Jute
farmers, spurious Jute seed market, poor quality seeds, obsolete machines,
inefficient retting practices, etc. have all been contributory factors to the decline
of the Jute industry. in an effort to diversify jute products, the Committee note
that some organizations such as Bharat Seva Sangh, are producing diversified
jute products such as sanitary pads, activated carbon filter, hand spurn yarn etc.
made out of jute pulp. Noting the tremendous potential and demand for Jute carry
bags as a replacement to plastic carry bags in the domestic market, the
Committee desire to be furnished with details of the initiatives taken by the
Ministry and NJB towards realising the goal. The Committee are of the view that
Jute farmers need to be educated and familiarized in modern techniques of
cultivation and processing of Jute. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry/NJB undertake awareness and training drives for Jute farmers so as
to acquaint them with efficient and modern techniques of cultivation and
processing of Jute. The Committee also recommends that necessary measures
be taken towards effectively linking Jute farmers to the production units of
diversified Jute products as well as with other players in the market so as to
ensure good and assured price for the raw material. The Committee also

recommend that the National Institute of Design (NID), National Institute of

43


Fashion Technology (NIFT), Indian Institute of Packaging (17) and other research
and development organisations be involved in activities and programmes aimed

towards promotion and diversification of jute and jute products.

19. The Committee note that the Ministry/NJB has been taking various actions
towards producing and promoting new jute products, in view of the potential
market for these goods. The activities are being implemented through
involvement of MSMEs and retail outlets. The Committee also note that jute
products are also being used in the Geo-Textiles sector inclusive of road
construction, slope protection, controlling soil erosion and for replacing
synthetics and plastics. Jute products are also being used in Agro- textiles. Many
Government Departments are using various jute products to a considerable
extent. The Committee also note that IJIRA is involved in R&D activities for both
centralized and decentralized sectors. About 1200 entrepreneurs have been
trained. The Committee desire that a framework for further coordinated action
needs to be put in place so that diverse jute products can be produced and
pushed into the market through artisans, MSMEs etc. The trained entrepreneurs
may be engaged in this productive work with incentives so that their knowledge

can contribute in promoting the sector.

20. The Committee note that jute, the golden fibre can be processed through
running water retting practice, and the traditional method of processing the fibre
in ponds with mud on the top which blackens the final product need to be
discouraged. The Committee also note that the untreated residual water causes
number of diseases and health hazards. The Committee recommend setting up of

44


STPs for purifying the residual water. The Committee understand that the powder
distributed by the Government for the purpose of retting is being considered as
chalk powder by the farmers and they do not have much faith in this. Therefore,
the Committee desire that farmers may be educated/acclimatized on usage of
alternate techniques in the jute sector. The Committee appreciate the fact that the
Ministry have started taking measures towards improving retting practice with the

help of the District and other authorities concerned.

Export of Jute products and challenges

21. | While analyzing the export potential of the jute sector, the Committee have
been informed that India is facing competition from other jute producing
countries due to superior quality of the products of these countries. The NJB is
responsible for cultivation, manufacture, marketing of Jute and Jute products and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. Regarding exports, the
Committee note that the NJB, through ‘Export Market Development Assistance
Scheme’ (EMDA) is facilitating participation of Jute exporters in foreign fairs,
BSMs and Trade delegations. The Committee in this regard note that the Ministry
have expressed satisfaction with the participation and the growing export trade
value. The Committee however, do not subscribe to the view that only facilitating
participation of exporters in various events abroad to be the contributory reason
for growth of exports. The Committee urge the Ministry to acknowledge the fact
that demand for jute products is growing which needs to be tapped. As regards
competition from other countries, it has been informed that the Ministry of

Finance has imposed anti-dumping duty on import of goods from Nepal and

45


Bangladesh which has resulted in increased consumption of domestic products.
The Committee are constrained to mention in this regard that the Ministry does
not seem to have an unambiguous export policy as such and recommend for
framing a clear export policy mainly keeping in view the aspect of competition
from the neighboring countries. Measures towards growth of exports should not
be confined to the existing market only. As the demand for environment friendly
jute products is growing which will only increase in near future, and with a view
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the Ministry of Textiles
should coordinate with other Ministries concerned to analyse the potential

demand in other countries with a view to increasing its market share.

22. In the course of examining the Audit observations, it was evident that
though the officers of the Ministry were aware of problems facing the Jute sector
yet, no concrete action seems to have been initiated to address the problems.
The Committee expect that the recommendations made in the report are
considered with due seriousness and implemented for addressing the issues
ailing the Sector. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Audit
observations are furnished to the satisfaction of the Audit and clear and
unambiguous action taken replies furnished to the Committee in respect of each

Recommendation/Observation made in this report.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
| [ August, 2021 Chairperson
Shravana, 1943 (Saka) पु Public Accounts Committee

46