56

TRIBAL SUB PLAN

[Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their 857 Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRIES OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS, EDUCATION,
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE AND AYUSH

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

FIFTY SIXTH

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2285

FIFTY SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

TRIBAL SUB PLAN

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their 857 Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRIES OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS, EDUCATION,
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE AND AYUSH

Presented to Lok Sabha on: / 4 /2- 202).
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 1Y- Jen Pe 22

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Page
No.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (i)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER | Report
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government
CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2022-23) on 05.12.2022
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on _ the

Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their 85" Report (16" Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

4. — Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7 Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

8 Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9... Shri Brijendra Singh

10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh

20. Vacant!

21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Director
3. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Executive Officer

(ii)

1 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha
on 21 June, 2022.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tribal
Sub Plan’ relating to the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Education (formerly Human
Resource Development), Health and Family Welfare and AYUSH.

2. The Eighty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 18 December 2017. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the
Ministries concerned in separate batches. The Committee considered and adopted the
Fifty-sixth Report at their Sitting held on 05 December, 2022. Minutes of the Sitting of
the Committee are given at Appendix-l.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighty-fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-I/

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
01 December, 2022 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(iii)


Chapter- |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by the
Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Eighty Fifth Report (16 Lok Sabha) on the subject “Tribal Sub-Plan" based on C&AG
Report No.33 of 2015 relating to the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Education (formerly Human
Resource Development) (Department of Schoo! Education and Literacy), Health & Family
Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare) and AYUSH:

2. The Eighty Fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha), was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 18" December, 2017 contained 13 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and

Total: 08

Chapter - Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. Nil

Total: Nil

Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. 1, 3, 4, 9 and 12
Total: 05
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para No. Nil Total: Nil
Chapter - V


3. During the detailed examination of the subject “Tribal Sub-Plan" by the
Committee it was revealed that discrepancies like non-adoption of specific norms for
earmarking and release of Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) funds, non-creation of a non-lapsable
pool for TSP funds, weak management of programmes under TSP, delays and non-
formulation of nodal units, deficient monitoring system, non-implementation of
Information Education and Communication (IEC) Programmes for the benefit of the
tribal people, incorrect release of TSP fund to the tribal majority States which do not
qualify under TSP, etc. Some of the important observations/ recommendations made by
the Committee in their Report are mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs.

4. The Committee noted that TSP funds had been released even to non-tribal populated
States along with tribal majority States in violation of TSP guidelines. It was also
observed that there was lack of clarity and co-ordination between the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs and Ministry of AYUSH that resulted in inappropriate calculation of the
percentage of tribal population in a State, tribal concentrated districts, etc. leading to
incorrect release of funds. The Committee, therefore had exhorted the Ministries
concerned to improve upon their coordination and information showing mechanism and
take corrective/remedial measures including imposition of penalty upon the erring
Officials and recovery of incorrectly released funds.

5. The Committee found that despite the revised TSP guidelines and the
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee to transfer unutilized TSP funds at
the end of a financial year into a non-lapsable pool of TSP fund and allocation of
proportionate funds from the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of TSP fund (NLCPTF) to the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for implementing schemes exclusively meant for development
of STs, such a modality had not been devised. The Committee were of the opinion that
concerted efforts should be made towards optimal utilisation of the allocated TSP fund
within the given financial year and Non-lapsable pool for TSP fund be created at the
earliest

6. The Committee had emphasised that it is imperative to identify and prioritize
issues/concerns of the local community in the planning and decision making process
and had recommended that inputs/suggestions of local tribal community should be
sought before finalizing the plan for implementation of any programme under the TSP.

7. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Human
Resource Development (Department of School Education and Literacy), Health &
Family Welfare and AYUSH in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations made in the Original Report which either need reiteration or merit
comments.


8. The Committee desire that concerned Ministries to furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter |
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.

Better Financial Management

(Recommendation Para No. 1)

9. The Strategy for development of Scheduled Tribes (STs) through TSP includes
earmarking of Plan funds of Central Ministries/Departments into a separate head of
account to strengthen the administrative arrangements for proper utilization and
monitoring of the TSP funds. However, the Committee found that there had been no
segregation of TSP funds under a separate Head at State/District /Block level. The
Department of Secondary Education & Literacy had written to all States / UTs for strict
compliance on maintenance of separate account/record/ Head for the funds received
and expenditure incurred under TSP from the Financial Year 2016-17 wherever
possible, and strictly from the next financial year i.e. 2017-18 and reflected in the Final
Utilization Certificate submitted to the Department. The Committee had opined that such
instructions should have been issued much earlier to the States/UTs and recommended
that the Department should take a more proactive approach in monitoring and keeping
track of fund utilisation and progress in the implementation of the Scheme so as to
ensure efficient and timely achievement of targets set under the Plan. The Committee
had further recommended that strict adherence to earmarking of funds into separate
head at every level be made mandatory for release of funds.

10. In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Education
(Department of School Education and Literacy) in their duly vetted final action taken
reply by Audit and furnished to the Committee on 217 May, 2021 stated as under:-

“On going through the 85" report of PAC and the recent OM dated 28" July,
2019, it is mentioned that the replies w.r.t. point No.1 & 8 pertaining to MHRD
was communicated vide letter No.1 2/2015-EE 15(pt.) dated 13" March, 2018

The department has sent various communications in this regard vide letter dated
21% February 2017, 17" October, 2017 and 28" March, 2018 whereby this
Department has written to all States and UT for strict compliance on maintenance
of separate accounts/record and head for funds/expenditure incurred under TSP.

With integration of the erstwhile scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA),
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and Teacher Education (TE) into
one integrated Scheme Samagra Shiksha, the States and UTs have again been
instructed vide letter no.2-16/2017-EE3/IS-1 dated 12" April, 2019 to ensure that
appropriate bank accounts under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme and
maintenance of Separate Bank Account w.r.t SC and ST should also be complied
with and disbursement should be made from the account for all activities covered

-3-


11.

12.

under the Samagra Shiksha. It may be mentioned that the States and UTs have
been further instructed to separately show the component of ST and SC
component on the fund utilization and emphasized at mechanism should be
devised for ready availability for the relevant data at the different level. It may be
stated that Department has also issued instructions to the States to provide
separate budget head for the ST component in the State budget also in line with
the budget heads as provided in the Central budget for the scheme. It may be
further informed that the mandatory provision for ST component (10.70% of the
total BE) is invariably provided in the Central Budget and Samagra Shiksha
Scheme.

Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

५) Ministry has not furnished the details of any action taken by it for
monitoring and keeping track of fund ulilization and progress as
recommended by the PAC. Further, the outcome of the efforts made by
the Ministry to ensure strict adherence to earmarking of funds into
separate head at every level be made mandatory for release of funds has
also not been provided. The same may be provided to PAC.

(ii) How many States have complied with the instructions issued on
12/04/2019 by the Ministry?”

The Ministry in their updated reply stated as under:-

“The allocation of funds in Samagra Shiksha Scheme is governed by the
programmatic and financial norms and the activities and interventions are
well defined and depending on the interventions, the funds are budgeted
for the benefit of STs and spent accordingly. Some of the beneficiary-
oriented activities funded under the scheme are as follows:-

i. Provision free text-books up to Class ५॥- To all children including
ST students.

ii. Uniforms up to Class Vill- Two sets of Uniforms to children
belonging to SC, ST & Minority communities including BPL
families.

iii. Special projects for Social equity: the benefits under this
intervention are accorded to SC, ST, OBC Minorities communities

iv. KGBVs for Girls from Elementary Level (VI-VIIl) to Senior
Secondary Level (VI-XIl). The Scheme provides for access and
quality education to girls from disadvantaged groups of girls in the
age group of 10-18 years aspiring to study in classes VI to XII:
belonging to SC, ST, OBC, Minority communities and BPL families

aie


to ensure smooth transition of girls from elementary to secondary
and upto class XII wherever possible.

Also Priority is given to special focus districts with higher
concentration of SC, ST, Minorities and aspirational districts as well
as educationally backward blocks while approving interventions
such as upgradation/strengthening of schools. ICT facilities,
vocational education etc.

The budgetary allocation of 20% for SC and 10.70 % for ST is done
out of the total BE as per the guidelines. Funds are released
accordingly under separate sub-heads and utilized by the States
and accounted for under different sub-heads.

An online project monitoring system, namely ‘PRABANDH’ has
been launched for enhancing efficiency and managing the
implementation of Samagra Shiksha in all the States & UTs. It is
enabled on the website https://seshagun.gov.in and can be
accessed from the School, Block. District and State Level. The
important features of the PRABANDH System are:
न Online submission of Annual Work Plan & Budget
from District/State Level
. Tracking of GO! Funds release to State/UTs
. Generation of different types of reports like Physical &
Financial Progress, Spill-over and Committed
Liabilities, Unspent balances etc. on real time basis.

Also, a Data Visualization Dashboard has been created in the
PRABANDH System for display of monthly status of physical and
financial progress under the major interventions. With a view to
facilitating the online submission of Monthly Progress Reports
district wise, by the respective State/UT, an Expenditure Module for
District Users has been introduced to capture the physical and
financial progress of various interventions from the district level and
the progress can be seen in the National Reports.

All the States and UTs except Ladakh and Lakshadweep maintain
books of account in computerized manner.

Public Financial Management System (PFMS) being implemented
by Controller General of Accounts (CGA) for all Centrally
Sponsored Schemes also covers Samagra Shiksha. Funds to the
States/UTs under the scheme are released through the PFMS.”

13. Audit in their further vetting comments communicated to the Ministry stated as
under:-

oo


i) Ministry has not furnished the details of any action taken by it for
monitoring and keeping track of fund utilization and progress as
recommended by the PAC. Further, the outcome of the efforts
made by the Ministry to ensure strict adherence to earmarking of
funds into separates head at every level be made mandatory for
release of funds, has also not been provided The same may be
provided to PAC.

ii) How many states have complied with the instructions issued on
12/04/2019 by the Ministry?

iii) The reply by the Ministry at (iv) above indicates that there is
difficulty in measuring the outcomes of the earmarked fund. How
does the Ministry plan to tackle this shortcoming?

14. Comments/clarification furnished by the Mid Day Meal (MDM) Division,

Department o'

1 School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education in respect of point No.

(iii) commented by Audit stated as under:-

“i)

v)

vi)

vii)

The MDM is ensuring adherence to the guidelines issued by the Central
Government for earmarking of 10.7% of the Budget Estimates for Tribal
Sub Plan in the Demands for Grants of the Department.

The releases for TSP are made on the basis of tribal population of
elementary class children in various States /UTs in accordance with the
data in U-DISE

Separate sanctions are issued for each category viz. General, SCSP
and TSP so as to ensure transparency and accountability in the financial
assistance for each category.

The instructions contained in the Budget Circular issued every year by
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) regarding re-
appropriation of TSP funds to other heads of accounts in the scheme are
followed.

Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for creating a Non Lapsable
Pool of TSP funds so that the savings in TSP funds is ploughed back to
NLP of TSP. As an when the NLP of TSP is created, the unutilized funds
from TSP would go back to that pool.

The States/UTs compile Annual Work Plan & Budget proposals by
adopting bottom up approach in consultation with schools, blocks,
districts and State and indicate expenditure incurred against allocated
funds for General, SCSP and TSP during the previous year and
projections for requirement of funds for each category viz. General,
SCSP and TSP during the next year. The approved AWP&B proposals
of States and UTs are uploaded on Department of School Education &
Literacy website www.mdm.nic.in.

The Department has taken an initiative for providing flexi funds for new
intervention relating to setting up of School Nutrition Gardens for
addressing the problems of anemia and deficiency of Micronutrients
amongst the school children. Supplementary nutrition is also provided to
school children in Tribal identified areas with reported high level of
malnutrition.


viii) The Mid Day Meal Scheme is an ideal platform for promoting and
conserving the composite culture of the country. The value of integration
and communal harmony are taught to the children when they sit together
and take mid day meal together irrespective of their caste, religion etc.
Out of 25 lakh Cooks-cum-helpers engaged by States/UTs about 90%
women are from the socially and economically challenged segment of
the society.

ix) MDMS is a right based programme under National Food Security Act,
2013 for all the children studying in elementary classes in eligible
schools, irrespective of their caste, religion etc.

x) The sanction letter for release of central assistance for TSP also
includes a condition that Utilization Certificate of grant will be submitted
within three months of the closure of financial year."

15. The Committee in their Report had opined that instructions that were
issued to the States/UTs by the Department of Secondary Education & Literacy
for strict compliance on maintenance of separate account/record/ Head for the
funds received and expenditure incurred under the Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) should
have been done much earlier. To further address the issue, the Committee had
also recommended the Department to take more proactive approach in
monitoring the utilisation of funds and the progress made in implementing the
Scheme. Further, the Committee had emphasized the need for strict adherence to
mandatory earmarking of funds into separate heads at every level. An
examination of the action taken reply reveals that with the integration of the
erstwhile scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha
Abhiyan (RMSA) and Teachers Education (TE) into one Scheme under the
Samagra Shiksha, States/UTs had been instructed to streamline the flow of funds,
by way of measures such as ensuring maintenance of appropriate and separate
bank accounts with respect to SC and ST, and separation of ST and SC
component on fund utilization. In addition, the Ministry have issued instructions

to the States to provide separate budget head for the ST component in their State

budget in line with the budget heads as provided in the Central budget. The

t-


Committee, having taken due note of the initiatives that have been taken by the
Ministry, nonetheless, find the repiy inadequate, and bereft of any concrete action
taken by the States on the points raised in the recommendation. They are of the
view that responsibility of the Ministry begins with issuance of the instructions
but without visible outcome, it remains a non starter. The Committee feel that this
is unfortunate and urge the Ministry to apprise them of the concrete action taken
under due intimation.

The Committee are also baffled that till date, the Ministry are unable to
furnish the details of the States/ UTs that have complied with their instruction that
was initiated way back in February, 2017. The lethargic situation being despite the
Audit in their vetting comments having time and again emphasizing the need to
do so. Moreover, the reply is completely silent on the issue flagged by the
Committee regarding release of subsequent funds only after checking that
States/UTs that have mandatorily adhered to earmarking of funds into separate
heads. The Committee find this unacceptable and therefore, desire to know the
status of compliance to the instruction issued by the Ministry with regard to all
the States/UTs. In cases of erring/deviating States/UTs, the need of the hour is
their identification and initiation of stringent measures for due compliance. They
would also like to have a detailed report on the outcome of the earmarked fund to
facilitate them in assessing the impact it has made in the lives of the ST
population in the country.

The Committee also note from the reply that the Ministry has only focused
on the Mid Day Meal Scheme and are surprised as to why the Ministry are
completely oblivious about the other components of TSP which inter-alia include

Sarva Siksha Abhiyan, Information and Communication Technology, Rashtriya


Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan, etc. The Committee find the approach evinced by
the Ministry completely unacceptable and thus, urge the Ministry to apprise them
of the visible outcome of other components under TSP. At the same time, the
Committee would also emphasize upon the Ministry to avoid furnishing
generalized reply, as is the case pertaining to Mid Day Meals Scheme.

Creation of a non- lapsable pool for TSP Fund
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

16. The Committee noted that despite the revised TSP guidelines and the
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee to transfer unutilized TSP funds at
the end of a financial year into a non-lapsable pool of TSP fund and allocation of
proportionate funds from the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of TSP funds (NLCPTF) to the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for implementing schemes exclusively meant for development
of STs, such a modality had not been devised at that time. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs
had informed that the issue of Non-lapsable pool of funds was being handled by NITI
Aayog in consultation with the Ministries concerned. The Ministry had simultaneously
advocated the creation of a non-lapsable pool for TSP funds. The Committee had
opined that concerted efforts should be made towards optimal utilisation of the allocated
TSP fund within the given financial year and Non-lapsable pool for TSP fund be created
at the earliest to pool funds that could not be utilized due to unforeseen eventualities
and unavoidable circumstances, within the specific time period.

17. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“An online monitoring system has been put in place with web address
https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages monitoring of allocations for
welfare of STs under the schemes, monitoring of expenditure vis-a- vis
allocations, monitoring of physical performance and outcome monitoring. In the
First phase, Central Ministries/Departments have been linked to the
https://stcmis.gov.in. This online system captures the release data scheme-wise
and also state-wise by the Central Ministries / Departments. As regards efforts
towards optimal utilisation of the allocated TSP fund within the given financial
year and creation of Non-lapsable poo! for TSP fund, the same is to be decided
at appropriate level in the Government.”


18. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

“The efforts made by the Ministry to ensure optimum utilization of
allocated TSP fund within the given financial year and to create non-lapsable
pool for TSP fund may be intimated to PAC.”

19... The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their updated reply stated as under:-

“Nodal officers have been nominated in each line Ministry/Department and
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is taking meetings with these nodal officers under the
chairpersonship of Secretary (TA) to persuade the concerned
Ministries/Departments for full utilization of allocated funds. NITI Aayog has
observed that in India the system of cash-based budgeting is followed. However,
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is deliberating with NIT Aayog for an appropriate
decision with regard to optimum utilization of funds in line with the suggestions of
PAC.”

20. The Committee found that the modality to create non-lapsable pool for TSP
fund was not in vogue despite the revised TSP guidelines and the
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee. In this backdrop, the
Committee had urged the Minsity to make concerted efforts for optimal utilisation
of the allocated TSP fund within the respective financial year and non-lapsable
pool for TSP fund be createdat the earliest. The Committee note with
dissappointment that the Ministry have not addressed the focal point of their
recommendation and have merely apprised them about the nomination of nodal
officers in each Ministry/Department and the meetings they had with them for
fuller utilization of allocated funds along with their deliberations with NIT] Aayog
with regard to optimum utilization of funds. The Committee, while noting the
aforementioned efforts, desire that the Ministry, in coordination with NITI Aayog
should expeditiously take a well reasoned and pragmatic decision to ensure that
funds allocated under the TSP are judiciously and efficiently utilised.

In view of the lackadaisical approach exhibited by the Ministry in

prolonging a genuinely required policy for the judicious utilisation of allocated


funds even after the expiry of financial year, the Committee express their utmost
displeasure as the intent of the Committee through their recommendation was to
create non-lapsable pool for TSP fund while the response is completely silent
about it. The Committee while strongly reiterating their recommendation desire
that the Ministry gear up appropriately and initiate all possible measures for
creating a non-lapsable pool for TSP fund without any further delay. Details of
action taken may be intimated to the Committee.

Better Programme Management

(Recommendation Para No.4)

21. The Committee noted that full amount was not released for National Programme
for Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE), National Programme for Prevention & Control
of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases & Stroke (NPCDCS) due to high unspent
balance in these programme under TSP. The Committee found that, in the case of
NPHCE, there was lack of health care and training facilities and the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare had not conducted IEC and mass media activities to inform the
elders of different health risks and treatments. In the case of NPCDCS, there was lack
of activities for behaviour & Life style changes, non-screening of persons for early
diagnosis, deficiency in treatment facilities and training activities, non-establishment of
Tertiary Cancer Centre (TCCs); deficient treatment for infant diseases, etc. The
Committee were of the view that had the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare formulated
the comprehensive plan to spend the allocated fund under these programmes and
diversify the expenditure on IEC activities, training and health centres, health
counselling camps, screening and health checkups, etc., there would not have been any
unspent balance of funds and more importantly, these programmes would have
achieved their goals. The Committee, therefore recommended that hence forth, while
formulating a comprehensive plan for the implementation of these programme, the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should take into consideration IEC activities for
widening the reach of these programmes through awareness, trainings and health
counselling, health centres and innovative and interactive activities etc., so as to ensure
effective and efficient utilization of the allocated funds under NPHCE and NPCDCS for
betterment of the intended beneficiaries.

22. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health & Family
Welfare) in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“(i) National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS):

“Ue


The Government of India is implementing National Programme for
Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and
Stroke (NPCDCS) for interventions up to District level under the National Health
Mission (NHM). It has focus on awareness generation for behaviour and life-style
changes, screening and early diagnosis of persons with high level of risk factors
and their treatment and referral (if required) to higher facilities for appropriate
management for Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs).

The programme was revamped after 11" Five Year Plan. During 12" FYP,
the focus of the programme was on the PAN India coverage on health promotion,
prevention, detection, treatment and rehabilitation services at decentralised level
up to district hospital & below level under the overall umbrella of National Health
Mission (NHM) for primary and secondary level health care services.

Strategy for implementation of the programme comprised focus on Health
promotion, awareness generation and promotion of healthy life style, screening
and early detection, timely, affordable and accurate diagnosis, access to
affordable treatment, rehabilitation. Strategy for early diagnosis comprised
opportunistic screening of persons above the age of 30 years for diabetes and
hypertension, with health care facility, for village, sub-centre, CHC and District
hospital.

Under the programme, testing, diagnosis and treatment facilities for
cancer (Oral, Cervix, Breast), diabetes and hypertension are provided through
different levels of healthcare by setting up NCD Clinics in District Hospitals and
Community Health Centres (CHCs). The treatment is either free or highly
subsidized for the poor and needy. Till June, 2018; 525 District NCD Clinics,
2564 Community Health Centres NCD Clinics and 167 Cardiac Care Units have
been set up under the programme.

A population level initiative for prevention, control and screening for
common Non-Communicable Diseases (diabetes, hypertension and cancer viz.
oral, breast and cervical cancer) has been rolled out in over 150 districts of the
country in 2017-18 under NHM, as a part of comprehensive primary healthcare.
Under the initiative, frontline health workers such as Accredited Social Health
Activists (ASHA) and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANM), inter alia, are leveraged to
carry out screening and generate awareness about the risk factors of NCDs
among the masses. Training modules for screening have been launched and
distributed to the States. State-level trainings are organized for implementing the
programme. Funds for training of health professionals i.e. MOs, ASHAs, ANMs,
Staff Nurses, Multi Purpose Health Workers (MPHWs) are also being provided to
States under the initiative.............. Under NPCDCS, funds are also being
allocated to the States/UTs in the State PIPs for awareness, training, health
counselling to the health centres for innovative and interactive activities etc. for

ना


betterment of the intended beneficiaries including scheduled tribes. Budgetary
allocation for IEC activities has also been increased from Rs.10 lakh per State
NCD Cell to Rs. 70 lakh (24 bigger States) & Rs.50 lakh (small States/UTs).
States have developed many modes for IEC viz. pamphlets, banners, posters,
teaching manuals along with audio-visual and visual means. World Cancer Day
and World Diabetes Day are also observed to generate public awareness to
promote healthy lifestyle habits.

(ii) National Programme for the Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE):

‘NPHCE, since 2015-16, is being implemented under NCD flexible pool of
National health Mission (NHM) for implementation of district and sub- district
activities of the programme on the basis of Programme Implementation Plan
(PIP) submitted by the States/UTs and examined by this Ministry. The flexible
pool was introduced to utilize the optimum funds released under the pool for
implementation of the activities and goals envisaged under the programme.
However, observation of the Committee will be complied with while considering
the IEC activities for widening the reach of NPHCE through awareness, training
and health counselling, health centres and innovative and interactive activities
etc.

23. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

“Utilisation of allocated funds against the allocation and achievement
against the target may be intimated to PAC.”

24. 116 Ministry in their updated reply submitted as under:-

“Allocation & Expenditure is given at Annexure: “A” Physical Target &
achievement is attached at: Annexure: “B

25. The Committee had emphasised that while formulating a comprehensive
plan for the implementation of National Programme for Health Care for the Elderly
(NPHCE), National Programme for Prevention & Control of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular Diseases & Stroke (NPCDCS), the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare) should take into consideration
the significance of Information Education and Communication (IEC) activities for
widening the reach of these programmes through awareness, training and health

counselling, health centres and innovative and interactive activities, etc. This

-th-


would go a long way in ensuring targeted and efficient utilization of the allocated
funds under NPHCE and NPCDCS for betterment of the intended beneficiaries. In
their action taken reply, the Ministry inter-alia have apprised that for NPCDCS,
funds are being allocated to the States/UTs in the Programme Implementation
Plans (PIPs) of the State for awareness, training, health counselling to the health
centres for innovative and interactive activities for better outreach of the intended
beneficiaries including Scheduled Tribes. Further, the budgetary allocation for
IEC activities has also been increased from Rs.10 lakh per State NCD Cell to
Rs.70 lakh (for 24 bigger States) and २5.50 lakh (for small States/UTs).
Accordingly, States have developed many modes for IEC viz. pamphlets, banners,
posters, teaching manuals along with audio-visual and visual means. World
Cancer Day and World Diabetes Day are also observed to generate public
awareness 50 as to promote healthy lifestyle habits. However, the Committee are
surprised to note that regarding National Programme for the Health Care for the
Elderly (NPHCE), the Ministry have casually indicated that the observation of the
Committee will be complied while considering the IEC activities for widening its
reach. This is not acceptable to the Committee as the emphasis to adopt IEC was
for both the programmes. Moreover, IEC was to act as a medium for innovative
and interactive activities so that effective and efficient utilization of the allocated
funds are ensured. The Committee express their displeasure with the half baked
reply and impress upon the Ministry to take expeditious steps for introduction of
IEC for NPHCE too and they be informed accordingly of the visible outcome and
the impact it has brought on fuller utilisation of funds for both the programmes at

the earliest.

न


A perusal of the statement on allocation and expenditure of funds and
achievements of physical targets under Non-Communicable Diseases Flexi Pool
during the period from 2015-16 to 2018-19 reveal that out of the allocated fund of
Rs.1,84,204 lakh only Rs. 82,626.46 lakh could be spent, indicating thereby that
there was huge under utilisation of funds as only 44.85 percent could be utilised.
The Committee also observed that there has been mismatch between the set
physical target and the achievements made therein during the said period (2015-
16 to 2018-19) for NPCDCS. For the District Non-Communicable Disease Cell, out
of the target of 687 only 543 could be achieved (79 percent). The achievement for
District Non-Communicable Disease Clinic was 585 out of 698 i.e. 86 percent
whereas the achievement made for Critical Care Unit was 168 out of 245 i.e. 68
percent. As far the achievement in regard to Day Care Centres, it was 168 out of
276 i.e. 60 percent whereas for the CHC-NCD Clinics, the achievement was 3084
out of 4241 i.e. only 72 percent achievement. Analysing this, the Committee are
constrained to conclude that the financial and physical performance of the
programmes were not upto the mark and the efforts being undertaken by the
Ministry definitely require a push forward. The Committee, therefore, desire to be
apprised of the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance and the concerted
efforts that have been made/need to be made by the Ministry to efficiently utilise
the fund allocated for the programmes. The Committee also desire to be apprised
of the performance of the programme since 2018-19 till date.

Central Nodal Unit for Overview

(Recommendation Para No.6)

26. The Committee noted that as per the guidelines of Planning Commission (2006),
TSP was to be implemented by constitution of dedicated unit in every
Ministry/Department. The Committee had however, noted that that there were delays in

157


formation of nodal units in the Ministries/Departments. In addition, the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs were neither involved in the annual planning exercise nor were there any
guidelines detailing the processes for an oversight. As the basic objective of Tribal Sub-
Plan is to channelize the flow of outlays from Central Ministries/Departments by
earmarking funds for the development of Scheduled Tribes in the States, at least in
proportion to their population; the Committee had emphasised that a central unit for
oversight was an absolute necessity and recommended that as suggested by NITI
Aayog, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should create a central nodal unit for oversight so as
to facilitate better co-ordination and efficient implementation of TSP through an online
monitoring system.

27. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“Allocation of Business Rules (ABR) has now been amended in January,
2017 whereby Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) has been given mandate for
monitoring of STC funds of Central Ministries based on the framework and
mechanism designed by NITI Aayog. TSP Division of the Ministry is acting as a
central unit to facilitate better co-ordination and efficient implementation of TSP.
An online monitoring system has been put in place with web
address https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages monitoring of allocations
for welfare of STs under the schemes, monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis
allocations, monitoring of physical performance and outcome monitoring. Further,
nodal officer has been nominated in the line Ministries / Departments for
coordination and monitoring.”

28. No further comments from Audit.
29. The Committee had opined that a central unit for oversight, is an absolute

necessity and had recommended that as suggested by NITI Aayog, the Ministry of
Tribal Affairs should create a central nodal unit to facilitate better co-ordination
and efficient implementation of TSP through an online monitoring system. The
Committee note from the action taken reply that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have
amended the Allocation of Business Rules (ABR) in January, 2017 as per the
mechanism designed by NITI Aayog and they have been given the mandate to
monitor the Scheduled Tribe Component (STC) funds of Central Ministries. The
Committee also note that TSP Division is the central unit to facilitate better co-

ordination and efficient implementation of TSP and an online monitoring system

-


has been put in place to monitor allocation of funds, physical performance and
outcome of ST Schemes. Moreover, a nodal officer has also been nominated for
better coordination between Ministries/Departments. The Committee, while
appreciating the initiative taken by the Ministry desire that they be apprised of the
outcome that has been achieved as a consequence of the amendment made in
January, 2017 whereby the Ministry have been given the mandate to monitor the
Scheduled Tribe Component (STC) funds of Central Ministries and the trickle

down impact it has made on the performance of the Tribal Sub Plan since 2017.

Inclusive online Monitoring System

(Recommendation Para No.9)

30. The Committee noted that monitoring of TSP of Central Ministries/Departments
would be by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and accordingly the Ministry was developing an
online monitoring system for Central Ministries/ Departments. The system would
encompass monitoring of fund allocations and expenditure and achievement of physical
targets i.e. scheme-wise performance of each Ministry/Department. The Committee
were of the view that in order to ensure implementation of programmes under TSP as
per guidelines and also to ensure flow of benefits to the tribals, it is imperative for nodal
units at the Central level as well as the State level to have real time information sharing
system. The Committee had also opined that online monitoring system only at the
Central Ministries/Departments would be incomplete and ineffective as the Ministry was
unable to gain/collect/gather information on the actual needs of the tribals at the grass
root level. The Committee, therefore, recommended that nodal units at the State level
as well as District level be included in the online monitoring system that was being
developed by the Ministry at the earliest. The Committee desired to be apprised of the
status report in that regard within six months of the presentation of this report.

31. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“An online monitoring system has been put in place with web
address https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages monitoring of
allocations for welfare of STs under the schemes, monitoring of
expenditure vis-a- vis allocations, monitoring of physical performance and
outcome monitoring. In the First phase, Central Ministries / Departments
have been linked to the https://stcmis.gov.in. This online system captures
the release data scheme-wise and also state-wise by the Central
Ministries / Departments.”

alt:


32. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

“The Ministry did not furnish the status of inclusion of the nodal units at the
State level and District level in the online monitoring system that has been
put in place. The same may be provided to PAC.”

33... The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their updated reply stated as under:-

“There is multiplicity of schemes and agencies, multiple implementation
guidelines, multiple physical and financial reporting structures. Also, within
each State, different Departments handle TSP funds. Thus, bringing
synergy and effecting convergence is a grave challenge. However,
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has given a project to Price Water House Cooper
(PWC) to work out a monitoring framework to be incorporated in the online
monitoring portal https://stcmis.gov.in.”

34. The Committee in their Report had recommended that nodal units at the
State level as well as District level be included in the online monitoring system at
the earliest and they be apprised of the same accordingly. The Ministry of Tribal
Affairs in their action taken reply have now submitted that a web address,
https://stcmis.gov.in has been put in place for online monitoring of allocations,
monitoring of physical performance and outcome of schemes. To bring about
synergy and convergence in monitoring by different Departments at different
levels, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have given a project to Price Water House
Cooper (PWC) to work out a monitoring framework to be incorporated in the
online monitoring portal. The Committee, while strongly believing that the project
given to Price Water House Cooper must have been completed by now, urge the

Ministry to apprise them of its outcome.

The Committee are however disheartened to note that the Ministry have
chosen to remain silent on the specific thrust made with regard to inclusion of
the nodal units at the State and District levels in the online monitoring system.

The Committee find that the Ministry have accepted that there is multiplicity of

न 16>


agencies which poses a grave challenge in bringing in nodal units. This logic in
itself vindicates the idea raised by the Committee as the issue of existence of
multiple agencies by itself, needs to be streamlined in accordance with the
requirement of monitoring. Therefore, the Committee find the response
absolutely unacceptable and further urge upon the Ministry, while reiterating the
recommendation, to address the issue on priority basis and be informed
accordingly.

35. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health & Family
Welfare) in their action taken reply to Recommendation Para No.9 of the Committee
stated as under:-

“The Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) software developed with the
support of NIC had some operational issues. Therefore, an enriched
version of the software is being developed with the support of external
agencies. This new software would facilitate the Ministry in receiving all
future PIPs electronically with separate disclosure on activities related to
Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). This software will act as an on line monitoring
system and would facilitate to assess the actual needs of the tribal’s at
ground level.”

36. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

“The latest status of the development and operationalization of the
software may be intimated to PAC.”

37. The Department of Health & Family Welfare in their updated reply stated as
under:-

“National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was launched in 2005 to provide
accessible, affordable and quality health care to the rural population
especially the vulnerable sections. One of the key features of NRHM
included interventions for improving health indicators. In 2013, the
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was subsumed under the National
Health Mission (NHM) as its Sub-Mission, along with National Urban
Health Mission (NUHM) as the other Sub-Mission.

Under NHM, tribal areas enjoy relaxed norms as under:


iii.

Relaxed norms for health facilities-The population norms for setting up
Health Facilities in tribal areas are relaxed. Against the population norms
of 5000, 30000, and 1,20,000 for setting up of Sub Centre, PHC and CHC
respectively, in tribal and desert areas its 3000, 20,000 and 80,000. A
new norm of "time to care” has also been adopted for setting up Sub
Health Centres in tribal areas under which a Sub Health Centre can be set
up within 30 minutes of walk from habitation.

States have been provided with the flexibility of relaxing the norm of one
ASHA per 1000 population to one ASHA per habitation in Tribal/hilly and
difficult areas.

While other States had Mobile Medical Units per 10.00 lakh populations
subject to capping of 5 MMUs per district, for tribal and hilly states this
could be relaxed as per need. The norms for MMU have been further
revised to relax the norm where one MMU exceeds 60 patients per day in
plain areas and 30 patients per day in tribal/hilly areas.

In addition, all tribal majority districts whose composite health index is
below the State average have been identified as High Priority Districts
(HPDs). These districts are to receive higher per capita funding, relaxed
norms, enhanced monitoring and focussed supportive supervision and
encouraged to adopt innovative approaches to address their peculiar
health challenges.

* The PIP software is in the process of development and after
incorporating feedback of the States/UTs, the User Acceptance Test
(UAT) and third party audit will be carried out before hosting the same
into server. This process may take some more time; however, the
Ministry is in the process of finalizing the software at the earliest.

Pending that, presently, all proposals under NHM from the States/UTs
are received electronically in the form of e-mails and excel files etc.
from the State/ UTs. Further, unique FMR code have been approved
for each activity.”

38. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

(Department of Health & Family Welfare) are in the process of developing a

Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) software for online monitoring to facilitate

the assessment of the actual needs of the tribals at ground level. The Committee,

while welcoming the initiative taken by the Ministry and also believing that by

-2o-


now the software must have been put in place, desire that they be apprised of the
outcome seen and experienced by the Ministry as a result of such initiatives and
the lessons learnt in the process that can be shared with other Ministries/
Departments. The Committee further urge the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (Department of Health & Family Welfare) to coordinate with the Ministry
of Tribal Affairs to ensure smooth interface with the monitoring mechanisms by

adopting the online mode.

Strengthening the Implementation of Mid-Day Meal Scheme

(Recommendation Para No. 11)

39. In the implementation of Mid-Day Meal (MDM) Scheme, the Committee found
that no Annual Work Plan & Budget was prepared nor was there any special plan or
projects for ST students. The Committee also noted about non-availability of kitchen
sheds, incomplete infrastructure in kitchens, inadequate. kitchen devices and
insufficient drinking water, exposure of children to health hazards as the meals were
being prepared and served in open and un-hygienic conditions; absence of grievance
redressal mechanism, etc. The Department of School Education & Literacy had stated
that schools have population of all categories of children i.e. General, SC & ST and Mid
Day Meal is provided to all students on school days irrespective of their caste. The
Department had further submitted that all States had public grievances redressal
mechanism and grievances, if any, were promptly resolve. The Committee felt that the
Department had not conducted proper inspection of all concerned States/Districts to
gauge the actual state of affairs in the implementation of MDMs across the country, in
terms of schools and infrastructure being used for MDMs, quality of food, construction of
kitchens as per guidelines etc. The Committee, therefore had recommended that the
Department should either constitute a team of its own or engage an independent
agency to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under MDM Scheme for requisite
remedial action wherever warranted. The Committee desired that they be apprised of
the action taken by the Department within six months of the presentation of this report.

40. The Department of School Education and Literacy in their action taken reply to
Recommendation stated as under:-

“Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B)

The States and UTs submit their AWP&B for consideration and approval
by PABMDM headed by the Secretary, Department of School Education &
Literacy, MHRD, Government of India are consisting of Members from the

~2t-


line Ministries viz. Ministry of Women & Child Development; Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, NITI Aayog, Ministry
of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation etc. The AWP&B
is prepared through bottom up approach starting from smallest field unit
and compiled at Cluster, Block, District and State. The AWP&P is a
comprehensive document and provides data on enrolment of children in
elementary classes I-VIII in Government and Government aided schools,
Special Training Centres and Madrasas and Maqtabs supported under
Samagra Shiksha.

The AWP&B contains information on Budget Provision made by the States
& UTs for General category, Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and
Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). The AWP8B is prepared by bottom up approach
by compiling information obtained from the grass root level and
consolidated in the District Plan and State Plan. No separate Plan is
submitted by the States and UTs for General Category, SCSP and TSP.
However, keeping in view the nutritional requirement in tribal areas, the
approval of the Cabinet has been obtained for providing supplementary
nutrition to the children studying in the schools in these areas. Further,
10.70% of the Plan budget of MDM is allocated for TSP in the Demands
for Grants of MHRD. However, Central Government has issued
instructions that TSP allocation is not reappropriated to augment the
provisions of other heads of accounts for General Category and SCSP.
The unutilised TSP funds cannot be utilised for General categories and
SCSP. Therefore, the TSP allocations is utilised for the States and UTs for
covering the eligible children under TSP.

Kitchen-cum-Stores Release of non-recurring Central Assistance to the
States and UTs for construction of Kitchen-cum-stores was started from
2006-07. MHRD released non-recurring central assistance of
Rs.802555.79 lakh during 2006-07 to 2013-14 for constructions of
1006263 kitchen-cum-stores (Annexure-1). The Statement indicating the
number of kitchen-cum-stores constructed till 317 March, 2014 is enclosed
at Annexure-ll which indicates that 67% of the sanctioned kitchen-cum-
stores were constructed; construction work was in progress in 13%
kitchen-cum-stores and construction was yet to start in the remaining 21%
schools.

The pace of construction of kitchen-cum-stores was regularly reviewed
during the meetings of the Programme Approval Board-Mid Day Meal
(PAB-MDM). The States and UTs informed in these meetings that due to
the increase in the cost of construction, they were unable to construct the
kitchen-cum-stores which were sanctioned between 2006-07 to 2008-09

<Q2-


on unit cost norms @ Rs.60,000/- each. These States desired that they
may be provided additional central assistance or resanction these kitchen-
cum-stores on plinth area norms as per State's Schedule of Rates (SoRs).
The request of the States and UTs was considered and agreed by PAB-
MDM. The total number of kitchen-cum-stores sanctioned from 2006-07 to
2018-19 is 10,11,411. The slight change in the number of kitchen-cum-
stores sanction till 2013-14 and up to 2018-19 is due to the fact that some
States had either surrendered or requested for less number of kitchen-
cum-stores on plinth area norms against the kitchen-cum-stores
previously sanctioned on unit cost norms. As per the information
submitted by the States till 318 March, 2019, the States and UTs have
constructed 8,45,424 (84%) kitchen-cum-stores, whereas construction in
50,449 (5% approx) is under progress and work is yet to start for the
remaining 11% kitchen-cum-stores (Annexure-lil). The component of
tepair of 10-year-old kitchencum-stores has also been approved by the
CCEA in February, 2019. This has enabled the States and UTs to carry
out repairs for the kitchen-cum-stores constructed 10 or more years ago.

Kitchen Devices

For preparation and serving of cooked meal under Mid-Day Meal Scheme,
MHRD started the release of non-recurring Central Assistance to the
States and UTs for procurement of kitchen devices @ Rs 5,000 for each
school. The replacement of kitchen devices sanctioned five years earlier
was also started during 2012-13. MHRD had released central assistance
of Rs.88084.04 lakh for the procurement of 1240431 units of kitchen
devices and replacement of 521841 kitchen devices till March, 2013-14
(Annexure- IV). As per latest statement till September, 2019, MHRD has
sanctioned central assistance of Rs.115664.21 lakh for 2321094
(procurement of 1314427 and replacement of 1006667) kitchen devices
(Annexure - V). The norms for procurement and replacement of kitchen
devices have been revised with the approval of CCEA in February, 2019.
Now the grant for kitchen devices has been linked with enrolment in place
of previously unit cost norm of Rs 5000/- per school.

Drinking Water

The drinking water facilities in schools are provided in convergence with
the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. As per the information
furnished by the States, the drinking water facility was available in 94% of
the schools till. 2013-14. This has increased to 97% during 2018-19.
Relevant statements on the State and UT wise availability of drinking
water is at Annexures- VI and VII.

2b -


Inspections

As per MDM Guidelines at least 25% schools should be visited for,
inspections in each quarter. The State-wise information on the number of
institutes inspected during 2018-19 is enclosed at Annexure- VIII. The
information reveals that the inspections in the States and UTs of Andhra
Pradesh, Assam. Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Lakshadweep are not up to the mark. These States and UTs
have been advised to inspect the institutes on regular basis.

Grievance Redressal Mechanism

The status of Grievance Redressal Mechanism in States and UTs is
enclosed at Annexure-IX.

Monitoring Mechanism

Management Information System was developed In June, 2012 for web
based monitoring of the Mid Day Meal Scheme. The States and UTs have
also rolled out Automated Monitoring System for near real time monitoring
of the Scheme. The States and UTs have been advised to set up
Management Structures at State, District, Block and school levels. The
existing Monitoring Mechanism of Mid Day Meal Scheme is enclosed at
Annexure-X. At present the scheme is being evaluated by the NITI
Aayog.”

41. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:-

“Ministry has not provided the details of action taken on the PAC’s

recommendation on constituting a team of its own or engaging an independent
agency to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under MDM Scheme. The
same may be furnished to PAC.“

42. The Department of School Education and Literacy in their updated reply stated

as under:-

“The Mid Day Meal Scheme (MDMS) covers about 11.59 crore enrolled
children studying in 11.34 lakh schools in India. As per MDM guidelines,
all schools must be visited atleast once for inspection in a year.

In compliance of the recommendation of PAC, this Department has
initiated the process of framing guidelines for strengthening of monitoring
mechanism by engaging the services of reputed independent
Agencies/Institutes like National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), home science
departments of Central/State Agriculture Universities, reputed home
science colleges on a clearly defined Terms of Reference (ToR) and

-24्‌-


timelines for independent 37 party thorough inspection and monitoring of
the implementation of Mid Day Meal Scheme.

Keeping the spirit of PAC’s recommendation, the ToRs will be designed
in such a manner that every district in the country is covered each year.
These will also include tracking of children's nutritional and health
parameters to provide timelines and trend lines in order to assess the
impact of the scheme and to facilitate timely interventions for course
correction.”

43. The Committee had noted that that the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of School Education and Literacy) had not conducted
proper inspection of all concerned States/Districts to gauge the actual state of
affairs in the implementation of MDMs across the country, in terms of schools
and infrastructure being used for MDMs, quality of food, construction of kitchens
as per guidelines etc. Taking these into cognisance, they had recommended that
the Department should either constitute a team of its own or engage an
independent agency to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under MDM
Scheme for requisite remedial action wherever warranted and they be informed
accordingly. The Committee note from the action taken reply that a number of
measures to improve the implementation of the Mid Day Meal Scheme (MDMS)
have been taken by the Department as the physical progress of construction of
kitchen-cum-stores (Primary and Upper Primary) and availability of gas based
cooking, drinking water and toilet facility in schools have improved since 2013-
14, However, only a few States/UTs have achieved 100 percent target as of 2018-
19 on the various provisions made under MDMS. The Committee, therefore are of
the opinion that further efforts need to be made by all States/UTs towards

achieving 100 percent target and recommend that the Department may

< QS-


accordingly impress upon them towards achieving this end and Committee be

informed accordingly.

The Committee also note that the Department had initiated the process of
framing guidelines to strengthen the monitoring mechanism by engaging the
services of reputed independent Agencies/Institutes like National Institute of
Nutrition(NIN), home science departments of Central/State Agriculture
Universities, reputed Home Science colleges on a clearly defined Terms of
Reference (ToR) and timelines for independent Third Party thorough inspection
and monitoring of the implementation of Mid Day Meal Scheme, ToR was to be
designed to ensure that every district is covered each year and would include
tracking of children’s nutritional and health parameters to facilitate impact
assessment of the Scheme and timely interventions for course correction. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of Third Party interventions in
the monitoring mechanisms and the measures taken by the Department towards
improving the implementation of the MDM Scheme across the country and the

benefits it has brought to the Scheduled Tribe Population.

Involvement of Local Community in the Planning Process

(Recommendation Para No.12)

44. Audit had highlighted that planning for implementation of Schemes was deficient
as the plans were formulated without specific consideration of tribal beneficiaries as
required under TSP. The Committee felt the need to strengthen the planning process
with the involvement of the community especially in tribal dominant blocks. The
Committee had opined that it is imperative to identify and prioritize issues/concerns of
the local community in the planning and decision making process. The Committee
therefore had recommended that inputs/suggestions of local tribal community should be
sought before finalizing the plan for implementation of any programme under the TSP.
The Committee were of the view that such initiative would enable the implementing
agency to pin point issues that need special attention and devote additional fund,

-d6-


human resources and time for resolution of the same and ensure flow of benefits to
tribal communities under the respective programmes/schemes.

45. 116 Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“As per guidelines for State TSP dated 18.06.2014 issued by erstwhile
Planning Commission it is stipulated that Tribal Welfare Department is the
nodal department authorized to lead the process of TSP development at
the State level. While formulating State TSP, State Nodal Department
shall ensure that TE? should be formulated at the District level by the
District Planning and Monitoring Committee (DPMC). DPMC must reflect
on the actual demand for the schemes / programmes that are to benefit
STs, giving priority to equity aspect of their local aspirations and socio-
economic backwardness.

While issuing Sanction orders by this Division, one of the conditions is that
State Government shall ensure that concerned Panchayati Raj Institutions
should be duly informed about the projects / programmes relating to Tribal
Development to be implemented in the area of jurisdiction. State
Government shall also ensure that meetings of Gram Sabha are
conducted on regular interval as per norms in such areas.

46. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“Ministry may intimate PAC about the mechanism put in place to ensure
that inputs/suggestions of local tribal community have been sought and
incorporated in the plan as recommended by the PAC.”

47. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their updated action taken replies stated as

under:-

“As stated above, while issuing Sanction orders by the Ministry, one of the
conditions is that State Government shall ensure that concerned
Panchayati Raj Institutions should be duly informed about the
projects/programmes relating to Tribal Development to be implemented in
the area of jurisdiction. State Government shall also ensure that meetings
of Gram Sabha are conducted on regular interval as per norms in such
areas”

48. The Committee had opined that it is imperative to identify and prioritize

issues/concerns of the local community in the planning and decision making

process and recommended that their inputs/suggestions should be sought before

finalizing the plan for implementation of any programme under TSP. The

Committee note from the action taken reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs that

-24-


while issuing Sanction orders by the Ministry, one of the conditions is that State
Government shall ensure that concerned Panchayati Raj Institutions are duly
informed about the projects/programmes relating to tribal development to be
implemented in their areas and shall also ensure that meetings of Gram Sabha
are conducted at regular intervals as per norms. However, the desired
information regarding the issue of incorporating local community felt needs and
their suggestions in the Plan are conspicuously absent. The Committee find this
unacceptable and while again acknowledging the importance of taking the local
community in confidence in formulating and implementing any project, reiterate
their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to furnish information on
steps taken to address the specific point raised by the Committee in their Report

and they be apprised accordingly.

49. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health & Family
Welfare) in their action taken reply to Recommendation Para No.12 of the Committee
stated as under:-

“Under National Health Mission, bottom-up approach is expected for
preparing the Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) for States. The
Framework for implementation of NHM provides for decentralised
planning. Untied grants are provided to Village Health Sanitation and
Nutrition Committees to enable local planning and action. Further, under
NHM, States have been asked to provide higher per capita allocation to
High Priority Districts that cover all Tribal Districts with composite health
index below the State average.”

50. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“Reply of the Ministry does not address the recommendation of the PAC.
Specific reply may be furnished to PAC.”

51. The Department of Health & Family Welfare in their updated reply stated as
under:-

“Under the National Health Mission, support is provided to States/UTs for
strengthening their healthcare system based on proposal incorporated in
their State Programme Implementation Plan (PIP). The State PIPs are

-2E-


envisaged to be an aggregate of the district/city health action plans, and
include activities to be carried out at the state level.

District Health Action Plans developed through district based planning
utilizing locally generated service data, civil registration etc is a key pillar
under NHM. Decentralized planning using data has following benefits:

+ It ensures active community participation including tribal
population participation to identify local Health needs and ways
to address them.

+ It also enables mobilization of resources from sectors other than
health.

* ‘It brings community closer to the health system and provides a
platform for interaction of community members with health
service providers.

+ It enables health system to get feedback from the community to
improve quality of services and utilization of services offered.

+ Programmes based on evidence are likely to be more effective
and successful.

Letter has been issued to the states that the local tribal communities
should be involved in the planning for development of health action plans
in scheduled tribal districts. (Copy enclosed)

52. To ensure involvement of the local tribal community in the planning and
decision making process in TSP Scheme implementation, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare (Department of Health & Family Welfare) in their action taken
note have informed that the State Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) are an
aggregate of the district/city health action plans and include activities to be
carried out at the State Level. Further, the District Health Action Plans are
developed through district based planning utilizing locally generated service
data, civil registration, etc. under the National Health Mission (NHM). In addition,
the Department have also instructed States to involve local tribal communities in
the planning for development of Health Action Plans in the scheduled tribal
districts. The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken towards involving
the local tribal communities in the planning process, wish to be apprised of the

mechanism that has been put in place by the Department to check compliance of


हे the same by the States. The Committee are also of the view that while empirical
data is important in the planning process, first hand inputs and suggestions from
the local tribal community are also of equally vital importance in formulating a
complete plan for the welfare of tribal people in the country. The Committee,
therefore desire that interactive sessions and meeting may be conducted at
periodic intervals to hear the views of the tribal local community as well as
educate them on healthy and hygienic living by the concerned officials involved

in the process regarding the health schematic interventions.

-2906 -


Annexure-A

NC D Flexi Pool हु
Statewise Release under NCD Flexi pool during FY 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 & 2018-19
(Rs.in Lakh)

Central Release Under NCD Flexi Pool Expenditure # (NPCDCS)
State/UT | 2018-
81. | 2018-16 | 2016-17 | 2017-18 | 2018-19 | 2015-16 2016-17 | 2017-18 | (७
No
A. High Focus |
States |
1... Bihar | | 467.82
2 | Chhatisgarh 4012.76 |
3 Jharkhand | 3204.74 |
Madhya i |
4... Pradesh |
5 | Odisha — “4
8. Rajashthan “| ae 740.5
7 UitarPradesn 5439) 81 938.48 | 2909.59 [mae 57 |
“Sub-Total (A) 16582 | 20: 36538 | = 4670.03 | 7258.13 | 4245.51 |
B. Hilly States | _ | हु आओ
' Himachal ————T? हु 7 का |
8 Pradesh हा | 8 324 644 605. 403.08 | _ 76.92 | 160.69 | 257.66 |
Jammu & | | |
9... Kashmir ' 816 | 1459 | 235 | | 1469.46 |
10 Uttarakhand | 552 | 659 | & “| 296.28
Sub-Total (8). 1986 2673 | उ87 | 3259 883.77 305.
दे का । ' न जन min pas
States |
: Andnra- ~~ हर 7 | -_ ~ |
11... Pradesh 675.31 | 1276.18 |
12. Telangana 15.54 “375.44 |
13 Goa =m 98 3
14° Gujarat "4470.8
15 Haryana LL 266.48
16 Karnataka 1479.76
7 Kerala 873.12 | 2 9.72
i | | .
48 Maharashtra » 2754 3768 | 6208 | 1234.94 2 _|
19 Punjab 677) हठ5 | 1728 | 1182 । 289.89 |
है एड ह _ 3278.1 |
20 TamilNadu | 1716.00, | 2145 [| 54 2775.15 8. हि 7 a
21 - West Bengal | 4363 | 2485 19 I 1819.1 |

Lae


1

22 | Chandigarh | 69 | 46 109 84 18.95 28.26 28.19 1.09
23 | Delhi 223 564 1289 395 18.58 14.07 9.03 6.17
24 | Puducherry 29 39 125 137 13.64 104.93 18.37 | 45.22

Sub- Total (C) 13745 | 19426 | | 38515 | | 18455 | 8119.61 9588.06 4762.88 | 13020.29 |

D. Union

Territories

Andaman &

Nicobar
25 | Islands 55 121 108 | | 2.2 28.13 54.21

Dadra &
26 | Nagar Haveli 63 82 | ७ | 62 37.93 65.67 28.05 34.9
27 | Daman & Diu 35 39 19 | 0 | | o | [| 0 | 5.74 44
28 | Lakshadweep 7 | 0 | ; 0 | | 0 | 3.18 0.76 | 0 | [0 |

Sub- Total (0) [| 160 | [| 242 | | 216 | | 62 | 41.11 68.63 | 61.92 | | 93.51 |

E. North-

Eastern High

Focus States

Arunachal
29 | Pradesh 570 841 1606 974 128.47 493.82 | 270.52 | 382.06
30 | Assam 3578 5533 6046 1113 | 890.69 | 1279.07 | 369.04 | 517.62
31 | Manipur 308 250 675 416 63.69 123.12 94.46 200.6
32 | Meghalaya 246 531 779 | 0 | 42.36 153.54 77.08 | 129.57
33 | Mizoram 142 214 1297 356 149.16 316.97 12.96 65.88
34 | Nagaland 263 183 637 304 217.04 99.94 43.76 | 254.94
35 | Sikkim 95 158 115 159 103.19 69.19 64.4 106.32
36 | Tripura 255 266 821 664 47.79 172.54 | 264.06 | 209.06

Sub-Total (E) 5457 7976 11976 3986 | 1642.39 | 2708.19 1196.28 1866.05

Grand-Total

(A+B+C+D +E) 37900 50471 | ५७०४० | | ५4०७५ | | ।83569 | 19928.78 | 10964.48 | 36376.29

# NPCDCS Programme has been Subsumed under NCD Flexi Pool from 2015-16
onward. Release (Central) of funds under the Flexi Pool of NCD is for 5 programmes
(including NPCDCS) and expenditure of NPCDCS has been shown as reported by the
States/UTs including Centre & States/UTs share.



“BS -

Annexure-B
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS)

As on March, 2019

Approved up to 2018-19 Achievement upto 2018-19
ie
No. a State | District | District Day CHC | State | District | District Day | cue NcD
NCD NCD NCD | CCU] Care NCD | NCD NCD NCD ccu Care Clinic
Cell Cell Clinic Center | Clinic | Cell Cell Clinic Center
Andhra
[1 | Pradesh 1 13 13 12 12 | 20 | 1 13 13 7 | o | 193
Arunachal
2 Pradesh 1 20 20 3 3 54 1 18 18 0 | | o | 49
3 Assam 1 27 27 11 7 123 1 14 14 5 5 79
4 Bihar 1 38 38 12 22 63 1 38 30 [| 6 | | 0 | | 0 |
5 | enhattisgar) 1 27 27 se | 1 | 136 | 4 27 27 1 2 | 8 |
| 6 | Goa 1 2 2 2 2 [9 | 4 1 2 2 2 4
7 Gujarat 1 33 33 13 16 123 1 19 wo | 5 | 2 | 6 |
| 38 | Haryana 1 21 13 | 8 | | 8 | 149 1 13 20 | 8 | | 8 | 62
Himachal
3 | Pradesh 1 12 12 Ls | 7 | 2 | 4 12 12 11 11 146
Jammu &
10 Kashmir 1 22 22 12 7 56 1 14 14 | | 5 36
11 Jharkhand 1 24 24 3 110 1 23 21 1 | 658 |
12__| Karnataka 1 30 30 10 | 9 | 243 1 28 29 | 5 | 5 201
13 Kerala 1 14 14 11 14 317 1 14 14 4 16 85
Madhya
14° | pradesh 1 51 51 10 10 | 6 | 4 | ६5 | 51 5 51 51
1s | Maharashtr | 35 34 | 18 | 23 | 686 | 1 34 34 2 | 10 447
16 Manipur 1 16 16 2 10 22 1 11 11 1 1 5



17 Meghalaya 1 7 7 1 1 14 1 4 4 1 2 8
18 Mizoram 1 | 8 | | 8 | 2 2 15 1 | 85 | | 8 | 2 2 10
19 Nagaland 1 11 11 1 1 | 5 | 1 11 11 1 2 | 5 |
20 | Odisha 1 30 30 12 12 247 1 30 30 5 30 62
21 [Punjab | 1 22 22 23 18 140 1 22 22 14 3 192
22 Rajasthan 1 33 33 | 8 | | 8 | 227 1 33 33 | 8 | | 5 | 227
23 Sikkim 1 4 4 2 2 2 1 4 2 2 1 | 2 |
24 Tamil Nadu 1 32 32 32 32 664 1 32 32 32 | 0_| 664
25 __| Telangana 1 14 30 2 7 74 1 12 7 2 1 21
26 | Tripura 4 | 5 | | 5 | 2 2 56 1 | 8 | | 85 | | o | | o | 23
Uttar
27 Pradesh 1 75 75 7 5 427 1 53 55 | o | | ० | 234
2g | iteraknan | 1 13 13 2 2 35 1 1 1 | o | | ० | | 8 |
West 3
29 Bengal 1 27 27 10 14 8 1. 27 27 | 3 | 1 38
Andaman
30 & Nicobar 1 3 2 1 | ० | | 3 | 4 | oo | | ० | | ० | | ० | | ० |
31 | Phandigar | 1 Lo | 1 0 | | ० | 3 |1 |_० | 1 | ० | | ० | 3
Dadar &
32 Nagar 1 | 1 | श्र 1 1 | 1 |] | | |
Haveli
33. | paman& | 1 1 2 Lo | oo | 2 1 oo | | ० | Lo | | o | oo |
34 Lakshadwe 1 Lo | 1 1 4 3 4 [oo | | ० | 0 | | o | Lo |
35 Delhi 1 11 11 [| 0 | | 0 | | 0 | 1 | 0 | | 0 | | 0 | | 0 | [| 0 |
36 | Puducherry | 41 | 3 | 4 | 1 1 4 1 4 4 1 | o | 4
Grand Total | 36 | 687 698 | 245 | 276 4241 | 36 | | 543 | | 585 | | 168 | 168 3084

“31-



ayer me

. ; ५ Araceone 4,

. . : , . @

Delails of Central Assistance released and utilised for Construction of Kitchen Gum Store under Mid-Day Meat Scheme during 2006-07 to 2013-14

Rs ta lakh)
on
2 State Novot Kitchen sheds sanctioned @ Rs. 60000 per ७०४४०, of kitchen sheds sanctloned on plinth ance monme 3० per State Scheduled of rates | Tote! No.of ‘Kite nto
(2008-07 2007-08 | 2008-04 2008-40 (2016-44 2944-42 [ea] 43 2013-16 } ‘2013-44
H | Unit ये Amount [Unit | Amount | Unit [Amount [Unie Amount [ Unit [Amount | Unit [Amount | Unk [Amount) Unit [Amount| Unit] Amount है
Cr es es 571 ह&77 [as es a EF उठ | ae et [ 76 1 a et
n-NER State
[4 Tanchra Prodash {foi soszusi|”seszel 18056 80] Oo a | [23 PEG 75283] 58166.86)
2 [Star हा | 150507_ 968,75] 15058 2035.45)" 31070] 1ह6658.80| 1 a) 7 80 0.00 3786। न्वि्ला माउस '11335.14] 573] 553,14] 55558 45183.05|
[3 “ichhatdsgan §570|""3342,26| 6016; 3609.60] 26727] 18085 20) [of 00011 0 eon as] arass| 30025,
[151 हिक्शा 7-7 का ए 0.00] ol उता of 9,00] 0 ता of का [at o.00} कला [of 000]
[5 }Gufarar | e378} 3700 58] ता | 0.50|1_ 8303] 9303) 6584.20) 4247 | 3475.07 | {of [oy {of Saat Sis. 72) 28077] ~23203,15]
§Horyana 3185] 4911,28 673, 523.80] [a | ___d.col T425|"S275.45] } of [6.057 oO} 1 1185! rs
[7_[himachal Predosh | Sasa 2059.80] वा 282 ties) evecol ait tap sal [of 0.63 a] — j——— 414955 EI
| 8" [Jenmu & Kashmir | b087| 2082 76 [_¥25["435.00{ 0} एका- हा EX) 0 007 Teg Tet) 6393.53,
[9 mnarkhand ~~ ल्सा | "ss22.ta{ 70354) ह212301 उठती —a706.co, Sea [3270.00 of __a.col seo] 36051] ""40845.48)
[761 —— soos! 8763.61) 18241] 7054460] of 0.05) 6] हवा. 7 87241 30184: Gr 2083.10) छा फ्इकछा- sae 585
आप 4sif 270.85] "egal _£50.40[" —~m_Ceay 78-7730 a 0.09) ‘or 0:00| [2480] 2544.55]
43 कि Pradesh 2321 15939,081 44583) उठ759 ता [2268] 17566 88, of 68067: 0.05] Ey 2.00 15531 "1574.26 2289) 2643.80) 6247.34)
iE —e hire | 48447" 13 ठो (17655 26] 37 £2.20) 39048[" 22825.65 [3362] 3427.08} | हल्ला छत, a 60001 7634.58] fr 81446.07}
iad lonsea. "पल 554.23] 26516! 15791.40] 18749] 4124040] becal dane oat [ol 9.00, a} re | 0578.87
(18 78७ 1 55711 1 2742.७0 052] [631.20] 12822] 7692.20) 524) £92.00] of o.aa} [of { 1165900॥
10_ JRejastian 8083) 4849.58) 4 40387] 24034.3_ j00as| 6616.16) a -) 0०51 [५ 1 77298] | 37155 95|
17 raminedy [487] [274,30 | आएगी 7287.40] 2282.40] 20551 18853 00[ [.: 0] [0.09] | x 14330] 26877. 28470] 45007.60)
[38 मर ~~ “asa उबर [._of cool o|_acol aang] | उठ13585 खछ्छ| 88|_ 3361] 5203.52, 7689] 17253 27]
19 fUlter Pradesh [33536] | 13751,63] 18195] 41519.40] _Saev6| aavas<5} | 00] ry a [| te2872[__75000.681
[20] [West Bengal} 2: 9792. 5573 28 7959) 3340.51 (art [2247485] 1... ०4191 17566. 581_ 7i9a 255. 881 S023] 7180.541 —— {_ 73726) 9652.60 | 83344: 85818.44)
From] : A7ere6] s07408.0%1 234587] 5318:301 ze teat} कहर छत haves Tal 88521 24530,0:1_ 77889] Sa80r.0d) उछूझ्ा GOISEAG] 31408 का [Petar
Ure with Ledleletzre ¢ [ a  ऑओऑऋ] हा
[24 leek | तू“ 7 Ey शक ) ख्याल का जज Oo 5 ठग 7 a) RE)
६ ख }Pucucieny, [oy 0.0 gl] रण 2 5.20! of ——o.00] 9, 0.00 of 900 | | pe | eal 5.29]
फिट at at [of 0.co उश छठ 76 | 0.9 0 5a} हा 00 808 56 8.06] of छा 7 छठ:
पर without Ceginiature a 0.59 ee | [of 0.09}
[23 TaaNisienge 77 [1 ० aca] [ol ००० हा [ व्यय तर कि | ठा उर्क  ऊा छा क्र रखछ | था आर्य 254 1295.60!
24 [Ghencigarhy | 3] गण 0.00) tol zal a 7) ee 0.00 F tg} es 10 23.34)
35 [DEN Haveil oi एव ol रण of arpa al 60 of 0० ७० ६६2] [sof 85:52
[28_[eman & Baa saa] 9] 0.00] af 000 ०0 o.00} ol 0.00] | 60.0 दा sal पता खऊका | 32] 39.39]
27 1#छउ>छक | ० a a हे a.5a{ of o.00] a ~a.00 0] 2.60 [0.00 |
hi | {36} a ar 0.00] 49) 23.34) a 000 01 Q 0,09) 324.52
NER Stetes sa
{28 [Arunachal Pradesh { आटा 145.20[ 70 1. ठ.का aS) | |) छठ्ता
C2 | lAssam 1 ता | 1.00 76७58 6028.80] 4613] [7449.72] | 8325] 40347. 18] -10347.18 |
(301 {Manipur 1५४६ [ 0! ___ 0.60} 0.60[ 0} 085] 1 हा [of
{37f [Megneaya _T [280.85 [ized] 1 रा540| | 7467] | _ of
[7327 |Mierem 7} [42.60 S01] — 540.60) [ss]
33_TNagatend 4.80[ 22) 43.20, हा 5 [4452.52] 0 0,09]
. [34] [Sikkim | 0| 1. 080 [55] 15540 o} ADE 0|_ 05091 Cy 0,09} Oo] 0.00] Ti] ies a2| छा 634.34,
38 पक TF [sea 16.60] Feat उक्त पतला {ol 0.cal 7740] —-aabe-say [eso] बह 301 53477 74713
कि 1 >> | 650,291 4046| ~7az7-col उठा | 12300.40[ zo [ 01951 पं 251.401 उत्साह 8650.42] 3,80} | 071 1020.27] 53169 इ1635:66
[GRAND yOTAL 7 5746 1 2308491] | 332563 211 (पट 237 03.49 | 2949 891 176%8766। 1 58417 191538:26; ELIA [4371.40] 88401 |"440779.82[ i077] 29060.05 [317s3) $3136.59) 008263, 802555.75)
Or Say, Re. In Crore [4325.63] 4337.09. 1768.69) 7016.36 437,74 4407.60) 489,60) [534.37] 8025.56;

“Roleasa the currondered amount to ules for construction of 18,875 kilchanceomate .


. हे 664
Dots
“~~
LL PHYSICAL PROGRESS ON CONSTRUCTION OF XITCHEN-CUM-STORES (PRIMARY #UPPER PRIMAR’
020/Desk-MDM No. of einen tu Physical Progess of Kitchen cum stores.as on 3103-2014
esk- Stores sanctione eae 77
1558/2 Sh Na, State/UT during 2006-07 to Constricted | in Progress Fog vet started
043-4 | Wo. | है [__ %& | | No. | [se [Nol %
[if [ss 7 [5६ 7 8 7 i [s| sd
pi] [Andhra Prager | Pradesh 75283; i2908[ a7 7868 30%| 54507] [724]
2 [Arunachal Pradesh [af 4085 [ 23%] गे OF ——-— 4 [iz]
| 3 | [Assam जा i | saat | sara] | हा 8811, 28%) 9273) aga
[4 [Bihar 88880] 6140] | छा 1 9939 | ___ 35%] a [36544
आन आटा आजा [४8:58 [a2] 47266 [38044] 80%] an) — 27386)
5 Goa eT 0| [Oo] | 0x4 0%) | of Of {of [ om}
| 7 Teutarae 25077 28388] 7354 [a 1 27% 6558 26
| 8 1 आध्याद sea] |  ख्थआ [65% ॥ 2268] Oo 2504 25%
[97 [Himachal pradesh ~~] pradesh [ass] 23638] a मा [889] —— 452] a
[30 Jammu & Kashmir | 11825] 41442 97%] | पट [at जड 266| [af
| 11 Tharknand i 33003" 20884] ता [8356 22% so5if 2654]
[32 [xa matake | £0877 28952) 7256 | se3¢/ [ses 5890) 15%
13 [kere ——, 338] 3x] [464] | 205 1628 67%
[| 345 7 [Nachys Pradesh ~~] Pradesh 200751 55680] 85% Se [Bs 62.08] 6%
55 (ae inane —— [os] | 58% 4046) 534 25714) 35%!
36 lee 7] — | 374 [38% [of 7 | 2879] [6254
a7 EE =F] [ 80% 3701) rd
[aa | — [2396] [i008 3
| 29 | 2223[ 32081 99% aa]
[20 f | [36322 as | 22403]
[2 | [Punjep 77 3858s" 36433} [e734 [ 2032) पक
2 [ie i 27298 44828; 1 उप ——
23 विधाक i S360) | हल्का 59)
1.24 Wado 28470) 7682)" 275 20788;
ji 2s | {Tipure 7 5244/ $260; 83%] [334s] [2a]
[26 | litter Pradesh} Predesh [| as72} 210245 sox sia]
| 27 |Uttaraitiend 26589] 8994 S244) 3477] | 20]
a
2B [West Bengal —~] Bengal [asia ‘$8822, [ aula]
£ [दस या
29 [ARN Istands शा al
{30 | (गा जा का
[32 | [baN Havel J Havelt —ee je
| 32 Joaman& ow 32]
[33 |] [Sei झए मानक! —
[34] [iakshadweea ~~] ee
[35 |Puduche Ey
[| Feta 77 2006283, [70585] 6744 [234



किनारा

781 558/2026707:7 एछछ#टए PROGRESS ON CONSTRUCTION OF KITCHEN-CUM-STORES

No, of Kitchen -

cum-stores

Physical Progess of Kitchen cum stores upto 31.03.2019

51. No. State/UT sanctioned during Ee __In Progress | 1०६ yet started
2006-07 to 2018- | ०. | % No. % Lt ०. %
19

7 2 a 3 5 | 6 | 7 8 | 9 |
1 [Andhra Pradesh 44875 41%) 355] 2% 2492 Sen
2__ [Arunachal Pradesh [ 1085] 100%) [i 0%| 0| | 0%।|
3__[Assam 56795 90% 527) I%| 5122 9%
[4 शीक्ष | 66550 aay बह का 7703| 1२%
5 _|Chhattisgarh | 47266 96%| 2100 का व एछ
[6 [Goa किक) 09% OF %__ ० 6७
7 [Gujarat 25077 97% 7 Om 7e|__3%
| 8 [Haryana 11483 88% 653 64 675 ei
| 9 [Himachal pradesh 14959 ‘39% 34 on ऋ 1
10_[iammu & Kashmir 11815] 60% @ onl 4697] ३0%
11_|iharkhand __ 3900[ 76%| एक _ अआ अर्का शक
12 [karnataka 40477 97% | om] 1444 3%
33 [kerala 5481 ae of ox] उठा «55%
14_|Madhya Pradesh 103401]. 94%{ 4800} 5%] कह 5%
15__|Meharashtra_~ 71783 83% 545 1%| 11832) 76%
16__|Manipur 1 [_/_. 2966] [37%] 3686 63% OM
17_|Meghalayal 1 [75] o_O 0% 267! 3%
| 28 | [Mizoram \_| \ 2532 EE | [0% | 26] 1%
19 _ [Nagaland \ 2223 “100%| i 7 a 7१ हक
20 _[Odisha 69152 | 24661, 36%) ४ एक
21 [Punjab 18969 18969 100%, _ 8४| पका कई ए॥ऋ
22 [Rajasthan | 77298 50595 65%| 4143 sx 22560, 29%
23 |sikkim | 948 940} 39%] | 1% a 0%
24 [TamilNadu_ | 28470] _ _____ 98%] 344] 134 334 1%
25 [Telangana 30408] _ a 57% 3698 172४ शश 30%
26 एम | हे 5304 105% SC 0 0%
| 27 [Uttar Pradesh 122572 112808 92%) 2 ox] भरा x
_28 [Uttarakhand 15933 15639 98% 83 1% 211 1%
29 |westBenzal— 81382 TAG 95%] 4136] 7 ० 0०%
| 30_[aa.nislands 251 165 7 a) a eZ
S1_|Chandigarh 10 7| 70% 0 ७ _ ३ 3
32_[D&N Haveli 50 50 100% of of OSC
33 [Daman & 00 32) आय 100%, __ | ।ैा की 1] 0%
34 [behi SSC a ऋ। कर
उ5 {Lakshadweep [// 0 _ 0 0% a ० ऋ
36 [Puducherry _—i| 105 92 88% 33 1234) 0%4
Total 39 845424 Bax] 50449 5%| tasaaol 14%

“Tripura has constructed 261 more kitchen-cum-stare than sanctioned.

- OF -

is

०7%:


. Phhewre=yy

> ™ 666
an
tw
Datalls of Centra! Assistance released for २.० SS SS ee ब and Roplacement of Kitchen Devices under Mld-Day teal Scheme during 2096-07 to 2013-14
(18
1558/2020/Dask- Divi No. Gt acheals 1“ Waverachcoiy | Nevotscncow No, ofachaars No. of echools [ore echoole 1 Novefecheate Sanctioned for 7 We. ef shoals | cesciioned for Teta Ns. ef सका
dele eG ler kitchen |serettorsed for Kishen| Jauetlsned ter | eenctloned for Mtenen Sanalsned forkitcherilaenctioned for ‘| sanctioned for | Replacement of pareienedter | Replacementer | devine sanctonce
st! devices @ Rs, 6600 par devices @ Re, 5900 | tenes Seices @ -| devices 69 Ra, 6000 per devieos @ Rs, 6000 Hichendevices | Procurement ef Klichen davies मल | kitchen davieas @ upto 2014-45,
| ee इनक, unitfer tha year २०१६५ Perunit forthe year | Rx. 8000 per unit far unt forthe year 2008. Perunt or theryanr 89. 8000 par unit fer | (६2000 coviees @ Re. 8000 pecuntefar| kitchen devicaa @ Re. £000 per unit for
ne. | ॥ 7 2007-08 the year 200509 10 Bist Yhavearzov12 | ws, 60001 Sy Mrevear 204243 | Fu, 000 perunieter| “Spe 20०
| L i «_tho yaer 2047443 [ets छत asaya ,
H [Unit TT amount] [wal TAmooat | एक [Amount | Unie] oe Tana] 1 Amour | [Unit “Tinea } [unit Tarun | Unie कद शक पल पक Amount! Gait [ Amount | “Wal [amount] [Gait 1 फठ्फा
Cet z 173 CO आय जाय आक बाबा आकार 30 ee पक पल a छाप छह आर
INom-NER Spier +
[jane Preset aa jansry Sreceah, OCT] खा हु 0] 0.00] Ey 6.53] [2a ELE) [aS iaT A)  ्यग
Cais 39170 ay77] 56 568 a oes [teal 1188.00] हल areal [area
EMIS 380 कट LE ठतत ef [eeacgt a वन्य
Pets [aoa] a [at a - खाट ॥ ee लक अर व
é | sea5| Fy थे गण ee ee ce =e
3 PEED) ol ah Sot —a उक्त या त। [sa
7 [1 Fas of nea abot पदक) 22
pe 2198: 559 81 ता उठा a. 6 $333; 21.850 हो — कि एप नकल, y
= 72809 40,481 का Sasa वाया ag हा ठ ——— = RAPE =e ॥
उठ Tamers FES Aa 5 बाप 0.09) oi Am) हज ESC 1338 डा Ce - खत
जरा Rass [35351 eS i 7 —— वि Pe i
ns ees 7 कोल कलम ry TET eS hana —
Lis teiteisay 13 Mera r £2680 2492-53 0} 1 उठकर [et Zz 1 खा - जय T &
Lae TS 343; 3778.25 of of — आप 0 [F550 23730] £2723}
33 Pure | रहता [03.77 [0.08] Eee 432.60} iy ef 1:71 1 उत्पर)
नह [Raesy ~ fee ea seal 733.48) णह en 34783) so al EH } or Waa] YB उपलठा उड़ Bee
[17 eras 7332)" 855.82] सं. S515{"~"<80.751 ढ़ [60a] A732)" sa5E0F 791 a बाबा eee i
MET +t Gaol sods —— teat —— 4h का पा को i
1 Tea seh + Bz] sas 05} BRO a 17 7 Sees) 463.201 Teg — zeae ne
Bowel Baca हर ae cil का उस OL 2 7 उप Zr thes
tres] [उभर 2. कि. 7 2271 आ प7 771 हक व ELSES ria] पा सं ६ sanyg क ऊल्लब 2044) 4609 39
2 n
z Lo PT =e ढ्व्ठा BL eee aay a (Tes el a a ae —— a आता r T — -
2 is 7201 of aca} 9 665! न जितना] of ता लत 1 [1 ——
[res 30 15.00 a 9] भें छा of आया 2 2.09 {Bs eat a 2.98 ges] ऋ 359, उठ
Ute wit —_-
Piatt ———— e _ ges —— 4 | टठ्व्य al 2.55] al 6.00 a 565] a ent a ee अर ee ee [ पा उक्त पार
aU 2 it Sef 228 a | ए ef al Cx) ाका। 9.00] पी कण पर] i i i a 4.26
2S 1 | Oy नि ७.0०| {ato ‘cot ००] a — : t an a बन. | 1215]
[ene i Ez 782] 2 093] ol हो [32h of == Gl a क्या tf i eT i 8.7]
से पक्का 1 i bE — ee {oj cof” ol खो | 9.60] i {a न i [at 5 हो काला
Trot i of 8 0.00! 321 60) 9 | हा. ऊउल्नः q a व्यय ar ee 1 30.%|
ER Stecn = fd i
22 Jannecns Petey cy. है “बाण 60.10 Sax] "381.64
(28 Assan tress] 1 66 1 लि sa 519.23]
(30 Manor I नकारा I 3407/ 183.35]
Cary pasareigye {onal S38) 26.20} | 3037] 450,35 43819} 639.53]
param (1 0.00 [ eT) | S040} i [587 zag 3e03]"130.,54]
Nagaand 9.०0! “7 20751 ssl ros) 4h [000] [0.001] [ss] ter sa]
—— हार | ता CO] 1 छोटी 7 उड़ा हक 443) 15] T उठ [1 — 1858] £2.99;
D 50] asi] ae est at st i अब 1 Bi she — ee |
50] 457, a हि; 1045.4 724 15 zi 204451 sat 2a, 282,46 "4028; 1767 139,05}
onaNDy, शिया पट arose Meme ees eee tae ee Tag Sol spd ae (eee ae at aes उपर ee
Srsey, Bee [कण दल बताकर रा वश eer LET FERS] [tena we
£2 x ct . —L ~ fait Amount

वख40431... 81992
पु Ropkeemem exis, 2600
. . 1752772 ¥8084.04

8

. Sy
ही on. \§



'1558/2020/Desk-MDM

Deals of Cental Ateiuoee redated for Procutement and Replsens ent of Kichen Devices undor Mi-Loy Heal Scheme duting 2608-07 to 2018-19
Rec | oad | eam
seceioeate | Bepiocersant | Replacornatt
Frceonmnte! | erktenen | clhae:
या 4040 | 4026 07% | «४४०१७ २०
61-28 pet |e pa (०५9 00 per nt

FRO S eee RETR स्ट्लम्क्क [रऋूमेब्कज्ण asco Yen aa] aaa nO]
Misviocdsee | mvcteartiec accunoes x | puactecrstee | Replacement |tacccored | Repeat [voted |
Manerdertes [isctincryeee power covert [Precatrentet| aguas | Peexeoed | otis | Prasswaee
बाण 08 /60 थे ॥४0107 02०७० हब लक | 2 | का | elite
otter yur ले 20७05 ७५४४० (0 थे ८४० | cake pee ont ey ०००६६ | earn per ar | olen GR

agers

nae Pena fon | 0 मा | exept | noes tthe | Soe pares 10:00 | year (ee oe
yarsen | ‘bebe meter woe
at EE a I Ed Eo एक (0७८ jee ecent Te avon] Ue [Apa a nen) Wet Tamers] एक Jameel tet Parma
abate आआग Bw eC था आम बा आ आह प्रभाकर जा

res}

[a a किक ला
rt

rt Canale

Tesi

2 मम
1 छा]

Last Daa) गज पर EET हक छा 13) Ped



81558/2020/Desk-MDM

— कु

पु Infrastructure
SLNo, Stato/ur Total
Institution Gas based evoking Drinking water Totlet
ee ey ce [3 |e ee हख वा आय कक जा। [st
[3 [Andhra Pradesh | __ 77051 27946) 36% [__39596| [rel | s3s7i] | _ 7044
[2 ~ Arunachal Pradesh fee tf a 7 €ै [2209] छुआ [ 22 ere
[3 [Assam | 3s 9 [45829] की 4036274
| 4 [Bihar i 69367, 288 0% 66693] 9654} | 53252] [80%
[5 {Chhattisgarh aL 47879} [si] eg ०1% 47879] | 1000 | 45769 sev 96%/|
[ 6 ठ68 1532] 6 98| 1439) न 14051 __ 52%
[7 [Sujerat J} 23728) 29901 59%] 34623] 1  उ531 _त्आ
8 [Haryana | 15264) 15305] 100% 15466) 1919 75566 to1%4|
2___|Himachal Pradesh 15197 13023 86% | 25207 100%] |___45091/ [ 9%|
[10 ammu & Kashmir [22965] | 13716| sang] [37874] 78%4| "16379. उठछ।
| 11 |Jharkhand is 40855 1843; Sc 3376] [35577] 88%
[32 TKamataka | |" 58089] 53839) 985% 8581 10% S543] [10184
| 13 [Kereta न of |" 312189| rea]
| 14” |[Machya Pradesh 16356583] |" 10% उल्टा 1 Tass]
| 15 |Mahareshim [56028] ioo%|” 85971) tear]
[367 Manipur] | 3258] eH 1545] 794]
[37 [Meghalaya | __toseqj S74] s825{ 834)
[38 Mizoram J | 2516) [85542095] [83%
| 39 [Negeiend ~~} 2261 | sst4| 3962) ad
| 20 [Orissa 63531 |_—_ 635331 तक ay [72%]
— Punjab 20369) {100% 20569! P 755%|
[C22 Rajasthan कार्य कक of oa
[23 आए J [E76 56% 79 a
| 2६ िश्णा पता 42619 | [ 992 | ५7676] 980 उठा 42315] 99%
5 trips 5545 2% 5263] 83%| 59841 oral
[26 [Uttar Pradesh 165918 [55% उल्लत्यशा VARIES Cy 91%|
[27 ]Utteraxhand [1 17736] 48% 416649 98%] 33743| 150%)
| 28 [West Bengat 83707 [8st 83333] 100% 82476| 55%]
[29 ~ TABN Islands [338] a 7 खत [338 100%) 338 109%
[30 "|Ghandigarh } {8 215] [5%] j 21516094]
| अर [D&N Havel 283 ि 373) ssa
[83] [100% शक
[3065] 100% 3065)
| aa] | [al
[453] [| sis}
Tisg070) [31%] 1 पणा69_ saa]

FIV UME -.. Wy:
@

668

(ag


: Arngnre — Vil

Avallibility of Gas based cooking, Drinking water, and toilet factlfty in schools [PY +UPY] Gas based cooking, Drinkin: rT, and toilet facility in schools [PY +UP 669
2018-19.
'1558/2020/Desk-MDM | S.No. State Total PT काया >
! esk- institution Gas based cookin; | Drinking water | Toile]

ra Zz [3 a 4 [5६४८ | 7 [fs [9 +4
| = ‘Andhra Pradesh [45583] 34826 98% 35198 99% 44826 98%
2 |Arunachal Pradesh 3187] = 3%] 3182] 100% 2503{ «19%
[3 lAssam 7 37240] 13474[ अंक 453] 83% 57240 100%
(4 [Biba Sd [72957 4512) 7594] [4991 90%] 65499) 90%
| 5 [Chhattisgarh 7 88 3153] Pe 44838 100% 44838 100%|
16 656०0 | [14794 [ +1479) 100%: 1478) 100%! 1478: 100%|
7 ठिशंक्षणआ 34759[ 347591 100%] 34644 100% 34644) 100%
[8 [Haryana = 14392, 13975[" का 79592 100% 34392 [00%
9 [Himachal pradesh 71550] 14868 96% 15467] 100% 35339 99% |
7 [Jammu & छत | 23141] 14894 63% 20658 89% 21410 93%
[1 Tharkhand 39870 15672) 39% 39518] 99% उमर [_ 93%]
(“72 lKamataka [34839] 34839 100% 54833 100%| 54833] 100%
13 Kerala dT 12341] 100%) 12341 100% 12341 100%
[| ia” |Medhya Pradesh [113830] 32033] 28% 113830 100%| 113830 100%|
|_15[Mcharashta id 86301] 38041] Sa] 33485] ___ 96% 30033 92%
[16 [Manipur Sd 3857 300] 85% 1871 49% 2545] 66%
ff 17 Meghalaya Tt 11847 | 373i [3% |" 10670} 30% 10177] 86%
18 [Mizoram | 2532 2539| _ 1 ठ्कआ 2146 85% 2095) 83%
५ | 19 [Nagaland 7 2139 1752 82% 1246 58% 1962f 92%|
[20 Orissa 38784 22210 38% 38301 99% 58784 700%,
[21 Punjab 20157) 20246) 100%) 20157] toa%| 20137} 100%]
22 [Rajestien 777] 66565 64497 97% 66506|__ 1»ऋ| 66506 [00%
{23 [Sikkim Sd 569 447] 51% 869; 100%| 869 100%
24 |Tamil Nadu 43283[—«35713] 83% 43205 100%] 43205] ___ 100%।
25 |Telangann «sd 28672 4772 17% 26991 94% उह675 00%
26 [Tripura Sd [नाता 24%) उसडट| 87% 6128 93%
27__|Uttar Pradesh 169291 163580 97% 168122 99% 167960) 99%
28 [Uttarakhand छठ] 11196] 61% 17084 93% 17293 949%
29 [West Bengal mn } हटाए 38798 46% 83696) 99% 83205 99%
30 |A&N Islands EE: 99#-_79%%| 338 100% 338 100%
["31__|Chandigarh ला =) 100%, 123 100% 123 100%
32 [DRN Haveli | 280 280 100%! 280 100% 280 100%
33 [Damen & Diu 7 4 100%] ___ 856 100% 96] 100%
34 [Delhi Sd 297 __ उठ79]| 100% 2975 100% 29751 100%|
35__[Lakshedweep | 7 की कक owl ग 98% 39 98%
[36] "नए [33] 430 59% ~~~ 100% 31 100%
E विछछा SC*d 1142068[ 720663 63% 1107636 57% 1114288] _ 98%

डे
=
4 -



we woes 92 / 2222 YT
Institute Inspected:-(Primary and Upper Primary) 2018-19 ‘

- . पु ©
[sno] no] States /UTs hea ot [insane | Te out No. of Tas t. % institutions Inspected . 670
[2777 3 a  ट्  े
[1 Andhra Pradesh [SCS 583] , उ7इ491 /“!“ _. /  दठ्र|
11558/2020/0९5/1000 2 [Arunachal Pradesh [3934 100%
3 [Assam | 57103 er 65%
(4 [Bihar _./। | P9513. 89513} 100%
3 |Chhattisparh id __ 4488 _ _. 44838 -- 100%
हि [Goes | “कक 100%
7 |Gujarat लिया 34644 "34644 का
( [Haryana nasi] | 06 51%
9 Himachal Predesh | ॒/॒ [5504] 504] _ 100%
[10 Jammu & Kashmir i 23120 [ /.. लख्वश। 16401 [ST
1i__|Jharkhand 39717 [87731 90%
t 12 |Kamataka | 54830(SS«S ASTI 100%
13__ [Kerala 12341 12341 100%
14 [Madhya Pradesh [ «113621 110012! 97%
15 [Maharashtra 86744 79430) 92%
[6 [Manipur [pt 3481p =a 100%
[7 |Meghalaya 11659 55| ______ 77%
[18 [Mizoram | //ै_ उठा 1927 76%
19 [Nagaland | 2099[ 358] 66%
20__lOrissa SiS 590 [~—~iSO533| 88%
21 [Punjab 20157 20157] 100%
22 |Rajasthan—SSS~*d 66506 56506 100%
23 [Sikkim  ...][  - उछ्ग ns) 78%
24 |Tamilnada 43283 38829 90%]
25 |Telangana 2eseo] 0 27732f SSS
26 [Tripura dT ैौ[ौर- 5529| |/  ._. 53529 100%
27 [Uttar Pradesh [ 169232) 169239 100%
28 |Uttarakhand [739.0739 100%
29 [West Bengal SiS TTT 80261 95%
30 |Andaman Nicobar | SSC«B 8} | /.. 7 33)7| व 98%
1 {Chandigarh S| | es -) 100%
32 (28013 & Nagar Haveli 230] SSS~S~« BOF 100%
33 [Daman and Diu | 932] शशि 92 100%
4 |Delhi /ै$ैै 1  _ उठ ना पा 100%
35__ [Lakshadweep 9] aT] LC 79%।|
36 [Puduchery ~*d 428; ै__ य29| 100% हे
{__|Toet | 1134655 109040 _ _ 92% | हर


781558/2020/Desk-MDM |

1 . ~ Public Grievance System ~ Toll-free — ~ ~ _|
न -No. =| ~ Toll-free Numbers |
A Z _ Andhra Pragesh : | State lev 3 वाल a
277 VAarunachal Pr. 800-345-3604 and 0360 ~ 2292061 92061 (Dedicated No} _ No} |
3 ll 18003453525 = __ — _ है

18003456208
18002351152 .
{line installed for three Deputy Education Officers

Dedicated land!
If they fail to redress the Grievance,
Assistant Director (Education) whose
displayed on the school notice board.

(Source -AWP&B-2016-17 for Goa). >दागग: ;
Complaints received at State, District and Block level offices.
Commissioner (MOM) reviews the complaints at State Level. a
Grievances can’ also be submitted on Chief Ministers Help Line 4
"SWAGAT”. (Source: AWP&B-2016-17 of Gujarat _| ~

the same is forwarded to
telephone No, has been

8 | Haryana ano: 2584522 a
9... | Himachal,pra 1800 -180-8007 _ _ .
~ 10 Jarnmu & Kash Departmental Heirarchy addresses = grievances (Source: rm
| eens es 1 | AWP&B-2016-17 ए |) ->_ प7फ्द्ाशाशई ~
JM, -| Jharkhand Monitoring Cel) set up at State, District and’ Block Level for {
pos grievance redressal with 24 to 72 hours.
_. _| Source : AWP&B 2016-37 of fare AWP&B 2016-17 ofjharkhand)
a2... (| Karnataka 1BU0425-20007 __
. ७13 ,... Kerala. GRM constituted on 19" January, 2011 at State level with
woes Parents Teacher Association, Director of Public Insturctions and oan)
पु a Local Bodies. Grievance can be registered on dedicated landline
a Of Neon Meal Section. (Source AWP&B-2016-17 of Kerala). 1
14° Madhya Pradesh roll Free number -181 ई
> ‘TMaharashtra_ "| 18002339908 j
a

Manipur, ; “[3800:345-3820 and 0985-2411095 _ \
Meghalaya All Deputy Commissioners and ae Officer (Civil)
i ~ | have set up Grievance edressal Meachanism.)

“मिद Free No, 0389-2341325 at (State Level and 0389-2345639

Mizoram

18 :
. a _ | at district level. SMS on Mobile No. 91-8974245007 and email id
: __ migor orammdm@gmail.com (Sour Source: State's AWP&B eV ion" AWP&B-2016-17
19 _ Nagaland. 037 22.6003 6(olfice) ee
20 Orissa ~ __| Toll free number - 18003456722 _ _
Punjab |
Rajasthan ~ 0141-2221960 and 0141-2221694. |
कण 2-2 :

have been provi
7 Tiravallur 1800 28-7003 14 Sivag:
2 Piruvannamalai 00-425 AQTB
3 Tinuvarur [800-425-5125 be
4 Erode [800-425-8367 17 Theni 1800 -425 0045

5 6250 18 Sater 1000-425 -U 24

“Tamil Nadu.



“T6 5 19 Dindigul 1800- 425-0382 |
7 Namakkal 1800-255-4444 20 Tirunelveli 1800 -425- 00768

6 Dharriiapuri 180-425-1074 21 Trichy 1800 -425- 6867 i

9 Krishnagiri 1800-425-7009 22 Virudhunagar 1800 -425-2528
10 Tirupur 1090: 0421 23 Pudukottai 1800-425-2230

{1 Thanjavur 1800-425-3996 24 Perambalur 1800-425-4166

12 Kanyakumari 04652 224048 25 Ramnad.1800-425-4187

_| 23 Vellore 1800-425-4982

Telangana

1800-426-3525 and 1800-425-7462_

"| 180-345-3667

26 |- Tripura
- 27 -| Uttar Pradesh 1800-4190-102
(28 | Urtarakhand -_ 1800 180 4132 see Od
29 71 West Bengal Phane No. (033)2359-6761, 6798, 6799
- Pe eee -Bax-£033)23344052 ;
©, | ASN ‘&N islands . | Thete is no separate help lines available however the present

|30 |

Telephone Numbers of Nodal Officer (Mid Day Meals)
‘sd Nine Zonal Officers across the Islands are used for
‘nddvesuing the grievances and its. redressal. Complaint boxes
and registers are also maintained in all schools.

Sources AWPRB 2016-17 of UT) ->तटजप7

Telephone No. 0172-021697 and by dak in the office.

3a Chrandigan
: ia : |-Foll Free No. has been applied.
32. SN Haveli -48002330260
_ कि Daman & Die --09se6609450 __  + _-+---
हैं - 134 | Dalhi -- ~-| 014-23890002__ se .
“135 | Lakshadweep Telephone No. of Grievances Redressal Mechanism 4

A. Jsland Level

1 Agatti Principal, GSSS -04894 242253
2 Amini Principal, GSSS -04891 273255
3 Andrott Principal, GSSS__- 04893 232323
6585. -04890 275222

SSS- 04899 276256
6 Kadmat Principal, 5559. "04897 274223
7 Kalpeni Principal, GSSS_ - 04895 252225
1 8 Kavaratti Se en GSSS. -04896 262218
9 Kiltan Principal, 0955 - 04898 272239
10 Minicoy Principal, GSSS  -04892 222251

8. UT Level ५
Lakshadweep Directorate of Education ~ of Education - 04996 262318

36 Puducherr,

1000-425-1967



781558/20

672

Annexure-X

20/Desk-MDM

Monitoring Mechanisms

Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource
Development has prescribed a comprehensive and elaborate mechanism for
monitoring and supervision of the Mid-Day Meal Scheme. The monitoring
mechanism includes the following:

i)

ii)

iit)

iv)

vi)

Arrangements for focal level monitoring: Representatives of Gram
Panchayats/ Gram Sabhas, members of SMCs, VECs, PTAs, SDMCs as well
as Mothers’ Committees are required to monitor the () regularity and
wholesomeness of the mid-day meal served to children, (ii) cleanliness in
cooking and serving of the mid-day meal, (iii) timetiness in procurement of
good quality ingredients, fuel, etc, (iv) implementation of varied menu, (v)
social and gender equity on a daily basis.
Dispiay of Information: In order to ensure transparency and accountability,
all schools and centers, where the programme is: being implemented, are
required to display the following information at a visible place in the campus
for the notice of the general public:

a) Quantity of food grains received, date of receipt.

b) Quantity of food grains utilized.

c) Other ingredients purchased, utilized.

d) Number of children given mid-day meal.

e) Daily Menu.

f) Roster of Community Members for supervision and monitoring.

Block Level Committee: A broad based Steering-cum-Monitoring
Committee also monitors implementation of the Mid-Day Meal Scheme at the
block level.

Inspections by State Government Officers: Officers of the State
Governments/UTs belonging to the Departments of Revenue, Rural
Development, Education and other related sectors, such as Women and Child
Development, Food, Health etc. are also required to inspect schools and
centres where the programme is being implemented. It has been
recommended that 25% of the schools/special training centres are visited
every quarter,

District Level Committee: Besides a District Level Steering-cum-Monitoring
Committee for monitoring the MDM scheme, a District Level Committee under
the Chaiimanship of senior most Member of Parliament (MP) of the district
stituted! 10 monitor the scheme on quartorly basis

This committee also monitors the implementation of Samagra Shiksha and
Bharat programmes in the district.

Periodic Returns: The State Government/UT is also required to submit
periodic returns to the Department of School Education and Literacy, Gol to

~ 4

has been ce



781558/2020/De:

vii)

viii)

ix)

x)

xi)
xii)

xiii)

provide information on (i) coverage of children and institutions, (ii) number of
SHAG WAys (iii) Progress in utilization of central assistance {iv) availability of
necessary infrastructure in schools, (v) any untoward incident etc. :
Grievance Redressal: States and Union Territories are required to develop a
dedicated mechanism for public grievance redressal, which should be widely
publicized and made easily accessible.

State fevel Monitoring: States and UT Administrations are also required to
setup a Sieering-cum-Monitoring Committee at the State level to oversee the
implementation of the Scheme. States/UTs have deployed independent
institutions for the evaluation of the Scheme.

Web enabled MDM-MIS has been launched for effective antine monitoring of
the Scheme. The portal captures information on important: parameters like
category wise enrollment, teacher (looking after MDM) details, cook-cum-
helpers details with social composition, availability of Infrastructural facilities
like Kitchen-cum-stores & Kitchen devices, mode of cooking, drinking water,
toilet facilities etc. on annual basis. The States/UTs are also feeding monthly
data into the portal, which helps in monitoring the critical components/
indicators of the MDMS such as no. of meals served, utilization of food grain
& cooking cost, honorarium paid to cook-cum-helpers, school’ inspection
details etc.

Automated Monitoring System (AMS)

This department has put in place an automated system of data collection for
real time monitoring of MDMS. Such data (on number of meals served on that
Particular day and reasons if meals not served) is being captured from
schools with no cost to school Head Master/Teacher,

Under the automated monitoring system, States/UTs have set up a suitable
system of data collection (i.e. Interactive — Voice Response
System(IVRS)/SMS/Mobile ApplicationWeb Application) from schools on a
daily basis and using it for purpose of monitoring and timely follow up action,
States/UTs are pushing data on specific fields in a predefined format on a real
time basis to the Central Server maintained by NIC. A central portal for
analysis and display of data at the Central level. Based on the data collected,
various drill down reports are made available for real time monitoring of the
scheme at National/State/District/Block level, Daily email alerts are sent to

States/UTs regarding number of schools which have reported data on that

particular date and schools where meals have not been served. {t has been
implemented in all the States and UTs.

Emergency Medical Plan to tackle the untoward incidents, if any, at schools.
Grievance Redressal Mechanism to address the grievances of the
stakehoiders,

National tevel:

a) Empowered Committee on Mid-Day Meal has been set up under the
Chainnanship of Hon'ble Minister, Human Resource Development for
monitoring the access, safety, hygiene and quality aspects in the

६ 46८

8)

674


implementation of MUMS; Review mechanism isin place [0 exsufe-

781558/2020/Desk-Mifective monitoring and evaluation of the scheme, Mechanism is in place

xiv)

for community participation in the scheme and its effective monitoring.

b) Executive Council of the National Mission for Samagra Shiksh(SS) headed
by the Minister, Human Resource Development also reviews Mid-Day
Meal'Scheme. हु

0) National Level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee (NSMC), Programme
Approval Board (PAB) under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (SE&L).

d) National Meetings with Education Secretaries and Regional Review
Meetings are also held to monitor implementation of MDMS.

10" Joint Review Mission visited 5 States namely Madhya Pradesh
(districts Dewas and Sheopur) during 3-9 October, 2017, Telangana (districts
Karimnagar and Warangal) during 27 November - 4 December, 2017,
Arunachal Pradesh (districts Papumpare and Lower Subansiri) during 14 - 21
December, 2017, Punjab(districts Jalandhar and Rupnagar) during 2274. 297
January, 2018 and Gujarat (districts Banaskantha and Vadodara) during 57 -
12" March, 2048. 11" JRM visited to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh during 2018-19.

xv) Social Audit

“Social audit’ means the process in which people collectively monitor and
evaluate the planning and implementation of a programme or scheme. The
social audit was conducted by Society for Social Audit Accountability and
Transparency (SSAAT) in two districts viz. Khammam and Chittoor of
undivided Andhra Pradesh during 2012-13. Encouraged by the outcome of
the Social Audit in Andhra Pradesh, the Department had issued detailed
guidelines for conducting of social audit under Mid Day Meal Scheme. So far
13 States viz.- Bihar, Maharashtra, Odisha, Karnataka, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Telangana, Nagaland, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan, Uttrakhand
and Tamil Nadu have conducted of social audit.

The Programme Approval Board-Mid Day Meal informed the States and UTs
while considering and approving the their AWP&B 2019-20 that Social Audit

~ Is collective monitoring of a scheme by people’s active involvement. It covers

the issues of equity and equality along with expenditure in programme
implementation. States and UTs were informed that under the provisions of
section 28 of National Food Security Act, 2013 Social Audit of the scheme is
mandatory. As per the MDM guidelines it is mandatory to conduct Social Audit
in at least 20 schools in all districts. The Social Audit Units (SAU) set up
under MINREGS, may be actively involved in conducting Social Audit of MOM
in all districts. State was advised to share the findings of Social Audit with
Deparwnent of School Educalion and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India.

TF


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee are deeply concerned to note that TSP funds have been
teleased even to non-tribal populated States along with tribal majority to the incorrect
release of funds due to lack of clarity and have assured to avoid such lapses in future.
The Committee are surprised that lack of clarity and co-ordination between the Ministry
of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of AYUSH has resulted in inappropriate calculation of the
percentage of tribal population in a State, tribal concentrated districts, etc. leading to
incorrect release of funds. While expressing their serious displeasure over the state of
affairs, the Committee exhort the Ministries concerned to improve upon their
coordination and information showing mechanism and take recourse to all precautionary
and corrective/remedial measures including imposition of penalty upon the erring
officials and recovery of incorrectly released funds so as to obviate recurrence of such
lapses/ mistakes.

[Para No.2]
Action taken by the Ministry of AYUSH

Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM)

The Council has followed/has been following the Guidelines for Inter-State
allocation of funds and implementation of Programmes/Activities under Special Central
Assistance (SCA) to Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) during 2016-17 and onwards issued by
Ministry of Tribal Affairs vide F. No. 11016/06/2016-SG-II dated 01.07.2016.

The Council has been following guidelines of expenditure in TSP as available
from time to time both by communication from Ministry and observations of audit.

The Council is conducting Mobile Healthcare Programme under TSP for the
benefits of Tribal Populations only in selected Tribal Districts/ITDA as per guidelines
issued by Ministry of Tribal Affairs vide F.No. 11016/06/2016-SG-II dated 01.07.2016.
The Council is very much careful in releasing the funds following the recommendations
of CAG Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub-Plan as such imposition of Penalty on
erring officials does not arise.


Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS)

The Council has followed/has been following the recommendations of CAG
Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). The Council has not released funds
either to non-tribal States or to tribal majority States.

The Council has been following guidelines of expenditure in TSP as available
from time to time both by communication from Ministry and observations of audit.

The Council is conducting tribal health care research programme under TSP only
in selected blocks as per CAG Report No. 33 of 2015.

The Council is very much careful in releasing the funds following the
recommendations of CAG Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub-Plan as such imposition
of Penalty on erring official does not arise.

Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH)

The Council has followed/has been following the recommendations of CAG
Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). The Council has discontinued to
release funds either to non-tribal populated States or to tribal majority States.

The Council has been following guidelines of expenditure in TSP as available
from time to time both by communication from Ministry and observations of audit.

The Council is conducting health care research Programme under TSP. for the
benefits of Tribal Populations only in selected Blocks/Districts as per guidelines issued
by Ministry of Tribal Affairs vide F. No. 11016/06/2016-SG-II dated 01.07.2016.

The Council is very much careful in releasing the funds following the
recommendations of CAG Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub-Plan as such imposition
of Penalty on erring officials does not arise.

Vetting comment of Audit

a) Improvement in its coordination and information sharing mechanism, and
b) Imposition of penalty upon erring officials and recovery of incorrectly released
funds.

-1१-


Updated Reply of the Ministry of AYUSH

In the light of the observation of C&AG Audit Paras, the Ministry has sought to
improve its monitoring mechanism with following initiatives:

(i) Shri २.०. Aggarwal, DDG in the Ministry of AYUSH has been
nominated as Nodal Officer, vide O.M. No. G.25012/1/2015-AYUSH
(E.IIl) dated 03.02.2017 (copy enclosed), for monitoring of Tribal Sub-
Plan and also assigned the monitoring/co-ordination job to the
concerned Section (P&E) in the Ministry.

(ii) Further, the three Councils, viz Central Council for Research in Unani
Medicine (CCRUM), Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic
Sciences (CCRAS) and Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy
(CCRH) have also nominated their respective Nodal Officers (copies
enclosed).

(iii) After the receipt of CAG Report No. 33 of 2015 on Tribal Sub-Plan, the
Councils have discontinued funding the projects in Tribal majority
States and scrupulously following the guidelines issued by the Ministry
of Tribal Affairs, vide F.No. 11016/06/2016-SG-II dated 1.7.2016.

(iv) The Ministry has been regularly monitoring/coordinating the Tribal Sub-
Plan projects under implementation. Monitoring report of respective
Research Council implementing the TSP projects with the targets and
Actual Achievements for the year 2017-18 is enclosed herewith.

b) In regard to imposition of penalty upon erring officials and recovery of
incorrectly released funds it is stated that all the three Councils have discontinued their
projects in Tribal Majority States. They have taken suitable and corrective measures
and are scrupulously following the guidelines on TSP. Hence, as suitable and corrective
measures have been taken and also as funds previously released in Tribal majority
States were for the benefit of tribal people without any malafide intention therefore,
imposition of penalty on erring officials is not considered appropriate.

Observation/ Recommendation

As regards creation of nodal units for the implementation of TSP, by the Ministries/
Departments concerned, the Committee note that the Department of School Education
& Literacy and Higher Education have a dedicated Unit (SC/ST Cell) to formulate and
implement Tribal Sub Plan under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Both

-So:


the Departments have stated that as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961
(amended from time to time), the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for
overall policy, planning and coordination of programmes of development for the
Scheduled Tribes. The Committee further note that NITI Aayog had suggested that the
TSP Ministries/Department should set up monitoring units and indicate State-specific
allocation and release for the vulnerable section separately under centrally sponsored
schemes and Central Sector Schemes. However, information regarding the creation of
nodal units at the States and District level is awaited from the concerned State/District.
The Committee, recommend that all Ministries/Department concerned should set up
their own dedicated nodal units to ensure effective monitoring of Tribal Sub Plan at the
implementation stage. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs issue instructions to all States to ensure timely formation of nodal units at the
State and District levels and consider withholding release of TSP funds to those States
which have not created the nodal units.

[Para No.5]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

As per Guidelines for State TSP dated 18.06.2014 issued by erstwhile Planning
Commission, State Tribal Welfare Department is the nodal department authorized to
lead the process of TSP development at the State level. Further, Nodal department has
to work in close coordination with all relevant line departments, for appraisal of the
perspective document as well as of the TSP schemes of different departments. for
inclusion in Annual TSP.

Vetting Comment of Audit

Ministry may inform PAC outcome of Minsitry’s consideration to withhold release
of TSP funds to those States which not created the Nodal units.

Updated Reply of Ministry of Tribal Affairs

All the States having notified STs has unit looking after tribal development.
Except Kerala, all such States have constituted an Executive Committee under the
Chairpersonship of Chief Secretary for finalization of TSP in the States.

Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Under NHM, the funds are allocated and released to States/UTs under three
different components viz. General, Scheduled Caste Sub plan and Scheduled Tribe Sub
Plan on the basis of Census Population of 2011 so that funds can be utilised by the
States accordingly. Further, the utilisation certificates (UCs) furnished by the States are
settled accordingly. The NHM Policy division of the Ministry monitors the benefits of
Tribal population due to implementation of TSP. The health outcome in Tribal population
is significant and much accelerated implementation in HR, Infrastructure and Health

Sie


Service Delivery etc. Apart from this, the Bureau of Planning acts as a Nodal Unit for the
Ministry.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Ministry's reply that Bureau of Planning acts as a Nodal Unit for the Ministry is
not in line with the recommendation of PAC. Further, Ministry has not respond to issue
of instruction to all States by Ministry of Tribal Affairs to ensure timely formation of nodal
units at the State and District level and consider withholding release to TSP funds to
those States which have not created the nodal units taken on the recommendation of
PAC. The same may be provided to PAC.

Updated Reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

AS per the recommendation of the Committee is D.O. letter No.G-
27034/145/2018 dated 20" August, 2018 has already been issued to Mission Directors
(NHM) of all States/UTs for necessary action (copy enclosed).

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note that as per the guidelines of Planning Commission (2006),
TSP was to be implemented by constitution of dedicated unit in every
Ministry/Department. The Committee, however, note that that there were delays in
formation of nodal units in the Ministries/Departments. Moreover, the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs was neither involved in the annual planning exercise nor were there any
guidelines detailing the processes for an oversight. As the basic objective of Tribal Sub-
Plan is to channelize the flow of outlays from central Ministries/Departments by
earmarking funds for the development of Scheduled Tribes in the States, at least in
proportion to their population; the Committee are of the view that a central unit for
oversight is an absolute necessity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that as
suggested by NITI Aayog, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should create a central nodal unit
for oversight so as to facilitate better co-ordination and efficient implementation of TSP
through an online monitoring system.

[Para No. 6]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

Allocation of Business Rules (ABR) has now been amended in January, 2017
whereby Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) has been given mandate for monitoring of
STC funds of Central Ministries based on the framework and mechanism designed by
NITI Aayog. TSP Division of the Ministry is acting as a central unit to facilitate better co-
ordination and efficient implementation of TSP. An online monitoring system has been

22>


put in place with web address https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages
monitoring of allocations for welfare of STs under the schemes, monitoring of
expenditure vis-a- vis allocations, monitoring of physical performance and outcome
monitoring. Further, nodal officer has been nominated in the line Ministries /
Departments for coordination and monitoring.

Vetting Comment of Audit
No further comments.
Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

At the Ministry level, the annual plan as far as flagship programme of the Ministry
ie. the National Health Mission (NHM) is concerned; it is more of funding provision. The
annual plans in form of PIP for NHM are prepared by the States based on their specific
needs and local context. The implementation is carried out by the States and is guided
by the Framework for Implementation of the NHM.

The Mission Steering Group (MSG) and Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) at
the national level provide broad policy direction for implementation of NHM. The
Secretary MoTA is Member of MSG and EPC. The Secretary, Dept. of Tribal Affairs in
the States are members of State Health Society.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Ministry has not replied to the recommendation for PAC on creation of a central nodal
unit for oversight by Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The same may be provided to PAC.

Updated Reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

As stated earlier, the Mission Steering Group (MSG) and Empowered
Programme Committee (EPC) at the National level provide broad policy direction for
implementation of NHM. The Secretary Ministry of Tribal Affairs is Member of MSG and
EPC. The Secretary, Dept. of Tribal Affairs in the State is member of State Health
Society.

Further, it is submitted that Bureau of Planning (BOP) Division of the Ministry is
working central nodal unit for Tribal Matters.

Observation / Recommendation

The Committee find that even though funds from the Central Government were released
under trifurcated head Gen/SC/ST to the States and from States to District
implementing agencies, the accounts for such expenditure have not been maintained
separately at each level. Also there is no proper earmarking of TSP funds at the grass
root level and allocations of funds have not been based on tribal specific plans. The
Committee find it absurd that expenditure of funds released under three heads namely,


Gen/SC/ST are not earmarked under separate head of accounts. Since funds released
under TSP are meant exclusively for the tribal, it is pursuant to maintain separate
expenditure account for each category which would enable the Ministry to keep track of
the expenditure, targets/ achievements and effective implementation of the TSP
Scheme. The Committee therefore exhort the Ministry to impress upon all States and
District implementing agencies to strictly adhere to maintenance of separate
expenditure accounts and submit UCs under separate heads. The Committee further
recommend that the Ministry review the TSP strategy to ensure that funds allocated are
not diverted elsewhere and expenditure reported are linked with actual accrual of
benefits to STs.

[Para No.7]
Action Taken by Ministry of Tribal Affairs

The allocations under schemes for welfare of STs have already been allotted a
separate budget head 796 for avoiding possibility of diversion of funds.

Vetting Comment of Audit

The Ministry's reply does not address the PAC's recommendation to: (a) impress
upon all States and District implementing agencies to strictly adhere to maintenance of
separate expenditure accounts and submit UCs under separate heads and (b) to review
the TSP strategy to ensure that funds allocated are not diverted elsewhere and
expenditure reported are linked with actual accrual of benefits to STs. Specific replies
may be submitted to PAC.

Updated reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

As per Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 as amended from time to time, ‘In
regard to sectoral programmes and schemes of development of these communities
policy, planning, monitoring, evaluation etc. as also their coordination will be the
responsibility of the concerned Central Ministries/ Departments, State Governments and
Union Territory Administrations.’ Ministry of Tribal Affairs invariably impresses upon the
States to provide UCs of funds released under its schemes as also the physical
progress report of the sanctioned projects. In case of pending UCs, allocated funds are
adjusted to that extent before further release.

Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

The State and District level maintenance of separate accounts for TSP funds
under the NHM may not be feasible as under this programme the funds are provided for
18 different programs, each of which has STSP, SCSP and General component.
Further, funds under NHM flow from State to 672 District Health Societies, 763 District
Hospitals and Sub-District units that comprise of 5396 CHCs, 25308 PHCs, 153655

© SAe


Sub-Centers, 5,10,416 Village Health and Sanitation, Nutrition Committees (VHNSCs)
and to various Implementing agencies for civil works, procurements etc.

However, the States have been asked to report expenditure component wise in
the Financial Management Report (FMR).

Vetting Comments of Audit

Utilization of allocated funds at State and Districts Level may be provided to
PAC. Ministry has not furnished the details of review of TSP strategy to ensure that
funds allocated are not diverted elsewhere and expenditure reported are lined with
actual accrual of benefits to STs. The same may be furnished to PAC.

Updated reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Public Health and Hospitals is a State subject and its implementation also lies
with the State Governments. However, Ministry has issued directions to State
Governments by issuing D.O. letters for category wise reporting of expenditure. Some
States viz. Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana etc. have already started submitting
Category wise Utilisation Certificates (UCs) in adherence to the guidelines.

This was also communicated to the’ States in the 1st Quarterly Performance
Review Meeting held on 19th and 20th September, 2019 which was attended by Senior
State Officials.

Observation / Recommendation

The Committee find various deficiencies in the implementation of Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (SSA) under TSP which inter-alia include shortfall in establishment of Kasturba
Gandhi Balika Vidhyalayas (KGBVs); non establishment and non-functioning of ‘Model
Cluster Schools for Girls’; lack of basic amenities and facilities; non distribution of
school uniforms as per norms; deficiencies in appointment of local language native
teachers and non availability of text books and shortage of teachers. The Department of
School Education & Literacy has clarified that beside the States of Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra, other States concerned have not provided a compliance report despite
repeated reminders. Taking serious note of the brazen negligence towards efficient
implementation of SSA at the State and District levels, the Committee, recommend that
the Ministry take a more pro-active approach by imposing a deadline for implementation
and target achievement, set a minimum standard/quality of infrastructure and penalize
the non-compliant States by withholding central share of funds. The Committee further
recommend that the Ministry conduct online inspections apart from periodical on the
spot inspections/ verifications to ensure proper implementation of programmes as per
SSA guidelines/norms.

[Para No.8]

SS”


Action Taken by the Department of School Education & Literacy

The reply on the above Para w.r.t. action taken has been sent to the concerned
section on 13th March, 2018 and thereafter, 3rd April, 2018. Apart from the action as
reported in above referred communication further action has been taken as mentioned
below:

1. Under the new scheme of Samagra Shiksha, the compliance by States and
UTs for meeting the RTE entitlement such as school uniform, text books, etc. has
already been ensured as the expenditure on the same is monitored through the Project
Monitoring System (PMS) portal. The central share is released only after examining the
progress made and the expenditure incurred for all interventions including infrastructure.
Based on evaluation of the physical and financial progress, the central funds arc
released, thereby restricting the flow of funds.

2. Further, in order to monitor all the activities, the Department has initiated the
following steps during the year 2019-20 under Samagra Shiksha.

a. School based audit has been devised (Shagunotsav) to physically examine the
existence of the infrastructure and the utilization of various grants including school
grants up to the last level.

b. Performance Grading Index - The Performance grading index (PGI) has been
designed to cater to the transformational change in the field of school education where
the focus has now shifted to the quality of education. The index comprising of 70
indicators would propel States and UTs towards undertaking multi pronged interventions
that will bring about the much desired educational outcomes. These also include timely
provisions of uniforms and text-books to all eligible students.

6. Specific focus is laid on girls' education. Provision has been made to extend
KGBVs up to class XIl for smooth transition of girls from elementary to senior
secondary. Out of 3700 KGBVs, 1232 have been upgraded up to class X/XII in 2018-19.
More than 7.25 lakh rural girls from SC, ST, OBC, Minority and BPL families will benefit.
Financial support has been provided to 2,11,416 government schools for self-defense
training for girls for inculcating skills for self protection and self-development.

The above steps have been taken to ensure that all the vulnerable sections
including ST beneficiaries are fully covered and benefits accrued them directly.

The referred letters as above is enclosed.

Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV): Department of school education and
literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development has implemented integrated
Scheme for School Education (ISSE) namely Samagra Shiksha. The Integrated
Scheme for School Education envisages the ‘school’ as a continuum from Pre-school,
primary, upper primary, secondary to Senior Secondary levels.

Till the year 2017-18, Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVS) were
residential schools at upper primary level for girls belonging to disadvantaged groups
such as SC, ST,OBC Minority and BPL under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) and the


girls hostel component of Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) envisaged
construction of a hostel with the capacity of 100 girls with the objective to improve
access to and retain the girl child in Secondary and

Higher Secondary classes (IX-XII) so that the girl students were not denied the
opportunity to continue their study due to distance to school, parents financial capacity
and other connected social factors.

Under the Samagra Shiksha, effective from 2018-19 the existing KGBVs at upper
primary level and girls hostel at secondary level have been extended/converged to
provide residential and schooling facilities at upper primary level up to Senior
Secondary level. The scheme envisages to provide access and quality education to girls
from disadvantaged groups by setting up residential schools from upper primary to
senior secondary level and to ensure smooth transition of girls from elementary to
secondary and up to class XII wherever possible. The State-wise status of civil works of
KGBVs (as on 02.03.2021) is given at Annexure-A.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Reply of the ministry does not address the recommendations of PAC. Ministry
may provide the PAC the following: हु
(i) How does the Ministry ensure that basic amenities and facilities are ensured and
shortages of teachers are taken care of under the Samagra Shiksha?
(ii) Details of action taken in case of non-compliant States/UTs. (iii) Details of online
inspections apart from periodical on the spot inspection/verifications to ensure proper
implementation of programmes as per SSA guidelines/norms.

Updated Reply of the Department of School Education and Literacy

(i) Regarding Basic Amenities and Facilities: The requirement of necessary basic
amenities such as toilets, drinking water, classrooms, is reviewed periodically and in
detail at the time of finalising the Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B) of every State
and UT in the Project Approval Board (PAB) meeting, and the Gaps are identified based
on UDISE+ database and bridged by providing additional facility after assessing the
progress made during the previous year and availability of funds.

In response to the clarion call made by the Prime Minister on 15 August, 2014,
the Department of School Education & Literacy launched the Swachh Vidyalaya
Initiative (SVI) for provision of separate toilets for girls and boys in all government
schools. Under the initiative, 4,17,796 toilets
including 1,90,887 girls' toilets were constructed/made functional in 2,61,400
government schools in the one-year period up to 15thAugust, 2015 in collaboration with
State and UT Governments, Public Sector Undertakings (PSU) & Private Corporates.

ae


Further, schools ensure hand washing stations and safe drinking water facility for all
students and availability of essentials like soap, alcohol rub/hand sanitizer or chlorine
solution, disinfection and cleaning material in the school.

In keeping with the spirit of Digital India initiative, the Swachh Vidyalaya
programme conceptualized and developed a web portal to plan, implement, monitor,
and support this initiative in real time. The web portal, apart from other features,
enabled corporates and partners to easily navigate and identify specific locations and
schools they wished to support for construction and repair of toilets. It allowed them to
pledge financial and in-kind commitments. The digital solution provided the means to
monitor the initiative in real time through the portal. This also made the information on
progress transparent and encouraged public participation. The newly launched
Samagra Shiksha scheme in 2018-19 made provision for earmarking at least 10% of
the Annual Composite School Grant towards Swacchta Action Plan, for ensuring
maintenance of hygiene and sanitation in schools and the expenditure is also reviewed
periodically.

The newly launched Samagra Shiksha scheme in 2018-19 made provision for
earmarking at least 10% of the Annual Composite School Grant towards Swacchta
Action Plan, for ensuring maintenance of hygiene and sanitation in schools and the
expenditure is also reviewed periodically.

Regarding Shortage of Teachers:- Education is in the concurrent list of the
Constitution and most of the teachers are under the jurisdiction of the respective States
& UTs. The recruitment of teachers and their rational deployment come under the
purview of the respective States & UTs. However, this department has taken steps to
address the same in two pronged manner:

a) Rationalization of Deployment of teachers.

b) Fill up vacant posts immediately.

The following directions have been issued and the States and UTs are asked to
do the needful during the PAB meeting for the AWP&B and review meetings held from
time to time.

The States are asked to rationalize teacher deployment in primary and upper
primary schools, so that there is no single teacher school and all schools have Pupil
Teacher Ratio (PTR) as per norms under the RTE Act, 2009. At the upper primary level,
special emphasis should be laid on maintaining the subject PTR.

The States & UTs are also asked to recruit Headmaster in primary and upper
primary schools as per the RTE norms. Given the significant role of a headmaster in
school management, direct recruitment (Including through limited department exam) of
50% of all headmasters may be considered. These vacant post needs to be filled up on
priority as it is also directly impacting Performance Grading Index (PGI) grading of the
States.

८५85"


In order to ensure that the States & UTs take effective steps for recruitment of
teachers, the Central assistance is given only for the filled-up posts and States are
asked to fill up the vacant posts to get remaining funds.

(ii) All the States and UTs have taken steps for compliance of all the directions and
facilities to be provided and the same was also reviewed in the PAB meeting held for
the year 2020-21 and in subsequent review meetings.

As already stated performance parameters have been devised through the
process of Performance Grading Index (PGI) and activities/outcomes are well defined
and States & UTs are graded annually on the basis of the same. The Performance
Grading Index has now been extended upto district level.

Moreover as regards the infrastructure, the States have been asked to complete

the pending infrastructure works by March 2021.
(iii) The States have been asked to provide online data through the SE Shagun
portal and the PRABANDH portal as well as UDISE+ and the same is reviewed by the
department for taking further corrective action and the directions are issued to individual
States and UTs pointing out the deficiencies and for compliance of the same.

Recently a monitoring format has been designed for Exhaustive online
monitoring and regular monitoring is being done at different levels i.e. Director/Joint
Secretary/Secretary level for review of physical and financial progress of
implementation of the different components of the scheme.

Observation / Recommendation

The Committee find a number of deficiencies in the implementation of National
Health Mission (NHM) like non-availability of basic health care facilities, primary health
care centres, shortage of doctors and nurses in the remote areas, inaccessibility to
basic/first aids in the far-flung areas etc. The Committee also note that the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare are undertaking innovative concepts like incentives to attract
doctor and nurses, providing mobile vans in remote areas etc. to ensure basic medical
accessibility in remote areas. While appreciating the initiatives being taken by the
Ministry, the Committee stress that funds allocated for programmes under NHM be
streamlined and utilized, keeping in mind, the varied needs of the beneficiaries in order
to ensure a more comprehensive approach in the implementation of NHM. The
Committee, further recommend that in addition to the remedial measures, the Ministry
should also focus on preventive/precautionary measures and undertake IEC activities to
educate the tribal population on healthy living habits, benefits of sanitation, training for
basic first aid treatments, etc.

[Para No. 10]

- S9-


Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

National Health Mission scheme is so designed that provides an inbuilt flexibility
to States/UTs where the States/UTs propose their Programme Implementation Plans
(PIPs) based on their health care needs and context. Thus, there is very substantial
flexibility for the states under the NHM. The Ministry does provide technical support and
guidelines, but cannot impose them on the states. Therefore, the financial approvals are
given to States keeping in mind the varied needs of the beneficiaries in order to ensure
amore comprehensive approach in the implementation of NHM.

Further, the Ministry also focuses on preventive/precautionary measures and
undertakes IEC activities to educate the tribal population on healthy life styles, benefits
of sanitation, nutrition, training for basic first aid treatments, etc. Health and Wellness
centres are the second pillar of Ayushman Bharat announced by the Central
Government for provision of comprehensive primary healthcare close to communities.
Besides provision of expanded package of primary healthcare services, comprehensive
primary healthcare includes health promotion and prevention with focus on counselling
on healthy lifestyles. The operationalization of Health and Wellness Centres have been
prioritised for Aspirational districts which include many tribal majority districts. The
Government has also rolled out Health and Wellness Ambassadors Initiative under
Ayushman Bharat. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed between
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA),
Government of India for cooperation between the two Ministries. The MoU covers
various activities including extending all aspects of the School Health Program viz.,
providing weekly Iron and Folic Acid Supplementation, biannual de-worming, basic first
aid and health promotion activities through teachers designated as Health and Wellness
Ambassadors at the school level in all functional EMRSs, Ashram Schools and other
Schools supported by MoTA in the states.

Audit Vetting Comments
No further comments.

Observation / Recommendation

In the implementation of Mid-Day Meal (MDM) Scheme, the Committee found
that no Annual Work Plan & Budget was prepared nor was there any special plan or
projects for ST students. The Committee also noted about non-availability of kitchen
sheds, incomplete infrastructure in kitchens, inadequate. kitchen devices and
insufficient drinking water, exposure of children to health hazards as the meals were
being prepared and served in open and un-hygienic conditions; absence of grievance
redressal mechanism, etc. The Department of School Education & Literacy had stated

- 60:


that schools have population of all categories of children i.e. General, SC & ST and Mid
Day Meal is provided to all students on school days irrespective of their caste. The
Department had further submitted that all States had public grievances redressal
mechanism and grievances, if any, were promptly resolve. The Committee felt that the
Department had not conducted proper inspection of all concerned States/Districts to
gauge the actual state of affairs in the implementation of MDMs across the country, in
terms of schools and infrastructure being used for MDMs, quality of food, construction of
kitchens as per guidelines etc. The Committee, therefore had recommended that the
Department should either constitute a team of its own or engage an independent
agency to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under MDM Scheme for requisite
remedial action wherever warranted. The Committee desired that they be apprised of
the action taken by the Department within six months of the presentation of this report.

[Para No.11]
Action taken by the Department of School Education and Literacy
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B)

The States and UTs submit their AWP&B for consideration and approval by
PABMDM headed by the Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy,
MHRD, Government of India are consisting of Members from the line Ministries viz.
Ministry of Women & Child Development; Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment,
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation
etc. The AWP&B is prepared through bottom up approach starting from smallest field
unit and compiled at Cluster, Block, District and State. The AWP&P is a comprehensive
document and provides data on enrolment of children in elementary classes |-VIII in
Government and Government aided schools, Special Training Centres and Madrasas
and Magqtabs supported under Samagra Shiksha.

The AWP&B contains information on Budget Provision made by the States &
UTs for General category, Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan
(TSP). The AWP&B is prepared by bottom up approach by compiling information
obtained from the grass root level and consolidated in the District Plan and State Plan.
No separate Plan is submitted by the States and UTs for General Category, SCSP and
TSP. However, keeping in view the nutritional requirement in tribal areas, the approval
of the Cabinet has been obtained for providing supplementary nutrition to the children
studying in the schools in these areas. Further, 10.70% of the Plan budget of MDM is
allocated for TSP in the Demands for Grants of MHRD. However, Central Government
has issued instructions that TSP allocation is not. reappropriated to augment the
provisions of other heads of accounts for General Category and SCSP. The unutilised


TSP funds cannot be utilised for General categories and SCSP. Therefore, the TSP
allocations is utilised for the States and UTs for covering the eligible children under
TSP.

Kitchen-cum-Stores Release of non-recurring Central Assistance to the States
and UTs for construction of Kitchen-cum-stores was started from 2006-07. MHRD
released non-recurring central assistance of Rs.802555.79 lakh during 2006-07 to
2013-14 for constructions of 1006263 kitchen-cum-stores (Annexure-1). The Statement
indicating the number of kitchen-cum-stores constructed till 31@' March, 2014 is
enclosed at Annexure-il which indicates that 67% of the sanctioned kitchen-cum-stores
were constructed; construction work was in progress in 13% kitchen-cum-stores and
construction was yet to start in the remaining 21% schools.

The pace of construction of kitchen-cum-stores was regularly reviewed during the
meetings of the Programme Approval Board-Mid Day Meal (PAB-MDM). The States and
UTs informed in these meetings that due to the increase in the cost of construction, they
were unable to construct the kitchen-cum-stores which were sanctioned between 2006-
07 to 2008-09 on unit cost norms @ Rs.60,000/- each. These States desired that they
may be provided additional central assistance or resanction these kitchen-cum-stores
on plinth area norms as per State's Schedule of Rates (SoRs). The request of the
States and UTs was considered and agreed by PAB-MDM. The total number of kitchen-
cum-stores sanctioned from 2006-07 to 2018-19 is 10,11,411. The slight change in the
number of kitchen-cum-stores sanction till 2013-14 and up to 2018-19 is due to the fact
that some States had either surrendered or requested for less number of kitchen-cum-
stores on plinth area norms against the kitchen-cum-stores previously sanctioned on
unit cost norms. As per the information submitted by the States till 31@' March, 2019,
the States and UTs have constructed 8,45,424 (84%) kitchen-cum-stores, whereas
construction in 50,449 (5% approx) is under progress and work is yet to start for the
remaining 11% kitchen-cum-stores (Annexure-lll). The component of repair of 10-year-
old kitchencum-stores has also been approved by the CCEA in February, 2019. This
has enabled the States and UTs to carry out repairs for the kitchen-cum-stores
constructed 10 or more years ago.

Kitchen Devices

For preparation and serving of cooked meal under Mid-Day Meal Scheme,
MHRD started the release of non-recurring Central Assistance to the States and UTs for
procurement of kitchen devices @ Rs 5,000 for each school. The replacement of
kitchen devices sanctioned five years earlier was also started during 2012-13. MHRD
had released central assistance of Rs.88084.04 lakh for the procurement of 1240431
units of kitchen devices and replacement of 521841 kitchen devices till March, 2013-14
(Annexure- IV). As per latest statement till September, 2019, MHRD has sanctioned

62°


central assistance of Rs.115664.21 lakh for 2321094 (procurement of 1314427 and
replacement of 1006667) kitchen devices (Annexure - V). The norms for procurement
and replacement of kitchen devices have been revised with the approval of CCEA in
February, 2019. Now the grant for kitchen devices has been linked with enrolment in
place of previously unit cost norm of Rs 5000/- per school.

Drinking Water

The drinking water facilities in schools are provided in convergence with the
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. As per the information furnished by the
States, the drinking water facility was available in 94% of the schools till 2013-14. This
has increased to 97% during 2018-19. Relevant statements on the State and UT wise
availability of drinking water is at Annexures- VI and VII.

Inspections

As per MDM Guidelines at least 25% schools should be visited for, inspections in
each quarter. The State-wise information on the number of institutes inspected during
2018-19 is enclosed at Annexure- Vill. The information reveals that the inspections in
the States and UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Assam. Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim and Lakshadweep are not up to the mark. These States and UTs
have been advised to inspect the institutes on regular basis.

Grievance Redressal Mechanism

The status of Grievance Redressal Mechanism in States and UTs is enclosed at
Annexure-IX.

Monitoring Mechanism

Management Information System was developed In June, 2012 for web based
monitoring of the Mid Day Meal Scheme. The States and UTs have also rolled out
Automated Monitoring System for near real time monitoring of the Scheme. The States
and UTs have been advised to set up Management Structures at State, District, Block
and school levels. The existing Monitoring Mechanism of Mid Day Meal Scheme is
enclosed at Annexure-X. At present the scheme is being evaluated by the NITI Aayog.”

Audit vetting comment

Ministry has not provided the details of action taken on the PAC’s
recommendation on constituting a team of its own or engaging an independent agency
to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under MDM Scheme. The same may be
furnished to PAC.

-C3-


Updated reply of the Department of School Education and Literacy

The Mid Day Meal Scheme (MDMS) covers about 11.59 crore enrolled children
studying in 11.34 lakh schools in India. As per MDM guidelines, all schools must be
visited atleast once for inspection in a year.

In compliance of the recommendation of PAC, this Department has initiated the
process of framing guidelines for strengthening of monitoring mechanism by engaging
the services of reputed independent Agencies/Institutes like National Institute of
Nutrition (NIN), home science departments of Central/State Agriculture Universities,
reputed home science colleges on a clearly defined Terms of Reference (ToR) and
timelines for independent 3% party thorough inspection and monitoring of the
implementation of Mid Day Meal Scheme.

Keeping the spirit of PAC’s recommendation, the ToRs will be designed in such
a manner that every district in the country is covered each year. These will also include
tracking of children's nutritional and health parameters to provide timelines and trend
lines in order to assess the impact of the scheme and to facilitate timely interventions
for course correction.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that during the sitting of the Sub-Committee IV on
05.01.2017, the representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Health and Family
Welfare, AYUSH and Department of School Education & Literacy and Higher Education
were requested to furnish their written replies and comments on some issues and points
relating to their Ministries/Departments. While the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Departments
of School Education & Literacy and Higher Education and the Ministry of AYUSH have
furnished the requisite written information, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have
not furnished written replies to the relevant points relating to them in spite of repeated
reminders. Taking a serious note of such aberration, the Committee caution the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare to be more alert and careful in future and undertake
immediate measures to tackle issues like discrepancies/lacunae in the implementation
of immunisation programme, shortfalls in providing maternal health facilities, child health
facilities etc. under the Child Health Flexible Pool, loopholes in the implementation of
Flexible Pool for State Programme Implementation Plan (FPSPIP) and Reproductive
Child Health Flexible Pool (RCHFP) etc. The Committee desire to be appraised of the
action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on these issues within six
months of the presentation of this report.

{Para No. 13]

~ 04 -


Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Maternal Mortality Ratio of India has declined by 37 points from 167/ lakh live births
in 2011-13 to 130/ lakh live births in 2014-16 and achieved the MDG -5 goal for
Maternal Mortality Ratio and Under Five mortality of India has come down from 69/per
1000 live births in 2008 to 39/1000 live births 2016.

Under National Health Mission (NHM), Various Child Health Facilities such as
792 Special Newborn Care Units (91009), 2330 New-born Stabilization Units
(NBSUs) and 1150 Nutrition Rehabilitation Centers (NRCs) has been set-up all
across the country. More than 9.5 Lakhs newborn have been treated in SNCUs
in 2017-18 and more than 1.8 lakhs under 5 children have been treated in NRCs
in 2017-18.

Promotion of institutional deliveries through Janani Suraksha Yojana. More than
1.07 crore pregnant women received JSY benefits in 2017-18.

Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK) entitles all pregnant women
delivering in public health institutions to absolutely free and no expense delivery
including Caesarean section. The initiative stipulates free drugs, diagnostics,
blood and diet, besides free transport from home to institution, between facilities
in case of a referral and drop back home. Similar entitlements have been put in
place for ante-natal and post-natal complications during pregnancy and all sick
infants accessing public health institutions for treatment. Approximately 1.3 crore
pregnant women received JSSK benefits every year.

Funds are being provided for strengthening of ‘Delivery Points’ for provision of
comprehensive Reproductive, Maternal, New Born Child Health and Adolescent
(RMNCH+A) services. More than 20,000 facilities have been strengthened as
delivery points.

Over 2200 facilities have been operationalized as First Referral Units (FRUs) to
provide comprehensive emergency obstetric care services and blood transfusion
services. Additionally over 50 Obstetric HDUs/ ICUs have been established to
provide critical care to mothers developing life threatening complications.

In order to provide state-of-the-art and outstanding quality care to pregnant
women and children 100/50/30 bedded Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Wings
have been sanctioned in Public Health facilities with high bed occupancy. More
than 32,000 additional beds have been sanctioned across more than 590 health
facilities.

Capacity building of MBBS doctors in Anesthesia (LSAS) and Obstetric Care
including C-section (EmOC) skills has been undertaken to overcome the
shortage of specialists in these disciplines, particularly in rural areas.

-6S-


LaQshya: In order to further accelerate our decline in the coming years, Health
Ministry has recently launched 'LaQshya - Labour room Quality improvement
Initiative’. LaQshya program is a focused and targeted approach to strengthen
key processes related to the labour rooms and maternity operation theatres
which aims at improving quality of care around birth and ensuring Respectful
Maternity Care.

Carrying forward the vision of our Hon'ble Prime Minister, the Pradhan Mantri
Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan was launched in 2016 to ensure quality antenatal
care to pregnant women in the country on the 9th of every month.

More than 1.42 crore antenatal checkups have been conducted at PMSMA sites
for comprehensive services under the programme.

Under the RMNCH+A approach, iron and folic acid supplementation under the
National Iron Plus Initiative (NIPI) is being given across life stages including
pregnant, lactating women and adolescent girls at health facilities and during
outreach activities

Recently, Operational Guidelines have been prepared and disseminated to the
States for Screening for Diagnosis & management of Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus, Hypothyroidism during pregnancy, Calcium supplementation during
pregnancy and lactation, De-worming during pregnancy, universal screening for
HIV/Syphilis during pregnancy.

Capacity building of doctors is undertaken to strengthen availability of
Comprehensive Abortion Care Services at health facilities.

5 National level and 54 state level Skill Labs have been established to strengthen
skills of staff working at delivery points.

Dakshata, a strategic 3 day training capsule for building the skills of health care
providers for imparting quality intrapartum care, is also being implemented.
Additionally, various Capacity building programmes such as RTI/ STI trainings
etc are being implemented for health personnel i.e. doctors, staff nurse and
auxillary mid-wife (ANMs).

MCP Card and Safe Motherhood Booklet are distributed to the pregnant women.
A Mother and Child Tracking System (MCTS) / RCH portal and Mother and Child
Tracking Facilitation Centre (MCTFC) has been introduced. A name, telephone,
address based web enabled system has been introduced by Government of India
to track every pregnant woman and child in order to ensure and monitor timely
and quality services to them including ANC, JSY benefit, Immunization etc.
Special focus to the tribal population in the country:

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is giving special attention to provide
Reproductive and Child Health services in the hard to reach areas including tribal
districts.

- 66°


* Cash assistance of Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) is available to women
belonging to Scheduled Tribe households for giving birth in public health facilities
or accredited private health facilities.

e¢ Gram Swaraj Abhiyan: Mission Indradhanush is one of the seven flagship

schemes under Gram Swaraj Abhiyan which was launched on 23rd April 2018 in
16850 villages identified based on the SC/ST population across states and UTs.
The main aim of the drive is to achieve 100% saturation in the identified villages
through immunization of all the unreached and partially vaccinated children and
pregnant women. During the three rounds under GSA, as on 16th July 2018
around 5.01 lakh children and 1.14 lakh pregnant women have been vaccinated
and nearly all the villages have been saturated.
Partner agencies (WHO, UNICEF, ITSU and UNDP) are also extending support
for the drive. Nodal persons have been identified for the districts under GSA to
provide necessary support to the district in planning and implementation of the
drive.

¢ 117 Aspirational districts have been identified across 28 States in the country for
transformation by the year 2022. Among the 117 aspirational districts, 47 districts
are Priority Districts identified by Ministry of Tribal Affairs. Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare has given special focus to intensify implementation of existing
programmes in these Aspirational districts by monitoring 13 core indicators such
as, Pregnant Women receiving four or more Ante-Natal Care (ANC) check-ups,
pregnant women taking Supplementary Nutrition under the ICDS programme,
pregnant women having severe anaemia, institutional deliveries, home deliveries
attended by an SBA, new-borns breastfed within one hour of birth, underweight
children, stunted children, SAM children, 6 - 23 months old receiving adequate
diet, children fully immunized, Tuberculosis (TB) case notification rate and Health
Infrastructure.

e Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is also committed towards implementation of
the Extended Gram Swaraj Abhiyan in the identified 49,178 villages across the
Aspirational districts. Mission Indradhanush (MI), for ensuring immunization
services to children& pregnant women who have been partially or fully left out of
routine immunization in the Aspirational districts, has now been extended to
cover 117 aspirational districts identified by NIT| Aayog. The main aim of the
drive was to achieve 100% saturation in identified 48,929 villages by 15th August
2018. However, under MI-EGSA, it was aiming for saturation of entire districts.

The partner agencies have been asked to extend their support this round of Mission
Indradhanush. One nodal person for each district has been identified to provide the
required support for the implementation of the drive.

Ce.


Audit Vetting Comments

No further comments.

- 68°


CHAPTER Ill

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

64-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

The Strategy for development of Scheduled Tribes (STs) through TSP includes
earmarking of Plan funds of Central Ministries/Departments into a separate head of
account to strengthen the administrative arrangements for proper utilization and
monitoring of the TSP funds. However, the Committee found that there had been no
segregation of TSP funds under a separate Head at State/District /Block level. The
Department of Secondary Education & Literacy had written to all States / UTs for strict
compliance on maintenance of separate account/record/ Head for the funds received
and expenditure incurred under TSP from the Financial Year 2016-17 wherever
possible, and strictly from the next financial year i.e. 2017-18 and reflected in the Final
Utilization Certificate submitted to the Department. The Committee had opined that such
instructions should have been issued much earlier to the States/UTs and recommended
that the Department should take a more proactive approach in monitoring and keeping
track of fund utilisation and progress in the implementation of the Scheme so as to
ensure efficient and timely achievement of targets set under the Plan. The Committee
had further recommended that strict adherence to earmarking of funds into separate
head at every level be made mandatory for funds.

[Para 1]
Action taken reply of the Department of School Education and Literacy

On going through the 85"" report of PAC and the recent OM dated 28" July, 2019,
it is mentioned that the replies w.r.t. point No.1 & 8 pertaining to MHRD was
communicated vide letter No.1 2/2015-EE 15(pt.) dated 13" March, 2018

The department has sent various communications in this regard vide letter dated
21% February 2017, 17 October, 2017 and 28" March, 2018 whereby this Department
has written to all States and UT for strict compliance on maintenance of separate
accounts/record and head for funds/expenditure incurred under TSP.

With integration of the erstwhile scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA),
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and Teacher Education (TE) into one
integrated Scheme Samagra Shiksha, the States and UTs have again been instructed
vide letter no.2-16/2017-EE3/IS-1 dated 12" April, 2019 to ensure that appropriate bank

HO -


accounts under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme and maintenance of Separate Bank
Account w.r.t SC and ST should also be complied with and disbursement should be
made from the account for all activities covered under the Samagra Shiksha. It may be
mentioned that the States and UTs have been further instructed to separately show the
component of ST and SC component on the fund utilization and emphasized at
mechanism should be devised for ready availability for the relevant data at the different
level. It may be stated that Department has also issued instructions to the States to
provide separate budget head for the ST component in the State budget also in line with
the budget heads as provided in the Central budget for the scheme. It may be further
informed that the mandatory provision for ST component (10.70% of the total BE) is
invariably provided in the Central Budget and Samagra Shiksha Scheme.

Audit vetting comment

i) Ministry has not furnished the details of any action taken by it for monitoring and
keeping track of fund ulilization and progress as recommended by the PAC. Further, the
outcome of the efforts made by the Ministry to ensure strict adherence to earmarking of
funds into separate head at every level be made mandatory for release of funds has
also not been provided. The same may be provided to PAC.

(ii) How many States have complied with the instructions issued on 12/04/2019 by the
Ministry'?”

Updated reply of the Department of School Education & Literacy

The allocation of funds in Samagra Shiksha Scheme is governed by the
programmatic and financial norms and the activities and interventions are well defined
and depending on the interventions, the funds are budgeted for the benefit of STs and
spent accordingly. Some of the beneficiary-oriented activities funded under the scheme
are as follows:-

५. Provision free text-books up to Class VIIl- To all children including ST
students.
vi. Uniforms up to Class ५॥- Two sets of Uniforms to children belonging to

SC, ST & Minority communities including BPL families.

vii. | Special projects for Social equity: the benefits under this intervention are
accorded to SC, ST OBC Minorities communities

viii. | KGBVs for Girls from Elementary Level (VI-VIIl) to Senior Secondary Level
(VI-XIl). The Scheme provides for access and quality education to girls
from disadvantaged groups of girls in the age group of 10-18 years
aspiring to study in classes VI to XII: belonging to SC, ST, OBC, Minority


communities and BPL families to ensure smooth transition of girls from
elementary to secondary and upto class XII wherever possible.

Also Priority is given to given to special focus districts with higher
concentration of SC, ST, Minorities and aspirational districts as well as
educationally backward blocks while approving interventions such as
upgradation/strengthening of schools. ICT facilities, vocational education
etc.

The budgetary allocation of 20% for SC and 10.70 % for ST is done out of
the total BE as per the guidelines. Funds are released accordingly under
separate sub-heads and utilized by the States and accounted for under
different sub-heads.

An online project monitoring system, namely ‘PRABANDH’ has been
launched for enhancing efficiency and managing the implementation of
Samagra Shiksha in all the States & UTs. It is enabled on the website
https://seshagun.gov.in and can be accessed from the School, Block.
District and State Level. The important features of the PRABANDH
System are:

Online submission of Annual Work Plan & Budget from District/State Level
Tracking of 501 Funds. release to State./UTs

Generation of different types of reports like Physical & Financial Progress,
Spill-over and Committed Liabilities. Unspent balances etc. on real time
basis.

Also, a Data Visualization Dashboard has been created in the PRABANDH
System for display of monthly status of physical and financial progress
under the major interventions. With a view to facilitating the online
submission of Monthly Progress Reports district wise, by the respective
State/UT, an Expenditure Module for District Users has been introduced to
capture the physical and financial progress of various interventions from
the district level and the progress can be seen in the National Reports.

All the States and UTs except Ladakh and Lakshadweep maintain books
of account in computerized manner.

Public Financial Management System (PFMS) being implemented by
Controller General of Accounts (CGA) for all Centrally Sponsored
Schemes also covers Samagra Shiksha. Funds to the States/UTs under
the scheme are released through the PFMS system.”

ae


Further Audit vetting comments

i) Ministry has not furnished the details of any action taken by it for monitoring
and keeping track of fund utilization and progress as recommended by the PAC
Further, the outcome of the efforts made by the Ministry to ensure strict
adherence to earmarking of funds into separates head at every level be made
mandatory for release of funds has also not been provided The same may be
provided to PAC.
ii) How many states have complied with the instructions issued on 12/04/2019
by the Ministry?
iii) The reply by the Ministry at (iv) above indicates that there is difficulty in
measuring the outcomes of the earmarked fund How does the Ministry plan to tackle
this shortcoming?

Comments/clarification furnished by the Mid Day Meal (MDM) Division,
Department of School Education & Literacy

i) The MDM is ensuring adherence to the guidelines issued by the Central
Government for earmarking of 10.7% of the Budget Estimates for Tribal Sub Plan
in the Demands for Grants of the Department.

ii) The releases for TSP are made on the basis of tribal population of elementary
class children in various States /UTs in accordance with the data in U-DISE

iii) Separate sanctions are issued for each category viz. General, SCSP and TSP so
as to ensure transparency and accountability in the financial assistance for each
category.

iv) The instructions contained in the Budget Circular issued every year by the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) regarding re-appropriation of TSP
funds to other heads of accounts in the scheme are followed.

v) Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for creating a Non Lapsable Pool of
TSP funds so that the savings in TSP funds is ploughed back to NLP of TSP. As
an when the NLP of TSP is created, the unutilized funds from TSP would go back
to that pool.

vi) The States/UTs compile Annual Work Plan & Budget proposals by adopting
bottom up approach in consultation with schools, blocks, districts and State and
indicate expenditure incurred against allocated funds for General, SCSP and TSP
during the previous year and projections for requirement of funds for each
category viz. General, SCSP and TSP during the next year. The approved AWP&B
proposals of States and UTs are uploaded on Department of School Education &
Literacy website www.mdm.nic.in.

-43-


vii) The Department has taken an initiative for providing flexi funds for new
intervention relating to setting up of School Nutrition Gardens for addressing the
problems of anemia and deficiency of Micronutrients amongst the school children.
Supplementary nutrition is also provided to school children in Tribal identified
areas with reported high level of malnutrition.

viii) The Mid Day Meal Scheme is an ideal platform for promoting and conserving the
composite culture of the country. The value of integration and communal harmony
are taught to the children when they sit together and take mid day meal together
irrespective of their caste, religion etc. Out of 25 lakh Cooks-cum-helpers engaged
by States/UTs about 90% are women are from the socially and economically
challenged segment of the society.

ix) MDMS is a right based programme under National Food Security Act, 2013 for all
the children studying in elementary classes in eligible schools, irrespective of their
caste, religion etc.

x) The sanction letter for release of central assistance for TSP also includes a
condition that Utilization Certificate of grant will be submitted within three months
of the closure of financial year.

Action Taken by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

The allocations under schemes for welfare of STs have already been allotted a
separate budget head 796 for avoiding possibility of diversion of funds.

Vetting Comment of Audit

Though the Ministry has allotted a separate budget head 796 for Tribal Area Sub-
Plan as Minor Head, it did not furnish the efforts taken to ensure earmarking of funds
into separate head at State level. The details of earmarking of fund into separate head
at every level may be intimated to PAC.

Updated Reply of Ministry of Tribal Affairs

At the central level, allocations under schemes for welfare of STs have been
allotted a separate budget head 796. Provision has also been made under the State
TSP Guidelines issued by erstwhile Planning Commission in 2014 that funds under TSP
shall be earmarked under a separate Minor Head below the functional major Head/Sub-
Major Heads.

Action Taken by the Department of Health & Family Welfare

The State and District level maintenance of separate accounts for TSP funds
under the National Health Mission (NHM) may not be feasible as under this programme
the funds are provided for 18 different programs, each of which has Scheduled Tribe
Sub Plan (STSP), Scheduled Caste Sub Pan (SCSP) and General component. Further,
funds under NHM flow from State to 672 District Health Societies, 763 District Hospitals

"शव -


and Sub-District units that comprise of 5396 CHCs, 25308 PHCs, 153655 Sub-Centers,
5,10,416 Village Health and Sanitation, Nutrition Committees (VHNSCs) and to various
Implementing agencies for civil works, procurements etc.

However, the States are requested to report expenditure component wise
separately through Financial Management Report (FMR). Further, the Utilization
Certificates (UCs) are settled sanction and component wise.

Audit Vetting Comments

Ministry has not responded to the recommendation of the PAC on monitoring and
Keeping track of fund utilization and progress in the implementation of the Scheme and
strict adherence to earmarking of funds into separate head at every level. The same
may be furnished to PAC.

Updated reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Public Health and Hospitals is a State subject and its implementation also lies
with the State Governments. However, Ministry has issued directions to State
Governments by issuing D.O. letters for category wise reporting of expenditure. Some
States viz. Guajrat, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana etc. have already started submitting
Category wise Utilisation Certificates (UCs) in adherence to the guidelines.

This was also communicated to the States in the 1st Quarterly Performance
Review Meeting held on 19th and 20th September, 2019 which was attended by Senior
State Officials.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that despite the revised TSP guidelines and the
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee to transfer unutilized TSP funds at
the end of a financial year into a non-lapsable pool of TSP fund and allocation of
proportionate funds from the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of TSP funds (NLCPTF) to the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for implementing schemes exclusively meant for development
of STs, such a modality had not been devised at that time. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs
had informed that the issue of Non-lapsable pool of funds was being handled by NITI
Aayog in consultation with the Ministries concerned. The Ministry had simultaneously
advocated the creation of a non-lapsable pool for TSP funds. The Committee had
opined that concerted efforts should be made towards optimal utilisation of the allocated
TSP fund within the given financial year and Non-lapsable pool for TSP fund be created
at the earliest to pool funds that could not be utilized due to unforeseen eventualities
and unavoidable circumstances, within the specific time period.

[Para No.3]

s-


Action taken by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

An online monitoring system has been put in place with web address
https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages monitoring of allocations for welfare of
STs under the schemes, monitoring of expenditure vis-a- vis allocations, monitoring of
physical performance and outcome monitoring. In the First phase, Central
Ministries/Departments have been linked to the https://stcmis.gov.in. This online system
captures the release data scheme-wise and also state-wise by the Central Ministries /
Departments. As regards efforts towards optimal utilisation of the allocated TSP fund
within the given financial year and creation of Non-lapsable pool for TSP fund, the same
is to be decided at appropriate level in the Government.

Audit vetting comments

The efforts made by the Ministry to ensure optimum utilization of allocated TSP
fund within the given financial year and to create non-lapsable pool for TSP fund may
be intimated to PAC.”

Updated reply Ministry of Tribal Affairs

Nodal officers have been nominated in each line Ministry/Department and
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is taking meetings with these nodal officers under the
chairpersonship of Secretary (TA) to persuade the concerned Ministries/Departments
for full utilization of allocated funds. NITI Aayog has observed that in India the system of
cash-based budgeting is followed. However, Ministry of Tribal Affairs is deliberating with
NIT! Aayog for an appropriate decision with regard to optimum utilization of funds in line
with the suggestions of PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that full amount was not released for National Programme for
Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE), National Programme for Prevention & Control of
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases & Stroke (NPCDCS) due to high unspent
balance in these programme under TSP. The Committee found that, in the case of
NPHCE, there was lack of health care and training facilities and the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare had not conducted IEC and mass media activities to inform the
elders of different health risks and treatments. In the case of NPCDCS, there was lack
of activities for behaviour & Life style changes, non-screening of persons for early
diagnosis, deficiency in treatment facilities and training activities, non-establishment of
Tertiary Cancer Centre (TCCs); deficient treatment for infant diseases, etc. The
Committee were of the view that had the Ministry formulated the comprehensive plan to
spend the allocated fund under these programmes and diversify the expenditure on IEC
activities, training and health centres, health counselling camps, screening and health


checkups, etc., there would not have been any unspent balance of funds and more
importantly, these programmes would have achieved their goals. The Committee,
therefore recommended that hence forth, while formulating a comprehensive plan for
the implementation of these programme, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
should take into consideration IEC activities for widening the reach of these
programmes through awareness, trainings and health counselling, health centres and
innovative and interactive activities etc., so as to ensure effective and efficient utilization
of the allocated funds under NPHCE and NPCDCS for betterment of the intended
beneficiaries.

[Para No.4]
Action taken reply of the Department of Health and Family Welfare

(i) National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular
Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS):

The Government of India is implementing National Programme for Prevention
and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) for
interventions up to District level under the National Health Mission (NHM). It has focus
on awareness generation for behaviour and life-style changes, screening and early
diagnosis of persons with high level of risk factors and their treatment and referral (if
required) to higher facilities for appropriate management for Non-Communicable
Diseases (NCDs).

The programme was revamped after 117 Five Year Plan. During 12" FYP, the
focus of the programme was on the PAN India coverage on health promotion,
prevention, detection, treatment and rehabilitation services at decentralised level up to
district hospital & below level under the overall umbrella of National Health Mission
(NHM) for primary and secondary level health care services.

Strategy for implementation of the programme comprised focus on Health
promotion, awareness generation and promotion of healthy life style, screening and
early detection, timely, affordable and accurate diagnosis, access to affordable
treatment, rehabilitation. Strategy for early diagnosis comprised opportunistic screening
of persons above the age of 30 years for diabetes and hypertension, with health care
facility, for village, sub-centre, CHC and District hospital.

Under the programme, testing, diagnosis and treatment facilities for cancer (Oral,
Cervix, Breast), diabetes and hypertension are provided through different levels of
healthcare by setting up NCD Clinics in District Hospitals and Community Health
Centres (CHCs). The treatment is either free or highly subsidized for the poor and


needy. Till June, 2018; 525 District NCD Clinics, 2564 Community Health Centres NCD
Clinics and 167 Cardiac Care Units have been set up under the programme.

A population level initiative for prevention, control and screening for common
Non-Communicable Diseases (diabetes, hypertension and cancer viz. oral, breast and
cervical cancer) has been rolled out in over 150 districts of the country in 2017-18 under
NHM, as a part of comprehensive primary healthcare. Under the initiative, frontline
health workers such as Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) and Auxiliary Nurse
Midwives (ANM), inter alia, are leveraged to carry out screening and generate
awareness about the risk factors of NCDs among the masses. Training modules for
screening have been launched and distributed to the States. State-level trainings are
organized for implementing the programme. Funds for training of health professionals
ie. MOs, ASHAs, ANMs, Staff Nurses, Multi Purpose Health Workers (MPHWs) are
also being provided to States under the initiative... .Under NPCDCS, funds are
also being allocated to the States/UTs in the State PIPs for awareness, training, health
counselling to the health centres for innovative and interactive activities etc. for
betterment of the intended beneficiaries including scheduled tribes. Budgetary allocation
for IEC activities has also been increased from Rs.10 lakh per State NCD Cell to Rs. 70
lakh (24 bigger States) & Rs.50 lakh (small States/UTs). States have developed many
modes for IEC viz. pamphlets, banners, posters, teaching manuals along with audio-
visual and visual means. World Cancer Day and World Diabetes Day are also observed
to generate public awareness to promote healthy lifestyle habits.

(ii) National Programme for the Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE):

‘NPHCE, since 2015-16, is being implemented under NCD flexible pool of
National health Mission (NHM) for implementation of district and sub- district activities of |
the programme on the basis of Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) submitted by the
States/UTs and examined by this Ministry. The flexible pool was introduced to utilize the
optimum funds released under the pool for implementation of the activities and goals
envisaged under the programme. However, observation of the Committee will be
complied with while considering the IEC activities for widening the reach of NPHCE
through awareness, training and health counselling, health centres and innovative and
interactive activities etc.

Audit vetting comment

Utilisation of allocated funds against the allocation and achievement against the
target may be intimated to PAC.

«te -


Updated reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Allocation & Expenditure is given at Annexure: “A” Physical Target &
achievement is attached at: Annexure: “B”

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that monitoring of TSP of Central Ministries/Departments
would be by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and accordingly the Ministry was developing an
online monitoring system for Central Ministries/ Departments. The system would
encompass monitoring of fund allocations and expenditure and achievement of physical
targets i.e. scheme-wise performance of each Ministry/Department. The Committee
were of the view that in order to ensure implementation of programmes under TSP as
per guidelines and also to ensure flow of benefits to the tribals, it is imperative for nodal
units at the Central level as well as the State level to have real time information sharing
system. The Committee had also opined that online monitoring system only at the
Central Ministries/Departments would be incomplete and ineffective as the Ministry was
unable to gain/collect/gather information on the actual needs of the tribals at the grass
root level. The Committee, therefore, recommended that nodal units at the State level
as well as District level be included in the online monitoring system that was being
developed by the Ministry at the earliest. The Committee desired to be apprised of the
status report in that within six months of the presentation of this report.

[Para No.9]
Action taken reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

An online monitoring system has been put in place with web
address https://stcmis.gov.in. The framework envisages monitoring of allocations for
welfare of STs under the schemes, monitoring of expenditure vis-a- vis allocations,
monitoring of physical performance and outcome monitoring. In the First phase, Central
Ministries / Departments have been linked to the https://stcmis.gov.in. This online
system captures the release data scheme-wise and also state-wise by the Central
Ministries / Departments.”

Audit vetting comment

The Ministry did not furnish the status of inclusion of the nodal units at the State
level and District level in the online monitoring system that has been put in place. The
same may be provided to PAC.

Updated reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

There is multiplicity of schemes and agencies, multiple implementation
guidelines, multiple physical and financial reporting structures. Also, within each State,

_न१-


different Departments handle TSP funds. Thus, bringing synergy and effecting
convergence is a grave challenge. However, Ministry of Tribal Affairs has given a
project to Price Water House Cooper (PWC) to work out a monitoring framework to be
incorporated in the online monitoring portal https://stemis.gov.in.

Action taken reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

The Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) software developed with the support
of NIC had some operational issues. Therefore, an enriched version of the software is
being developed with the support of external agencies. This new software would
facilitate the Ministry in receiving all future PIPs electronically with separate disclosure
on activities related to Tribal Sub Plan (TSP). This software will act as an on line
monitoring system and would facilitate to assess the actual needs of the tribal’s at
ground level.”

Audit vetting comment

The latest status of the development and operationalization of the software may
be intimated to PAC.

Updated reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was launched in 2005 to provide
accessible, affordable and quality health care to the rural population especially the
vulnerable sections. One of the key features of NRHM included interventions for
improving health indicators. In 2013, the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was
subsumed under the National Health Mission (NHM) as its Sub-Mission, along with
National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) as the other Sub-Mission.

Under NHM, tribal areas enjoy relaxed norms as under:

v. Relaxed norms for health facilities-The population norms for setting up
Health Facilities in tribal areas are relaxed. Against the population norms
of 5000, 30000, and 1,20,000 for setting up of Sub Centre, PHC and CHC
respectively, in tribal and desert areas its 3000, 20,000 and 80,000. A
new norm of "time to care” has also been adopted for setting up Sub
Health Centres in tribal areas under which a Sub Health Centre can be set
up within 30 minutes of walk from habitation.

vi. States have been provided with the flexibility of relaxing the norm of one
ASHA per 1000 population to one ASHA per habitation in Tribal/hilly and
difficult areas.

- Cor


vii. While other States had Mobile Medical Units per 10.00 lakh populations
subject to capping of 5 MMUs per district, for tribal and hilly states this
could be relaxed as per need. The norms for MMU have been further
revised to relax the norm where one MMU exceeds 60 patients per day in
plain areas and 30 patients per day in tribal/hilly areas.

viii. In addition, all tribal majority districts whose composite health index is
below the State average have been identified as High Priority Districts
(HPDs). These districts are to receive higher per capita funding, relaxed
norms, enhanced monitoring and focussed supportive supervision and
encouraged to adopt innovative approaches to address their peculiar
health challenges.

* The PIP software is in the process of development and after
incorporating feedback of the States/UTs, the User Acceptance Test
(UAT) and third party audit will be carried out before hosting the same
into server. This process may take some more time; however, the
Ministry is in the process of finalizing the software at the earliest.

Pending that, presently, all proposals under NHM from the States/UTs are
received electronically in the form of e-mails and excel files etc. from the State/ UTs.
Further, unique FMR code have been approved for each activity.

Observation/Recommendation

Audit had highlighted that planning for implementation of Schemes was deficient
as the plans were formulated without specific consideration of tribal beneficiaries as
required under TSP. The Committee felt the need to strengthen the planning process
with the involvement of the community especially in tribal dominant blocks. The
Committee had opined that it is imperative to identify and prioritize issues/concerns of
the local community in the planning and decision making process. The Committee
therefore had recommended that inputs/suggestions of local tribal community should be
sought before finalizing the plan for implementation of any programme under the TSP.
The Committee were of the view that such initiative would enable the implementing
agency to pin point issues that need special attention and devote additional fund,
human resources of the same and ensure flow of benefits to tribal communities under
the respective programmes/schemes.

[Para No.12]
Action taken reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

As per guidelines for State TSP dated 18.06.2014 issued by erstwhile Planning
Commission it is stipulated that Tribal Welfare Department is the nodal department

&l-


authorized to lead the process of TSP development at the State level. While formulating
State TSP, State Nodal Department shall ensure that TSP should be formulated at the
District level by the District Planning and Monitoring Committee (DPMC). DPMC must
reflect on the actual demand for the schemes / programmes that are to benefit STs,
giving priority to equity aspect of their local aspirations and socio-economic
backwardness.

While issuing Sanction orders by this Division, one of the conditions is that State
Government shall ensure that concerned Panchayati Raj Institutions should be duly
informed about the projects / programmes relating to Tribal Development to be
implemented in the area of jurisdiction. State Government shall also ensure that
meetings of Gram Sabha are conducted on regular interval as per norms in such areas.

Audit vetting comments

Ministry may intimate PAC about the mechanism put in place to ensure that
inputs/suggestions of local tribal community have been sought and incorporated in the
plan as recommended by the PAC.

Updated reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

As stated above, while issuing Sanction orders by the Ministry, one of the
conditions is that State Government shall ensure that concerned Panchayati Raj
Institutions should be duly informed about the projects/programmes relating to Tribal
Development to be implemented in the area of jurisdiction. State Government shall also
ensure that meetings of Gram Sabha are conducted on regular interval as per norms in
such areas.

Action taken reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Under National Health Mission, bottom-up approach is expected for preparing the
Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) for States. The Framework for implementation
of NHM provides for decentralised planning. Untied grants are provided to Village
Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees to enable local planning and action. Further,
under NHM, States have been asked to provide higher per capita allocation to High
Priority Districts that cover all Tribal Districts with composite health index below the
State average.

Audit vetting comments

Reply of the Ministry does not address the recommendation of the PAC. Specific
reply may be furnished to PAC.

Updated reply of the Department of Health & Family Welfare

Under the National Health Mission, support is provided to States/UTs for
strengthening their healthcare system based on proposal incorporated in their State

82°


Programme Implementation Plan (PIP). The State PIPs are envisaged to be an
aggregate of the district/city health action plans, and include activities to be carried out
at the state level.

District Health Action Plans developed through district based planning utilizing
locally generated service data, civil registration etc is a key pillar under NHM.
Decentralized planning using data has following benefits:

+ It ensures active community participation including tribal population
participation to identify local Health needs and ways to address them.
+ It also enables mobilization of resources from sectors other than health.
* It brings community closer to the health system and provides a platform for
interaction of community members with health service providers.
+ It enables health system to get feedback from the community to improve

quality of services and utilization of services offered.
* Programmes based on evidence are likely to be more effective and

successful.
Letter has been issued to the states that the local tribal communities should be
involved in the planning for development of health action plans in scheduled tribal
districts. (Copy enclosed).

-B%-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-

NEW DELHI:
2 December, 2022
16 Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)

ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
Chairperson,
Public Accounts Committee

- 517


(APPENDIX - Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(iii)

(४)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 13
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 1,3,4,9 and 12

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

13

Total: 08
Percentage -61.54%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: 1
Percentage— 38.46%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%