 
 
SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-2024) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
Implementation of USOF project (Phase 1) to provide mobile 
services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2023 /Sravana 1945 (Saka)  


 
 
PAC NO. 2300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 B
Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi –110 001 

(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGES 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24).......................................... (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23)........................................... (v) 
COMPOSITION O F T HE SUB-COMMITTEE–I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2022-23)............................................................................................................................. (vii) 
INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................... (ix) 
PART I  
I. Introduction.............................................................................................................. 1 
II. Project Planning (Para 2.1.4.1)  
A. Imprudent selection of low power BTS using 2G technology.......................... 2 
B. Failure of USOF to review and upgrade technology used in the project......... 7 
C. Vendor guided selection of technology led to de- facto single vendor 
situation. Co-ordination with State Governments(Para 2.3.1) ....................... 12 
III. Project Execution (Para 2.1.4.2)  
A. Delays in implementation status of LWE Project- Phase................................ 13 
B. Agreement for award of work by BSNL prior to agreement between USOF 
and BSNL ....................................................................................................... 14 
C. Inadequate marketing of Telecom products.................................................... 15 
IV. Monitoring/ Evaluation of the project (PARA 2.1.4.3)  
 A. Evaluation of performance of LWE sites ........................................................ 16 
 B. Quality of Service- Non-Compliance of terms and conditions of     
Agreement...................................................................................................... 18 
V. Financial Issues (PARA 2.1.4.4.)  
 A.  Irregular payments of CAPEX and OPEX subsidy........................................... 19 
B. Liquidated Damages recovered by BSNL from Contractors/vendors 
notcredited to 
USOF............................................................................................. 23 
C. Non-adjustment of CENVAT Credit by BSNL.................................................. 24 
PART II 
 Observations/Recommendations................................................................... 27 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the First  sitting of the Sub- Committee – I of Public Accounts 
Committee (2022-23) held on 03.01.2023...................................................... 33 
II. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Sub- Committee – I of Public Accounts 
Committee (2022-23) held on 13.01.2023...................................................... 35 

(ii) 
 
III. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Sub- Committee – I of Public Accounts 
Committee (2022-23) held on 18-04-2023………………………………….….  38 
IV. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Sub -Committee–I of Public Accounts 
Committee (2022-23) held on 28-04-2023…………………………………….. . 41 
V. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 09.08.2023 .................................................................................... 43 
 
  

(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury — Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
13. Shri Jayant Sinha 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli  
17. Dr. K. Laxman 
18. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 

(iv) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  — Under Secretary  
 
  

(v) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury — Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri T.R. Baalu  
 3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
 4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
 5. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
 6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
 7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
 9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
 10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
 11. Shri Brijendra Singh 
 12. Shri Jayant Sinha  
 13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
 16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
 17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 18. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
 19. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 20. Vacant ∗ 
 21. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
  
                                                           
∗ Due to retirement of  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy on 21.06.2022. 

(vi) 
 
 
  

(vii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-I OF PAC (2022-23) 
 
1.Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury   — Chairperson 
2.Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  — Convenor 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  — Member 
4. Dr. C.M. Ramesh   — Member 
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  — Member 
6. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy — Member 
  

(viii) 
 
  

(ix) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023- 24) having been authorized by the 
Committee, do present this Seventy-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Implementation of 
USOF project (Phase 1) to provide mobile services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism” 
based on C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021 relating to the Ministry of Communications. 
 2. The C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021 was laid on the Table of the House on 29.11.2021. 
 3. Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the aforesaid subject and allocated the 
same to Sub-Committee–I for examination and Report. 
 4. The Sub -Committee–I of Public Accounts Committee (2022- 23) took briefing by Audit 
on 03.01.2023. Thereafter, Sub- Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Comm unications on the aforementioned subject on 13.01.2023, 18.04.2023 and 
28.04.2023 respectively. 
 5.The Sub-Committee–I of PAC (2022- 23) first considered and adopted the Draft Report 
on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 28.04.2022. Then the Draft Report was 
placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) for consideration and adoption. The 
Committee adopted the same at their Sitting held on 9.8.2023. The Minutes of the Sittings are 
appended to the Report. 
 6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of the Report. 
 7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject. 
 8. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Telecommunications under Ministry of Communications for tendering evidence 
before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Sub- Committee-I of P ublic Accounts 
Committee (2022-23) in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 9. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
August, 2023  Chairperson 
Sravana, 1943 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

(x) 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
 
PART I 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF)  aims to provide for quality and affordable 
mobile and digital services across the rural and remote areas of the country; allowing non-
discriminatory access to mobile and network services along with equitable access to knowledge 
and information dissemination, leading to rapid socio- economic development with improved 
standard of living.The Universal Servic e Obligation (USO) Fund is headed by the Administrator, 
USO Fund who is appointed by the Central Government, for the administration of the fund. It is 
an attached office of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Communications. 
GENESIS OF UNIVERSAL SERVICE OBLIGATION FUND (USOF) 
2. The genesis of  USOF is almost 200 years old, with the concept of Universal Service 
Obligation having been introduc ed by Rowland Hill in 1837 with his postal reforms. The postal 
reforms included uniform rates across the United Kingdoms (UK) and prepayment by sender via 
postage stamps. Universal Service was the key objective of the Universal Postal Union.In India, 
the U niversal Service Obligation (USO) Fund was established initially with the fundamental 
objective of providing access to "Basic" telegraph services to people in remote and rural areas at 
affordable and reasonable prices. Subsequently, the Indian Telegraph (A mendment) Act, 2006 
was notified on 29.12.2006 to repeal the term "Basic" wherein the scope of USO Fund was 
widened to provide access to telegraph services (including mobile services, broadband 
connectivity and ICT infrastructure creation) in rural and rem ote areas.To give impetus to rural 
telephony, Government of India (GoI) constituted Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) by 
an Act of Parliament with effect from 01 April 2002. The resources for meeting Universal Service 
Obligation (USO) were to be rai sed through a Universal Access Levy (UAL) as a percentage of 
revenue earned by all telecom operators under various licenses. As per Para 9B of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 2003, the sums of money received towards USOF shall be first credited to 
Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, if the Parliament by appropriation 
on this behalf so provides, credit such proceeds to the fund from time to time for being utilized 
exclusively for meeting USO. Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of 
Communication has a pivotal role here as it is responsible for policy formulation, performance 
review,monitoring, international cooperation and Research & Development intelecommunication 
sector. The Department also allocates frequency and manages radio communications in close 
coordination with international bodies. It is also responsible for enforcing wireless regulatory 
measures and monitoring the wireless transmission of all users in the country. The Department is 
also responsible for grant of licenses to operators for providing basic and value-added services in 
various telecom circles as per the approved policy of the Government. 
3. The C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021 for the year that ended in March 2021 contains 
significant results of the performance audit  of Implementation of USOF project (Phase 1) to 
provide mobile services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism  by the Department of 
Telecommunications of the Union Government from 2013-14 to 2022-23. 
4. Public Accounts Committee (2022- 23), selected the aforesaid C&AG Report and 

 
2 
allocated the same to one of their Sub- Committees viz. Sub-Committee – I for examination and 
report. 
5. The Sub- Committee - I of the Public Accounts Committee (2022- 23) considered the 
subject for detailed examination, took oral evidences of the representatives of Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) on 13.01.2023, 18.04.2023 and 
28.04.2023 respectively and obtained written replies on the same. Based on the oral evidence 
and written replies, the Sub-Committee examined the subject in detail. 
II. PROJECT PLANNING (PARA 2.1.4.1) 
A. Imprudent selection of low power BTS using 2G technology (2.1.4.1) (a) 
6. Audit expressed the view that the choice of a limited use 2G technology , when more 
advanced and versatile technologies were available,  was not efficacious as future upgradation 
would be at a cost. Further, as funds for the project were not a constraint ,ab-initio adoption of 
latest available technology would have improved outco mes and made the project future proof. 
Besides, adopting a solution suggested by a private company which later participated in the bid 
for the project as a vendor, instead of a neutral and competitive process for selection of 
technology, deprived USOF of t he opportunity of making an optimum technological choice with 
respect to coverage, scope and scalability of the project while tapping possible cost benefits. 
7. In their background note, the Ministry have stated as under: 
I.  It is submitted that the Cabinet approval of the project was accorded only in 2014 to 
be given on nomination basis to BSNL and 2G technology in 2/2/2 configurations for 
the 3 sectors of mobile BTS tower was as per the voice communications needs in the 
Left-Wing Extremism areas with low  data connectivity as available in 2G technology 
with GPRS/EDGE enhancements. The BTS installed were of 10 -watt systems for 
each of the 2/2/2 configuration which is not low power. 
II. Further, the range of network also depends on number of factors including terrain, 
height of tower and spectrum used. In case of BSNL 40-meter height tower were used 
which is the standard height and further spectrum used for 2G was in the range of 900 
Mhz which gives larger coverage as compared to higher spectrums s uch as 1800 , 
2100 and 2300 Mhz. 
III. As per TEC GR category-I and category-II both are for rural requirements and in terms 
of power of BTS, category-I are traditional high power systems while category -II is for 
low power systems for rural applications where availabil ity of grid power may not be 
sufficient and utilization of DG may be a costly expenditure apart from maintenance 
and other issues. The reliance on solar systems is therefore kept in the project. It 
needs to state here that the solar systems being renewable source of green energy 
are deployed in all such areas as per requirement and also as per Green Telecom 
Policy of the Department. Grid power is made available as per connec tivity from 
electricity boards. 
IV. In addition, the design of the low powered equipment is modular and scalable and as 
per the latest Generic Requirements of TEC GR NO. GR/WS/BSS -002/01 Dec 2009 
and Gol Order letter no. 16- 6/2011-CS- III dated 04.01.2012 i ssued to all service 
providers. 

 
3 
V. It may be appreciated that the demand of MHA was  to provide voice communication 
for security forces in LWE affected areas. BSNL had submitted multiple times the 
DPR based on traditional mobile equipment which was only on 2G. The estimate was 
to the tune of Rs. 6000 crs. and was having major component as  High speed Diesel 
(HSD) for O&M without considering the price escalation of HSD Diesel and 
manpower. The coverage radius for mobile communication was envisaged as 3 KMs 
around the cell site. 
VI. The object of the scheme was to provide voice connectivity to Security forces and was 
incidental on the scattered population around the tower. It was well established that 
only 2G technology was able to provide coverage to large area whereas any other 
technology having focus on data speed provides much less coverage especially when 
the new technologies like 3G were just rolled out. Thus to serve large population from 
a tower 2G was the best know option on that time (2012-13). 
VII. In addition, the Government of India had decided to adopt measures to green the 
telecommunication sector setting broad directions and goals to achieve the desired 
reduction in carbon emission through the use of Renewable Energy Technologies and 
energy efficient equipments vide letter no. 16- 6/2011-CS-TII dated 04.01.2012 in 
accordance with the guidelines principle of NTP 2012. 
VIII. DoT high powered technical committee consisting of highest level technical expertise 
in India decided to go ahead with Solar based towers as per government policies. 
TEC GR for those types of towers was in existence since 2009. A solution based on 
that TEC G R was proposed as BSNL had experience of towers being blown by 
Naxalites using diesel available on sites. 24x7 electricity infra. was not available which 
is considered a basic requirement for mobile communication uptime and traditional 
high powered BTS. The committee weighed all pros and cons and selected TEC GR 
based product fully workable Solar solution for these areas. 
IX. The equipment has been supplied after TSEC Certificate, which indicates that 
equipment complies all clauses of GR including clause 8. 1.4 on expansion 
techniques. Although IIT Bombay has not made any adverse comment on the 
technology or equipment deployed in this project except indicat ing that there is heavy 
call congestion in VSAT sites which was due to insufficient VSAT bandwidth. To 
overcome this issue, BSNL has increased VSAT bandwidth from 512 kbps to 2 Mbps 
with the approval of DoT by augmentations of satellite bandwidth of all VSAT sites. All 
the VSAT sites had been augmented to 2Mbps. After augmentation of satellite 
bandwidth, call traffic of such sites has increased to 150% and now there is no call 
congestion and no further complaints. Further it also needs to state here that call 
congestion was never reported on sites working on MW/Radio, hence equipment as 
such is having optimum capacity and coverage as envisaged in the scheme.  
X. Configuration of 2+2+2 was selected to be deployed as the population in target area 
was very less. It is to note that the currently deployed solution can be added further if 
traffic is increased. There is no traffic congestion as at most of these sites. Hence the 
decision of high level technical committee seems appropriate to deploy 2+2+2 
configuration in sparsely population Naxal affected areas. Regarding Coverage 

 
4 
around site, the system deployed by BS NL is as per TEC GR, which provides mobile 
coverage of more than 4 Kms around the cell site and 100% sites were tested for RF 
coverage by BSNL and TERM Cell of DoT.  
XI. As per TRAI report, the total subscriber base of wireless services has grown from 
391.76 million in March 2009 to 904.51million in March 2014: Out of 904.51 million 
subscribers at the end of financial year 2013- 14, 847.41 million (93.69%) were GSM 
Subscribers wherein 2G subscriber base was accounted over 70% at that time. It 
needs to state here that 2G Handset was affordable and cheaper for the common 
people of the rural & remote areas at the time of project execution. However Focus 
Audit was conducted in circumference during 2017-18 & review audit in 2020-21.  
XII. Regarding low power system is used, that is a misconception. The  selection of the 
technology was to use Energy efficient systems as mentioned in the GR. These are 
low power consumption systems which can be used on Solar power technology.  
XIII. As GSM is global standards and produ cts were procured as per TEC GRs , the GR 
was selected by high powered technical commi ttee of DoT . It is to further state that 
the technology was best suitable for these security sensitive areas at  that time for 
providing voice/SMS connectivity to security forces and locals.  
XIV. The problems sighted regarding coverage and call drops were due to several 
reasons such as poor backhaul in case of VSAT sites and number of spectrum 
channels. This is not because of 10- watt power system primarily. Further, BSNL was 
free to deploy additional TXR units depending on traffic and user requirement.  
XV. Accordingly, the review of Audit is not based on the time and space (2012- 23) during 
which the project was conceived and implemented and audit has also not considered 
the reduction in heavy expenditure of 6000 crore to 3567 crore. 
8. In reply to a question on the same subject, the Department of Telecommunication 
explained in a written reply stated as under: 
“Regarding selection of technology, department adopted the prevailing technology at the 
time of project conceptualization which was suitable to rural & remote areas and also 
affordable to rural public in terms of handset ecosystem which also best suited for 2G. 
BSNL had called for an open competitive tender for pr oject implementation since 2G 
based network was vast and already deployed by BSNL in its network, it was prevailing 
technology at that time for rural and remote area at reasonable and affordable rates.” 
9. In response to further query as to who approved 2G  technology to be adopted for this 
project, and on what basis the technology was approved, the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under: 
“Union Cabinet had approved the proposal for deploying 2G services on 04th June 2013. 
The technology was adopted based on: a. 2G was widely accepted technology at that 
time. As per TRAI report of 2013- 14, only 45.61 million mobile wireless broadband users 
were there in India out of 904.51 million mobile users i.e. only 5%. In rural India, these 
numbers were even lesser making it non- viable to plan 3G services at that time;  b. Non-
availability of affordable 3G Handset ecosystem due to high cost for 3G handsets at that 
time and especially in LWE area due to lower per capita income;  c. 3G service has less 

 
5 
geographical coverage as compared to 2G service reducing coverage area;  d. 2G was 
the prevailing technology at the time in India and was cost effective;  e. The initial 
estimated cost of the project was approx Rs 6000 crores. However, given the challenges 
on diesel and power availability in the dense forest, a considered decision was taken to 
deploy energy efficient solution based on TEC GR of 2009 which reduced the project cost 
to Rs 3567 crores (approx. 40% saving to public exchequer).” 
10. When asked about the reason as to why was low power BTS chosen when BSNL had 
specifically mentioned that it was not proposing low power BTS as it would not provide adequate 
coverage due to the dense vegetation in the LWE areas, the Department of Telecommunication, 
in a written reply stated as under: 
“The object of the scheme was to provide voic e connectivity to Security forces. The 
department selected the prevailing technology which was 2G and handset ecosystem 
was also available for 2G at that time. Regarding Coverage around site, the system 
deployed by BSNL is as per TEC GR, which provides mobile coverage of more than 4 
Kms around the cell site and 100% sites were tested for RF coverage by BSNL. The BTS 
installed were of 10- watt systems for each of the 2/2/2 configuration. Low power 
consumption BTS were deployed owing to limited power availabil ity and high cost of 
diesel.” 
11. When enquired about the reasons as to w hen the DoT had 3G technology in 2009,  
why did they opt for 2G in 2014,  the Department of Telecommunication explained in a written 
reply as under: 
“Regarding selection of technology, department adopted the prevailing technology at the 
time of project conceptualization which is suitable to rural & remote area and also 
affordable to rural public in terms of handset ecosystem which also best suited for 2G.” 
12. When the  Committee desired to know whether GPRS Service is available with 2G 
facility, the Department of Telecommunication in a written reply stated as under: 
“Yes, GPRS service is available with 2G facility.” 
13. On being enquired that during evidence, Representatives of DoT inform ed that MHA 
had stated that 2G technology be adopted but the audit observed that MHA had not advised 
about any adoption of technology either 2G or 3G. What are your views in this regard, the 
Department of Telecommunication explained in a written reply as under: 
“The proposal was based on provisioning of voice connectivity. No specific technology 
was recommended. The technology selection was based on prevailing technology in India 
as well as BSNL network at that time which is 2G. In addition, the handset sys tem was 
also best suited for 2G at that point of time.” 
14. During the evidence before the Committee, when the Ministry representative was 
asked to clarify with regard to the procedure followed by the Department to select the 2G 
technology, the representative replied as under: 
“The technology was selected based on TEC GRs keeping in view the sensitive area for 
providing the voice connectivity. The Department follows the TEC GR standards.” 
15. When the Committee cross questioned about the selection of 2G technology and 

 
6 
stated that the MHA had not asked for 2G technology and was rather silent on it, the 
representative replied as under: 
“Sir, their comment was ‘voice services’. At that time, in voice services, as we talk about 
data, our preferred technology is 4G but when we talk about voice, it is 2G technology. If 
we look at the development of technology, we find that it developed during 2011-2014 
and not before. The maturity of thought process and maturity of technology came about 
only thereafter. A very important factor in the choice of any technology is the handset 
ecosystem. If we bring 5G technology today, 90 percent of the mobiles w ill go down 
because the handset is not 5G compatible in rural areas.” 
16. During evidence before the Committee, the Secretary made submissions regarding 
the question of selection of 2G technology in response to the queries made by the Committee 
and the submission reads as under: 
“Sir, the whole process was carried out through an open tender under the banner of the 
preferential market access circulars which have been issued by the Department of 
Telecommunications in 2012. On 5
th October, 2012, the Department  came out with a 
policy to domestically manufacture telecom products in procurement due to security 
considerations in Government procurement. Though it was an open tender and subject to 
the 2012 Preferential Market Access order.  It is very clearly said that the procurement 
would be subject to condition that the product shall have a minimum value addition. At 
that point of time, there are a very few companies which were operating in India and it 
was rightly so because there was a need to promote manufacturi ng within the country. 
So, at that point of time, the small size 2G or 3G based stations, in the year 2012-13, they 
had a preferential market access and the value addition has to be, at least, 35 per cent in 
the country.  There was a table indicating that by 2014, it would become 100 per cent 
market access and 40 per cent value addition and to going up to 55 per cent by 2017- 18. 
So, this tender was subject to that. Therefore, it was very clear that only a certain 
companies of domestic nature had the manufacturing facilities.” 
17. On being asked as to who had suggested these conditions, the Secretary responded 
as under: 
“Sir, this was the part of a Government Gazette Notification issued by the Department on 
5
th October, 2012. So, based on that, open tenders were called for.  I will request CMD to 
also give some details about it. But I would like to say that the tender was done in a 
transparent manner following these conditions and with an idea to promote local 
companies.  As of today, Sir, if you look at the outcomes, 2343 sites are functional and 12 
lakh subscribers have been there on to the system. Each base station is earning roughly 
about Rs. 83 lakh per month.  The talk time is about 4500 hours per BTS per month.” 
18. When the Committee pointed out that main purpose was to provide these services to 
police forces that are deployed in those areas but they were not getting connectivity and instead 
they themselves were complaining that they were not able to use it, the Secretary replied as 
under: 
“Sir, unlike t he VHF sets, which will operate at 300 mega hertz etc., these radios will 
cover a radius of only four kilometres and most of these villages and towers are in 
scattered areas. Therefore, there will be coverage gaps because the towers were not 

 
7 
provided at every road. The towers are meant for citizens of the country under the USOF. 
So, it has to be established near a village.  Incidentally, it may cover some part of the 
road but there will be many pockets in the dense forest which will not be covered because 
that will not be the design of the project. So, I will also request CMD, BSNL to answer 
specifically with respect to the police force.” 
19. During further illustration of the reason for selection of 2G technology, the 
representative stated before the Committee as under: 
“Sir, this technology was chosen because of the two reasons. First one was handset 
ecosystem was not matured for 3G. Secondly, it was able to provide the cost -effective 
power efficient technology and the overall cost was lower.  There are three very important 
which I would like to submit. This is a solar -powered BTS system. If we look at ten years 
before, the power availability in the country was not very very good. Even in the deep 
rural areas and deep forest areas, the power infrastructure w as not available. I will give 
you one example. In 4G  saturation project which we are doing today, we find that 
average cost of taking the power to the site is coming more than Rs. 10 lakh. In some of 
the places like Arunachal Pradesh, average cost is comi ng more than Rs. 70 lakh. The 
discom is saying that you will have to make payment for extending electric lines, 
transformers everything for a distance of 15 or 20 kilometers then only they can provide 
electric connections, and that is for the on-grid connection. So, the decision was taken the 
power efficient technology to be utilized, so that requirement of generators should not be 
there. Secondly, the availability of power was continued to be a challenge in deep forest 
areas. But at the same time, it was able to give me a similar kind of radiation and it is able 
to give me coverage of four kilometer. Sir, now I come to outcome-based. On an average, 
the availability of network is around ninety -three per cent from the date of commissioning 
of network till January, 2023. That means five years’ average of network, which has been 
there, is the ninety -three percent average uptime of the network. On an average, every 
BTS is giving 4500 erlangs of traffic as well. So, it is nearly Rs. 83 lakh of revenue and 
ninety-three per cent average uptime with an erlang traffic of 4500, and 12 lakh 
customers are connected every month. So, it is a very successful project in very difficult 
areas. The choice of technology was based on the prevailing circumstances, and it is able 
to meet the objective which is required to be met. The second issue is about security 
solution. I would like to mention one thing very candidly. When the estimate was 
prepared, a provision was made for a security guard. So, what the audit has pointed out 
is correct that there was a provision of a security guard at the time of an estimate. The 
Cabinet has given the approval and said that you will float a tender and whatever the cost 
will be, that will be the only cost which will be reimbursed. At the time of f loating of a 
tender, BSNL had taken an innovative way because we thought that electronic 
surveillance through Network Management Centre will be a much better option, rather 
than posting a security guard at each of the location, because life of the people, at that 
particular place, was not considered to be safe, and secondly, we also find that in many 
of the cases, Naxalite felt that they could be agents of the Government.” 
B. Failure of USOF to review and Upgrade technology used in project (PARA 2.1.4.1) (b) 
20. The audit observed that technological solution for the project based on 2G was 
selected by DoT/ USOF in December 2012. However, the sites under the project were 

 
8 
commissioned over a prolonged period i.e. from July 2015 to November 2018 and the project 
period including O&M was extended till 2022. As mentioned earlier, in June 2016, approval was 
also given for establishing an additional 156 towers. However, the same 2G based solution was 
retained. Thus, though both the project size and period was increased no technology reviews 
were undertaken despite Telecom technologies evolving rapidly and becoming more efficient 
with multifarious capabilities. In addition, over this period user requirement had also undergone 
changes. Audit is of the view that technology reviews for large and critical projects were 
important and should have been undertaken. DoT in its reply (May 2019) stated that for high 
speed data Wi-Fi / LTE can be overlaid at any time utilising the infrastructure created through the 
project. It intimated that the State Government of Jharkhand had separately funded and got this 
equipment installed by BSNL at all 816 towers set up under the Project in the state. However, 
this upgradation was at the initiative of the State Government using its own funds and not part of 
any centralized USOF funded exercise for upgradation. Records of USOF show that it had 
belatedly asked BSNL for a proposal for 4G upgradation for exis ting sites and that the same is 
under consideration. However, the exercise was yet to be approved and commenced on ground. 
21. In response to the above, Department of Telecommunications explained in their 
background note as under: 
“The observations of audit are not correct. USOF has reviewed the project from time to 
time and various steps were taken to ensure that adequate capacity is available at all 
sites. Few steps are augmentation of satellite backhaul to upto 2 Mbps per site in addition 
to approval given by DoT for conversion of all feasible VSAT sites to Microwave to ensure 
that adequate backhaul is available and the issues of call latency. call drops etc are 
resolved.  
ii. Regarding upgradation from 2G to 4G, the department has considered the request of 
MHA and the DPR/cost estimates have been approved by Digital Communication 
Commission on 04.01.2022 utilizing the existing passive infrastructure created for 2G.  
iii. In addition, Cabinet Note has also been circulated for Inter-Ministerial Consultation and 
work is expected to be completed within 12 months of approval of Union Cabinet.” 
22. The Ministry in their written reply on the same subject stated as under: 
“Based on feedback from various stakeholders, decision was taken for upgrading the 
existing 2343 LWE Phase- I sites during the meeting on 26.08.2019 under chairmanship 
of Hon’ble Home Minister and Central Ministers of LWE affected States.  
b. Subsequently, DG (Telecom) was requested to provide the feedback regarding 4G 
services already available at  these locations vide letter dated 10.12.2019. As per 
feedback received from DG(T) vide letter dated 17.02.2020, 4G coverage was found 
available at 1,720 sites out of 2,343 sites which are working.  
c. In the meantime, MHA vide letter dated 04.09.2020 has recommended the continuation 
of Operation and Maintenance of existing LWE sites in view of security consideration on 
all sites.  
d. Department accordingly sought inputs of Ministry of Home Affairs on the funding of 
O&M of these sites. As per reply received  from MHA vide DO dated 01.04.2021; MHA 
indicated that “no additional liability on the State exchequer outside of USOF is 

 
9 
envisaged” and requested for funding arrangement through USOF for extension of O&M 
of these sites.  
e. The matter was re-examined in the department wherein it was decided to fund for O&M 
of the 2G services and also 4G upgradation of the LWE Phase-I towers.  
f. Accordingly, Digital Communication Commission approved on 04.01.2022 the 
upgradation of existing LWE Phase -I sites from 2G to 4G utilizing the existing passive 
infrastructure created for 2G. Union Cabinet considered the same in its meting dated 
27.04.2022.  
g. Decision of the Cabinet was communicated to the BSNL vide letter dated 09.05.2022 
and Letter of Intent (LOI) has also been issued to the BSNL on 20.07.2022.  
h. It is stated that the delay is administrative in nature given the cost and stakeholders 
involved and a considered decision was taken after seeking detailed inputs on the same.” 
23. On being enquired by the Committee whether the whole system of 2G technology 
based tower will have to be replaced because there is neither any compatibility nor there is any 
scope of upgradation, the representative replied as below: 
“The way the tower has been made, the same tower will be used for the purpose of 
upgradation to 4G technology.” 
24. On being asked as to whether any technical enquiry has been conducted in regard to 
the complaint by the Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh police about non- availability of 
connectivity in those areas and futility of the 2G based technology, representative replied that: 
“When MHA handed over this project, their first objective was to give the voice 
connectivity to the Paramilitary Forces which are there in those particular areas. While 
going to the rural ar eas, despite having so many towers in vicinity of our eyesight, we do 
not get the coverage to those locations. There are nearly 35,000 villages in the country 
which do not have the mobile tower coverage. The first objective before us is that voice 
connectivity has been provided. SMS was provided. GPRS data service was provided. 
The coverage of any site is possible within the radius of four kilometres.” 
25. On being asked about the rationale for retaining the same (2G) low power BTS 
solution for 156 additional sites sanctioned in June 2016 enquired on the manner of ensuring that 
information so shared was appropriately taken into account by ITO units while undertaking 
scrutiny assessments, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The project adhered to TEC GR as suggested by high powered technical committee of 
DoT. The project was initially planned for 1836 new sites and 363 existing BSNL sites 
under Phase-I. Meanwhile MHA had recommended additional 156 sites as per security 
requirement. In this regar d it is stated that LWE Phase -I project was under 
implementation during the 2015- 17, hence based on the MHA urgent requirement and 
approval of Hon’ble MoC, 156 addl sites added in ongoing project with same terms and 
conditions of Agreement dated 30.09.2014 to avoid delay in implementation.” 
26. On being pointed out as to how the Ministry is going to address the issue in the light 
of proposed 4G upgradation as pointed out in IIT Bombay Report on ‘4G services with one or two 
Mbps backhaul are not meaningful’, the Ministry stated as under: 

 
10 
“Department has already approved conversion of feasible VSAT sites (approx. 200) to 
MW. For 4G upgradation, at 331 VSAT based sites, media is being upgraded to Fiber/ 
Microwave by BSNL so that sufficient bandwidth is availabl e and at balance VSAT sites, 
bandwidth is being increased to 8 Mbps.” 
27. When asked as to why was no technology review/upgradation undertaken when 
coverage and connectivity issues were reported as early as June 2015 and what was the 
rationale for retaining the same (2G) low power BTS solution for 156 additional sites, the Ministry 
in a written reply stated as under: 
“Based on feedback from various stakeholders including State Govt., MHA regarding poor 
backhaul, Coverage issue related to latency etc were limited to sites with VSAT backhaul. 
Accordingly, Telecom Commission had decided to upgrade the VSAT backhaul from 512 
Kbps to 2 Mbps in Dec 2017 and as such no further complaints were received 
subsequent to backhaul upgradation since 2018 in Department/USOF. Technology 
review was undertaken after a lot of deliberation and final approval was accorded by 
Union cabinet for upgradation of all sites to 4G on 27.04.2022. The same is in under 
implementation through BSNL.” 
28. When the Committee desired to know about specific measures taken by the DOT so 
as to ensure the completion of this project on time, i.e., by 31 December 2023, the Ministry in 
their written reply stated as under: 
“As infrastructure/ 2G towers are already available at existing 2343 LWE Locations, there 
are no issues of land allocation/land availability and existing tower will be used which will 
also be a cost saving. Now Land allocation/Forest issue and access related issues are 
not there which were the main cause of delay in earlier deployment. The requirements 
are to only provide passive upgradation like battery/additional solar solution and active 
infra upgradation. Tender for Passive infra has been awarded and for active infra, it is in 
final stages. All efforts are being made to complete the project by Dec 2023 as planned.” 
29. When enquired as to how many sites have since been upgraded to 4G and how many 
sites are still left, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Tender of active Infra is in final stages and subsequently all sites will be upgraded t o 4G 
by Dec. 2023.” 
30. When enquired as to how many LWE villages have been planned to be included in 
the mobile coverage under Aspirational Districts Projects and the 4G Saturation Project (PAN 
INDIA), the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
“Around 6124 villages in the LWE affected States have been planned for provision of 
mobile services under Aspirational District Projects.” 
31. On being enquired as to in how many States, Optical -Fiber based connectivity is 
under implementation under Bharat  Net Project, how can this project help in increasing the 
connectivity as well as voice quality in LWE areas, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“Under Bharat Net Project around 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats spread over 6,600 Blocks 
and 641 Districts are to be covered by laying incremental fiber. Incremental fiber is being 

 
11 
planned from existing BSNL/ BharatNet Fiber. As per the planning, 40% sites will be 
upgraded to Fiber based connectivity and around 58% on microwave. Further BharatNet 
provides required backhaul integration with the network with reliable connectivity. This will 
help in better quality of services, higher uptime and low latency and elimination of call 
congestion and better data services.” 
32. When asked to provide details as to whether the DoT has done any study regarding 
the extent of satisfactory users of these services as public Wi -Fi services were also given in 
some circles at 792 tower locations to improve the connectivity in LWE areas, the Department of 
Telecommunications stated as under: 
“As the mobile infrastructure was built from scratch as well as other development 
activities were going in parallel in LWE areas including roads, Electric Power Supply, 
buildings and other developmental projects, it took some time to stabilize the transmission 
network. There was call congestion in VSAT sites which was due to limited VSAT 
bandwidth. To overcome this issue, VSAT bandwidth was increased from 512 kbps to 2 
Mbps. Further it may be seen that call congestion was never reported on sites working on 
Fiber/ Microwave connectivity. As far as Wi -Fi services at 792 locations are concerned, 
same have been provided by State Government and BSNL has shared only physical 
Infrastructure. Various social impact assessments were carried out in thes e areas in year 
2019-20 and as per the reports available, the mostly have reported that the Project has 
helped improved telephonic connectivity in LWE areas. However, Quality of service 
needs to be improved considerably by introducing high speed internet f acility such as 4G 
to enable people to use high speed data services for which decision has already been 
taken to upgrade the 4G.” 
33. On being asked about the measures taken to improve these services and the 
outcome of the steps taken in this regard, the Department of Telecommunications stated as 
under: 
“Based on complaints received from various stakeholders, Ministry had reviewed the 
project from time to time and various steps were taken to ensure that adequate capacity 
is available at all sites. Few steps are: -  
a. Augmentation of satellite backhaul to upto 2 Mbps per site.  
b. Conversion of all feasible VSAT sites to Microwave to ensure that adequate backhaul 
is available and the issues of call latency, call drops etc. are resolved.  
c. Upgradation proposal for 4G services was approved to ensure uninterrupted data 
services in these areas as per requirement and demand of stakeholders including public.” 
34. On being enquired about the measures taken to increase the number of calls 
andwhether the numbers of  calls have since been improved, the Department of 
Telecommunications stated as under: 
“There are total 2343 sites under LWE -I project. Total customer latched to BTSs are 
around 12 lakhs and total per month revenue for 2343 sites is around Rs. 83 lakhs. These 
figures are at par with BSNL Network for rural area. BSNL requested CRPF and other 
users to give their feedback. BSNL received more than 200 satisfactory services 
certificates for 2G services covering about 850 sites.” 

 
12 
C. Vendor guided selection of technology led to de-facto single vendor (PARA 2.1.4.1) (c) 
35. The DoT Committee recommended the solution based on a proposal made by a 
vendor viz. M/s VNL. BSNL accordingly floated tenders for the projectwith specifications 
approved by the DoT Committee which was in turn based on the presentation given by M/s VNL. 
As a result, only two vendors viz . M/s VNL and M/s HFCL- which had a Transfer of Technology 
(ToT) agreement with M/s VNL- participated in the tender. As there were only two participants -of 
which one, viz. M/s HFCL had a ToT agreement with the other bidder i.e. M/s VNL-  the tender 
was tantamount to a single vendor case despite the high value of the project. It was observed 
that the DoT c ommittee on selection of technology, had mentioned in its report  that TEC had 
indicated that “multi -vendor implementations” are available for the recomm ended technology. 
Besides, the c ommittee itself had observed that other “cost effective technical solutions” that 
“support the generic requirements” could also be avail able. However, DoT/ USOF neither 
ascertained the vendor base for the recommended solution prior to tendering, nor did they review 
the specifications on account of the very limited participation in the tender to expand 
participation. Thus, both failures to follow a technology neutral approach and to assess vendor 
base for the selected technology led to limited participation which did not give any assurance that 
the price discovered was the most cost effective. 
36. In reply to the above, the Ministry in their background note stated as under: 
i. Traditional 2G mobile technology was globally being made by major 4 companies 
across world i.e. Nokia -Siemens, Ericsson, ZTE and Huawei. Out of these 2 were Chinese 
companies. 
ii.Due to security and sensitivity of the matter, the focus of the department and the 
government mandated preference to use of Indian manufactured products was given a filip . 
Though one Indian company could develop the technology as per Government standards i.e. 
TEC GR, 2 manufacturers got product TSEC approved as per open tender called by BSNL. 
iii. The choice of technology in mobile communication which has features such as 
roaming across networks is limited in terms of technology such as GSM, CDMA based networks 
such as 2G, 3G, 4G and now 5G which is being implemented. All these developments from 2G to 
3G, 4G and 5G are as per availability of ecosystems, availability of devices and are driven from 
standard bodies such as ITU, 3GPP recommendations etc. Withinthe ambit of 2G as prevalent 
and in use technology in that period of approval. award and implementation, the technology was 
adopted as per the requirement. Specifications of power, frequency, height of tower etc. largely 
depend on the Telecom Service Provider such as BSNL wi thin the license conditions. The 
committee may have decided some of these specifications as per prevalent standards and 
options as available keeping in view that tender will be floated by BSNL for procurement 
following the guidelines of DPIIT for the use of technology from domestic manufactures as 
applicable. 
37. On being asked about the reason for not exploring “multi-vendor implementation” and 
other “cost effective technical solutions” via. Expression of Interest (EoI) route for better 
competition and price discovery, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
“With respect to limited tender participation, it is submitted that this was an open tender 
based on TEC GR specifications of the prevalent technology at that time. In addition, 2G 
technology was well established not only in the country but was also deployed largely in 

 
13 
BSNL existing network. The need for ascertaining the vendor base for prevalent 
technology does not arise. In addition, TEC GR is prepared with wide consultation 
including Nati onal and International OEMs and covers all standard products. M/s L&T, 
M/s Toshniwal, M/s ITI, M/s HFCL and M/s VNL showed interest in the tender. Work was 
awarded to M/s VNL & M/s HFCL by BSNL through open Tender. It may be appreciated 
that telecom technologies are based on high R&D done by the technology providers and 
there are limited technology vendors all over the world and not just in India.  2G was 
established technology in India and was also deployed largely in BSNL existing network.” 
38. On being further asked whether tendering was published appropriately, the 
representative replied as under: 
“In the Indian Express , it was published. I have the paper cutting with me. It was 
published in Dainik Jagran; it was on the websites of TCIL, BSNL, and it was published in 
the Indian Trade Journal. Wide publicity has been given. The trade journals, which are 
accessible and are used by all the industries, and on the BSNL and TCL websites, so that 
everybody who is likely to participate should have the knowledge that a tender has been 
published. Cuttings of the tenders are available with us. We can share with the 
Committee. It was not a very hush-hush kind of tendering. It was an open tender. Anyone 
could have participated. There was sufficient technological avail ability for companies. 
There is no condition that we can say bars anybody from participating except that it has to 
be PMA compliant.” 
III. PROJECT EXECUTION (PARA 2.1.4.2) 
A. Delays in implementation status of LWE Project- Phase I(PARA 2.1.4.2 ) (a) 
39. The DoT Committee had recommended (December 2012) the solution based on 2G 
and renewable energy technologies as this was considered to be cheaper and quickly 
deployable. However, audit scrutiny disclosed delays at various stages stating that the 
Government approved the proposal for the project in June 2013. As per the approval , the 
installation and roll out of towers/sites was targeted to be completed in 12 months after signing of 
agreement with BSNL which would take about three months. Accordingly, the Agreement 
between USOF and BSNL should have been signed by September 2013 but Audit noticed that 
the Agreement was signed only in September 2014 i.e. after a delay of a year. Further, as per 
the agreement between USOF and BSNL, BSNL was to set up the infrastructure and 
commission the mobile network covering 1,836 mobile sites within 12 months from the effective 
date i.e. by 30 September 2015. Audit however, noticed that agreement was amended multiple 
times between December 2015 to January 2017 to extend the project period. By an amendment 
in December 2015, the roll out period was extended upto 21 months, which was further extended 
to 27 months in July 2016. In December 2016, the total agreement period including O&M was 
fixed at six years i.e. up to September 2020 which was later extended June 2022. In January 
2017, the date for commissioning the additional 156 sites was fixed as 21 July 2017. From the 
above it can be seen that initial delays in signing the agreement between USOF and BSNL and 
frequent amendments in the agreement allowing extension of time period for execution of the 
project added to the delays in completion of the LWE Phase I of the project. 
40. On being asked about the reaction of the Ministry in the above matter, the 
Department of Telecommunications, in their written reply, stated as under: 

 
14 
“Project was executed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
BSNL had started the mobile services in naxal affected areas which are in deep forest, 
and inaccessible to citizens and sec urity agencies at the time when no private telecom 
operators could think to go in those areas. BSNL is providing 98% uptime of BTS in such 
difficult areas. Most of the sites are working with solar power solution (a Green Telecom 
Energy Efficient solution) where no commercial power supply is used. Mostly 95% work of 
the Project was completed in time except some sites which could not be completed in 
time due to following reasons: 
i. non-allocation of sites by state government in time; 
ii. Frequent naxal attacks in LWE areas. In some sites, Police had asked the vendor 
to stop work as police was not in position to provide protection; 
iii. Change is sites/ location based on technical feasibility. These delays which came 
during roll out of LWE Project -I as the situation in LWE areas is very difficult and 
sensitive which was out of control of any agency. It is appreciable that LWE Project 
could be rolled out in such situations in naxal areas at the time when no one think s to 
enter in those areas. Even electricit y and proper roads were not there at that time in 
these areas.” 
B. Agreement for award of work by BSNL prior to agreement between USOF and BSNL 
(PARA 2.1.4.2) (b) 
41. Audit observed that BSNL had been assigned the task of implementation of the 
project for setting up the infrastructure and commissioning of the mobile network covering 1,836 
mobile sites in LWE areas on nomination basis. As per Government approval an agreement 
between USOF and BSNL for the project was to be signed by September 2013. BSNL instead 
first issued a tender for the work in August 2013 in which two vendors viz.  M/s VNL and M/s 
HFCL participated. After opening of the bids a case was sent to USOF for approval. However, it 
was decided by DoT to retender the project which was done in April  2014. M/s VNL emerged as 
L-1 and M/s HFCL was L-2. The work was awarded on 05 September 2014 on turnkey basis vide 
Advance Purchase Orders (APOs), to M/s VNL and M/s HFCL in ratio of 70:30 respectively. 
Audit noticed that the agreement between USOF and BSNL was executed only on 30 September 
2014 i.e. subsequent to the finalization of the tender by BSNL and issue of APO to the vendors. 
Thus, BSNL had awarded the work to its vendors prior to the work being formally awarded to it 
by USOF. The work of add- on 156 LWE sites was also given to the same vendors in the same 
ratio in 2016. As BSNL had issued tenders prior to entering into an agreement with USOF, there 
were discrepancies between the terms and rates in the tender/ APOs issued to the vendors by 
BSNL and in the agreement between USOF and BSNL. It was noted that for several works the 
agreement between BSNL and vendors did not specify individual items of work and only provided 
a lump sum rate, the agreement between USOF and BSNL provided item wise details of  the 
work including estimated costs. It was also noted that the agreement between BSNL and USOF 
required each item of work to be performed but the same obligation was not specified in the 
agreement between BSNL and the vendors. These discrepancies were not  reviewed and 
corrected in the Purchase Orders (POs) issued to the vendors. This led to the vendors receiving 
payments for items of work which were not performed by them. 

 
15 
42. The Ministry in their written reply on the subject matter stated as under: 
• “The line items for the USOF BSNL agreement were only for the cost estimations.  
• The actual cost based on price discovery by BSNL was approved by Union Cabinet 
indicating that the process and the procedure adopted by BSNL was vetted by the 
department and Union Cabinet and payments are made according to BSNL tender.” 
43. On being asked as to why were the discrepancies between USOF agreement and 
vendors’ agreement with BSNL not resolved before placing the Purchase Orders, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
“As per USOF rules, agreement has to be signed for release on payment which is as per 
actual cost discovered in the tender. BSNL called open tender and based on price and 
terms & conditions of open tender, agreement was signed between BSNL and USOF.” 
44. When asked to clarify why BSNL had issued tenders prior to entering into an 
agreement with USOF, the Department of Telecommunications, in their written reply, stated as 
under: 
“It is stated that the agreement was signed only in Sept 2014 since the agreement was 
based on price discovery by BSNL and the cost discovered by BSNL through its tender 
was to be paid to BSNL. It is also stated that as per ITR, the works are to be awarded 
from open bidding process. Since project was given to BSNL on nomination basis, it was 
expected that BSNL shall carry out the work from an open competitive bidding procedure 
and the cost discovered through the procedure shall be funded by USOF. Though the 
APO were issued by BSNL prior to agreement, the final PO were issued only after the  
approval of tendered discovered cost by DoT/Cabinet.” 
C. Inadequate marketing of Telecom Products (PARA 2.1.4.2) (c) 
45. In accordance with the BSNL tender, the vendors of the project were responsible for 
setting up customer service centres for making BSN L mobile prepaid/ postpaid SIM cards, 
recharge coupons etc. available in the LWE areas. The vendor was required to provide mobile 
connections and retail services for telecom products at BTS sites in accordance with terms and 
conditions applicable to Direct  Selling Agents (DSA). In terms of BSNL’s Sales and Distribution 
policy, four retailers were to be appointed for each BTS. Audit however, observed that the 
vendors did not appoint the required numbers of retailers. It was noted that out of 5,259 retailers 
required to be appointed as per policy, only 232 retailers were appointed by the vendors in five 
Circles with circles like Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana having 
appointed only one dealer each. The situation was somewhat better i n Bihar and Jharkhand 
where 35 and 193 dealers respectively were appointed. The limited availability of BSNL outlets 
was also pointed out by IIT, Bombay in its evaluation report, in the context of low level of 
awareness about BSNL schemes. Further, due to absence of outlets, even willing customers 
found it difficult to obtain BSNL SIM cards. Further, BSNL did not monitor fulfilment of the 
contractual obligation relating to opening of retail outlets and instruct them to make the required 
number of retailers available. DoT in their reply stated (August 2020) that as BSNL had directly 
appointed the vendors as rural distributors in LWE areas, they were being asked to justify the 
shortfall. Audit observed that better marketing and more outlets of BSNL would have resulted in 
BSNL products being more accessible to customers for whom the project had been 

 
16 
implemented. This would also have increased utilization of the towers in the LWE areas. 
46. The Ministry in their background report replied as under: 
“i. In this regard, it may be appropriate to say that LWE Phase-I Project was planned for 
mobile connectivity to security forces/villagers in sensitive naxal areas. 
ii. Accordingly, BSNL, in the tender document, made the provision that vendor will do 
the sales activit y also as per DSA Policy of BSNL. It is submitted that provision of 
penalty is mentioned in DSA Policy for any deviation and same is also applicable in 
LWE Phase-I Project as stated by BSNL.  
iii. Further, it needs to state here that, there is no exclusive sales territory for DSA. As 
per the DSA Policy, the DSA is not allowed to appoint retailer as territory has not been 
allotted on exclusive basis to DSA. Only Franchisee is allowed to appoint retailer and 
has exclusive sales territory.  
iv. However, BSNL s hall be sensitized under various projects to ensure marketing is 
carried out in letter and spirit.” 
47. When asked as to why did neither BSNL nor USOF enforce respective agreement 
provisions for adequate marketing of telecom products in the LWE areas, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as below: 
“232 retailers were appointed in the sensitive situation in LWE areas. Peoples were not 
interested in the retailer work. Most of the retailer work was carried by BSNL staff in those 
areas. In some areas many  customers opted for services and revenue earned is at par 
with normal BSNL network. It is pertinent to mention that services of this project is being 
utilized by around 10 lakh subscribers, with approximate revenue of Rs. 1 crore per 
month. Availability o f network is about 90% and voice traffic per BTS is about 4500 
erlang.” 
48. On being asked why is BSNL not taking part in the competition like 4G and 5G, it was 
stated in the written reply as under: 
“BSNL is in the process of deployment of 4G for which EoI  is in final stages. There are 
plans to upgrade the network to 5G.” 
49. When asked as to why BSNL stopped the existing services like ring tone record 
message and voice mail box divert service, the Ministry in the written reply stated as under: 
“These are the value added services and decision is taken on all India basis as per 
techno-commercial feasibility and viability.” 
IV. MONITORING/EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT (PARA 2.1.4.3) 
A. Evaluation of performance of LWE sites (PARA 2.1.4.3) (a) 
50. In terms of the Agreement for the project, the Administrator, USOF had the right to 
inspect the equipment installed at the sites and conduct service performance tests. It could carry 
out the performance tests either directly or through a designated monitoring agency, and 
evaluate “Quality of Service parameters” at any time during the tenure of the Agreement. Audit 
noted that in November 2015, MHA conveyed complaints received from the Chhattisgarh and 
Madhya Pradesh Police to USOF that the towers installed by BSNL in the LW E areas were 

 
17 
largely non-functional. As a result, security forces deployed in the area were deprived of mobile 
connectivity. USOF passed on these complaints to BSNL but did not carry out any performance 
tests directly or through Designated Monitoring Agenc y (DMA). USOF designated CCAs who 
belong to the Finance wing of DoT, as DMAs for the project only in December 2016 with the 
responsibility only for “Inspection of sites for verification of claims submitted by BSNL and for 
ensuring proper utilization of funds”. However, even these instructions for carrying out limited/ 
non-technical checks, were issued to DMAs only in February 2017 i.e. 20 months after the 
commissioning of first LWE site in July 2015. By that time 1,668 sites i.e. 90 per cent of the LWE 
sites planned had already been commissioned. Ministry accepted (May 2019) the audit 
observation, but intimated that after installation of BTS sites, “coverage” testing would be done 
by the respective TERM cells of DoT. It also added that instructions had been issued to BSNL in 
April 2018, for undertaking measures for improving services in LWE areas and contended that 
the performance of LWE sites was gradually improving. Audit is of the view that instead of 
routinely assigning inspection work to CCAs who were not equipped in technical matters, USOF 
should have constituted a Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) to comprehensively monitor and assess 
performance of the whole project as this was a major project of National importance. This would 
have provided the required oversight over BSNL which would have assisted timely project 
implementation and helped address technical issues impacting on coverage and quality of 
services. 
51. The Ministry in their background note replied to the above audit finding as under: 
“Being a project of national importance, the roll out was monitored at the higher level 
including PRAGATI. In addition regular reviews at all levels in government i.e. Secretary - 
T, JS-T, USOF-A, CMD-BSNL and Director-CM were carried out from time to time during 
the whole duration of the project. BSNL CMD had also made Director level committee to 
resolve any issue faced in roll out on immediate basis so that mobile services to Security 
forces can be delivered in time. P&T audit teams as well as field audit teams done the 
evaluation of the tender as well as implementation along with various feedback's on 
continuous basis and all audit points raised in last 5- 6 years by these agencies were well 
settled to their expectations and no open point is there as of now. Hence t he project got 
continuous monitoring at highest government levels and was evaluation at each stage 
since inception till the completion of O&M of 5 years. The Operation and Maintenance of 
the sites under this project is being monitored through centralized N MS in Patna, Bihar 
which was integral part of the project and all components of sites are integrated to 
centralized NMS. As per Instructions/guidelines issued on 17 -02-2017 the physical 
inspection of LWE sites has been conducted atleast once during the val idity period of 
Agreement for all the LWE Sites except in states of Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh where 
25% of the total sites in their circle were be randomly inspected. It needs to be 
appreciated that physical inspection can only be carried out after site i nstallation and 
commissioning in order. Therefore issuance of guidelines in Feb 2017 had no adverse 
affect. In addition, evaluation study from IIT Bombay and Social Impact Assessment by 
Field Units were carried out for proper evaluation of the scheme. However, in future, 
specific PMUS as desired by Audit shall be constituted.” 
52. When asked about timely and proper testing and evaluation of LWE sites, periodic 
performance reviews not undertaken and corrective measures taken to ensure provision of 

 
18 
reliable services to the customers in LWE areas, action for improving mobile connectivity in LWE 
areas, improvement in performance of LWE sites, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
below: 
“Acceptance testing and subsequent monitoring of LWE sites was regul arly done by 
BSNL as per prevailing norms. However regular reviews at all levels in government were 
undertaken for whole duration of the project. BSNL also made Director level committee to 
resolve any issue faced in roll out on immediate basis so that mobi le services to Security 
forces can be delivered in time. P&T audit teams as well as field audit teams done the 
evaluation of the tender as well as implementation along with various feedbacks on 
continuous basis and all audit points raised in last 5- 6 years by these agencies were well 
settled to their expectations and no open point is there as of now. Hence the project got 
continuous monitoring at highest government levels and was evaluation at each stage 
since inception till the completion of O&M of 5 years . In addition, based on various 
reviews under DoT, decision on upgradation of VSAT backhaul was also taken by DoT 
apart from conversion of VSAT sites to MW for better backhaul connectivity. Based on the 
said decisions, no further complaints were received r egarding call congestion or poor 
coverage. In addition, LWE Phase II with 4G services was also launched which is under 
implementation.” 
B. Quality of Service –  Non-Compliance of terms and conditions of Agreement (PARA 
2.1.4.3) (b) 
53. As per the Project Ag reement, BSNL was required to ensure provision of reliable 
services to the customers as per the Quality of Service (QoS) prescribed by the TRAI from time 
to time. In this regard, audit noted that USOF had received complaints from MHA and the State 
Governments regarding poor voice quality, one- way communication, low signal strength, limited 
range, dropping of calls, call congestion, repeated un- serviceability of the towers and poor 
infrastructure, with respect to the sites commissioned by BSNL under the proj ect for LWE areas. 
In addition, USOF’s own analysis of performance of LWE towers for the quarter April-September 
2017, disclosed low uptime of the towers. It was found that only in 19.56 per cent of the LWE 
sites i.e. 358 out of 1,831 sites, uptime was above the 98 per cent benchmark. In 1,398 sites 
uptime was in the range of 60- 98 per cent and in 75 sites it was from 60 per cent and less. As 
uptime in the case of 80.44 per cent of towers at LWE sites was below the 98 per cent 
benchmark, BSNL was liable to be penalized through subsidy cuts. DoT contended (May 2019) 
that the BTS downtime for network equipment under the project, was less than two per cent (per 
site limit) as per data obtained from Network Operating Centre (NOC) since October 2017 and 
also claimed increased utilization of the sites in some states. However, DoT did not provide any 
authenticated supporting document for this. On the contrary, there was evidence of feedback 
from clients/customers about poor quality/ inadequate services by BSNL, and findings relating to 
low utilization, and technology and capacity constraints of its own study done by IIT Bombay. The 
IIT study had also pointed out that utilization was high only in states/ areas where other TSPs 
were not available. In addition, data provided in the reply itself showed that the downtime was 
more than two per cent in over 53 per cent sites thereby contradicting the claim of downtime 
being less than two per cent since October 2017. Further, the status of performance during 
January 2019 to November 2020 shows that downtime was less than two per cent only in 21 per 
cent sites. Thus, as a result of the high downtime and BSNL’s poor performance in maintaining 

 
19 
medium of transmission and quality of mobile service, the very purpose of the project viz.  “to 
provide mobile connectivity especially to the security forces in LWE area” was not met. 
54. The Ministry in their written reply in the matter stated as under: 
• “It is to note that uptime and QoS is not fully dependent on BTS equipment only 
but transmission media is also involved. 
• As the mobile infrastructure was built from scratch as well as other development 
activities were going in parallel in LWE areas including roads, buildings and other 
developmental projects, it took many months to stabilize the transmission network 
as well as redundant network to meet the desired QOS and uptime. 
• As per the project Agreement, the penalty would be calculated on monthly basis 
and deducted from tendered OPEX for the particular BTS which has been carried 
out by field units while settlement of the claims.” 
V. FINANCIAL ISSUES (PARA 2.1.4.4) 
A. Irregular payments of CAPEX and OPEX subsidy (PARA 2.1.4.4) (a) 
(i) Irregular payments for electricity connections: 
55. Audit findings have reflected as under: 
• USOF released CAPEX subsidy of ₹51.40 crore in advance for providing 
electricity connections for 1,028 mobile towers, whereas electricity connections 
were provided in only 152 towers. OPEX subsidy of ₹63.35 crore was also paid to 
the balance 876 non electr ified sites. ₹58.07 crore disbursed to BSNL for sites 
where electricity connection was not planned.(Total ₹ 165.22 crore)  
•  USOF provided for deployment of security guards at all LWE sites and covered 
the cost of deploying two security guards per site. But  security guards were not 
provided as per the Agreement. (₹ 165.24 crore)  
• USOF had unduly released subsidy to BSNL. BSNL in turn passed this on to the 
vendors without ensuring the envisaged deliverables under the agreement.  
•  A flawed system of contracting appears to have been followed in the project. As a 
result, in this case the agreements between BSNL and the vendors show 
deviations from the agreement between USOF and BSNL with respect to scope of 
services resulting in irregular excess payments to vendors. 
56. The Ministry in their background note has commented on the matter as under: 
“(i) Irregular payments for electricity connections: 
i. BSNL has called a tender to get cost effective and efficient way to get the project 
implemented in line with cabinet approvals. A comprehensive scope has been defined 
including security guard deployment for site security, deployment of green energy solution 
to get rid of Commercial power supply.  
ii. The sites have been installed in the Left -Wing Extremist affected areas. The sites were 
allocated by the State Governments. During the rollout of the sites, in many instances the 
sites were changed. It is submitted that the sites are located in LWE prone areas, where 
even security agencies are also being ambushed. Developmental works like road, 
telecom, electricity etc. in those areas also face resistance from the local populace in 

 
20 
many instances and these developmental activities also get delayed for varying lengths of 
time. Also, for such far flung areas, which are not motorable, the electricity connections 
have not come through despite constant persuasion by the circles. In these 
circumstances, it was not possible to have 100% survey in all respects in advance. The 
observation of the audit for proper advance survey is not practicable in those challenging 
areas and those specific times.  
iii. Keeping in view the urgency of the project from the point of internal security, many 
sites were commissioned without electricity connection but with due commitment from 
vendors that without electric connection also, vendor would maintain uptime through its 
own resources. Subsequently, electric connections are being instal led as and when it is 
made available by Electricity Board. However, there are many sites where electric 
connection has not yet been provided but is expected to be done in near future.  
iv. However, despite efforts from BSNL, only 152 sites have been provided with electric 
connection so far and accordingly an amount of Rs.48.18 crore (including centage of 
Rs.4.38 crore) has been adjusted by USOF against the non -provision of electric 
connection at 876 no's of LWE sites from the BSNL's claim vide sanction memo  no.30- 
40/2018-USOF/LWE-VSAT B/W/ 5169 -5173 dated 25.10.2021. Accordingly; the audit 
objections appear to be resolved.  
v. Regarding audit observation of electricity supply, it is indicated that the same was for 
the purpose of estimation and the agreement  between USOF and BSNL clearly specify 
the composite cost in Annexure IX. This has also been appreciated by Audit in its final 
conclusion that the BSNL floated the tender on turnkey basis where only composite cost 
was discovered and there was a difference between the agreement between USOF-
BSNL and BSNL -vendor. No separate rate was called for electricity consumption in the 
tender; rather a single comprehensive rate for Complete OPEX works per site for all 
OPEX related deliverable was called for, irrespective of EB site or non EB site. 
■ As per agreement between USOF- BSNL indicating cost values, there are mainly two 
components viz-a- viz Tendered and Non-Tendered. The Non-Tendered Components 
are paid to BSNL and no payment is paid subsequently to vendors.  
■ The tendered components and its cost calculations are arrived through the tendered 
discovered cost of BSNL tender arrived through an open and competitive process. 
The same has been communicated to USOF/DoT and approved by Union Cabinet. 
For tendered cost; BSNL is paid as per its tender conditions. The cost of Rs . 132.77 
cr. for OPEX subsidy of electricity connection is for estimation purpose only and 
approved cost is on the project is on the basis of tendered discovered cost of BSNL. 
Further, BSNL has float ed the tender in which rates are based on composite 
comprehensive package and no component wise cost has been discovered by BSNL. 
Instead; being a turn- key project on cost plus basis; BSNL awarded the work on 
outcome based with all sub- summed components for OPEX and no component wise 
subsidy is mentioned in the tendered discovered prices.  
■ BSNL tender does not specify any category/ component wise cost and a lump cost 
has been identified for maintenance of the site in its tender and payments are made 
as per terms and conditions of approved tender. This tender discovered single 

 
21 
comprehensive rate of Rs 1,20,734 lakh ( for all 5 type of sites) for OPEX for 1836 
towers for 05 years approved by Telecom Commission has been mentioned against 
all five OPEX items mentioned in the estimate. 
■ As such there is no irregular payment being made by USOF to BSNL or by BSNL to 
its vendor.” 
(ii) Irregular payment of security costs: 
57. Audit noted that a flawed system of contracting appears to have been followed in the 
project. DoT/USOF being project owners should have first entered into an agreement with the 
implementing agency i.e. BSNL which should after tendering, entered into back to back 
agreements with the selected vendors for execution and maintenance based on the main 
agreement. As a result, in this case the agreements between BSNL and the vendors show 
deviations from the agreement between USOF and BSNL with respect to scope of services 
resulting in irregular excess payments to vendors. The implication of the dev iations can be that 
while USOF will recover excess payments from BSNL for services not given, BSNL may have to 
absorb these costs as vendors may not agree to any recoveries. It was also noted that though 
the work was awarded to the vendors on a turnkey bas is, no bill of quantities appear to have 
been provided for so as to ensure that all items included in project estimates were actually 
provided/ supplied by the vendors. 
58. The Ministry in their background note commented on the above issue as under: 
“i. The Union Cabinet approved the proposal to award the work to BSNL on nomination 
basis for providing and maintaining mobile services in LWE affected areas & Telecom 
commission considered the project cost discovered by BSNL through tender process. 
Accordingly, an agreement was signed between USOF and BSNL on dated 30.09.2014. 
ii. Since Telecom Commission had approved rate for this project as discovered in the 
BSNL tender, the deliverables were also required to be as per the terms and condition of 
finalised tender document only of BSNL. Terms and conditions of tender document were 
drawn up along with the representatives from TEC as per Clause 2.5.2 of the BSNL/ 
USOF Agreement and Cabinet approval was communicated vide letter No. 30- 156/2013-
USF dated 25.06.2013. 
iii. BSNL had floated the tender in which rates are based on Composite Comprehensive 
Package and no component wise cost has been discovered by BSNL. Instead; being a 
turn-key project; BSNL awarded the work on outcome based with all sub- summed 
components for OPEX and no component wise subsidy is mentioned in the tendered 
discovered prices. The same has also been reiterated in USOF reply to Audit during the 
exit conference. 
iv. There are mainly two components viz -a-viz Tendered and Non- Tendered. The 
tendered components and its cost calculations are arrived through the tendered 
discovered cost of BSNL tender arrived through an open and competitive process. The 
same has been communicated to USOF/DOT and approved by Union Cabinet. 
v. For tendered cost; BSNL is pa id as per its tender conditions and approved cost on the 
project is on the basis of tendered discovered cost of BSNL. 

 
22 
vi. The tendered discovered cost (Tendered Components of both CAPEX/ OPEX) as 
communicated by BSNL was duly approved by Union Cabinet and hence the subsidy is 
released as per the Tendered OPEX Cost.  
vii. The payments to vendors are paid by BSNL as per its  tender conditions and not as 
per USOF agreement and vendors are bound to follow BSNL tender which is the 
responsibility of BSNL. In addition, BSNL tender does not specify any category/ 
component wise cost and a lump cost has been identified for maintenanc e of the site in 
its tender and payments are made as per the same to its vendors. The responsibility of 
ensuring that tender conditions are fulfilled are within the domain of BSNL and only the 
tendered cost passed onto vendors is supposed to be claimed by BSNL along with 
Centage for Tendered OPEX Component. 
viii. It is fact that providing and managing Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism 
affected areas, which pose security threat to internal security of the country. 
Communication needs are paramount in these areas for security forces as well as 
general public. In this project, tower Locations were also identified by MHA due to 
security concerned and mostly locations are situated in security forces campus or nearby. 
BSNL Tender did not ask for dedicated sec urity guards to be provided on each site but 
the operation and maintenance including security of supplied equipment was the 
contractor / vendor's responsibility and desired Uptime as per TRAI QoS parameter and 
terms and conditions of the LWE Agreement dated 30- 09-2014. The same is part of 
BSNL reply to Audit queries during Exit Conference.  
ix. It is pertinent to mention here that now a day's security service has become 
deployment of modern technology rather than deployment of full time manpower. It is 
submitted that Infrastructure created under LWE project with advanced monitoring 
mechanism so as to cater to security needs in disturbed areas of LWE. Each equipment 
supplied on site is equipped with advanced sensors which can detect and send signals at 
centralized monitoring place which is located at nearby location. The sensors deployed 
include even door opening alarm for boxes deployed as well as can even tell if excessive 
dust is there on solar panels. All the equipment's including BTS, Radio as well as Sol ar 
Power system which can be monitored remotely through BSC locations as well as 
through centralized NOC. Any activity to damage the equipment or any tinkering with any 
site equipment gives alarm at centralized location. The information is immediately passed 
on to the nearby field maintenance staff who can access the site within 30 Minutes 
without giving any specific information to locals/Naxalites.  
x. It needs to state here that all LWE Sites are covered under insurance to meet any 
exigencies and for which complete insurance premium is being paid by Vendor as per the 
tender requirement of BSNL. Till date around 180 sites were damaged by Naxalites which 
were made up by vendor without any additional costs and running smoothly after 
restoration. 
xi. Thus, wit h intelligent mix of technology with centralized manpower at BSC/OMC 
locations coupled with field maintenance staff deployed at a distance security services 
are being provided by vendors at all these sites for last 4 years where even state police 
and paramilitary forces have problem to assert low and order.  

 
23 
xii. As per conclusion on above issue, only composite comprehensive package rate per 
site discovered through open tender and approved by Telecom Commission as OPEX 
subsidy was released to BSNL by USOF/ CCA as per the agreement signed between 
BSNL and USOF to make eligible contractual payment to vendor as per terms and 
conditions. BSNL has informed that at no stage the security and upkeep of the sites have 
been compromised. Thus, the observation of Audit t hat security guard is to be deployed 
by vendor is not based on the tender documents of BSNL and spirit of USOF agreement 
and extant approvals of Union Cabinet.”  
59. The Ministry in their written reply on the same subject matter have stated as below: 
“• USOF has deducted the balance amount of Rs. 43.80 Crores against non 
provision of electricity at 876 LWE sites. 
• The provision for electricity supply cost, it is stated that the same is part of only the 
estimates. 
• BSNL adopted a pragmatic approach and floated a tender on lump sum basis 
without compromising on delivery of required SLA. 
• No separate rate was called for security guards in the tender; rather a single 
comprehensive rate for Complete OPEX works per site for all OPEX related 
deliverable was called for. Specific provisioning of security guards has not  been 
called for in the tender. 
•  The cost of engaging security guards was taken for the purpose of estimates only 
since cost on engaging security guards is a variable component and changes with 
each year based on state specific rates.” 
60. When asked about usage of DG sets on mobile tower sites, the representative replied 
as under: 
“It was one of the largest mobile tower projects which has been running on green 
telecom. The power backup that has been used is solar -based. Around 18 million people 
were connected through it, and about 1987 sites have been commissioned under this 
particular project. These all are new sites which have been commissioned in LWE areas. 
Its implementation took around 23 months. All those sites are 100 per cent solar 
powered. There is no usage of DG sets for running those sites.” 
B. Liquidated Damages recovered by BSNL from Contractors/ vendors not credited to 
USOF 
61. As per the agreement between USOF, BSNL was required to ensure recovery of 
Liquidated Damages (LD) from the vendors in accordance with the contract agreement and pass 
on the same to USOF. LD amounting to Rs.  29.09 crore in respect of 1,836 sites and Rs.  0.67 
crore for additional 156 sites had been deducted by the CGMs, BSNL of the respective circles 
but was retained by BSNL. Audit noted that subsequently after a plea from the vendors, LD was 
reduced to Rs. 12.39 crore for 1,831 sites and to Rs. 19.11 lakhs for the additional 156 sites by 
the BSNL Corporate Office. However, retention of LD by BSNL was not compliant with provisions 
of the Agreement between USOF and BSNL. DoT had accepted the audit observation (May 
2019) and stated that the issue had been taken up with BSNL. BSNL (August 2020), was yet to 

 
24 
pass on the recovered LD to USOF nor has the latter adjusted the same. 
62. The Ministry in their background report has replied to the above point as under: 
“i. As per D.G. P&T audit; an LD of Rs. 29.76 Cr. was required to be recovered. However, 
BSNL has indicated t hat the said LD amount of only provisional and finalization of LD is 
done on case to case basis after detailed review of each case by circles and in 
accordance with Clause 21. Section 5B of the BSNL tender document. BSNL has 
accordingly waived LD on vendor s based on recommendations of various circle heads 
and the final figure of L.D. Rs 12.39 crores for 1836 sites scheme and an amount of Rs 
19.10 lakh for Addl. 156 sites scheme was adjusted from utilization statement.  
ii. As per Clause 4.9 of the agreement ; it is the responsibility of the BSNL to pass on the 
LD recovered from its vendors as per terms of its tender and no separate LD is proposed 
under the agreement on BSNL.  
iii. The net payment made to vendors after deducting or withholding provisional LD has 
been included in fund utilization certificate submitted by BSNL to USOF for adjustment of 
advance fund received from USOF. Thus, the LD deducted or withheld has not been 
retained by BSNL but has been properly passed over to USOF. The final payment of 
CAPEX was made to BSNL vide sanction memo no 30-  40/2018-USOF/LWE Phase -I 
Gen case/ 3142-48 dated 24.05.2021 based on Statutory Auditor certificate of utilization if 
funds clearly indicating LD damages adjusted.” 
C. Non-Adjustment of CENVAT Credit by BSNL (PARA 2.1.4.4) (c) 
63. As per the agreement, CENVAT credit realized by BSNL was required to be adjusted 
against payments to be made by USOF as project cost. Audit observed that during the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20, BSNL realized CENVAT credit relating to LWE project to the tune of 212.26 
crore. Out of this amount USOF had adjusted andavailed credit of only 118.45 crore upto March 
2020. The balance credit amounting to 93.81 crore is yet to be passed on by BSNL to USOF or 
adjusted against payments made by USOF.  Ministry confirmed the above fact and replied 
(September 2020) that remaining CENVAT credit would also be recovered as per LWE 
agreement. 
64. In their written reply on the subject, the Ministry have stated as under: 
“
•As per Clause 6.8 of LWE Agreement dated 30.09.2014 ‘CENVAT Credit realized by 
BSNL will be adjusted in the payments to be made by USOF as project cost. 
•As per Annexure IX of the agreement, the cost discovered in inclusive of taxes. 
Accordingly, while paying the claims to BSNL, tax component was also paid for 
which input credit was claimed by BSNL since the funding from BSNL was in the 
form of subsidy. The same was required to be recovered as per clause 6.8 of the 
agreement which states that “CENVAT Credit realized by BSNL will be adjusted in 
the payments to be made by USOF as project cost.  
•The Cenvat Credit is accordingly recovered by CCAs from the OPEX claims and as 
per information available with USOF HQ from various CCAs, all Cenvat Credit has 
been recovered.  
•Hence, action of the Department is in consonance with extant provision of the Indian 

 
25 
Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, Cabinet approval and LWE A greement dated 
30.09.2014 and its amendments.” 
65. When the Committee enquired about the adjustment particulars of the balance credit 
along with supporting documents and wanted to know whether the DoT have reconsigned 
discrepancies about adjustment particulars of the balance credit, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under: 
“As per latest records, Rs. 237.48 cr. has been recovered/adjusted from BSNL’s claim on 
account of realization of Cenvat as per clause 6.8 of the LWE Agreement dated 
30.09.2014 for which final reconciliation is under process with BSNL.” 
66. On being asked as to how this cost which was earlier Rs. 6,000 crore is reduced to 
Rs. 3,567 crore, the Ministry representative replied as under: 
“The Government reverted back to us that we should use energy -efficient technology. 
Then Department of Telecom formulated a committee which arrived at a low -power 
equipment so that solar power can be deployed instead of DG set. The majority of the 
cost was because of the AC requirement as well as di esel power generation. So, the 
revised cost was Rs. 3,567 crore based upon the low power consuming solution which 
drastically reduced the diesel cost and opex. Based upon that, the tender was floated. 
There were two broad components in the tender. There was a capex cost and then there 
was opex cost. The estimated value of the work was Rs. 2,258.47 crore against which the 
discovered price was Rs. 2,531 crore. So, it was 12 per cent higher. Earlier, in one of the 
meetings, it was mentioned that discovery of r ate was 22 per cent higher. I would like to 
clarify that capex price discovery was 3 per cent higher than the estimate and the opex 
was 22 per cent since it was a single bid.” 
67. On being enquired as to whether sufficient advertisement was given to invite 
competitive bidding, the ministry stated as under: 
“Sir, the tender was sufficiently advertised and there was sufficient interest by the people. 
Six bidders had shown the interest. The total project in terms of delivery was at 2,187 
locations, out of whic h 1,836 were new sites and 363 were already installed sites by 
BSNL.” 
68. When asked as to why only four bidders participated in the bidding process, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
“Sir, L&T gave us two letters on 21
st of April and 25 th of April in which e xtension was 
asked for and pre -bid queries were raised. When we do the bidding, everybody has a 
right to raise the query on tender for clarification. At that time, if there is anything which is 
not done appropriately by us in any manner, it can be rectified. L&T raised the query 
twice; ITI raised the query on 22
nd of April; HFCL raised the query on 24 th of April; VNL 
raised the query on 24th of April; Tejas raised the query on 25th of April; and Toshniwal on 
21st and 25th of April. The people who are among the probables can participate. It is not 
that they were not intimated. It is a tough terrain, Sir. So, many of the people were not 
able to take the risk and work. Sir, ten years down the line, if we look at the kind of 
conditions which were prevailing in these districts, very few people were having the 
wherewithal to do it. Similarly, in the case of advertisement, we have published the 

 
26 
advertisement in big newspapers. Indian Express is the first newspaper in which the 
advertisement was published and it is not a one liner advertisement.” 
69. On being asked whether there was any Government website where you have 
advertised it, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Sir, there are five places where we have published the advertisement. It was published in 
the Indian Express newspaper which is a big national daily. It is not like it was published 
in any advertisement magazine. Secondly, it was advertised in Dainik Jagran on 
26.04.2014 and it n also has a very big following in the country . It was published on the 
BSNL website also. It was also published in TCL website. It was also published in India 
Trade Journal which is a Government entity. So, the advertisement was published in five 
places by the BSNL. As on date, even publishing the tender in newspaper is not required 
as per the new guidelines, but we have done it and it was published in two newspapers, 
two websites and India Trade Journal. So, it was widely published. The publicity has 
resulted into enough interests by the parties as s ix people have shown their interest to 
participate in the tender and they raised the queries. So, it is a transparent bidding 
process which was sufficiently advertised and it was not restrictive. Sir, the second query 
was raised about 2G versus 3G. We would like to submit two points here. Any technology 
matures over a period of time. Even today, 5G has been introduced in the country, but 5G 
in terms of numbers is very small. In the case of 2G and 3G technologies, at that time, 90 
crore mobile customers were there in the country in March, 2014, and out of that, 4.5 
crore were 3G customers. It means the numbers are even less than five per cent. If we 
see in rural areas, perhaps that number may be less than one per cent. if I put a 5G 
equipment in Dantewada, can a person afford a handset of Rs. 25,000 and avail the 
service. So, at that time, the 3G technology was as expensive as the 5G technology 
today is. So, we have to draw a similar analogy. So, non- availability of handset 
ecosystem was another constraining f actor at that time. Thirdly, 3G service has a lesser 
site coverage in comparison to 2G due to the technological aspect.”  
 
  

 
27 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
Introductory 
1. The project for providing mobile services in LWE affected areas with funding 
from USOF was a significant initiative in providing communication services in remote and 
difficult areas of the country. USOF/ DoT chose a technology for the project which was 
delivering sub -optimal performance with limited scope for augmentation impacting  
performance of the network. Further, though the project had been substantially 
commissioned, there were delays ranging from 3 to 18 months and the project duration 
was extended from September 2020 to June 2022. Audit also found that monitoring and 
evaluation of the project was inadequate. On account of the above there is limited 
assurance that the expected outcomes in terms of providing critical communications 
facilities in remote and disturbed areas would materialize despite incurring an expenditure 
of ` 3,112.32 crore on the project.Audit findings relating to project planning, execution, 
monitoring/ evaluation and financial aspects are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
Some of the issues contained in the Report have been examined by the Committee and 
commented upon suitably in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Imprudent Selection of low power BTS using 2G technology 
2. The Committee note from the Audit observation that both the options considered 
by USOF in 2012 were based on 2G technology even though BSNL had already launched 
3G services in 2009. Besides, by the time USOF signed the agreement with BSNL,  a 
further period of over 22 months had elapsed and the use of 3G had become common 
among Telecom Service Providers (TSPs). The Committee further note from the 
submission made by the Ministry during oral evidence that the choice of technology was 
based on the maturity of the technology and of the ecosystem of handset at that time. 
According to the Ministry, 2G was widely accepted technology at that time as in 2013- 14 
only 45.61 million out of 904.51 million mobile users in India were using mobile wireless 
broadband. Further, 3G service had lesser geographical coverage and 3G handsets were 
not affordable. The Committee further note that in December 2016, USOF continued with 
the same technology for the 156 additional towers, despite complaints being received 
relating to coverage and connectivity since June 2015. The Committee also note from the 
Annual Report of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India for the year 2016-17, that Telecom 
sector saw the advent and adaptation of 4G services in FY 2016 -17; the tariffs reduced 
further and the data usage proliferated; the number of mobile based stations also jumped 
during the year further improving coverage and reach and with increased availability of 
smart phones, there was a data revolution in the country;  Telecom services providers in 
the country were building access networks using 4G mobile technology and world- over, 
Internet Telephony was beginning to emerge as a cost -effective mode of delivery of voice 
calls. The Committee while observing that the telecom sector had taken rapid strides and 
was moving on from 3G to 4G opine that approving additional towers with the same 2G 
technology in December 2016 indicates lack of foresightedness on part of the Ministry. 

 
28 
The Committee are of the considered view that a  reassessment/review of the existing 
technology would have enabled the USOF to either adopt better technology instantly or 
prepared them for upgradation of existing technology to the state- of-art-technology in a 
phased and timely manner. 
Vendor guided selection of technology led to de-facto single vendor 
3. From the audit observation, the Committee find that the DoT committee 
recommended the selection of technology to be used for the project based on a proposal 
made by a vendor viz. M/s VNL and the BSNL floated tenders for the project in August 
2013 with specifications approved by the DoT Committee which was in turn based on the 
presentation given by the same vendor. The Committee note that the vendors viz. M/s VNL 
and M/s HFCL participated and only after opening of the bids, a case was sent to USOF for 
approval. However, it was decided by DoT to retender the project which was done in April 
2014. M/s VNL emerged as L- 1 and M/s HFCL was L -2. The work was awarded on 05 
September 2014 to M/s VNL and M/s HFCL in ratio of 70:30 respectively. The Committee 
note that there were only two participants on both the occasions, one of which, viz. M/s 
HFCL had a Transfer of T echnology agreement with  the other bidder i.e., M/s VNL and 
thus, the tender was tantamount to a single vendor case despite the high value of the 
project. Audit observed that the DoT/ USOF neither ascertained the vendor base for the 
recommended solution prior to tendering, nor did they review the specifications on 
account of the very limited participation in the tender to expand participation. The 
Committee, however, note from the written submission of the Ministry t hat it was an open 
tender and there was no condition for participating in the tender process except that it 
had to be ‘PMA compliant’.From the submissions made by the Ministry  during the oral 
evidence, the Committee further note that due to security and sensitivity of the matter, the 
focus of the department and the government mandated preference to use of Indian 
manufactured products was given a fillip. The Committee while noting the observations of 
DoT committee that  “multi-vendor impl ementation” were availablefor the recommended 
technology and that other “cost effective technical solutions” that supported generic 
requirements could be available were not given adequate emphasis by the Ministry are of 
the view that adopting an open approach would have not only promoted healthy 
competition but also encouraged indigenization of next generation technologies. Further, 
while noting that five vendors had shown interest and only one of them participated in the 
actual bidding process  along with a bidder who had a ToT agreement with the selected 
vendor, the Committee opine that the Ministry should have reviewed the 
specifications,while going for rebidding, in view of  the limited participation on the first 
occasion. The Committee opine that review of the specifications would have given a 
definite assurance as to the qualification criteria and the reasonability of prices offered by 
the selected vendor.  
Delays in implementation status of LWE Project- Phase I 
4. The Committee note from the audit observation that the agreement between 
USOF and BSNL should have been signed by September 2013 but the agreement was 

 
29 
signed only in September 2014 i.e. after a delay of a year. The Committee also note that 
project agreement was amended multiple times between December 2015 to January 2017 
to extend the project period. The Committee observe that  the prolonged delay in 
commissioning of the towers led to non- achievement of the key objective of the project 
i.e., to quickly provide communication facilities to the security forces in sensitive areas. 
The Committee further note from thereply of the Ministry that 95% work of the project was 
completed in time except some sites which could not be completed in time due to non -
allocation of sites by state government in time,f requent naxal attacks in LWE areasand 
additional work orders for 156 sites . The Committee are of the view that all the 
stakeholders were well aware of the aforesaid limitations in providing infrastructure in the 
LWE areas and desire that, henceforth, instead of resorting to subsequent extensions,  all 
related issues should be accounted for while setting the initial timelines. While noting that 
the tender of active Infra is in final stages and subsequently all sites will be upgraded to 
4G by Dec. 2023, the Committee hope that the project will be completed within the 
scheduled timeline. 
Agreement for award of work by BSNL prior to agreement between USOF and BSNL 
5. The Committee note from the audit observation that an agreement between 
USOF and BSNL for the project was to be signed by September 2013 but the BSNL issued 
tenders prior to entering into an agreement with USOF in August 2013 in which two 
vendors viz. M/s VNL and M/s HFCL participated. Besides,  it was executed only on 30 
September 2014 i.e. subsequent to the finalization of the tender by BSNL and issue of 
APOs to the vendorsand that there were discrepancies between the terms and rates in the 
tender/APOs issued to the vendors by BSNL and in the agreement between USOF and 
BSNL. The Committee also noted that for several works,  the agreement between BSNL 
and vendors did not specify individual items of work and only provided a lump sum 
ratewhereas, the agreement between USOF and BSNL provided for item wise details of the 
work including estimated costs. These discrepancies were not reviewed and corrected in 
the Purchase Orders (POs) issued to the vendors which led to the vendors receiving 
payments for items of work which were not performed by them. TheCommittee note from 
the submissions of the Ministry statingthat  the project was given to BSNL on nomination 
basis and it was expected that BSNL would carry out the work from an open competitive 
bidding procedur e and the cost discovered through the procedure shall be funded by 
USOF. Besides, though the APOs were issued by BSNL prior to agreement, the final PO s 
were issued only after the approval of tendered discovered cost by DoT/Cabinet. The 
Committee are of the  opinion thatif the cost discovered through the competitive bidding 
procedure was to be funded by USOF, the agreement between USOF and BSNL instead of 
being based on the cost estimations of  line items should have been on the same basis as 
between the BSNL and the vendors. The Committee opine that instead of  breaking up/ 
justifying the cost discovered by including estimations in respect of line items/ works 
which were not to be provided/ performed  by the vendor, the Ministry should have 
amended the Purchase Orders issued subsequently to bring parity in the two agreements. 

 
30 
Inadequate marketing of Telecom Products 
6. The Committee note from the audit observation that i n accordance with the 
BSNL tender, the vendors of the project were responsible for setting up customer service 
centres for making BSNL mobile prepaid/ postpaid SIM cards, recharge coupons etc. 
available in the LWE areas but  the vendors did not appoint the required numbers of 
retailers. Besides, out of 5,259 retailers required to be appointed as per policy, only 232 
retailers were appointed by the vendors in five Circles like Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana having appointed only one dealer each. The Committee 
also took note of the evaluation report of II T, Bombay which highlighted limited  
availability of BSNL outlets in the context of low level of awareness about BSNL schemes. 
From the submissions made by the Ministry in their reply, the Committee further note that 
only 232 retailers were appointed due to the sensitive situation in LWE areas. Further, 
people were not interested in the retailer work and most of the retailer work was carri ed 
by BSNL staff in those areas and thatseveral steps were taken by the BSNL to improve 
sales viz. Daily monitoring of SI M sales and interaction with low performing Circles  
etc.While notingthat limited outlets were set up for marketing of telecom products ,the 
Committeebelieve that competitive as well as lucrative agreements with the local existing 
outlets could have been more effective in addressing the issues in  marketing telecom 
products.Further, better marketing and innovative solutions could have resulted in BSNL 
products being more accessible to customers for whom the project was implemented. 
Evaluation of performance of LWE sites 
7. The Committee note that as per  terms of the Agreement for the project, the 
Administrator, USOF had the right to inspect the equipment installed at the sites and 
conduct service performance tests either directly or through a Designated Monitor ing 
Agency (DMA), and evaluate “Quality of Service parameters” at any time during the tenure 
of the Agreement. The Committee note with dismay that instructions for carrying out 
limited/Non-technical checks were issued to DMAs only in February 2017 i.e., 20 months 
after the commissioning of first LWE site in July 2015 and that by that time 1,668 sites i.e., 
90 per cent of the LWE sites planned had already been commissioned. The Committee 
further note from the submissions of the M inistry that being a project of national 
importance, the roll out was monitored by none other than PM under PRAGATI. However 
regular reviews at all levels in government i.e. Secretary-T, JS-T, USOF-A, CMD-BSNL and 
Director-CM were carried out for  whole duration of the project. Further, BSNL CMD also 
constituted a Director level committee to resolve any issue faced in roll out on immediate 
basis so that mobile services to Security forces could  be delivered in time. While 
appreciating the recent measures taken for reviewing the progress , the Committee desire 
that Project Monitoring Unit as an independent vigilant body  may be constituted for 
effective oversight and gauging the actual extent of coverage and quality of services  
being provided under this project.  
Quality of Service- Non-Compliance of terms and conditions of Agreement 
8. The Committee note from the audit observation that i n November 2015, MHA 

 
31 
conveyed complaints received from the Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh Police to 
USOF that the towers installed by BSNL in the LWE areas were largely non-functional as a 
result of which security forces deployed in the area were deprived of mobile connectivity. 
Besides, USOF passed on these complaints to BSNL but did not carry out any 
performance test directly or through Designated Monitoring Agencies (DMA). The 
Committee notefrom the Audit observation that the downtime was more than two per cent 
in over 53 per cent sites due to which the very purpose of the project viz.  “to provide 
mobile connectivity especially to the security forces in LWE  area” was not met. The 
Committee further note from the submissions made by the Ministry that Mobile network 
setup in LWE affected areas under the scheme faced numerous problems related to naxal 
activities in the starting of the project resulting in high downtime and that uptime and QoS 
is not fully dependent on BTS equipment only but multiple factors where Core network as 
well as transmission media is also involved. In addition, as per the project Agreement, 
penalty clause mentioned for downtime/interruption in mobile service from LWE sites was 
to be calculated on monthly basis and deducted from tendered OPEX for the particular 
BTS which had  been carried out by field units while settlement of the claims.  The 
Committee desire that concrete action regarding downtime/interruption in mobile service 
for LWE sitesshould be taken to strengthen the network services and further given the 
security considerations, stringent measures be taken to obviate contravention of terms 
and conditions of Agreement. 
Irregular payments for electricity connections and security costs 
9. The Committee note that as per clause 6.3 of the Agreement between USOF and 
BSNL, BSNL was required to ensure deliverables as stipulated by USOF/DoT in the 
Agreement. Hence, award of O& M by BSNL to the vendor based on a lump sum cost 
without specifying electricity supply as a deliverable was a violation of the agreement 
between USOF and BSNL. Further, separate items such as usage of DG sets on mobile 
tower sites,electricity charges specified in the agreement between USOF and BSNL have 
not been specified in the approved tender for the vendors  and that the vendors were also 
meeting expenditure on the electricity charges from the same quantum of O&M subsidy in 
the case of 152 LWE sites where electricity connections were provided. The Committee 
further note from audit revelation that maintenance of electric connection and cost of 
electricity had to be borne by the vendor and the financial implications of the same were 
considered by BSNL while evaluating the tender but it was not separately specified and as 
a result, the vendor got payment towards electricity consumption for the sites which were 
never provided elect ric connection, i.e., for costs never incurred. The Committee note 
from the submission of the Ministry that BSNL called a tender to get cost effective and 
efficient way to get the project implemented in line with cabinet approvals and a 
comprehensive scope had  been defined including security guard deployment for site 
security and deployment of green energy solution to get rid of Commercial power supply. 
Further, no separate rate was called for electricity consumption in the tender; rather a 
single comprehensive rate for Complete OPEX works per site for all OPEX related 
deliverable was called for, irrespective of EB site or non EB site. Likewise, Security cost 

 
32 
was not separately specified and as a result the vendor got payment towards security at 
the sites which were never provided with any, like for sites within Police stations and 
CRPF Ca mps. The Committee while noting from GFR 204 that “ Lump-sum contracts 
should not be entered into except in cases of absolute necessity;  Where lump-sum 
contracts become unavoidable, full j ustification should be recorded;  The contracting 
authority should ensure that conditions in the lump -sum contract absolutely safeguard 
and protect the interests of the Government” opinethat award of O&M by BSNL to the 
vendor should not have been on lump- sum basis ( without detailing out t he estimated 
component costs) . The Committee are of the view  that recovery of paymentsfrom the 
BSNL/Vendors on paymentsmade over and above the limits of agreement between the 
BSNL and USOF may be considered to enforce financial discipline and to  settle such 
inconsistencies for the posterity. 
Conclusion 
The USO Fund is an important mechanism established by the Government of India 
for providing communication services in remote and difficult areas of the country. The 
project for providing mobile services in LWE affected areas with funding from USOF was 
thus a significant initiative in this direction. Audit of the project, showed that USOF/ DoT 
had chosen a technology for the project which was delivering sub- optimal performance, 
and had limited scope for being  augmented which had impacted performance of the 
network. In addition, though the project had been substantially commissioned, there were 
delays ranging from 3 to 18 months. The project duration including O&M had  since been 
extended up to 2022. Audit found that monitoring and evaluation of the project was also 
inadequate. On account of the above there is limited assurance that the expected 
outcomes in terms of providing critical communications facilities in remote and disturbed 
areas would materialize despi te expenditure of 3,112.32 crore on the project. A different 
approach involving use of latest available technology along with review and upgradation 
of technology and a better financial discipline would have ensured value for money and 
better communication facilities in LWE areas. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
August, 2023  Chairperson 
Sravana, 1943 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee 
  

 
33 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE–I OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 3RD JANUARY, 2023 
  The Committee sat on Tuesday the 03rd  January, 2023 from 1600 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in 
the Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil    — Convenor      
MEMBERS 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
3. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
PART-I 
(1600 hrs. to 1640 hrs.) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar    — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das       — Director 
3. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja  — Director 
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja    — Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal     — Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Office of the C&AG 
1. Shri Rakesh Mohan — Dy. C&AG 
2. Ms. Meenakshi Sharma — Dy. C&AG 
3. Shri Bivash Ranjan Mondal     — Director General 
4. Shri Purushottam Tiwary —  Director General 
5. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey  — Director General 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor welcomed the Members and the officials of the Office 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting of the Sub -Committee - I convened 
to have briefing by the Audit Officers on the subjects “Implementation of USOF project (Phase –I) 
to provide mobile services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism” based on Chapter II (Para 
2.1) of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021. 
3. The Convenor, then, asked the Officers of the office of C&AG to firstly brief the Sub-
Committee on the shortcomings as pointed out by them during the Audit of the subject 
“Implementation of USOF project (Phase – I) to provide mobile services in areas affected by Left 
Wing Extremism”, acceptance of the shortcomings by the concerned Department i.e. Department 
of Telecommunications, steps contemplated by the Department to overcome the shortcomings 
and recommendations proposed by Audit to address the same and action taken thereon by the 
Department concerned. 

 
34 
4. The representatives of Audit, then made Power -Point Presentation highlighting inter -
alia the project details, imprudent selection of low power BTS using 2G technology when 3G had 
already been rolled out in 2009, failure of USOF to review and upgrade technology used in the 
project since Telecom technologies  evolve rapidly and become more efficient with multiferous 
capabilities, vendor guided selection of technology leading to de-facto single vendor situation and 
delays in implementation of LWE Project - Phase-I.  Audit also apprised the Committee about the 
agreement for award of work by BSNL prior to agreement between USOF and BSNL which led to 
making payments to vendors for items of work which were not performed by them e.g., irregular 
payment of electricity connections and security costs, USOF not carrying out any performance 
tests directly or through Designated Monitoring Agency (DMA), release of CAPEX subsidy of ₹ 
51.40 crore by USOF in advance for providing electricity connections for 1,028 Mobile towers, 
whereas electricity connections, were provided in only 152 towers, security guards not being 
provided as per the agreement, undue release of subsidy to BSNL by U SOF, which in turn 
passed this on to the vendors without ensuring the envisaged deliverables under the agreement 
etc.    
5. Further, Hon'ble Convenor & Members sought clarifications on issues like reasons for 
not undertaking technology reviews despite rapidly evolving Telecom technologies and change in 
user requirement, reasons for belatedly asking BSNL by USOF for a proposal for 4G upgradation 
for existing sites, reasons for not ascertaining the vendor base prior to tendering by DoT/USOF 
and not reviewing the specifications on account of the very limited participation in the tender to 
expand participation.  Convenor/Members also asked about the reasons for delays in signing the 
agreement between the USOF and BSNL and frequent amendments in the agreement whi ch 
added to extension of time period for execution/completion of the project, awarding of work by 
BSNL to its vendors prior to the work being formally awarded to it by USOF.  Further, 
Convenor/Members asked several questions inter -alia seeking information reg. not appointing 
required number of retailers, absence of retail outlets, difficulty in obtaining BSNL SIM Cards by 
willing customers, action taken by DoT for improving mobile connectivity, voice quality, 
communication, low signal strength, limited rang e, dropping of calls, call congestion, poor 
infrastructure and repeated unservicability under the project for LWE areas, irregular payments 
for electricity connections which resulted in undue benefit to vendors for the services not 
rendered by them, steps taken by DoT to monitor the security in LWE sites due to not deploying 
security guards and reasons for deviation from the agreement between USOF and BSNL with 
respect to scope of services resulting in irregular payment to vendors etc.        
6. TheConvenor thanked the officers of the Office of C&AG of India for briefing the Sub -
committee on the said subject. 
PART- II 
(1640 hrs. to 1730 hrs.) 
***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
35 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – I OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 13th JANUARY, 2023 
The Sub-committee sat on Friday the 13th  January, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in 
the Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil     —  Convenor     
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
Rajya Sabha 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  — Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja   — Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Office of the C&AG 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury  — Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Bivash Ranjan Mondal — Director General 
3. Shri Purushottam Tiwary   — Director General 
4. Ms. Roli Shukla Malge    — Principal Director  
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) along with Representatives of BSNL 
1.  Shri Manish Sinha   — Member (Finance), DoT 
2. Shri Sanjeev Agrawal — Member (Technology), DoT 
3.  Shri P.K. Purwar — CMD, BSNL 
4. Smt. Yashashri Shukla  — Jt. Administrator (Fin.) – USOF 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor welcomed the Members and the officials of the Office 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting of the Sub -Committee - I convened 
to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) along with represent atives of BSNL on the subject “Implementation of 
USOF project (Phase –  I) to provide mobile services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism” 
based on Chapter II (Para 2.1) of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021. 
3. The Convenor then recalled that during the first sitting of Sub -committee-I held on  

 
36 
03-01-2023, Audit briefed the Sub- committee on the Audit findings as contained in this subject 
and the Action Taken by the Department of Telecommunications thereon. Audit pointed out their 
observations on the issues like (i) imprudent selection of low power BTS using 2G technology,  
(ii) Failure of USOF to review and upgrade technology used in the project, (ii) Vendor guided 
selection of technology leading to de- facto single vendor situation, (iv) Delays in implementation  
of LWE Project -Phase-l, (v) Agreement for award of work by BSNL prior to the agreement 
between USOF and BSNL, (vi) Irregular payments of CAPEX and OPEX subsidy (vii) Not 
carrying out any performance tests directly or through Designated Monitoring Agency ( DMA).  
Thereafter, the Convenor asked the Officers of the Office of Audit to brief the Sub- committee, if 
there is anything more to add on the subject matter. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) and BSNL were called in and the Hon’ble Convenor welcomed them and 
expressed his displeasure over the absence of Secretary and Additional Secretary of DoT during 
the sitting. He stated that while taking leave of absence, the Secretary had assured that the 
Additional Secretary would attend.  But his absence was taken off with due seriousness, the 
views of the Committee be conveyed suitably.   
5. The Convenor then apprised them about the briefing session by Audit on the aforesaid 
subject during the sitting held on 3 January, 2023, the Audit findings contained in Audit Para and 
action taken by the Department of Telecommunications thereon.  Some major shortcomings as 
pointed out by Audit on this subject are (i) failure of USOF to review and upgrade technol ogy 
used in the project while both the project size and period was increased,  (ii) USOF belatedly 
asked BSNL for a proposal for upgradation to 4G for existing sites,  (iii) DOT/USOF neither 
ascertained the vendor base prior to tendering nor did they revie w the specifications on account 
of the very limited participation in the tender to expand participation,  (iv) Delays in signing the 
agreement between the USOF and BSNL and frequent amendments in the agreement allowing 
extension of time period for execution of the project added to the delay in signing the agreement 
between the USOF and BSNL and frequent amendments in the agreement allowing extension of 
time period for execution of the project added to the delays in completion of the project, (v) 
awarding the work to its vendors by BSNL prior to the work being formally awarded to it by 
USOF. Therefore, there were discrepancies between the terms and rates in the tender/Advance 
Purchase Orders (APOS) issued to the vendors by BSNL and in the agreement between US OF 
and BSNL which led to the vendor receiving payments for items of work which were not 
performed by them, (vi) Vendors had not appointed the required number of retailers, (vii)  due to 
absence of outlets, even willing customers found it difficult to obtai n BSNL SIM cards, (viii)  
BSNL did not monitor fulfilment of the contractual obligation relating to opening of retail outlets 
and instruct them to make the required number of retailers available, in November 2015, (ix) 
MHA conveyed complaints received from the Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh Police to USOF 
that the towers installed by BSNL in the LWE areas were largely non- functional, as a result of 
which Security forces deployed in the area were deprived of mobile connectivity, (x) USOF 
passed on these com plaints to BSNL but did not carry out any performance test directly or 
through Designated Monitoring Agencies (DMAs) etc.  Impressing upon the witnesses to treat the 
proceedings of the sitting as confidential, the Convenor asked the Member, (Finance), 
Department of Telecommunications to brief the Sub- committee on the Audit findings as 
contained in C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021 and action taken thereon by the Department. 

 
37 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) made a Power Point Presentation on most of the issues pointed out by 
Audit. 
7. Hon’ble Convenor/Members sought certain clarifications from the representatives on 
the issues relating to disputable information regarding not using DG Sets while they were still 
being used and bills were being raised against the consumption of petrol and diesel, selection of 
an inferior technology instead of better one, lack of communication in the entire area of Saranda 
forests and Buda Pahad due to which the Forces  found it very difficult to communicate among 
sections of platoons and their other formations, current status of USOF Phase- II, reasons for 
opting for 2G technology in 2014 while 3G technology was available in 2009, steps taken in 
regard to connectivity is sues as Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh police stated that 
connectivity was not available and it was of no use, whether any technical investigations were 
done of the existing sites, whether GPRS service was available with 2G facility, reasons for 
opting for 2G technology while MHA has not issued any instructions to opt for this technology,  
non availability of the proper retailers for providing SIM Cards near the existing towers, reasons 
for not-opting for competitive bidding process which lead to finally depending on only one vendor, 
reasons for giving extra money to the vendor for deploying Security Guards at the Security 
Forces Camp which the contractor did not even spend. The Convenor/Members further asked 
about the reasons for only two companies partici pating in the bidding process out of five 
competitive companies, the reasons for not approaching these 5 companies, the mode of 
publicity used for the bidding process. 
8. Thereafter, Hon’ble Convenor asked the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and BSNL to furnish the information that 
was not readily available with them alongwith the replies to the List of Points being sent to them 
by the Committee Secretariat within fifteen days.  Hon’ble Convenor also stated that the Sub -
committee will take evidence of the officials of the Ministry and BSNL once again when the 
Secretary/Additional Secretary may also be present. 
9. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications) and BSNL for appearing before the Sub- committee and 
sharing valuable information. He also thanked the Audit officers for briefing the Sub- committee 
on the said subject. 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The Sub-committee then adjourned. 
  

 
38 
APPENDIX III 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – I OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 18th APRIL, 2023 
  The Sub-committee sat on Tuesday the 18th  April, 2023 from 1200 hrs. to 1310 hrs. in 
the Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil    —  Convenor    
MEMBERS 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das    — Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja  — Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Office of the C&AG 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury — Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Bivash Ranjan Mondal — Director General 
3. Ms. Roli Shukla Malge   — Principal Director  
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of  
Telecommunications) along with Representatives of BSNL 
1. Shri K. Rajaraman    — Secretary, DoT 
2. Shri Manish Sinha      — Member (Finance), DoT 
3. Shri Sanjeev Agrawal    — Member (Technology), DoT 
4.  Shri P.K. Purwar    — CMD, BSNL 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor welcomed the Members and the officials of the Office 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting of the Sub -Committee - I convened 
to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) along with representatives of BSNL on the subject “Implementation of 
USOF project (Phase –  I) to provide mobile ser vices in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism” 
based on Chapter II (Para 2.1) of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021. 
3. The Convenor then recalled that during the first sitting of Sub -committee-I held on  
13-01-2023, Audit briefed the Sub-committee on the Audit findings as contained in the report and 
the Action Taken by the Department of Telecommunications thereon. Thereafter, during their 
sitting held on 18th April, 2023, the Sub-committee had taken oral evidence of the representatives 
of Department of Telecommunications and BSNL on the aforesaid subject. 

 
39 
4. The Convenor then apprised them that during the previous sitting of Sub- committee 
certain clarifications were sought from the representatives of DoT on the issues relating to 
disputable information regarding not using DG Sets while they were still being used and bills 
were being raised against the consumption of petrol and diesel, selection of an inferior 
technology instead of better one, lack of communication in the entire area of Saranda forests and 
Buda Pahad due to which the Forces found it very difficult to communicate among sections of 
platoons and their other formations, current status of USOF Phase -II, reasons for opting for 2G 
technology in 2014 while 3G technology was available in 2009, steps taken in regard to 
connectivity issues as Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh police stated that connectivity was not 
available and it was of no use, whether any t echnical investigations were done of the existing 
sites, whether GPRS service was available with 2G facility, reasons for opting for 2G technology 
while MHA has not issued any instructions to opt for this technology,  non availability of the 
proper retailers for providing SIM Cards near the existing towers, reasons for not -opting for 
competitive bidding process which lead to finally depending on only one vendor, reasons for 
giving extra money to the vendor for deploying Security Guards at the Security Forces Camp 
which the contractor did not even spend. The Convenor/Members further asked about the 
reasons for only two companies participating in the bidding process out of six interested 
companies, the reasons for not approaching these six companies, the mode of publicity used for 
the bidding process etc. Impressing upon the witnesses to treat the proceedings of the sitting as 
confidential, the Convenor asked the Secretary, Department of Telecommunications to brief the 
Sub-committee on the Audit findings as contained in C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021 and action 
taken thereon by the Department. 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications)/BSNL were called in. After introducing themselves, they made a Power 
Point Presentation on most of the issues pointed out by Audit. 
6. Thereafter, Hon’ble convenor/Members sought certain clarifications from the 
representatives of Department of Telecommunications/BSNL on the issues such as reasons for 
not upgrading the technology till now; measures taken to provide a better technology than 2G in 
LWE areas; reasons for not adopting a neutral and competitive process for selection of 
technology; measures taken to increase the power availability in LWE areas so as to increase 
the coverage of the system deployed by BSNL in these areas; steps taken by the Department of 
Telecommunications/BSNL to promote participation of people at large in the retailer work; steps 
taken in regard to poor connectivity in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh; complaints registered 
by the Police in these States regarding non -availability of connectivity; whether the connectivity 
has since been improved, measures so taken to enquire about the experience of these States for 
improvement in connectivity now; reasons  for providing extra money to the vendor for deploying 
Security Guards at the Security Forces Camp; which was not even spent by the contractor; 
authorities who recommended for adoption of 2G technology; reasons for only two companies 
out of five companies taking part in the bidding process, mode of publicity used for healthy 
competition by the companies in bidding process etc. 
7. Hon’ble Convenor also desired the Department of Telecommunications/BSNL to 
provide a copy each of the (i) tender floated for USOF project, (ii) reasons for extension of time 
sought by the Department of Telecommunications for completion of this project, (iii) Specific 
reasons for seeking higher rates, (iv) Original complaints submitted by Police in Madhya Pradesh 

 
40 
and Chhattisgarh, reply of the Department of Telecommunication/BSNL thereon, action taken to 
improve the connectivity in these States and response obtained from the Police regarding 
improvement in connectivity. 
8. Thereafter, Hon’ble Convenor asked the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and BSNL to furnish the information that 
was not readily available with them alongwith the replies to the List of Points being sent to them 
by the Committee Secretariat within fifteen days. Hon’ ble Convenor also stated that the Sub-
committee will take further evidence of the officials of the DoT and BSNL on 28
th April, 2023. 
9. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications) and B SNL for appearing before the Sub- committee and 
sharing valuable information. He also thanked the Audit officers for briefing the Sub- committee 
on the said subject. 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The Sub-committee then adjourned. 
  

 
41 
APPENDIX IV 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH  SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – I OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 28th APRIL, 2023 
  The Sub-committee sat on Friday the 28th April, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in the 
Committee Room No. 3, Block A, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil       —   Convenor 
MEMBER 
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Tirthankar Das — Director 
2. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Office of the C&AG 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury    — Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Bivash Ranjan Mondal   — Director General 
3. Shri Purushottam Tiwary     — Director General 
4. Ms. Priti R. Jain      — Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) along with Representatives of BSNL 
1. Shri Manish Sinha   — Member (Finance), DoT 
2. Shri Sanjeev Agrawal   — Member (Technology), DoT 
3. Shri P.K. Purwar             — CMD, BSNL 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor welcomed the Members and the officials of the Office 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting of the Sub -Committee - I convened 
to have further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications) along with representatives of BSNL on the subject 
“Implementation of USOF project (Phase – I) to provide mobile services in areas affected by Left 
Wing Extremism” based on Chapter II (Para 2.1) of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2021. 
3. The Convenor then recalled that Sub-committee had a briefing session by Audit on the 
aforesaid subject on 3rd  January, 2023, wherein Audit apprised the Sub -Committee about the 
Audit findings contained in the Audit Para. Thereafter, on 13th January, 2023 and 18th April, 2023, 
the Sub- Committee had taken oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications/BSNL on the subject. 
4. The Convenor then apprised them that during the sitting of Sub-committee held on 18th 
April, 2023, Members sought certain clarifications from the representatives of DoT/BSNL on the 
issues relating to reasons for not upgrading the technology till now, measures taken to provide a 

 
42 
better technology than 2G in LWE areas, reasons for not adopting a neutral and competitive 
process for selection of technology measures taken to increase the Power availability in LWE 
areas so as to increase the coverage of the system deployed by BSNL in these areas, steps 
taken in regard to Poor connectivity in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh, complaints registered 
by users in these States, whether the connectivity has since been improved etc. 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications)/BSNL were called in. After introducing themselves, they made a Power 
Point Presentation on most of the issues pointed out by Audit. 
6. Thereafter, Hon’ble convenor/Members sought certain clarifications from the 
representatives of Department of Telecommunications/BSNL on the issues such as reasons for 
delay in asking the BSNL for a proposal for upgradation to 4G technology; reasons for delay at 
the stage of execution and completion of the project; steps taken to avoid such delays in future 
projects especially in LWE areas facing security challenges; specific measures taken by the DoT 
to ensure the upgradation of all the sites to 4G by 31st December, 2023, action taken by BSNL to 
resolve the connectivity issues as raised by the users in Chhatt isgarh and Madhya Pradesh 
Police; reasons for giving extra money to the vendor for deploying security Guards at the 
Security Forces Camp which the contractor did not even spend. The Convenor/Members further 
asked about the reasons for only two companies participated in the bidding process out of five 
competitive companies, cap for reasonability of rates, reasons for selecting 2G services over 3G 
serices which were also available at that time etc. 
7. Thereafter, Hon’ble Convenor asked the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and BSNL to furnish the information that 
was not readily available with them along with the replies to the List of Points being sent to them 
by the Committee Secretariat within fifteen days. 
8. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications) and BSNL for appearing before the Sub- committee and 
sharing valuable information. He also thanked the Audit officers for briefing the Sub- committee 
on the said subject. 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The Sub-committee then adjourned. 
  

 
43 
APPENDIX V 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
HELD ON 9TH AUGUST, 2023. 
 The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) sat on Wednesday, the 9th August, 2023 from 
1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs in Room No. ‘51’, Chairperson’s Chamber, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  —  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri  Brijendra Singh  
3. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
7. Dr. Satya Pal Singh   
8. Shri Jayant Sinha  
Rajya Sabha 
9. Dr.K. Laxman  
10. Dr.M. Thambidurai  
11. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
12. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar — Director 
3. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev.Tuteja — Director 
Officers of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
1. Shri Sarit Jafa — Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Rebecca Mathai — Dy. CAG 
3. Shri Subir Mallick — Dy. CAG 
 2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the office of 
C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the Members 
on the following Draft Reports:– 
i. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
ii. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 

 
44 
iii. Implementation of USOF Project (Phase –  I) to Provide Mobile Services in Areas 
affected by Left Wing Extremism; 
iv. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
v. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
 3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports without 
any modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of factual 
verification done by the Audit.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 