17

INCORRECT ADOPTION OF EXCHANGE RATE
AND UNDUE BENEFIT TO THE SERVICE
PROVIDER

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twelfth Report (167 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
PSE

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमैव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


. a oe a 2

ae


PAC NO. 2198

SEVENTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

INCORRECT ADOPTION OF EXCHANGE RATE

AND UNDUE BENEFIT -TO THE AND UNDUE BENEFIT TO THE SERVICE
PROVIDER

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twelfth Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha गा; 14.0% 2040
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: .../.9- OF £0080
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2020/Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)


Ca 2

vs


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2020-21)
(iv)

INTRODUCTION ..................... ७ ..००५०५०५५७ sessiessstvevristevesins

CHAPTER |

CHAPTER II

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........................

CHAPTER II

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
teplies received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ....

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEPlIOS ...................०५----०---० ०००७-५० ७०-७५ --

APPENDICES

Minutes of the 47 Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on 28" August, 2020.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on

the Observations/Recommendations of the Public °

Accounts Committee contained in their One

Hundred and Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha

Been


PPI ANA WI

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

ने ० [७ ++

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral _
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant }

Vacant Hl
SECRETARIAT mo

Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Joint Secretary
Shri. M.L.K. Raja : _ - Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja न Additional Director

Ms. Malvika Mehta | - Under Secretary


nee,


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Incorrect ‘Adoption of Exchange Rate ‘and Undue Benefit to the

” Service Provider’ relating to the Ministry of External Affairs.

2. The One Hundred and Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaliaid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha on 10 August, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 30
January, 2020. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and
thereafter adopted the Report at their sitting held on 28 August, 2020. Minutes of the
sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report. है

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government’ on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twelfth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
| 1 September, 2020 Chairperson
26 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) -Public Accounts Committee
a


mse


CHAPTER -1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with. action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred ‘and Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Incorrect Adoption
of Exchange Rate and Undue Benefit to the Service Provider” relating to Ministry of
External Affairs. हे
2. The One Hundred and Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
the Parliament on 10.08.2018. It contained seven Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs in

respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorised as

follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
हु Government
Para Nos. 1- 7.
Total:07
Chapter Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
NIL
Total:Nil
Chapter III
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of. which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies

NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that

incorrect adoption of prevailing official exchange rate by. the Mission and Posts in
Canada-in June 2010 and further unwarranted downward revision of service fees for
renunciation of Indian citizenship, and penalties on misuse of passports in March
2013 resulted in a cumulative revenue loss of हैं 27.01 crore. It was also found that

the decision of High Commission of India in London to award processing of Fast

—|-


Track Business Visas cases at enhanced Service Charge of Great Britain Pound
(GBP) 25 per case in place of normal Service Charge of GBP 7.70 resulted in undue
benefit of € 10.72 crore to the Service Provider from March 2010 to February 2015.

4. The Committee had recommended various measures to .be undertaken by
Ministry of External Affairs to streamline and strengthen various processes and
mechanisms within the Ministry and across’ all missions abroad, more specifically, to
conduct a review of all the missions to ensure adherence to stipulated rules and
guidelines, development of an effective mechanism for internal audit for early
detection and rectification of irregularities/errors, streamlining of the whole process of
issue of e-visa, computersiation and inter-connection of all missions with the central

portal of the Ministry for real time interface and mechanism for timely reporting and

accountability.

5. The Committee note that the Action Taken Notes were furnished by the
Ministry of External Affairs after a delay of more than a year. The Committee
deprecate the undue delay in submission of Action Taken Notes by- the Ministry
and desire that necessary instructions may be issued to ensure that replies to

the Committee are henceforth, submitted in time.

6. The Action Taken. Notes submitted by the Ministry on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred
and Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will now deal
with the Action Taken by the Government on some of _ their

Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which merit comments.

7. The Committee desire the Ministry of External Affairs (the Ministry) to
furnish ‘Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations
contained in Chapter | within six months of the presentation of the Report to

the House.

Laxity in following laid down procedures/ rules following laid down rocedures/ rules -
(Recommendation at Para No. 2) है
8. The Committee had noted that the High Commission of India, Ottawa and two

‘ Consulates under its jurisdiction, at Toronto and Vancouver had applied the official

-2-


exchange rate prevailing in June 2010 i.e.@ 1 Canadian Dollar (C$)=* 41.662 for
local currency both for penalty of misuse of passports and renunciation of citizenship
fees as against the rate of exchange for visa services i.e. 1 (C$)=% 29.231 which was
the rate required to be used according to the Citizenship Rules 2009 and Passport
Manual 2010, resulting in a loss of 76.05 crore. The Committee had further noted that
the High Commission in Ottawa and the two Consulates had made downward
revision of service fees for renunciation and penalty and misuse of passports despite
the Ministry's clear instructions that the fee in terms of local currency may be revised
if the local currency depreciated against US dollar by 10 per cent or more and which
depreciation had not happened at that point. The Committee had been dismayed to
note that the Mission in Ottawa could be so callous in their reply by stating that the
error was on account of ambiguity in the instructions issued by the Ministry and delay
by the Ministry in responding. The fact that all the other missions applied the correct
rate of exchange pointed to error of judgment on the part of the concerned officials in
the Mission and laxity in following duly laid down procedures/rules. The Committee
had further observed that, the fees was revised after receipt of clarification from the
Ministry in January 2015 and that too at the instance’ of Audit. The Committee had
deprecated the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry and the Mission in this regard.
The Committee had recommended that the Ministry may fix accountability for non-
adherence of stipulated rules and guidelines and further; that a review of all the
missions be conducted to check that such errors-were not being made and necessary
instructions be issued that strict action would be taken if such instances were to arise

again.

9. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under: है

“Pursuant to receipt of the PAC recommendation, a Video Conference was
held on the audit para 7.1 of Audit Report No. 11 of 2016 with the officials of
the High Commission of India (HCI), Ottawa, on 12.9.2018 led by the High
Commissioner. Additional Secretary (Administration), MEA, led the MEA
delegation at Headquarter. AS(AD) requested the High Commissioner to brief
about the process of decision making. High Commissioner responded that as
per available records with the Mission, HCI, Ottawa, had sought the Ministry's
views regarding adoption of exchange rate as there was ambiguity/ lack of
clarity regarding its application. AS (AD) requested HCI, Ottawa, to scan the
notings of the correspondences available with the Mission on this subject and
send it to the Ministry. The Mission was once again requested to clarify the
reason for the ambiguity in using the exchange rates prescribed in the
Passport Manual and carefully study the source of such an ambiguity from the

जा


available records. In response, HCl,’ Ottawa, reiterated their earlier
submissions and sent copies of the available records.

2. HCI, Ottawa, forwarded copies of the relevant noting and further
explanation reiterating that they had sought Ministry's instructions. However,
no explanation was given for further revising the fees downwards in March
2013 by applying the official rate of exchange of October 2012.

3. In view of the recommendation of the Committee to fix accountability, ‘a
four-member Fact Finding Committee (FCC) was accordingly constituted in

the Ministry with the approval of the competent authority to thoroughly re-examine
the case and look into the aspect of fixing accountability for non-adherence of
stipulated rules and guidelines.

4, The FCC has submitted its report and the same has been accepted by
the competent authority in the Ministry.

5. The FCC examined the relevant noting, documents available and the
relevant instructions prevalent at that time and the circulars issued by the
Ministry from time to time. Observations of the FCC are as follows:

Ministry had conveyed vide circular No. V1/401/1/4/2009 of 30 May 2010 that a
service fee of Rs. 7000/- was to be charged by Missions/Posts abroad in cases of
renunciation of Indian citizenship abroad as per provisions of the Citizenship Rules,
2009. These charges were effective from 4% June 2010. Prior to that, only US$ 20
was being levied as miscellaneous services fee for renunciation of citizenship. The
Rate of Exchange (RoE) to be used for converting Indian Rupees (INR) into
Canadian Dollars (C$) was to be the same as was being used for visa and consular
fees. The Missions/ Posts in Canada applied the Official RoE of June 2010 for fixing
the.renunciation’ fees of Rs. 7000/- in local currency. They should have applied the
RoE of C$ 1 = Rs. 29.23 but instead applied the RoE of C$ 1 = Rs. 41.66. It was
further clarified vide circular dated 4 June 2010 that the renunciation fee of Rs.
7000/- be charged only in fresh cases of renunciation of citizenship taking place from
4° June 2010 and not in cases where foreign citizenship had been acquired on or
before 31° May 2010. A further clarification was issued in August 2010 conveying
that renunciation fees was not a new regulation but that the cut-off date for the. new
charges was 31.5.2010.

Ministry revised the fees for passport and related services with effect from 01
October 2012 vide Gazette Notification GSR 731(E) dated 28 September 2012. The
fees for passport and related services were fixed in INR, US$ and Euros. It was
subsequently clarified that wherever the fee is to be fixed in local currency, Missions/
Posts should apply the prevailing RoE communicated by the FE Section or the
commercial RoE, whichever is beneficial to the Government of India. The Missions/
Posts in Canada were required to follow this advice of the Ministry. Missions/Posts
were advised that the fee’ in local currency may be revised if the local currency
depreciated against the US Dollar by 10% or more and that fee should not be revised
in case of appreciation of local currency. It was mentioned that the notification only

he


covered passport fees and passport related services. This revision in fees did not
apply for fess for renunciation of citizenship or for penalty for use and non-surrender
of passport after acquisition of foreign citizenship.

Mission has not been able to clarify whether penalty for non surrender and use
of Indian passport after acquiring Indian citizenship was being levied from the date of
issue of. circular No. VI/401/1/4/2009 dated 24 March 2009 at the prevailing
visa/consular fees rate. If it had been doing so, the Missions/ Posts should have
continued with the same rates and there would have been no justification for adopting
the official RoE of June 2010. है

Mission does not seem to have made out any case for adopting the RoE of
June 2010 even assuming that the penalties were to have been implemented from
June 2010. As in the case of renunciation charges, it appears that the Mission had
assumed that these fees were effective from June 2010 and that the RoE of June
2010 may be adopted was an erroneous conclusion.

Ministry revised the passport and related services fees w.e.f. 18' October 2012
and intimated the same in US Dollars and Euros. HCl, Ottawa, however, revised the
fees for renunciation and penalty in local currency w.e.f. March 2013 after receiving
clarifications from the Ministry in January 2013. Mission was only supposed to re-fix
the passport fees and. related services in local currency accordingly adopting the RoE
applicable for consular fees and visa and which would be beneficial to the
Government of India. Renunciation and penalty charges were not part of the gazette
notification of September 2012 or any other instructions that followed.

It is to be noted that Ministry revised the passport fees w.e.f. 1% October,
2012. . The earlier revision of passport fees was done w.e.f. 2002. While fixing the
Passport fees w.e.f. 1.1.2002, Ministry had intimated that the formula adopted for
fixing the passport fee in US Dollars and Euros has been the same as for the
consular fee and clarified that passport fee fixed in US Dollars and Euros will not
change on account of appreciation or depreciation. As regards conversion of
consular fees to local currency, Missions/Posts had been instructed to apply the
official RoE or commercial rate, whichever is beneficial to the government and any
revision in local currency would be done only when the local currency depreciates by
10% or more against the US Dollars. Ministry had mentioned in its clarifications to
the revision of passport fees that the rates of 2002 would not apply and that the RoE
as communicated by FE Section of MEA should be applied. As the matter concerned
only passport and other related services fees, the earlier pojnt of reference was 2002.

The Mission sought clarification in November 2012 from the Ministry. whether
the rates of 2002 or 2012 were applicable for passport and other related services .
because the latter rate would in fact reduce the fee in C$ due to appreciation of the
C$ against the US$ between 2002 and 2012. As the Ministry's earlier reference point
related to the period when the passport fees were last revised 2002, it was
repeatedly conveyed that the current official ROE being communicated by FE Section
of the Ministry in October 2012 would apply and not the rates of 2002. This could be

—&—


because when the rates are revised, it is expected that the new ROE would become
applicable as well as the fact that the rates in 2002 would.have been much higher
than the current rates in C$. Thus, there seems to be a gap in communication
between the HCI, Ottawa, and the Ministry and to this limited extent, there was
certainly some ambiguity in the understanding of the Mission.

HCl Ottawa’s proposal to revise the renunciation and penalty fees in local
currency with effect from March.2013 was ab initio fallacious because of the very fact
that (i) local currency had appreciated and not depreciated during the period 2010-
2012 and (ii) there was no requirement to revise these two fees as the same were not
part of the revised passport fees as per the gazette notification of September 2012.
Mission should have, as per extant instructions, treated the two as Miscellaneous
Services and should have only applied the same RoE as was being adopted for visa
and consular fees. It can be concluded that there was serious lack of understanding
as to the classification of the nature of services as well as confusion as to what rate
would be applied for calculating the same.

॥ Mission had sought clarification from the Ministry, then Mission should have
waited for proper clarification from the Ministry before going ahead and implementing.
It would have been financially prudent and diligent to have waited for the clarification
before any revision was done.

When the passport fee was fixed w.e.f. 01/10/2012, the same seems to have
been converted at the prevailing RoE as on October 2012. There seems to be no
audit objection on this aspect. Hence, it is probable that since Mission linked the
renunciation and penalty for non-surrender of Indian passport to passport services,
the same rate as for passport fees was applied. This appears to be the basic reason
for adoption of wrong rate of exchange.

Audit of the HCI, Ottawa and Consulates General of India, Toronto and
Vancouver are done on an annual basis. It is surprising that the fixation of
renunciation fees in local currency w.e.f. June 2010 and the revision of penalty
charges in local currency were not mentioned in any previous audit reports for the
period between 2010 — 2013. Audits conducted from 2010-12 did not raise any
objections or make observations due to which revenue loss kept on accruing. Had
the Audit observed these mistakes, the notional loss of revenue to the Gol could
have been prevented.

HCI, Ottawa did definitely fail to observe the extant instructions and adoption
of rate of exchange of June 2010 for renunciation and penalty was definitely
anomalous. Instructions repeatedly clarified that (i) rate adopted should be beneficial
to the Government of India; (ii) rates should be revised in local currency only when
local currency depreciated by 10% or more against the US Dollars and (iii) no
revision in local currency to,be done when the local currency appreciated against the
US Dollars. Further, it was-found that there were no papers to show that Mission had
sought clarification when the renunciation charges were fixed in local currency.

—67-


It can be concluded that HCI, Ottawa lacked serious understanding of the
instructions and concepts related to these two aspects (renunciation and penalty for
misuse of passports after obtaining foreign citizenship) and thus, a wrong rate of
exchange had been adopted. However, there is no evidence to show that these
wrong rates were adopted due to any wilful negligence or with malafide intentions.
The adoption of incorrect rate of exchange cannot be termed as inadvertent because
the premise that led to'such consequence was itself misplaced.

The Fact Finding Committee (FCC) found no evidence of any wilful
negligence or malafide intention on the part of the officials of HCI, Ottawa,
which could have benefited the officials concerned or anybody in particular. The
confusion in the adoption of the RoE was due to lack of understanding on the
part of the Mission's officials regarding the classification of these two services
and adoption of the RoE. Generic responses from the Ministry did not help to
address the specific points concerning the situation in Canada. It was also
noted that the Audit carried out in 2010-12 did not point out this lapse in adoption of
correct exchange rate. However, the FCC has not recommended any action
against any officers/officials present in HCI Ottawa between June 2010 —
March 2013 because the error arose due to serious misunderstanding of the
instructions and basic concepts and not due with any malafide intention.

PSP Division has issued instructions to all Missions/Posts including
those in Canada emphasizing the need to follow instructions/guidelines laid
down strictly and to always first examine the case for revision of any fees/rates
related to. passport services and miscellaneous. consular services on the
thumb-rules that (i) rate adopted should be beneficial to the Government of
India, (ii) rates should be revised in local currency only when the local
currency depreciates by 10% or more against the US Dollar and (iii) no
revision in local currency to be done when the local currency appreciates
against the US Dollar. They need to ensure that there is no loss to the
government while such revision of fees is done.”

10. Audit,.in their vetting comments have submitted the following: -

“The fact remains that there was no necessity for the Mission to obtain clarification
from the Ministry since the provisions of Passport Manual were clear on the rate of
exchange to be adopted. Besides this, the clear instruction regarding revision of
local currency only when it depreciated by 10% or more against the US Dollar did not
require any clarification.

The primary respénsibility for good governance is that of the Ministry through it -
internal control mechanism. The fact that the Ministry's internal audit mechanism and
periodic inspections by CNV. & | Division have not pointed out these discrepancies is
a pointer to the lack of a robust intetnal control set up in the Ministry.

Also the Audits are conducted ona sample test check basis, and not intended to be a
replacement of the required controls.

a=


Hon’ble PAC categorically pointed out in its reports the need for strengthening
internal audit mechanism of the Ministry as strong internal controls followed by
regular internal audit are a hall mark of good governance.

The FCC (para xii of its report) noted that HCI Ottawa did definitely fail to observe the
extant instructions and adoption of rate of exchange of June 2010 for renunciation
and penalty was definitely anomalous. The FCC, however, did not address the issue
of delayed revision of fees after receipt of clarification (January 2015) from Ministry at
the instance of Audit.

Further Ministry has not furnished details of any review of all the Missions to check
that such errors are not repeated as recommended by the PAC. Same may be
furnished to PAC.”

11. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have further
submitted as under:- है .

“Ministry had already admitted that there was no need for Mission to seek clarification
and it has been stated that if once clarification had been sought, status quo should
be maintained until thé same was received. It has been brought out by the FCC that
the basic issue was a fundamental lack of understanding of the rules and procedure
and there was no malafide on the part of the officials. Audit's comment that the
primarily responsibility for good governance rests with the Ministry is valid and
Ministry makes every effort to see that procedures are followed and errors are
rectified as soon brought to light. The present case was complicated and hence the
delay on the part of the Mission. It has already been conveyed to Missions that
Ministry will take a serious view in such cases and that accountability will be fixed on
the concerned officials in case it is found that proper procedure was not followed or
stipulated rules and guidelines have been bypassed. Review of Missions is an
ongoing process. After the completion of the integration of the passport issuance
system Ministry would be in a better position to set up a real-time monitoring of such
issues.” :

12. The Committee had, in their Original Report, noted that the High
Commission of India (HCI), Ottawa and the two Consulates under its
jurisdiction, at Toronto and Vancouver had applied the official exchange rate
prevailing in June 2010 for local currency both for purpose’ of imposing
penalty on misuse of passports and renunciation ‘of citizenship fees. The rate
required to be used as per the Citizenship Rule$ 2009 and Passport Manual
2010 was the exchange rate applicable for visa services. The incorrect
application of the exchange rate resulted in a loss of %6.05 crore. The
Committee had further noted that the High Commission had made a downward
revision of service fees applicable for renunciation of citizenship as well as the

penalty for misuse of passports. This was contrary to the Ministry’s

लकी


instructions that the fee in terms of local currency may be revised only if the
local currency depreciated against US dollar by 10 per cent or more, which had
not happened at that time. The Committee had'recommended that the Ministry
may fix accountability for non-adherence of stipulated rules and guidelines and
that a review of the practice followed in all the Missions thay be conducted so
as to check that such errors were not being made and necessary instructions
issued for taking strict action if such instances were to arise again. The
Committee note from the action taken replies of the Ministry that pursuant to
the recommendation of the Committee, a Video Conference was held by the
Ministry with the officials of High Commission of India, Ottawa wherein HCI,
Ottawa inter-alia reiterated the Commission’s earlier submission, forwarded
copies of the relevant notings and further explanation reiterating that they had
sought Ministry’s instructions. However, no explanation was given for revising
the fees further downwards. The Committee further note that a four-member
Fact Finding Committee (FCC) was constituted to re-examine the case for
fixing accountability in the matter. The Committee are astounded to note the
findings of the FCC that HCI, Ottawa lacked serious understanding of the
instructions and concepts related to renunciation and penalty for misuse of
passports after obtaining foreign citizenship. and, thus, a wrong rate of
exchange was adopted. As per FCC, the adoption of incorrect rate of exchange
could not be termed as inadvertent because the premise that led to such
consequence was itself misplaced. The Committee are astonished to note the
observation of the FCC that that there were no papers to show that the Mission
had sought clarification from the Ministry when the renunciation charges were
fixed in local currency. The Committee also note that the FCC has not
recommended any action as it did not find evidence of any wilful negligence or
malafide intention on the part of the officials of HCI, Ottawa, which could have
benefited the officials concerned or anybody in particular. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the officials of HCI, Ottawa who applied incorrect rate of
exchange for renunciation of citizenship as well as penalty; could not produce
proof of seeking clarification from the Ministry and; failed to observe the extant
instructions which resulted in a loss of 6.05 crore have been absolved of any
responsibility. The Committee are of the considered view that the officials
posted in an Indian Mission should be conversant with the fundamental rules

and procedures of working for Government of India and any indiscretion in this

--9-


regard cannot be overlooked. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that action be taken against those responsible for not
adhering to stipulated rules and guidelines and the Committee be apprised of
the details thereof. The Committee also desire that basic/ refresher training
may be imparted to all the Mission staff to ensure that such errors do not recur.
The Committee, further, note that instructions have been issued to all
Missions/Posts including those in Canada emphasizing the need to strictly
follow instructions/guidelines laid down. However, review has not been carried
out ofall missions to check that such errors are not occurring. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that a review of all the missions may be carried out to
ascertain and obviate occurrence of any such instances and desire that the
Ministry may furnish specific data on real-time monitoring of such issues since

the integration of passport issuance project.

Due Diligence/Detailed study before finalising Contracts

(Recommendation at Para No. 6)

13. The Committee had been constrained to note that the Mission did not undertake
due diligence in estimating the Service Charges for Fast Track Business Visa. In
August, 2008 it had proposed a service charge of GBP 50 which was reduced in
October, 2009 to. GBP 25 without detailed estimation of cost, market survey and
study and negotiations with the vendor. The Committee had noted that the new
Service Provider had agreed to render the same service at normal Service Charges
of GBP 7.44 w.e.f. March 2015 in a new agreement against the enhanced service
charge of GBP 25 during 15 March 2010 to February 2015. The Committee had
found that while going for a fresh tender for visa work in July 2013, the Mission had
omitted to include this item of work, The Committee had noted that, the contention of
the Ministry that the service charge for fast track business visa in 2009 was based on
prevailing market rates and negotiations, were not supported. with any documentary
evidence on record. This had clearly indicated that the decision of fixing the service
charges for FTBV was arbitrary.The Committee had, therefore, enjoined upon the
Ministry to fix the responsibility on. the concerned officers for this aberration and
unfair trade practice and to refer the matter to the CVO of the Ministry for enquiry.
The Committee had: desired to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.. While

noting that the Ministry had revised the standard tender document issued by Indian

—|o—-


Missions and Posts abroad for outsourcing of visa, passport and consular support
services, the Committee had hoped that the provisions so incorporated would be

followed in letter and spirit.

14. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under:

"This matter was taken very.seriously by the Ministry. An MEA inspection
team, comprising Shri AcquinoVimal, JS (CNV & I) and Ms Priyanka
Chauhan, Director (Finance), visited High Commission of India in London on
5-6 April, 2018 to investigate the issue. In’ their report they concluded that
there was no evidence of mala-fide or any vigilance angle. It may be noted
that the main objective of the introduction of the FTBV (Fast Track Business
Visa) was to facilitate short notice business travellers coming to India was
well as increase the ability of the visa issuance system to cater to urgent
needs, thus promoting our over trade and economic interests.With the
introduction of e-Visa, the demand for FTBV service has come down. As per
the new contract effective from March 2015, the service provider is not
charging any additional service fee for business visas.” .

15. Audit, in their vetting comments have submitted the following: -

“Ministry's reply is silent on PAC’s recommendation. to refer the matter to the
CVO of the Ministry for enquiry.
Further, a copy of report of the inspection team may be provided to the PAC.”

16. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action. Taken Notes have further
submitted as under:-

“The CVO of MEA is JS (CNV & |) who himself led the inspection team to HCI

London to investigate the issue. The inspection team, after examining all the

aspects of the issues raised by the Audit, in their report, concluded that there

was no evidence of malafide or any vigilance angle.

CPV Division is looking into implementation of the recommendations of the

inspecting team.”
17, The Committee had noted that the Mission did not undertake due
diligence in estimating the Service Charges for Fast Track Business Visa. In
this regard, the contention of the Ministry that the service charge for fast track
business visa in 2009 was based on prevailing market rates and negotiations,
was not supported with any documentary evidence on record and ‘clearly
indicated that the decision cof fixing the service charges for FTBV was arbitrary.
The Committee had also noted that the new Service Provider had agreed to
render the same service at normal Service Charges of Great Britain Pound
(GBP) 7.44 w.e.f. March 2015 in a new agreement against the enhanced service

charge of GBP 25 during 15 March 2010 to February 2015. The Committee had

—\\-


enjoined upon the Ministry to fix the responsibility on the concerned officers
for this aberration and unfair trade practice and to refer the matter to the CVO
of the Ministry for enquiry. The Committee note from the action taken reply
submitted by the Ministry that the CVO of MEA led an inspection team to HCI
London to investigate the issue and after examining all the aspects of the
issues, concluded that there was no evidence of malafidity ot any vigilance
related issue. The Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry that the
Consular Passport and Visa Division is looking into implementation of the
recommendations of the inspecting team. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the detailed findings of the enquiry team led by the CVO, the
recommendations made by the team and the status of implementation thereof.
The Committee also desire that the recommendations of the inspecting team

be considered and implemented within a fixed time frame.

Computerisation

Recommendation at Para No.7

18. The Committee had noted that incorrect fees was applied to 17,664
renunciation cases and 797 cases of misuse of passport from June 2010 to February
2013, i.e. for almost 3 years, and incorrect downward revision on renunciation fees
and penalty was applied to 27,057 renunciation cases and 5,125 cases of misuse of
passport from 1 March 2013 to 22 January 2015, i.e. for almost 2 years. The
Committee had inferred that the Mission correctly revised the renunciation fees and
penalty for misuse of passports with effect from 23 January 2015 only after being
pointed out by Audit. The Committee had been of the firm opinion that the delay in
identification and rectification of the incorrect rate of exchange pointed towards a gap
in communication between the Ministry and Missions. The Committee had been of
the opinion that full computerization of all processes and systems was essential for
effective communication and efficient service delivery. Accordingly, the Committee

had recommended the following :-

eAll the missions be fully computerized and connected with the central portal
of the Ministry of External Affairs for real time interface between the Missions
and the Ministry;

/nformation on various visa services provided, average number of days taken

for the same and. charges thereof may be made available online to ensure

yy


transparency. Further, a response time for clarification of queries regarding
visa services be prescribed by the Ministry; and

«Mechanism to ensure timely reporting and accountability may be created.

19.. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action Taken. Notes have
submitted as under:

“In so far as the passport issuance part is concerned, the Division would like to
inform that linking of all Missions/Posts abroad onto the Global Passport Seva
Project (GPSP) is underway. So far, 39 Missions have already been linked to
the system and work is in progress in 12 other Missions. With the completion
of this project, it is expected that all the Missions/Posts being linked to one
system it will enable better monitoring and real time reporting would become
possible.”

20. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-

“PAC may be intimated about status of ongoing work in remaining 12 Missions

alongwith timeline fixed for completion of remaining work.” है
21. The Ministry of External Affairs in the Action Taken Notes have further
submitted as under: |

“The integration has been completed in 54 Missions till 11.2.2020. Orders

have been issued to all the remaining Missions/Posts to procure equipment so

that the integration of their passport issuance system into the GPSP could be

completed before 31 May 2020.”
22. The Committee had noted that incorrect fees was applied to renunciation
cases and’ misuse of passport cases for almost 3 years, and incorrect
downward revision of fees on such cases was made applicable for almost 2
years, and was appropriately revised only after the anomaly was pointed out by
Audit. The delay in identification and rectification’ of the incorrect rate of
exchange being applied was clearly indicative of a gap in communication
between the Ministry and Missions. The Committee had opined that full
computerization of all processes and systems were essential for effective
communication and efficient service delivery. The Committee had
recommended that all the ‘missions be fully computerized and connected with
the central portal of the Ministry of External Affairs for real time interface
between them; information on various visa services provided, average number

of days taken for the same and charges thereof may be made available online

-35-


to ensure transparency; a response time for clarification of queries regarding
visa services be prescribed by the Ministry; and a mechanism to ensure timely
reporting and accountability may be instituted. The Committee observe from
the action taken reply of the Ministry that linking of all Missions/Posts abroad
onto the Global Passport Seva Project (GPSP) has been underway and that
with the completion of this project, it is expected that all the Missions/Posts
being linked to one system would enable better monitoring and real time
reporting. The Committee further note that.integration has been completed in
54 Missions till 11.2.2020 and orders have been issued to all the remaining
Missions/Posts to procure equipment so that the integration of their passport
issuance system into the GPSP could be completed before 31% May 2020. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of this project, status of
integration of all the Missions as per the project as well as the resultant impact
on monitoring and real time reporting. The Committee also desire to be
apprised whether implementation of this project specifically addresses the

concerns raised by them in their earlier recommendation.

—}) ye


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED. BY
THE GOVERNMENT

; Observation/Recommendation

The C&AG of India in their Report no. 11 of .2016 (Union Civil
Compliance) have brought out two paras viz. 7.1 and. 7.2 pertaining to the
Ministry of External Affairs on ‘Less collection of revenue due to incorrect
adoption of exchange rate on fees/penalties charged towards renunciation of
citizenship and misuse of passports’ and ‘Undue benefit to the Service
Provider’, respectively. In Para 7.1, Audit found that incorrect adoption of
prevailing official exchange rate by the Mission and Posts in Canada in June
2010 and further unwarranted downward revision of service fees for
renunciation of Indian citizenship, and penalties on misuse of passports in
March 2013 resulted in revenue loss of (¥6. 05 crore + % 20.96 crore) हैं 27.01
crore. In Para 7.2, Audit found that the decision of High Commission of India in
London to award processing of Fast Track Business Visas cases at enhanced
Service Charge of Great Britain Pound (GBP) 25 per case in place of normal
Service Charge of GBP 7.70 resulted in undue benefit of = 10.72 crore to the
Service Provider from March 2010 to February 2015. The Committee have
observed certain shortcomings in the functioning of the Ministry with regard to
these audit paras and have accordingly made their
observations/recommendations on important issues .in the succeeding
paragraphs. :

[Para-4, Part — Il, of 112" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken
The above para being an introductory para does not call for any action.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
No comments.

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee ‘note that the’ High Commission of India, Ottawa and. two
Consulates under its jurisdiction, at Toronto and Vancouver applied the official
exchange rate prevailing in June 2010 i.e.@,1 Canadian Dollar (C$)=% 41.662 for
local currency both for penalty of misuse of passports and renunciation of ©
citizenship fees as against the rate of exchange for visa services i.e. 1 (C$)=
29.231 which was the rate required to be used according to the Citizenship
Rules 2009 and Passport Manual 2010, resulting in a loss of %6.05 crore. The
Committee further note that the High Commission in Ottawa and the two

LAS


Consulates made downward revision of service fees for renunciation and
penalty and misuse of passports despite the Ministry’s clear instructions that
the fee in terms.of local currency may be revised if the local currency
depreciated against US dollar by 10 per cent or more and which depreciation
had not happened at that point. The Committee are dismayed to note that the
Mission in Ottawa could be so callous in their reply by stating that the error
was on account of ambiguity in the instructions issued by the Ministry and
delay by the Ministry in responding. The fact that all the other missions applied
the corréct rate of exchange points to error of judgment on the part of the
concerned officials in the Mission and laxity in following duly laid down
procedures/rules. The Committee further observe that, the fees was revised
after receipt of clarification from the Ministry in January 2015 and that too at
the instance of Audit. The Committee deprecate the lackadaisical attitude of the
Ministry and the Mission in this regard. While, the amount so lost cannot be
recovered, the Committee recommend the Ministry to fix accountability for
non-adherence of stipulated rules and guidelines and further; to conduct a
review of all the missions to check that such errors are not being made and
also to issue necessary instructions that strict action would be taken if such
instances were to arise again

[Para 2, Part —Il, of 412% Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

Pursuant to receipt of the PAC recommendation, a Video Conference was held on
the audit para 7.1 of Audit Report No. 11 of 2016 with the officials of the High
Commission of India (HCI), Ottawa, on 12.9.2018 led by the High Commissioner.
Additional Secretary (Administration), MEA,. led the MEA delegation at Headquarter.
AS(AD) requested the High Commissioner to brief about the process of decision
making. High Commissioner responded that as per available records with the
Mission, HCl, Ottawa, had sought the Ministry's views regarding adoption of
exchange rate as there was ambiguity/ lack of clarity regarding its application. AS
(AD) requested HCI, Ottawa, to scan the notings of the correspondences available
with the Mission on this subject and send it to the Ministry. The Mission was once
again requested to clarify the reason for the ambiguity in using the exchange rates
prescribed in the Passport Manual and carefully study the source of such an
ambiguity from the available records. In response, HCI, Ottawa; reiterated their
earlier submissions and sent copies of the available records. . -

2. 1101, Ottawa, forwarded copies of the relevant noting and further explanation
reiterating that they had sought Ministry's instructions. However, no explanation was
given for further revising the fees downwards in March 2013 by applying the official
rate of exchange of October 2012.

—\k7


3. In view of the recommendation of the Committee to fix accountability, a four-
member Fact Finding Committee (FCC) was accordingly constituted in the Ministry
with the approval of the competent authority to thoroughly re-examine the case and
look into the aspect of fixing accountability for non-adherence of stipulated rules and
guidelines. .
4, The FCC. has submitted its report and the same has been accepted by the
competent authority in the Ministry. ‘

5. The FCC examined the relevant noting, documents available and the
relevant instructions prevalent at that time and the circulars issued by the Ministry
from time to time. Observations of the FCC are as follows:

i. Ministry had conveyed vide circular No. VI/401/1/4/2009 of 3 May 2010 that a
service fee of Rs. 7000/- was to be charged by Missions/Posts abroad in
cases of renunciation of Indian citizenship abroad as per provisions of the
Citizenship Rules, 2009. These charges were effective from 1 June 2010.
Prior to that, only US$ 20 was being levied as miscellaneous services fee for
renunciation’ of citizenship. The Rate of Exchange (RoE) to be used for
converting Indian Rupees (INR) into Canadian Dollars (C$) was to be the
same as was being used for visa and consular fees. The Missions/ Posts in
Canada applied the Official RoE of June 2010 for fixing the renunciation fees
of Rs. 7000/- in local currency. They should have applied the RoE of C$ 1 =
Rs. 29.23 but instead applied the RoE of C$ 1 = Rs. 41.66. It was further
clarified vide circular dated 4" June 2010 that the renunciation fee of Rs.
7000/- be charged only in fresh cases of renunciation of citizenship taking
place from 1% June 2010 and not in cases where foreign citizenship had been
acquired on or before 311 May 2010. A further clarification was issued in
August 2010 conveying that renunciation fees was not a new regulation but
that the cut-off date for the new charges was 31.5.2010.

ii. Ministry revised the fees for passport and related services with effect from 01
October 2012 vide Gazette Notification GSR 731(E) dated 28 September
2012. The fees for passport and related services were fixed in INR, US$ and
Euros. It was subsequently clarified that wherever the fee is to be fixed in local
currency, Missions/ Posts should apply the prevailing RoE communicated by
the FE Section or the commercial RoE, whichever is beneficial to the
Government of India. The Missions/ Posts in Canada were required to follow
this advice of the Ministry. Missions/Posts were advised that the fee in local’
currency may be revised if the local currency depreciated against the US
Dollar by 10% or more and that fee should not be revised in case of
appreciation of local: currency. It'was mentioned that the notification only
Covered passport fees and passport related services. This revision in fees did
not apply for fess for renunciation of citizenship or for penalty for use and non-
surrender of passport after acquisition of foreign citizenship.

—|t-


ili, Mission has not been able to clarify whether penalty for non surrender and use

vi.

vil.

of Indian passport after acquiring Indian citizenship was being levied from the
date of issue of circular No. VI/401/1/4/2009 dated 24 March 2009 at the
prevailing visa/consular fees rate. If it had been doing so, the Missions/ Posts
should have continued with the same rates and there would have been no
justification for adopting the official RoE of June 2010.

. Mission does not seem to have made out any. case for adopting the RoE of

June 2010 even assuming that the penalties were to have been implemented
from June.2010. As in the case of renunciation charges, it appears that the
Mission had assumed that these fees were effective from June 2010 and that .
the RoE of June 2010 may be adopted was an erroneous conclusion.

Ministry revised the passport and related services fees ४४.६. 13 October 2012
and intimated the same in US Dollars and Euros. HCI, Ottawa, however,
revised the fees for renunciation and penalty in local currency w.e.f. March
2013 after receiving clarifications from the Ministry in January 2013. Mission
was only supposed to re-fix the passport fees and related services in local
currency accordingly adopting the RoE applicable for consular fees and visa
and which would be beneficial to the Government of India. Renunciation and
penalty charges were not part of the gazette notification of September 2012 or

any other instructions that followed.

It is to be noted that Ministry revised the passport fees ४४.७. 11 October,
2012. The earlier revision of passport fees was done w.e.f. 2002. While
fixing the passport fees w.e.f. 1.1.2002, Ministry had intimated that the formula
adopted for fixing the passport, fee in US Dollars and Euros has been the
same as for the consular fee and clarified that passport fee fixed in US Dollars
and Euros will not change on account of appreciation or depreciation. As
regards conversion of consular fees to local currency, Missions/Posts had
been instructed to apply the official RoE or commercial rate, whichever is
beneficial to the government and any revision in local currency would be done
only when the local currency depreciates by 10% or more against the US
Dollars. Ministry had mentioned in its clarifications to the revision of passport
fees that the rates of 2002 would not apply and that the RoE as communicated
by FE Section of. MEA should be applied. As the matter concerned only
passport and other related services fees, the earlier point of reference was
2002 .

The Mission sought clarification in November 2012 from the Ministry whether
the rates of 2002 or 2012 were applicable for passport and other related
services because tie latter rate would in fact reduce the fee in C$ due to
appreciation of the C$ against the US$ between 2002 and 2012. As the
Ministry's earlier reference point related to the period when the passport fees

—l8-


viii.

were last revised 2002, it was repeatedly conveyed that the current official
RoE being communicated by FE Section of the Ministry in October 2012 would
apply and not the rates of 2002. This could be because when the rates are
revised, it is expected that the new ROE would become applicable as well as
the fact that the rates in 2002 would have been much higher than the current.
tates in C$. Thus, there seems to be a gap in communication between the
HCl, Ottawa, and the Ministry and to this limited extent, there was certainly
some ambiguity in the understanding of the Mission. .

HCI Ottawa’s proposal to revise the renunciation and penalty fees in local
currency with effect from March 2013 was ab initio fallacious because of the

- very fact that (i) local currency had appreciated and not depreciated during the

xi.

xii.

period 2010-2012 and (ii) there was no requirement to revise these two fees
as the same were not part of the revised passport fees as per the gazette
notification ‘of September 2012. Mission should have, as per extant
instructions, treated the two as Miscellaneous Services and should have only
applied the same RoE as was being adopted for visa and consular fees. It can
be concluded that there was serious lack of understanding as to the
Classification of the nature of services as well as confusion as to what rate
would be applied for calculating the same.

ix. If Mission had sought clarification from the Ministry, then Mission should have

waited for proper clarification from the Ministry before going ahead and
implementing. It would have been financially prudent and: diligent to have
waited for the clarification before any revision was done.

When the passport fee was fixed w.e.f. 01/10/2012, the same seems to have
been converted at the prevailing RoE as on October 2012. There seems to be
no audit objection on this aspect. Hence, it is probable that since Mission

‘linked the renunciation and penalty for non-surrender of Indian passport to

passport services, the same rate as for passport fees was applied. This
appears to be the basic reason for adoption of wrong rate of exchange.

Audit of the HCl, Ottawa. and.Consulates General of India, Toronto and
Vancouver are done on an annual basis. It is surprising that the fixation of
renunciation fees in local currency w.e.f. June 2010 and the revision of penalty
charges in local currency were not mentioned in any previous audit reports for
the period between 2010 — 2013. Audits conducted from 2010-12 did not raise
any objections or make observations due to which revenue loss kept on
accruing. Had the Audit observed these mistakes, the notional loss of revenue
to the Gol-could have been prevented.

HCI, Ottawa did definitely fail to observe the extant instructions and adoption
of rate of exchange of June 2010 for renunciation and penalty was definitely
anomalous. Instructions repeatedly clarified that (i) rate adopted should be:

—|q-


ten

beneficial to the Government of India; (ii) rates should be revised in local
currency only when local currency depreciated by 10% or more against the US
Dollars and (iii) no revision in local currency to be done when ‘the local
currency appreciated against the US Dollars. Further, it was found that there
were no papers to show that Mission had sought clarification when the
renunciation charges were fixed in local currency. है

जी. can- be concluded that 1101, Ottawa lacked, serious understanding of the
instructions and concepts related to these two aspects (renunciation and
penalty for misuse of passports after obtaining foreign citizenship) and thus, a
wrong rate of exchange had been adopted. However, there is no evidence to
show that these wrong rates were.adopted due to any wilful negligence or with
malafide intentions. ‘The adoption of incorrect rate of exchange cannot be
termed as inadvertent because the premise that led to such consequence was
itself misplaced.

6. The Fact Finding Committee (FCC).found no evidence of any wilful negligence
or malafide intention on the part of the officials of HCI, Ottawa, which could have
benefited the officials concerned or anybody in particular. The confusion in the
adoption of the RoE was due to lack of understanding on the part of the Mission’s
officials regarding the classification of these two services and adoption of the RoE.
Generic responses from the Ministry did not help to address the specific points
concerning the situation in Canada. It was also noted that the Audit carried out in
2010-12 did not point out this lapse in adoption of correct exchange rate. However,
the FCC has not recommended any action against any officers/officials present in
HCI Ottawa between June 2010 - March 2013 because the error arose due to
serious misunderstanding ‘of the instructions and basic concepts and not due with
any matlafide intention. -

7. PSP Division has issued instructions to all Missions/Posts including those in
Canada emphasizing the need to follow instructions/guidelines laid down strictly and
to always first examine the case for revision of any fees/rates related to passport
services and miscellaneous consular services.on the thumb-rules that (i) rate
adopted should be beneficial to the Government of India, (ii) rates should be revised
in local currency only when the local currency depreciates by 10% or more against
the US Dollar and (iii) no revision in local currency to be done when the local
currency appreciates against the US Dollar. They need to ensure that there is no loss
to the government while such revision of fees is done.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
The fact remains that there ‘was no necessity for the Mission to obtain clarification

from the Ministry since the provisions of Passport Manual were clear on the rate of
exchange to be adopted: Besides this, the clear instruction regarding revision of

—20


local currency only when it depreciated by 10% or more against the US Dollar did not
require any clarification.

The primary responsibility for good governance is that of the Ministry through it
internal control mechanism. The fact that the Ministry's internal audit mechanism and
periodic inspections by CNV & | Division have not pointed out these discrepancies is
a pointer to the lack of a robust internal control set up in the Ministry.

Also the Audits are conducted on a sample test check basis,-and no intended to be a
replacement of the required controls.

Hon'ble PAC categorically pointed out in its reports the need for strengthening
internal audit mechanism of the Ministry as strong internal controls followed by
regular internal audit are a hall mark of good governance

The FCC (para xii of its report) noted that HCI Ottawa did definitely fail to observe the
extant instructions and adoption of rate of exchange of June 2010 for rénunciation
and penalty was definitely anomalous. The FCC, however, did-not address the issue
of delayed revision of fees after receipt of clarification (January 2015) from Ministry at
the instance of Audit.

Further Ministry has not furnished details of any review of all the Missions to check
that such errors are not repeated as recommended by the PAC. Same may be
furnished to PAC.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

Ministry had already admitted that there was no need for Mission to seek clarification
and it has been stated that if once clarification had been sought, status quo should
be maintained until the same was received. It has been brought out by the FCC that
the basic issue was a fundamental lack of understanding of the rules and procedure
and there was no malafide on the part of the officials. Audit’s comment that the
primarily responsibility for good governance rests with the Ministry is valid and
Ministry makes every effort to see that procedures are followed and errors are
rectified as soon brought to light. The present case was complicated and hence the
delay on the part of the Mission. It has already been conveyed to Missions that
Ministry will take a serious view.in such cases.and that accountability will be fixed on
the concerned officials in case it is found that proper procedure was not followed or
stipulated rules and guidelines have been bypassed. Review of Missions is an
ongoing process. After the:completion of the integration of the passport issuance
system Ministry would be in a better position to set up a real-time monitoring of such
issues. :

Observation/Recommendation

—&\-

Bem


The Committee are disappointed to note that the internal audit of the Mission in |
Ottawa and the two Consulates at Toronto and Vancouver failed to point out
the deviation in application of exchange rates which ultimately led to pecuniary
loss. In this regard, in their 30 report on ‘Global Estate Management’ and 61**
report on ‘Action taken on recommendations/ Observations of the Committee
contained in their 30" Report on ‘Global Estate Management’, the Committee,
while observing that the internal audit system of the Ministry was not
functioning properly, felt that there was a need for strengthening internal audit
as a preventive and remedial mechanism and had strongly recommended that
an effective internal e-audit system may be developed in the Ministry. The
instant case of incorrect adoption of exchange rate on fees/penalties charged
towards renunciation of citizenship and misuse of passports points to the
same issue of lack of internal audit. The Committee has been categorically
pointing out in their earlier reports the need for strengthening internal audit
mechanism of the Ministry as strong internal controls followed by regular
internal audit are a hall mark of good governance and are the need of the hour
for the Missions. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that an effective
mechanism for internal audit for early detection and rectification of
irregularities/errors may be developed and they may be apprised thereof.

[Para 3, Part —1I, of 112" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

Ministry has strong internal mechanism for exercising administrative control over
Missions abroad. It includes internal audit, annual audit by the C&AG Team and
periodic inspections by CNV & | Division.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN

Audit does not agree with Ministry's contention that CAG's audit is a part of the
internal control mechanism. CAG is an independent external auditor and an
oversight mechanism on behalf of the-parliament. Further Ministry’s stand that it has
strong internal mechanism for exercising administrative control over Missions abroad
does not seem to be validated. Had the internal audit pointed out these mistakes, the
notional loss of revenue to the Gol could hae been prevented. The fact indicates that
internal audit mechanism needs to be further strengthened by-the Ministry.

Further, the Committee has been categorically pointing out in their earlier reports the
need for strengthening internal audit mechanism of the Ministry. as strong internal
controls followed by regular internal audit. As desired by the Hon’ble PAC steps
taken in this regard may be intimated to them.

Ide


Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations

A sound internal contro! mechanism already exists in the Ministry. As indicated,
further strengthening of the. mechanism.has been felt necessary. Accordingly, an
additional post (Director level) for Internal Audit Wing has been approved. Number of
units under Annual Audit Plan of Internal Audit has been increased and Internal Audit
is regularly undertaken. Ministry has now assigned Nodal Officer in every Division
to address inspection and audit issues. An e-Audit portal has also been set up to
enhance prompt monitoring and reporting.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the High Commission of India, London introduced the
service of Fast Track Business Visa (FTBV) whereby business visa would be
issued on same day on payment of additional visa fee and Service Charges.
Audit contended that the Mission’s decision to award processing of FTBV .
cases at enhanced Service Charge of GBP 25 per case in place of normal
Service Charge of GBP. 7.70 resulted in undue benefit of € 10.72 crore to the
Service Provider i.e. VF Services (UK) Ltd. The Committee observe from the
reply of the Ministry that the High Commission of India, London had been
receiving a large number of requests for urgent visas from business travellers
and in the absence of a separate mechanism for receipt and processing of
urgent business visa applications, it was very difficult for the Mission to handle
such urgent visa requests. In this regard, Secretary MEA in his submission
stated that with the introduction of e-visa, demand for the FTBV came down.
The Committee further observe that e-visa is being handled by Ministry of
Home Affairs. The Committee are apprehensive of coordination and
jurisdictional issues in handling of e-visa which is being handled by Ministry of
Home Affairs as the Missions come under Ministry of External Affairs, and
hope that steps will be taken to streamline the whole process of issue of e-visa.
It has further been stated in the final action taken note that FTBV has been
dispensed with. In this context, the Committee are of the view that efficient
delivery of Visa services across all missions is essential not only to promote
trade and economic interests but also to allow seamless, smooth and hassle
free movement of people from and to India. While taking care of security
concerns is important on one hand, the focus should be on facilitation rather
than hindrance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all missions should
provide, through their visa issuance services, -visas on short notice for
immediate travel on medical reasons, death of family/relative, or any other
ground which can be justified by the traveller as urgent apart from business
purposes. |

[Para 4, Part — Il, of 112" Report of Public Accounts Committee _
- (167 Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

ge


As per new contract effective from March, 2015, the Service Provider at HCI, London
is not charging any additional service fee for emergency business visas. After due
process Mission awarded the contract to VFS being L1 at a service fee of 7.44
Pounds. The new agreement was signed on December 15, 2014 for a period of four
years valid up to March 31, 2019. Mission has stopped additional service fee for the
Service Provider pertaining to fast track business visa.

Regarding visa issuance at short notice, it may be noted that Missions/Posts are
empowered to issue visas on same day as per the local situation conditions.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
The consular service outsourcing contract between HCl, London and M/s VFS which
was valid till March 2019 has now been extended till 31 December 2019 by signing
an addendum (dated 1 March 2019) to the Agreement.
As per the current practice in vogue, for issue of urgent Business Visas, M/s VFS is
charging (on behalf of the HCl) the ‘applicable Visa fee’ (as prescribed by the
Ministry) and charges for issue of ‘Business Visas on same day’ (as prescribed by
the Ministry). - .
In addition to the above charges the service provider is also charging Urgent Courier
Charges of £12.33 (on its behalf), which has been agreed upon and approved by the
1101, London.
Hence, no further comments.

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
The vetted comments of audit on Ministry's reply has agreed with the submission
made by the Ministry. In view of this, the PAC para may be treated as settled.

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the work of Fast Track Business Visas was not

reviewed for a period of 5 years. The Mission continued outsourcing of this
work at the prevalent rate of GBP 25 per application despite the Ministry
expressing its reservations in June 2014, August, 2013 and May, 2014. In the
context of above and incase of the contract related to issuance of fast track
visas, Secretary, MEA in his oral submission to the Committee stated that the
Ministry did not want to disturb the existing. arrangement and had
communicated to the Mission that the prevalent arrangement could contiriue _
till the expiry of the existing contract and that alternate possibilities could be
explored thereafter. The apparent hesitation of the Ministry in giving clear
directions to the Mission points towards incongruity in the administrative
relationship of the Mission and the Ministry. The Committee recommend that

steps be taken to ensure that administrative instructions of the Ministry-are

34-


followed consistently by the Missions and that there should not be any scope
for discretion inthe same. है

[Para 5, Part — Il, of 112" Report of Public Accounts Committee

(167 Lok Sabha)]

' Action Taken .
Ministry has strong internal mechanism for exercising administrative control over
Mission abroad. It includes internal audit, annual audit by the C&AG Team and
periodic inspection by CNV &I Division. है
It may be noted that the main objective of the introduction of the FTBV (Fast Track
Business Visa) was to facilitate short notice business travellers coming to India was
well as increase the ability of the visa issuance system to cater to urgent needs, thus
promoting our over trade and economic interests.
With the introduction of e-Visa, the demand for FTBV service has come down. As per
the new contract effective from March 2015, the service provider is not charging any
additional service fee for business visas.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
Steps taken by MEA to ensure that administrative instructions of the Ministry are
followed consistently by the Missions without any scope for discretion may be
informed to the PAC. .
Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations.
Ministry has strong internal mechanism for exercising administrative control over
Missions abroad. It includes internal audit, annual audit by the C&AG Team and
periodic inspection by CNV & | Division. Further, to strengthen the monitoring
mechanism regarding Consular services in Missions/Posts, CPV Division have
already sent a circular to all Missions/Posts in March 2019 to furnish a bi-annual *
certificate on 1° of January and 11 of July every year confirming implementation of
the latest instructions of the Ministry regarding fixation of consular fee and exchange
rate, and also to furnish details of the deployment of personnel for the preceding 6
months period on the 11 of January and 11 of July every year. The Head of the
Consular Wing will be responsible to furnish the certificates and information on the e-
Samiksha portal, which will ensure fixation of individual responsibility in case of any
dereliction of duty. Accordingly, Missions/Posts have started uploading the bi-annual
certificates on e-Samiksha, which is closely monitored by CPV Division for effective
compliance:
: Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that the Mission did not undertake due

diligence in estimating the Service Charges for Fast Track Business Visa. In
August, 2008 it proposed a service charge of GBP 50 which was reduced in
October, 2009 to GBP 25 without detailed estimation of cost, market survey and
study and negotiations with the vendor. The Committee note that the new

Service Provider agreed to render the same service at normal Service Charges

—as-


of GBP 7.44 w.e.f. March 2015 in a new agreement against the enhanced
- service charge of GBP 25 during 15 ‘March 2010 to February 2015. The
Committee find that while going for a fresh tender for visa work in July 2013,
the Mission omitted to include this item of work. The Committee note that the
contention of the Ministry that the service charge for fast track business visa in
2009 was based on prevailing market rates and negotiations, had not been
‘supported with any documentary evidence on record. This clearly indicates
that the decision of fixing the service charges for FTBV was arbitrary. The
Committee, therefore, enjoin upon the Ministry to fix the responsibility on the
concerned officers for this aberration and unfair trade practice and to refer the
matter to the CVO of the Ministry for enquiry. It is needless to state here that
the Committee be apprised of the trajectory taken in this regard. While noting
that the Ministry has revised the standard tender document issued by Indian
Missions and Posts abroad for outsourcing of visa, passport and consular
support services, the Committee hope that the provisions so incorporated shall

be followed in letter and spirit.

[Para 6, Part — Il, of 112 Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)}

Action Taken
This matter was taken very seriously by the Ministry. An MEA inspection team,
comprising Shri AcquinoVimal, JS (CNV & 1) and Ms Priyanka Chauhan, Director
(Finance), visited High Commission of India in London on 5-6 April, 2018 to
investigate the issue. In their report they concluded that there was no evidence of
mala-fide or any vigilance angle.
It may be noted that the main objective of the introduction of the FTBV (Fast Track
Business Visa) was to facilitate short notice business travellers coming. to India was
well as increase the ability of the visa issuance system to cater to urgent needs, thus
promoting our over trade and economic interests.
With the introduction of e-Visa, the demand for FTBV service has come down. As per
the new contract effective from March 2015, the service provider is not charging any
additional service fee for business visas.

Audit’s vetting corhments on Ministry’s ATN

Ministry's reply is silent on PAC's recommendation to refer the matter to the CVO of
the- Ministry for enquiry.
Further, a copy of report of thie inspection team may be provided to the PAC

ao


Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
The CVO of MEA is JS (CNV & I) who himself led the inspection team to HCI London
to investigate the issue. The inspection team,-after examining all the-aspects of the
issues raised by the Audit, in their report, concluded that there was no evidence of

~ malafide or any vigilance angle

CPV Division is looking into implementation of the recommendations of the inspecting
team }

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that incorrect fees was applied to 17,664 renunciation

cases and 797 misuse of passport cases from June 2010 to February 2013, i.e.
for almost 3 years, and incorrect downward revision on renunciation fees and
penalty was applied to 27,057 renunciation cases and 5,125 misuse of passport
cases from 1 March 2013 to 22 January 2015, i.e. for almost 2 years. The
Committee infer that the Mission correctly revised the renunciation fees and
penalty for misuse of passports with effect from 23 January 2015 only after
being pointed out by Audit. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the
delay in identification and rectification of the incorrect rate of exchange points
towards a gap in communication between the Ministry and Missions.
Accordingly, in the present scenario, in the opinion of the Committee, full
computerization of all processes and systems is essential for effective
communication and efficient service delivery. Accordingly, the Committee in ©

unequivocal terms recommend that :-

i. All the missions be fully computerized and connected with the
central portal of the Ministry of External Affairs for real time
interface between the Missions and the Ministry;

ii. Information on various visa services provided, average number of
days taken for the same and charges thereof may be made
available online to ensure transparency. Further, a response time
for clarification of queries regarding visa services be prescribed
by the Ministry; and

iii. Mechanism to ensure timely reporting and accountability may be
created

[Para 7, Part - I, of 112" Report of Public Accounts Committee
(167 Lok Sabha)]


Action Taken
In so far as the passport issuance part is concerned, the Division would like to inform
that linking of all Missions/Posts abroad onto the Global Passport Seva Project
(GPSP) is underway. So far, 39 Missions. have already been linked to the system
and work is in progress in 12 other Missions. With the completion of this project, it is
expected that all the Missions/Posts being linked to one system it will enable better
monitoring and real time reporting would become possible.

Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
PAC may be intimated: about status of ongoing work in remaining 12 Missions
alongwith timeline fixed for completion of remaining work. ह

Ministry’s comments on Audit’s observations
The integration has been completed in 54 Missions till 11.2.2020. Orders have
been issued to all the remaining Missions/Posts to procure equipment so that the
integration of their passport issuance system into the GPSP could be completed
before 31% May 2020.

Heme,

— 88-


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

—AI- -


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-

—Zo-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__September, 2020 हे Chairperson,
Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


& OPN Oak ० ७

CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21) HELD
ON 2874 AUGUST, 2020.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 28" August, 2020 from 1500 hrs.
to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

Members
LOK SABHA
Shri T.R Baalu
Shri Subash Chandra Baheria
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Naresh Gujral -
11. ShriC.M Ramesh
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
. Shri T.G’ Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri MLK Raja 7 Director
3. . Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director

tee


—


Bee

“Qe

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

Ms.Shubha Kumar हु - Dy.CAG

1.
2. Shri K. Srinivasan - DG
3... Shri Sanjay Kumar - DG
4... Ms.Ritika Bhatia - PD i
5. Shri S.V. Singh - PD
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
PART-I
1. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson, welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of India
to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the Members
on the following Draft Reports:-
(a) न ae eee teh,
(b) Action Taken - by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained -in their
112" Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, “Incorrect Adoption
of Exchange Rate And Undue Benefit to the Service Provider’:
(०) *न्‍* कल. frees wee,
(d) हलक peers ike “and
(७) ***« overs wee ee
2. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any

modifications/changes. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports
in the light of factual verification/vetting comments, if any and present the same to

Parliament on behalf of the Committee.

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives of the Office
of the C&AG of India for assisting the Committee in the examination of the’ subjects.

नस्ल


a


-3-

PART-II

eee seek seek week

The Committee then adjourned.

34


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Total number of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1 to 6.
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. Nil.
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil.

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. Nil.

ote

07

Total : 07

Percentage:

100%

Total : 00

Percentage:

Total : 00

Percentage:

Total : 00

Percentage:

Nil

Nil.

Nil