20

AVOIDABLE PROCUREMENT OF A MOBILE
NITROGEN GAS GENERATOR PLANT,
INFRUCTUOUS PROCUREMENT OF
MATERIAL, DEVELOPMENT OF INTEGRATED
AEROSTAT SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM AND

IRREGULAR EXPENDITURE ON
CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLE TESTING
GROUND

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-first Report (16 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTIETH REPORT

en esestnenesenennesnnesnssnennret

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT }
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2201

TWENTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

AVOIDABLE PROCUREMENT OF # MOBILE
NITROGEN GAS GENERATOR PLANT,
INFRUCTUOUS PROCUREMENT OF MATERIAL,
DEVELOPMENT OF INTEGRATED AEROSTAT
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM AND_ IRREGULAR
EXPENDITURE ON CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLE
TESTING GROUND

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-first Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

सत्यमेव जयते

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: (६: OF- RKO

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2020/ Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER |

CHAPTER I

CHAPTER Iil

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Fewe

Report

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government

Observations/Recommendations ° in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations 1 respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES

Minutes of the 4" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2020-

21) held on 287 August, 2020

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-first

Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE

(ii

(iv)

27

32

47

48

51


cP ND YF BW DY

Bee eee
पी की ४ ऐि oS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury _ -

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

bri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
hri Naresh Gujral

hri C. M. Ramesh

hri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

5
5
5
5

Vacant
Vacant
SECRETARIAT

Chairperson

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar  - Joint Secretary

Shri. M.L.K. Raja * - - Director

Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director
Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the. Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant;
Infructuous Procurement of Material; Development of Integrated Aerostat
Surveillance System; and Irregular Expenditure on Construction of Vehicle
Testing Ground’ relating to the Ministry of Defence.

2. The One Hundred and Thirty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14
February, 2020. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and
thereafter adopted the Report at their sitting held on 28 August, 2020. Minutes of the
sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-first Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

17 September, 2020 2020 Chairperson

26 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Thirty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “
Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant, Infructuous
Procurement of Material, Development of Integrated Aerostat Surveillance
System and Irregular Expenditure on Construction of Vehicle Testing Ground”
based on the C&AG Report Nos. 15 of 2017 and 19 of 2016, respectively, relating to

the Ministry of Defence.

2. The One Hundred and Thirty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), which was
presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 19" December, 2018, contained 14
Observations/Recommendations, 7 Observations/Recommendations in Part A and 7
Observations/Recommendations in Part B . Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence and

these have been categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph No. 1, 2, 3, 5 & 6 of Part ‘A’
Total: 05
Chapter-Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph No. 7 of Part ‘A’ and Paragraph No. 6 & 7 of Part
‘B

: Total: 03
पु Chapter-lll

a
(ili) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of Which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

Paragraph No. 4 of Part ‘A’ and Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 3,4 & 5
of Part ‘B’

Total: 06

Chapter- IV


(५). Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim.replies:

NIL
Total: 00
Chapter- V
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred
Thirty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with
the Action Taken by the Government on some of their

Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.


3

A. Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant
(Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of Part A)

4. Consequent to enquiring this subject, the Committee in general infer the need
to re-look in to the functioning of DRDO and its associate laboratories as they are of
the view that under confidentiality or secrecy, development of sensitive technologies
has been a very time consuming affair. They are of the view that what DRDO needs is
operational freedom to function more effectively and deliver world class products on
time. Also, the Committee are of the specific view that synchronization is not effective
between the DRDO and the armed forces as they feel coordination among the
agencies has affected the systematic development of military hardware. The
Committee desire the administrative Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Defence to play a
proactive role in better synchronisation and coordination among the agencies as both
are mutually interdependent on each other and their association has direct bearing on
the overall security and preparedness of the Country. The Ministry may provide the

Committee steps/measures proposed to be taken in this regard.

5. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

“DRDO’s Mandate is to develop state of the art technology for the
requirements of user/Army. However the whole cycle for
conceptualization, development, lab scale experimentation, field level
evaluation, demonstration to the user of sensitive technology for usage in
exotic /hazardous user environment pose major technology challenges
for DRDO. However this whole cycle require good amount of time to
bring the hardware to maturity level for induction.

In addition to the above, DRDO has evolved & complying to a policy for
pursuation & execution of various projects depending upon the product's
technological level/maturity in terms of S&T, TD & MM, as per the
document ‘Procedures for Project Formulation and Management. -
PPFM-2016'; The projects are being taken after due review at various
levels [Lab, Cluster & DRDO HQrs.] with clear definition of its scope &
objectives. “Further on the User’s interactions, various proactive
measures have been taken by DRDO for close association with Army.

In order to ensure better coordination between DRDO and Army there
are various review mechanism in place like Quarterly Interaction
Meeting (QIM) and Vice Chief Review of projects Bi-annually. Apart
from this, during review of each staff project there is a presence of User


4

representative in each project .

An exclusive Directorate [0158] at DRDO HQrs. is nodal agency for
coordination of all the DRDO activities with the Armed forces. Army
Officers and Personals were posted at various Labs to support the R&D
activities. Of late, specific deputation of Army Officers have been made
to DRDO Labs as part of PMG for major projects. Recently, an
recruitment call has been made to permanently position the Army
Officers at DRDO as Scientists. In addition to the above, Scientists at
various levels were attached to the different Army Regiments for two
weeks attachment training programme in their area of research &
developmental activities. All the above initiatives would help for better
synchronisation and coordination for development of state of the art
Defence products.”

6. The Committee, had, in the course of examining various issues raised by
Audit in its report inter-alia expressed the need for undertaking an exercise
towards revamping DRDO, so as to boost its capacity and capability for Research
and Development of state of the Art Technology. The Committee have noted that
despite having a vast set up of laboratories, Ordanance Factories etc. DRDO has
not been totally effective in meeting the requirements of our Defence forces.
Consequently, the Forces continue to rely on imports not only for products of
advanced technology, but also for certain basic technology/products. The
Committee had in this regard, noted that for harnessing the full potential, DRDO
needs to be given operational freedom so as to enable the organization in

developing advanced cutting edge technology.

The Committee, accordingly, also recommended that the Ministry review
the functioning of DRDO, with a view to developing DRDO as a world class
organization which not only fulfills the needs of the Defence Forces of the
country effectively but also taps the export market. To this end, the Committee
had desired that each laboratory of DRDO should be.developed as a centre of
excellence. For the purpose a blue print needs to be prepared, with a clearly
defined road map. Further, as expressed earlier, there is a need to give functional
and financial autonomy to DRDO to meet its objectives. The Committee,
therefore recommend that apart from taking measures towards ensuring that

DRDO effectively caters: to the needs of the Defence Forces of the Country, the


5

mandate of DRDO should be enlarged so as to enable the organization in playing
a leading role in developing the Country as a producer of world class products

with the latest cutting edge technology.

B. Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System

(Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of Part B)

7. In their examination of Para 6.1 on "Development of an Integrated Aerostat
Surveillance System" based on the C&AG's Report No. 15 of 2017, the Committee observed
that the very purpose of import of a balloon made from laminated fabric was to attain the
objective of a medium sized aerostat without the constraints of endurance and shelf life as
experienced using a polyurethane (PU) coated fabric aerostat. However, the balloon imported
by the Aerial Delivery Research and Development Establishment (ADRDE), Agra for research
purposes militates against the project's objective as consequently neither the aerostat was
deployed nor Communication Intelligence (COMINT) payload was tested for the duration
desired by the Army. Also, the claim about usage of the imported balloon with laminated fabric
as a spare to cater for the unforeseen circumstances is incomprehensible to the Committee as
the intended objective has not been achieved even after incurring a total expenditure of *
49.50 crore, out of which an amount of * 6.20 crore pertained to importing of laminated fabric
balloon, which remained idle eventually.

8. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

“The core objective of project Nakshatra was to Design and Develop an
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System-Medium Size with deliverable ‘One
set of Integrated Aerostat Surveillance Medium Size System’. The system
comprises of indigenous Laminated fabric balloon, COMINT payload, Winch
and Mooring System, Active Pressure Control Health Monitoring System,
Power Management System, Ground Control System, etc.

The statement of case (SOC) of the project proposal highlighted ‘Laminated
Fabric’ Development as ‘High Risk Area’. In order to mitigate the risk, in case
of unavailability of laminated fabric it-was planned to import the laminated
fabric. In the meantime, the balloon was planned to be developed using PU
coated nylon fabric and COMINT payload was: to be integrated and
demonstrated. Further, it was envisaged to realize total 03 nos. of balloons
with 01 no. to be kept as spare.

The efforts were made to develop indigenous laminated fabric till mid 2013. In
spite of the best efforts put in by the lab, the indigenous laminated fabric
development did not fructify due to, technological complexity. In order to
continue the project activities it was. décided to use the improved PU coated
nylon fabric which was concurrently developed by the lab (having 30%


6

improved fabric life) and import one laminated fabric balloon. To this effect, a
cost enhancement | was sanctioned vide letter no.
DARO/03/342/P/1/2710/D(R&D) dated 29/10/2013 with concurrence of MoD
Finance vide MoD (Fin)/(R&D) vide Dy No. 958/MoD/Fin(R&D) dated
24/10/2013.

The fabrication of balloon with indigenous improved PU coated fabric was
initiated in June 2013 and was realized in Feb 2015. The procurement of
laminated fabric balloon through import route was initiated in Dec. 2013 and
was delivered in Aug. 2015.

After procurement, the laminated fabric balloon was inflated and integrated
with simulated payloads and other subsystems for conducting the performance
evaluation trials for 11 days. All the functional tests were carried out and the
balloon was made ready for flight. The interfaces of all the subsystems of
integrated aerostat system "Nakshatra" were made compatible to both PU
coated and laminated fabric balloon. In addition, DRDO scientists learnt
various technological aspects of laminated fabric balloon with respect to
configuration, fabrication and sealing technologies involved in laminated fabric,
panel and joint analysis, pressure drop study, inflation and deflation
techniques, integration of interfaces, static balancing of different loads in
inflated conditions, etc. This facilitated the development of indigenous
laminated fabric and sealing technologies which have been subsequently
matured and available for future use ..This proved to be an intangible benefit
from the imported balloon for maturing the indigenous laminated fabric balloon:

The integration efforts of Aerostat sub-systems on PU coated fabric balloon
was started in Feb. 2015 and the maiden flight of Nakshatra was conducted on
21 Oct. 2015.

The initial flight trial and test results were very encouraging with indigenous
balloon in terms of endurance requirement of 14 days meeting the QR
provided by SI Dte, Army Hqrs. Based on the encouraging results, the trials
were continued to mature all the indigenous technologies till April 2016 at Agra
with user involvement.

During the 10! Executive Board meeting dated 27 April 2016, in concurrence
with user, it was decided to close the project within PDC of 30 June 2016 after
deployment of system at user site as per scope of the project. Accordingly,
user associated technical trials were conducted at user designated site at Tibri,
Punjab. The user endorsed that the user associated technical trials were
successful and suggested for few improvements/modifications in terms of
payload’configuration and tether vide MoM 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated
31 Aug. 2016. हि


7

10" EB also directed to initiate a new project under product support (PS)
category for 02 years duration, beyond PDC of current project, with 2-3 months
of extensive user participation. Considering the above directive, imported
laminated fabric balloon was kept as reserve to meet this ensuing requirement.
Subsequently, ADRDE pursued user for obtaining QR for taking up new project
under PS. However, the user now envisage that the operational utility of
tactical (small sized) Aerostat with COMINT payload shall be much more than
medium sized/large sized Aerostat based system as communicated vide letter
no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 30 Aug. 2017. The user has offered
QR for comments vide letter no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 1 Mar.
2018 for medium sized Aerostat and clarifications have been sought through

. multiple communications from ADRDE to the user. No firm QR is received from
user till date.

In the meantime, other requirements emerged from DRDO sister
establishments, CABS, Bengaluru and IRDE, Dehradun to test and evaluate
set of sensors and Long Range Electro-Optic (LREO) device, respectively
during Sept. 2018. In order to meet these requirements, the Nakshatra
Aerostat system along with imported balloon was deployed as per test
requirements.

Therefore, the laminated fabric balloon was utilized and certain Critical aspects
of laminated fabric balloon technology were learnt by our scientists facilitating
indigenous development of laminated fabric balloon.”

Vetting Comments

(i) "The core objective of the project 'Nakshatra' was to design and develop an
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance system using laminated fabric balloon.
However, decision of DRDO to use balloon with PU coated nylon fabric instead
of imported balloon with laminated fabric militates against the project
objectives. Further, the decision to close the project in June 2016 when user
acceptance to the User Associated Technical Trials was yet to be received was
not correct as users suggested improvements/ modifications in terms of
payload configuration in August 2016 i.e. after closure of the project. Further
Executive Board (EB) before closure of the project (April 2016) deciding to
initiate new project using laminated fabric under product support involving
extensive user participation showed that project was closed without meeting
the project objective."
Department's Reply to Auditing Vetting Comments:

The core objective of the project ‘Nakshatra’ was to design and develop
an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance system- Medium Size. Design and
development of the surveillance system was started with the development of


8

laminated fabric balloon (which was one of critical technologies (High risk
Area) which was highlighted in the Statement of Case, but it could not fructify
due to technological complexity. In order to continue the project activities it
was decided to use the improved PU coated nylon fabric which was
concurrently developed by the lab (having 30% improved fabric life) and import
one laminated fabric balloon(as risk mitigation strategy. Technology -
Demonstration (TD) projects are normally initiated by DRDO as feeder
technologies for future or imminent MM projects. These are funded and
monitored by DRDO with little or limited User inputs. The purpose is to
develop, test and demonstrate a particular technology. Project objectives of
this TD Project were met with indigenously developed improved PU coated
balloon. Thus during the 100 Executive Board meeting daled 27 April
2016 in concurrence with user, it was decided to close the project within PDC
of 30 June 2016 after deployment of system at user site as per scope of the
project and the project was closed in consultation with the user after
successful demonstration at user site.

Accordingly, User Associated Technical Trials were conducted at user
designated site at Tibri, Punjab. The user endorsed that the user associated
technical trials were successful and suggested for few
improvements/modifications in terms of payload configuration and tether vide
MolVI 55340/ABC(Nakshatra) SI-11 dated 31 Aug. 2016. 10th EB also
directed to initiate a new project under product support (PS) category for

02 years duration, beyond PDC of ‘current project, with 2-3 months of
extensive user participation, as User requested to provide product support

Vetting Comment

(ii) "The ministry claimed that the Nakshatra Aerostat system along with
imported balloon was deployed as per test requirement and attached Annexure
- land Annexure - Il as supporting papers. On examination, it has been noticed
that Annexure - Il is the project proposal and Annexure - | is the sanction letter
of Project titled "Design & Development of Integrated Aerostat Surveillance
System - Medium Size (NAKSHATRA)".

Department’s Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

Nakshatra Aerostat system along with imported balloon was deployed as per
test requirement and attached as Annexure A & B, which are the test reports
submitted by DRDO labs (IRDE & CABS respectively).


9

Vetting Comment

(iii)"Ministry has not provided any evidence to support the claim that the
tests were carried out successfully".

Department’s Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

The test reports submitted by DRDO labs (IRDE & CABS respectively) are
attached as Annexure A & B which are testimony that the tests were carried
out satisfactory". The first phase trials with laminated fabric balloon of approx
60 days for electro optic payload and sensors/payloads from CABS have been
completed in May' 2019 Another phase was planned in March-April'2020
Tiberi, Punjab which is kept on hold due to Corona pandemic.

Vetting Comment

(iv)"The ministry's claim does not seem to be factually correct since
ADRDE stated (July 2018) that it was in dialogue with Navy and BSF for
demonstration & deployment of LREO payload on Aerostat. system.
Further, ADRDE stated that it was in process of developing electrical &
mechanical interfaces for Aerostat platforms. However, IRDE. stated
(August 2018) that Platform integration & evaluation/trials was out of
scope of the MM project and the development of Electro-Optical Payloads
for Aerostat 'Nakshatra’ was not linked with milestone of ADRDE project
for Nakshatra". हे

Department's Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

Exisitng LREO payload from IRDE was chosen for conducting the trial (May
2019) on Nakshatra aerostat platform for exploiting its utility after the closure of
Nakshatra project. Also, ADRDE was in dialogue with Indian Navy and BSF
(July 2018) for demonstration and deployment of Electro Optic (EO) payloads
on different types of aerostat platforms including futuristic system like Large
size Aerostat. Although, platform integration & evaluation trials was out of
scope of the MM project, as stated by IRDE (Aug 2018), ADRDE had planned
to use LREO payload on available Nakshatra platform for installation and trials
as requested by IRDE (July 2018), and with CABS payloads, flown with the
imported laminated fabric balloon. The first phase of these trialg was
completed in May 2019. The second phase of these trials were planned wat
Tibri, Punjab in March-April'2020. However, the same could not be done due to
present pandemic situation. The second phase trials would commence as soon
as the pandemic situation improves.”



10

(Observation/Recommendation No. 2 of Part B)

9. The Committee note that the technical specification of project 'Nakshatra’
specified the use of laminated fabric for aerostat to sustain a working life of 5 years
and for continuous operability for 14 days. However, they are dismayed to note that
PU fabric coated balloon was used for trials which was of a lower quality than imported
balloon made up laminated fabric. What can be more disconcerting for the Committee
than the fact that imported balloon; though of superior quality, was never put to any
field trial and was kept as risk mitigation strategy.
[Para No. 2 of Part ‘B’ of the 1311 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

10. 116 Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

“As noted by the PAC, the technical specification of project Nakshatra
specified the use of laminated fabric to sustain the working life of 05
years and continuous operability of 14 days. Also, it is agreed that PU

coated fabric balloon was used during project as observed by the
committee.

However, it is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric
met the project objectives viz., endurance of 14 days comparable with
the imported balloon. With respect to working life of 05 years achievable
with imported balloon, the same can be met with 02 nos. of improved
PU coated fabric balloons.

The performance of improved PU coated fabric balloon was not known a
priori. But, during trials, improved PU coated balloon met the endurance
requirement of 14 days and performed consistently. Hence, it was
decided to continue its usage to explore its performance to full potential
and complete the project. Therefore, the imported laminated fabric
balloon was not put for field trials and was kept as standby and also for
any future application.

However, after procurement, the laminated fabric balloon was inflated
and integrated with simulated payloads and other subsystems for
conducting the performance evaluation trials for 11 days. All the
functional tests were carried out and the balloon was made ready for
flight.

Later on, requirements emerged from DRDO sister establishments,
CABS and IRDE, to test and evaluate set of sensors and Long Range
Electro-Optic (LREO) device, respectively. In order to meet these


11

tequirements, the Nakshatra Aerostat system along with imported
balloon was deployed as per test requirements.

Hence it is submitted that the imported balloon was subjected to trials
and usage within and beyond project PDC of June 2016.”

Vetting Comments of Audit
"The ministry stating that imported balloon was subjected to trials within
PDC was not correct as field trials using imported laminated fabric
balloon was not _ held within the PDC of the project. The Ministry itself
admitted that the fabric was kept as standby for any future application.
Thus, the import of laminated fabric balloon did not serve the desired
objective defined in the project i.e. to sustain the working life of 05 years
and continuous operability of 14 days within the PDC i.e. 30 June
2016. Moreover, later in August 2016, user suggested some Improvement
in the product after closure of the project".
This has been vetted vide DGADS UO NO. 438IDP-4912014-151(33)12014-15 dated
09 Jun 2020.

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments

“It submitted again, that after procurement. the laminated fabric balloon was
inflated and integrated with simulated payloads and other subsystems for
conducting the performance evaluation trials for 11 days on ground. Functional
tests were carried out within PDC: It is agreed as stated by the committee that
the imported laminated balloon was not utilised for field trials within project
PDC. The performance of improved PU coated fabric balloon was not known a
priori. But, during trials, improved PU coated balloon met the endurance
requirement of 14 days and performed consistently. Hence, it was decided to
continue its usage to explore its performance to full potential and complete the
Project. Therefore, the imported laminated fabric balloon was not put for field
trials and was kept as standby and also for any future application. It is also
submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the project
objectives viz., endurance of 14 days comparable with the imported _ balloon.
As far as working life of 05 years achievable with imported balloon is
concerned, the same can be met with 02: nos. of improved PU coated fabric
balloons. Project objectives of “this TD Project were met with indigenously
developed improved PU coated balloon. The user endorsed that the User
Associated Technical Trials were successful. Thus during the 10th
Executive Board meeting dated 27 April 2016 in concurrence with user, it was
decided to close the project within PDC of 30 June 2016 after deployment of
system at user site as per‘scope of the TD project and the project was closed in
consultation with the user after successful demonstration at user site.”



12

(Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of Part B)

11. The Committee do not concur with the assertion of either the Ministry or the
DRDO that the Project met its set objectives and hence the use of laminated
fabric balloon was not necessitated. The Committee are confounded at the fact
that as to why, in the first instance, the balloon was imported if the purpose
could have been achieved with indigenous product. It clearly depicts the lack
of foresight and planning on the part of DRDO as at no stage of the examination,
the Committee could find DRDO coming up with the alternative use of the imported

balloon in case the domestic product proves to be successful.
[Para No. 3 of Part ‘B’ of the 1311 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok
Sabha]

12. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:
“It is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the
project objectives and the user endorsed vide Users MoM
55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 31 Aug. 2016 that the tests were
successful, suggesting a few changes to get optimal results from the
system.

With respect to alternative use of imported balloon, the same was
discussed during 10" EB meeting held on April 2016 and it was
suggested that the laminated fabric balloon could be utilised for the
product support project beyond PDC of Nakshatra project.

However, the QR pertaining to the Product Support Project was under
discussion with the user over a protracted period of time extending till
Feb. 2019. The reply from the user is still awaited.

In the meantime, the requirements from the sister DRDO lab emerged
for alternative usage to test and evaluate sensors during Sept. 2018. In
order to meet these requirements, the Nakshatra Aerostat system along
with imported balloon was deployed in the field, demonstrating and
meeting the requirements for CABS and IRDE.”

Vetting Comments of Audit हि

“The ministry reply indicated that usage of imported balloon was discussed in
EB meeting (April 2016), which was held near the fag end of the cfosure of the
main project ie. June 2016. It was suggested to use the same for-product
support beyond PDC of Nakshatra project. Since, the QR pertaining to Product
Support Project was yet to be finalized, it indicates that till date, DRDO is yet to
decide on the alternative use of the imported balloon. Moreover, it appears to
be an afterthought rather than a genuine need based usage of the imported
fabric. "


13

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments

“It is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the project
objectives and the user endorsed vide Users MoM 55340/ABC(Nakshatra) SI-
11 dated 31 Aug. 2016 that the tests were successful, suggesting a few
changes to get optimal results from the system. With respect to alternative use
of imported balloon, the same was discussed during 10th EB meeting held on
April 2016 and it was suggested that the laminated fabric balloon could be
utilised for the product support project beyond PDC of Nakshatra project.
However, the QR pertaining to the Product Support Project was under

discussion with the user over a protracted period of time extending till Feb.
2019. The reply from the user is still awaited. In the meantime, the
requirements emerged for alternative usage of NAKSHATRA to test and
evaluate sensors/payloads. The first phase trials of approx 60 days was
completed in May’ 2019. Another phase was planned in MarchApril'2020 at
Tiberi, Punjab which is on hold due to Corona pandemic. ”

(Observation/Recommendation Para No. 4 of Part B)

13. Here, the Committee would also like to highlight the fact that the Army also expressed
reservations about the effectiveness of the balloon during the User Assisted Technical Trials
(UATT). The Committee has every reason to believe that DRDO was more interested in
developing/importing a foreign made balloon rather than ensuring that the end-user is fully
satisfied with the product delivery. Non-extending the trials further on the ground that
expenditure was not available for the same, is evidently an amiss on the part of the DRDO.
Instead they came out with alternative suggestions of seeking queries from the Army after
giving them for 2 years user trials across the country. The Committee also note with concern
that since the completion of project, the Army has still not finalized the qualitative requirements
(QR) for the aerostat project. The Committee, in this regard, recommend that an internal
inquiry be set by DRDO to find out the reasons for these lapses and the avoidable expenditure
which proved to be infructuous.

14. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:

“During 10" EB meeting held during April 2016, including Users (SI
: Directorate), it was decided to close the Nakshatra project within PDC
{ i.e. 30 June 2016, and a new project under product support category
- shall be taken up.
After project closure, in a meeting held at Army Hars in Aug. 2016
between the scientists from ADRDE, Agra, DLRL, Hyderabad and the
Users (SI Directorate), DDGSI (WZ) informed the forum that the User
Associated Technical Trials (UATT) of the project Nakshatra held at
Tibri Cantt was successful and suggested a few changes pertaining to
COMINT payloads and Tether to get optimal results from the system. It


14

is reiterated that the user was satisfied with the UATT vide Para 4 of
MoM dated Ref 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 31 Aug. 2016.
Further during this meeting, it was collectively decided to launch a
comprehensive Product Support Project for a period of 2 years in
alignment with the decision taken during the 10" EB meeting. DRDO
communicated to users multiple times to provide the QR for taking up
Product Support Category Project. However, as observed by PAC, the
Army has still not finalised the QR for the medium size Aerostat. In the
meantime, the user has projected a requirement of Tactical (small size)
Aerostat, stating that operational utility of tactical (small sized) Aerostat
with COMINT payload shall be much more than medium sized/large
sized Aerostat based system as communicated vide letter no.
55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 30 Aug. 2017.
The request for carrying out the User Associated Technical Trials (UATT)
to be conducted for a period of 03 months was projected during Oct.
2016 after the project closure in June 2016 by the user. This request is in
contradiction to decision taken during 10" EB and also during meeting
held at Army Hqrs during Aug. 2016. Also, it is pertinent to mention here
that without a project in place, it is difficult to carry out expenditure
towards the trials, product support, etc. for a long duration of 3 months
and beyond. The same was communicated to the Users.
It is agreed as stated by the committee that the imported laminated
balloon was not utlisied for trials within project PDC. However the project
goals were met using indigenously developed improved PU coated fabric.
The imported laminated fabric balloon was subsequently deployed and
utlised for other DRDO projects as stated earlier. है
The laminated fabric balloon was utilized and certain critical aspects of
laminated fabric balloon technology were learnt by our scientists
facilitating subsequent indigenous development of laminated fabric
balloon. Hence it is requested not to consider the expenditure of Rs.6.2
Cr.as infructuous.”

Vetting Comments of Audit
"It appears that the decision to close the project within PDC was taken in a
hurry since the user i.e. Army as well as DRDO had not declared User
Associated Technical Trials successful within PDC/closure of the project in
June 2016. The user (9-11) had clearly stated in August 20'17 to the lab
(ADR&DE) that the efficacy of COMINT payload mounted on the aerostat could
not be ascertained during the User Associated Technical Trials and a joint trial
for two to three months was essential before taking up a case for extended
product support for three years. Further, DRDO was silent on PAC direction to


15

conduct an internal inquiry by DRDO to find out the reasons for the lapses and
the avoidable expenditure which proved to be Infructuous.

This has been vetted vide DGADS UO NO. 4381IOP-4912014-151(33)12014-15
dated 09 Jun 2020."

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments
“During 100 EB meeting held during April 20'16, including Users (SI
Directorate), it was decided to close the Nakshatra project within PDC i.e.30
June 2016, and a new project under product support category shall be
taken up. The request by Users in Oct'2016, for carrying out the User
Associated Technical Trials (UATT)for a period of 03 months before taking up

a case for extended product support was out of scope of the current TD
project and is in contradiction to decision taken during 10th EB in which Users
was also part of the decision and also during meeting held at Army Hars during
Aug'2016. It is pertinent to mention here that without a project in place, it is
difficult to carry out expenditure towards the trials, product support, etc. for a
long duration of 3 months and beyond. The same was communicated to the
User An Internal Enquiry Committee was constituted on 23.01 2019 and
committee submitted its report on 13.11.2019. Committee examined all the
project documents thoroughly. Internal committee found that the project is
completed in line with set procedures and all the decisions are taken
collectively involving Users. It is agreed as stated by the PAC committee that
the imported laminated balloon was not utilized for trials within project PDC.
However, the project goals were met using indigenously developed
improved PU coated fabric. The imported laminated fabric balloon was
subsequently deployed and utilised for other DRDO projects as stated
earlier. Further the committee found that the laminated fabric balloon was
utilized and certain critical aspects of laminated fabric balloon technology were
learnt by DRDO Scientists facilitating subsequent indigenous development
of laminated fabric balloon. Hence, the expenditure of Rs.6.2 Cr may not

be treated as infructuous.”

(Observation/Recommendation Para No. 5 of Part B)
15. Another glaring issue which has come up not only during the examination of this para
but in other subjects relating to DRDO is the delays and cost escalation in their projects. This
particular project viz. Nakshatra was initially sanctioned in July 2011 at the cost.of 48.80 crore.
However, the project cost was consequently revised to Rs. 58.80 crore in October 2013 with
the revised probable date of completion (PDC) June, 2016 instead of the original one, ie.,
December, 2014. Although the project was completed at a cost of 49.50 crore finally, the
Committee are in a dithering state as to why the project cost was hiked to the tune of almost
10 crores and then the same was also not utilized. This is undoubtedly a case of wrong
financial projections and goes against the principles of prudent financial management.
‘If seen in the backdrop of extending the field trials for the Army by DRDO on the ground of


tee

16

lack of funding, this issue assumes special significance. The Committee in no uncertain words
recommend that the internal inquiry as recommended in the preceding paragraph should also
cover these aspects and responsibility be fixed, if required, under intimation to the Committee.
They also recommend that all-out efforts be made to obviate instances of such nature which
include wasteful expenditure as well as cost and time escalations. At least now, they be
apprised of the outcome of the Qualitative Requirements as finalized by the Army

16. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted as follows:
“It is agreed that the original sanctioned cost of the project was Rs.48.8 crores.
After two and a half years of project execution, it was realized that
development of indigenous laminated fabric balloon needed more time than
anticipated. A decision was taken to procure laminated fabric balloon. A
budgetary offer of Rs.10 Cr. was obtained from M/s RosAeroSystems, Russia.
Accordingly, an additional fund of Rs.10 crores over the original sanctioned
cost of Rs.48.8 crores was sought. The project cost was revised to Rs.58.80
Cr. vide Govt. letter no. DARO/03/342/P/1/2710/D(R&D) dated 29/10/2013 with
concurrence of MoD Finance vide MoD (Fin)/(R&D) vide Dy No.
958/MoD/Fin/(R&D) dated 24/10/2013.
Although the funds were available in the project, a considered decision was
taken in concurrence with the user in 10" EB to close the project after
completion of trials at Tibri within project PDC i.e. 30 June 2016 followed by a
new Project of Product Support mode for 02 years.
DRDO communicated to user multiple times to provide the QR for taking up
Product Support Category Project. However, the Army has still not finalised the
QR for the medium size Aerostat. In the meantime, the user has projected a
requirement of Tactical (small size) Aerostat, stating that operational utility of
tactical (small sized) Aerostat with COMINT payload shall be much more than
medium sized/large sized Aerostat based system as communicated vide letter
no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 30 Aug. 2017. QR is still awaited from
the user.
Cost overrun in DRDO projects are rare. However, time overruns are there.
DRDO projects are completed in sync with help from users, production
agencies and private agencies. Users provide platforms and trial support,
OFB’s & Defence public sectors are involved in production, QA agencies are
tesponsible for timely clearance of certification requirements. Some of the
subsystem developments are undertaken with the help of private vendors.
However, it may be noted that R&D is an area of uncertainty where certain
unknowns are explored. In addition to taking design projects where the
subsystems are already matured, DRDO also has to undertake Technology
Development projects and Science & Technology projects where the
technology readiness levels may be at in intermediate and low levels
respectively increasing the risk of delays. Certain high risk and high pay off
projects and blue sky research has also been undertaken where there is
extremely high chance of delays and also failures.


17

However in recent past, several measures have been taken to mitigate the cost
& time overrun.”

Vetting Comments of Audit

“An additional Rs 10 crore over the original sanctioned cost of Rs 48.8 crore for
the procurement of laminated fabric balloon was not utilized for project
objective. Further, DRDO was silent on PAC direction to conduct an internal
inquiry by DRDO to find out the reasons for the lapses & fixing the responsibility
for including wrong financial to projection".

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments
“The sanctioned cost of the project was Rs 48.8 crores. After two and a_ half
years of project execution, it was realized that development of indigenous
laminated fabric balloon needed more time than anticipated. A decision was
taken to procure laminated fabric balloon. Accordingly, an additional fund of
Rs.10 crores over the original sanctioned cost of Rs 48.8 crores was sought.
The project cost was revised to Rs 58.80 Cr. vide Govt. letter no.
DARO/03/3421P11127101D(R&D) dated 2911012013 with concurrence of MoD
Finance vide MoD (Fin)(R&D) vide Dy No.958/MoD/Fin/(R&D)daled
2411012013. However only an amount of Rs 6.2 crores was utilised for the
procurement of laminated ballon.
An Internal Enquiry Committee was constituted on 23.01.2019 and committee
submitted its report on 13.11.2019. All the project documents have been
examined thoroughly by the committee. Committee found that the project is
completed in line with set procedures and all the decisions were taken
collectively involving Users.
The internal inquiry has been conducted as directed by PAC and its findings as
‘incorporated in the ATN submitted to O/o DGADS are as follows:-
The import of laminated fabric balloon was part of project risk mitigation
strategy. The indigenously improved PU coated-nylon fabric balloon was able to
demonstrate the COMINT payloads successfully till the completion of project.
All the functional aspects of the system were demonstrated at Agra and at User
Designated site also during Users Associated Technical Trials(UATT). The
success of the project was also endorsed by Users Upon successful
demonstration and completion of project. The Users suggested to incorporate
certain additional payloads and modifications in the system and conduct
extended trials for two year. Accordingly, based on the deliberations with Army
draft QR was forwarded to Army for approval, in order to take up a new project.
As a consequence, the imported laminated balloon remained as standby. after
completion of project. requirements emerged from other DRDO labs and the -
Imported balloon was deployed continuously for 60 days as an airborne
platform for testing of important payloads. Moreover, as a spin-off of learning


18

from the study imported balloon, the development of indigenous laminated
fabric technology has been expedited, matured and is available for future
requirements. Hence, the expenditure on imported balloon may not be treated
as Infructuous.

17. The Committee do not find the replies of the Ministry/DRDO on their
observations concerning Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance
System by DRDO to be convincing. ,

Considering that the objective of the project was to indigenously design,
develop and realize an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System, in the first
instance, import of laminated balloon itself is not justifiable. It is seen from para
5 of the Minutes of the 204 Executive Committee Board meeting on project
Nakshatra, held on 5 September, 2012, that the Chairman of the Board had
directed that the initial system be configured around PU Coated fabric. As per
the observation made at the meeting, development of alternate technology was
to be made parallelly. Similarly, as seen from para 3 of the 3" Executive Board
meeting held on 207 March, 2013, the Chairman of the Board was once again
categorical in stating that, development process of laminated fabric which was
in the Technology Development (TD) category needed to be developed
indigenously, must be undertaken on top priority. The Chairman had also inter-
alia directed at the Executive Board Meeting that development of Aerostat
Balloon should be realized with indigenous fabric, and not through import,
within the projected date.

Considering the fact that Chairman of the Board had advised ADRDE to
initiate the proposal for setting up pilot plant for development of laminated
fabric balloon of limited required quantity under GOCO Model, the Committee
fail to understand as to why the balloon was imported. The Committee would
also like to know as to why the import was routed through M/s Pipavav Shipyard
Ltd., and not directly by DRDO. The reply of the Ministry is not clear on the main
concern expressed by the Committee regarding necessity for importing the
balloon. The Committee accordingly desire that the entire gamut of issues
relating to import of balloon need to be looked into and, the Committee be

apprised of the details relating thereto.


19

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of Part A
(Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant)

॥ their examination of Para 6.1 on “Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile
Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant" based on the C&AG's Report No. 19 of 2016, the
Committee find that Combat Vehicles Research & Development Establishment
(CVRDE), placed an order for development of a mobile Gas Plant, at a cost of | 97.33
lakh despite no demand from the Army for Nitrogen gas generator plant. In
Committee's view, the development of Gas Plant by CVRDE was unwarranted as the
plant had already been developed by the firm, M/s GEM Pressure Systems for DRDO
in July 2010 and supplied to Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL)
in January 2011. However, the gas plant was not used for intended purposes in the

field areas/operations for three years.
[Para No. 4 of Part ‘A’ of the 131° Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

Nitrogen plant ordered by DRDL, Hyderabad & CVRDE, Chennai are different.
The Nitrogen Plant ordered by DRDL is a static plant and rated upto 150 bar pressure
for in house Nitrogen: filling operations. The plant ordered by CVRDE is chassis
mounted mobile Nitrogen Gas Generation rated upto 300 bar pressure with different
specifications. DRDL procured Nitrogen Gas Generation Plant (2 Nos) at the cost of
Rs. 1.1 Crores during 2016 and installed one at the Missile Integration Facility (MIF) of
BDL and another at DRDL..

The unit installed at BDL is fully operational and used for pressurising
Canisterised missiles with Nitrogen gas to protect the missile sub-systems from the
external environment and for conducting leak Tests.

The Second Plant was installed at Heat Treatment Centre of DRDL to supply
Nitrogen gas required for Liner removal of rocket motor casings. Nitrogen gas supply
has to be maintained during complete processing time which can extend up to
minimum of 12-15 hours for clean removal of Liner which enable the direct reusability
of metallic casing. The plant is fully utilised to remove the liner from the solid propellant
rocket motor casings and re-use the metallic casing. +

Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant was built as per the technical specification
of CVRDE. As CVRDE is the nodal Lab for development of Arjun MBT, this specialist /
maintenance support vehicle was ‘conceived & configured the plant for charging of
Hydro-gas Suspension Units [HSUs] of Arjun MBT in the field scenario. This plant is
different as compared to the earlier two plants (Developed by M/s GEM Pressure
systems in 3५1५ 2010) which have’ been made for DRDL. Those plants were static,


20

while this plant with high pressure gas bottles [300 bar] was built on mobile platform
[Ashok Leyland Stallion - Military Class Vehicle] for operational effectiveness of Arjun
tanks.

Arjun is only indigenous tank held by Army. These tanks were inducted during
2004 to 2010. Two regiments were raised with these tanks and deployed in desert
area at Jaisalmer. Other than Arjun, Army do have T-72 & T-90 tanks of Russia. These
T-series tanks are having mechanical suspension system (i.¢.) torsion bar suspension.
Whereas, Arjun is having Hydro-gas suspension system and the same has been
introduced to Army for the first time. This suspension requires nitrogen gas for
maintenance of the vehicle. Therefore, Army is not aware of the requirement of
nitrogen gas plant then. In general, all the maintenance/specialist vehicle would be
provided by Original Equipment Manufacturer [OEM] to Army. In similar line,
CVRDE/DRDO being original designer of Arjun MBT have developed the specialist
vehicle — mobile nitrogen generator plant and handed over to Army in 2016.

The Mobile gas plant was used In-house by CVRDE for generation of Nitrogen
gas, for the development of Arjun MBT Mk-ll. Subsequently, performance evolution
and consistency in Nitrogen Generation plant was done. It being a Technology
Development (TD) project, gas plant was offered to Army only after the evaluation
process was over.”

Observation/Recommendation No. 2 of Part A
(Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant)

The Committee note that nitrogen gas is very important and critical to keep the
Arjun MBT in war-fit condition as it is necessary for achieving cushioning effect of the
hydro-gas suspension unit, for the functioning of the braking system under dynamic
condition and to keep the Gunners Main Sight moisture free. They further note that
during war, a strategic support vehicle would be needed which shall be incorporated
with all the self sufficient sub-systems for the generation of nitrogen gas from the
atmosphere on a military class chassis, so as to have comparable mobility to move
along with the Army. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the acquired
gas plant from M/s GEM Pressure Systems remained unused for three years as it was
steadily being used by DRDL for performance evaluation and consistency in nitrogen
generation plant despite being procured for the end user i.e. the Army. Also, Army had

initially stated that they did not require the gas plant as their nitrogen gas cylinders ;

were being refilled through the Ordnance factories and were reluctant to receive the
procured gas plant as they were self sufficient with the available resources. In this
regard, the Committee observe that DRDL is the nodal agency to provide for the
specific needs of the armoured brigades of the Army and were mandated to develop
the nitrogen gas system for Arjun MBT but due to developmental exigencies, the gas
plant was procured from a private vendor terming it as a R&D project. They also note


21

with concern that acceptance of the gas plant by the Army for trials appeared to be
under duress as the Director General Mechanised Forces (DGMF) had stated that
CVRDE had offered them the gas plant on ‘no cost and no liability to the Army’. Also,
the Army has not placed any bulk orders for the gas plant indicating that the
development of gas plant by CVRDE has overshot the time frame of developmental
window and the end user is dependent on private manufactures for the gas plant. The
Committee are of the view that since CVRDE is mandated for developing and
providing critical hardware for the armoured wing of the Army, nevertheless they are
lagging behind in this area. They find that the establishment did not take the end user
on board and to supply them for their tailor made requirements. The Committee,
therefore, desire that all the stakeholders should have a consensus for the creation of
such important hardware as it has a direct bearing on the work horse of the armoured
regiments i.e. Arjun MBT which is essential in war time scenario. They therefore
recommend that the Army should lay down their explicit requirements in future to
establish a proper chain right from the conception stage to manufacturing of the end
product and subsequently handing it over to the Army for trials and eventual use.

[Para No. 2 of Part ‘A’ of the 131" Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

a. “DRDL’s mandate: DRDL is a multi-disciplinary Missile System laboratory with
thrust on design, development and flight evaluation of various types of Missile
Systems for armed forces.
The Nitrogen Plant (02 Nos.) ordered by DRDL is a static plant and rated upto 150 bar
pressure for in house Nitrogen filling operations. One plant is installed at the Missile
Integration Facility (MIF) of BDL and another at DRDL. The unit installed at BDL is
used for pressurising Canisterised missiles with Nitrogen gas to protect the missile
sub-systems from the external environment and for conducting leak tests.

Another plant acquired by DRDL was installed at Heat Treatment Centre of
DRDL and is fully utilised to remove the liner from the solid propellant rocket motor
casings and re-use the metallic casing.

CVRDE’s mandate: With respect to Design, Development, Testing and
Performance evaluation of tracked armoured fighting vehicle and their variants,
CVRDE is the,nodal agency in DRDO to undertake such activities to support the
armed forces. ;

The gas plant acquired from M/s GEM Pressure Systems was used in-house by
CVRDE for generation of Nitrogen gas, for the development of Arjun MBT Mk-II since
2012. Subsequently after’ the receipt of the plant, performance evaluation and
consistency in Nitrogen Generation plant was done and payment was made only in
2014. The equipment was continuously being used in CVRDE. It being a Technology
Development (TD) project, gas plant was offered to Army only after the evaluation
process was over.


22

The mobile nitrogen gas plant developed by CVRDE is being used by EME
Workshop since it is handed over to them. This vehicle is developed on military class
Ashok Leyland Stallion Chassis, which has desert mobility, and can be moved along
with the tanks during war operation. Army was procuring the required nitrogen gas
from ex-trade & the same procedure would be difficult during the operations.
Therefore, this vehicle issued by DRDO is useful to Army and enables maintenance at
deep operational area.

b. The mobile nitrogen gas plant vehicle is developed by CVRDE on military class
Ashok Leyland Stallion Chassis, which has desert mobility, and can 08 moved along
with the tanks during war operation.CVRDE proposed to hand over the plant to Army,
as the performance of the plant was found to be good and consistent in compliance to
the decision of 2010 Steering Committee, after a due deliberation with the User.
Accordingly, CVRDE requested Army to designate the agency for the same, vide
Letter No. CVRDE/ARJUN/PMA/47 dated 287 Aug., 2014 . For which, DGMF agreed
and confirmed that the Nitrogen generator vehicle was to be taken over by 140 Armd
Bde [246 Armd Workshop], vide Letter No, A/36026/MBT Gen/GS/IP(AC) dt. 3% Sept.,
2014. For which, to the CVRDE initiation vide Letter No CVRDE/ARJUN/PMA/47 dt.
8" Dec., 2014. Army nominated their personnel from 246 Armd Workshop vide Letter
No. 70301/MBTWksp dt. 23 Dec., 2014. and got trained

CVRDE has already taken up the initiative and got the BA No. for the vehicle on
14.9.2015 [vide Army DGIS No. B/28262/GS/MISO/TMS/BA No. dated 277 Sept 2015
and DRDO Hrs Letter No. DHRD/92481/CVRDE/BA/C/M/02 dated 14" Sept 2015,
as the BA No. was necessary for forwarding the vehicle to field area.

There was no necessity for Army to accept the equipment under duress. There
was letter from DGMF to Deputy Director Audit in 2013, which only mentioned this
statement “No Cost No Liability’. However, the equipment was handed over to Army
as per the advice of 11th Steering committee meeting held under the chairmanship of
Secretary Defence Production in July 2014.

८. With reference to bulk order, the Army [DG EME (CV)] stated that this one
vehicle is adequate to extend the maintenance support to the existing Arjun fleet.

The development of mobile gas plant was done well within the PDC of the order and
there is no lagging behind in this area. As per Project Procedures for Formulations of
Methodology (PPFM) in vogue, Army representatives are involved in the development
process in its initial stages in the Mission Mode Projects. In Technology Projects (TD)
projects, after maturity of the hardware / system-only, it is demonstrated to Army/ User.


23

Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of Part A
(Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant)

In this particular case, the Committee would like to bring to light the fact that the
Army, specifically the DGMF does not effectively require the gas plant for its regular
maintenance or operational requirements as they have established their supply chain
through the Ordnance factories. They wonder as to why DRDO/DRDL did not develop
or augment the existing facilities at Ordnance factories for development of the gas
plant due to its mission criticality in times of war. The Committee are not oblivious of
the fact that development of military technologies and their incorporation in hardware
is a time consuming process but wonder if a private firm could develop the gas plant,
why it took DRDO/DRDL five years in developing the same and reaching finality. They
accordingly recommend that DRDO should furnish details about the development and

subsequent production of the gas plant to the Committee.
[Para No. 3 of Part ‘A’ of the 1311 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16” Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

DRDL is a multi-disciplinary Missile System laboratory with thrust on design,
development and flight evaluation of various types of Missile Systems for armed
forces. The mobile nitrogen gas plant vehicle is developed by CVRDE on military class
Ashok Leyland Stallion Chassis, which has desert mobility, and can be moved along
with the tanks during war operation. In general, DRDO exploits knowledge base and
expertise available with the industry depending on their capability for the development
of technology. Ordinance Factories (OF) are involved in the product development of
DRDO, if it fits in their product range. In future also, Army can place order on OFs, for
the. supply of Nitrogen gas plant, sourcing from M/s GEM Pressure Systems, if
required. Development of Hardware only was done by private firm (ie M/s GEM
Pressure Systems) based on conceptualization, technical requirement and design by
CVRDE/DRDO. Subsequently performance evaluation was done from end use point of
view.

The nitrogen gas is very important for up-keeping of the tank, as its
unavailability will affect both the mobility and firing capabilities, which are all mission
critical features of the tank. At the same time, CVRDE/DRDO would like to re-iterate
again that the nitrogen gas requirement can be met from open market of the near-by
area during the peace time, as being done now through ordinance channel. Further, in
the DGMF Letter No. A/36026/ MBT Gen/GS/ IP (AC) dated 17.12.2013 addressed to
the Dy Director of Audit, it was mentioned that the. Ordinance Depot receives its
supplies of Nitrogen gas from Jodhpur Gas Agency, Industrial Area Boranada,
Jodhpur. However, during war sceriario, there won't be any open market at war zone.
If the tank moves inside the enemy territory, it would be impossible to locate the
source for the gas at those places. Under the circumstances, it was felt that there
would be a need for strategic support vehicle, which shall be incorporated with all the


24

self sufficient sub-systems for the generation of nitrogen gas from the atmosphere,

and also

on a military class chassis, so as to have comparable/matching mobility to

move along with the Army during the war

tee

Details of Development is as follows :

> SO No. CVRDE/12AT0132/RGD/11-12/LP dt. 3.10.2011

> Receipt & Acceptance CRV No. 13CRV0108 dt 17.8.2012

> Internal trials, usage for CVRDE’s requirements & final 10% payment
was cleared on 17.03.2014 on satisfactory functioning of the plant.

> Although this was an exploration & development exercise as stated in
the Equipment Procurement Committee [EPC] approval paper, CVRDE
proposed to hand over the plant to Army, as the performance of the plant
was found to be good and consistent in compliance to the decision of XIth
Steering Committee under Chairmanship of Secretary (DP) after due
discussion with the user.

> To CVRDE request 28" Aug., 2014, DG MF agreed and confirmed that
the Nitrogen generator vehicle was to be taken over by 140 Armoured
Brigade (246 Armd Workshop], vide Letter No. A/36026/MBT
Gen/GS/IP(AC) dt. 3 Sept., 2014.

> Since the plant is a combination of different sub systems namely-
Nitrogen generation unit, diesel operated generator, air compressor, high
pressure booster, high pressure gas cylinders, storage fitment, etc., the
proper training was extended to Army nominated personnel from 246
Armored Workshop [Army Nomination Letter No. 70301/MBT/Wksp dt. 23
Dec 2014] and got trained.

> In the mean time, CVRDE has already taken up the initiative and got the
BA No. for the vehicle on 14.9.2015 [vide Army 0065 No.
B/28262/GS/MISO/TMS/BA No. dated 2 Sept 2015 and DRDO HQrs
Letter No. DHRD/92481/CVRDE/BA/C/M/02 dated 14" Sept 2015], as the
BA No. was necessary for forwarding the vehicle to field area.

> After completing all the subsequent formalities, the Army crew from 246
Armoured Workshop visited CVRDE and collected the vehicle vide Issue
Voucher [No. IV/EXT/MM/B-up RG/Loan/03 dated 29" April 2016]. The
Army confirmed that they had received the plant. on 45” July 2016 & it was
under serviceable condition vide Letter No. 70301/MBT/Inst/Wksp dated 23
Aug., 2016.

> As of now, the vehicle has already reached 246 Armd Workshop [140
Armd Brigade], Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, and being utilized for further
experimentation and exploitation in the field area.

> Vide Letter No. 70301/MBT Arjun/Wksp dt. 20 Feb 2017, the Army stated
that the plant is in working condition & is useful for the workshop. Further,
they have stated that the plant is being continuously used for the generation
of gas for the maintenance & up-keeping of Arjun MBT fleet of the formation.



25

> Further, the plant was under continuous utilisation & usage for the above
purposes as long as it was in CVRDE.

Vide Letter No. B/25539/MBT/Arjun/EME CV-1 dt.20 Nov 2018, the User
[DG EME (CV)] stated that this one “Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generation Plant”
vehicle is adequate to meet the existing requirements of MBT Arjun and
further procurement of equipment is not required as of now.”

Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of Part A
(Infructuous Procurement of Material)

In regard to Para No 6.2 on “Infructuous Procurement of Material", the
Committee observe that DRDL was aware of the fact that C-103 material had
limitations to resist high temperature generated in the scramjet engine combustor and
the material had also failed in the flight tests of short duration of 20 seconds, yet, 1329
kgs of C-103 material was procured valuing = 4.83 crore, which eventually proved
wasteful. हु .
[Para No. 5 of Part ‘A’ of the 131% Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

The Scramjet technology program was one of the most ambitious programmes
of advanced countries like USA, Russia, China, France, Australia and Japan”.
Worldwide it is a closely guarded technology and the detailed information including
fabrication technology with C-103 material is not available in open literature. C-103 is
one of the most suitable and reliable material for the combustor chamber of Scramjet
engine for high temperature application. Two experts committees under the
Chairmanship of leading experts from ISRO and DAE had cleared the Scramjet engine
design and fabrication methodology using C-103 material. C-103 is a strategic material
and the lead time in procurement is high and decision was taken to procure the
material considering tight project schedule. |

The gas temperature in the engine goes up to 2500°C, but the engine wall
material does not cross 1100°C temperature. So this material is still valid and can
withstand this kind of 2500°C temperature with oxidation resistant coating. Even
though C-103 material could not be used for present HSTDV mission, it has been used
for developing oxidation resistant coating for long duration hypersonic flight,
establishment of various welding methodologies of C-103, development of long
duration thrusters in other programme. Hence, the procurement has not been wasteful.

_ Vetting Comments
“The facts and figures mentioned in the reply to Questionnaire (PAC (2018-19)
131%! Report (16" Lok Sabha) have been found correct. The Report is vetted”.


26

Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of Part A

(Infructuous Procurement of Material)

Scramjet or supersonic combustion ramjet is an air breathing jet engine in
which high vehicle speed is used to compress the incoming air forcefully before
combustion in supersonic airflow allowing it to operate efficiently at extremely high
speeds thus generating very high temperatures in the range of 2227°C to 2527°C.
Committee’s scrutiny of the subject reveal that for the development of scramjet
engines, DRDO procured Nimonic C-263 and Niobium.C-103 materials for their high
temperature resistance properties. However, the Committee note with concern that
both the materials eventually failed in the testing phase and some quantities of the
materials were used-in other on going research projects, thus defeating the very
purpose for which these were originally procured for. They would like to highlight the
fact that DRDO contested C&AG's claim of unwarranted procurement and eventual
wastage by stating during their audit, the DRDO scientists could not properly explain
the logic behind the move. However, the Committee are of the opinion that in the field
of research and development, conclusions are reached by the way of experiments
applying trial and error method but are of the considered opinion that materials
procured should be used for their intended purpose and not to be used for other
ongoing projects. Since development of new hardware is a technological intensive
activity, the Committee recommend that DRDO and its associated laboratories may
draw a comprehensive roadmap by undertaking thorough due dilligence for the
development right from the conception stage till the manufacturing stage so that
delays are minimised. The action initiatied/taken in this regard should be intimated to
the Committee. :

[Para No. 6 of Part 'A’ of the 1317 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16” Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

The comments have been well taken and it is agreed with view point of
committee that the materials procured should be used for their intended purpose and
not to be used for other ongoing projects.

With regard to the recommendation of the Committee to draw a comprehensive
roadmap, DRDO has replied as under:

Project HSTDV has provided a roadmap of its activities which is as follows:-

a) Activities (Ground Resonance test, Vibration tests of sections) for second
flight of HSTDV are under progress.

b) Electrical integration:& phase checks of Cruise vehicle sections are
under progress.

c) Second flight trial to’ be taken up shortly.


27

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation No. 7 of Part A
(Infructuous Procurement of Material)

Coming to inquiry of this subject; the Committee observe that C-103 material
could resist only 1370C whereas the heat generated in the scramjet engine reached
upto 2527C. However, DRDO stated that the high temperature generated was the gas
temperature. The Committee take serious note of this discrepancy and recommend
that DRDO may furnish the specific reasons for procuring the material out of which
only 107 kg of C-103 was used and remaining 88 per cent of the materials was used in
ballistic missile programme and other R&D programmes. Having been apprised of the
alternate usage to which C-103 can be put to use, the Committee recommend that
procurement for such alternate projects should be made project specific and that
possible alternate utility could not be used to justify procurement of unsuitable
material. They further desire to be apprised about the present status of the project with
complete details to be forwarded to them for taking the issue to a logical conclusion.

[Para No. 7 of Part ‘A’ of the 1317 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

a) Explanations regarding the gas temperature: The temperature in the engine is
of the order of 2,500 degrees because the hot flame is actually coming out of the
engine. This is the gas temperature. The metal temperature on the wallis around 1,000
degrees for the 20 second duration. It takes time for the metal to heat up. So, itis not a
wrong decision to select this material. Even now the temperature predicted is1,000
degrees and this material can withstand. But after procuring the material, when it was
attempted to use this material for fabrication, a number of fabrication issues came. The
original design was to have an external structural layer of C-263 with C-103 inside
which is exposed to the heat. The combination of these two materials has faced some
welding problem. This has never been done earlier. This material has to be given
silicide coating without which the properties were. going to drop. This coating
application process was not readily available for this configuration. However, the C-
103 material is still valid as it experiences approximately1100 degrees centigrade.

b) Reasons for procurement of the C-103 material are:

From design studies carried out for Scramjet engine, a single module double wall
configuration with C-103 Niobium based alloy as the inner wall and C-236 Nimonic
alloy as outer wall was finalized. Among all refractory materials, Niobium base C-103


was found to
the scramjet
Design and t

28

be ductile, light weight, possessing good fabricability. C-103 material for
engine was.a reliable material for high temperature application.Detailed
hermo-structural analysis of. double wall Scramjet engine was carried out

by structures group (DOFS), DRDL and independently verified by Design Experts at
IGCAR, Kalpakaam in Oct 2007. In 2007, a review committee consisting of leading
experts from various organisations and chaired by Dr. AR Acharya, well known
structural expert from ISRO reviewed the Thermo-structural design of Scramjet engine

and cleared t

he design of double walled construction of Scramjet Engine using C-103&

C-263 materials for further fabrication.
c) Reasons for not being able to use the C-103 material for scramjet engine for the
present HSTDV mission:

In

he single module double wall configuration of scramjet engine

manufacturing limitations were experienced to determine suitable form of
welding for dissimilar materials C-103 & C-263. Silicide coating development

was

also taking time. Due to these issues C-103 material was not used. As

the objective was to fabricate an engine, an alternate design was developed

with

two module engine using C-263. This modified design reduced the

stresses and deflections in the engine and C-263 was meeting the design
requirements. So C-263 material was used for present HSTDV mission.
d) Being aware of the high temperature capability of the C-103 material, instead of

keeping the remaining material idle, gainful utilization of the same was carried out
for developing oxidation resistant coating for long duration hypersonic flight,
establishment of various welding methodologies of C-103, development of long
duration thrusters in other programme.

The remaining C-103 material was used to establish welding and coating
technologies so that it can be used for long duration engines in future. Also, this
has been used in another project for making thrusters. Additionally, this material
has been used for manufacturing high temperature furnace baskets and furnace
hearths. पे

Presently, this material has been used to fabricate one panel of Cooled Scramjet
combustor. Thermal tests have been carried out. Also, different types of coating
tests are being carried out for long duration hypersonic mission.

« The committee recommendations are well taken and it is fully agreed that
the procurements should be project specific.

Status on Consumption of the balance C-103 material

¢ Out of the balance 160 Kg of C-103 material, 52 Kg was used for
trials fabrication of cooled combustor for long duration missions of
HSTDV (Apr-May 2019).

« From the balance 108 Kg of C-103 material, 30 Kg was used for
conducting coating trials and determining brazing parameters
(May 31 to July 2019) .


29

Present status

* ‘Out of balance 78 Kg of C-103 material, 55.30 Kg has been used

for coating trials and fabrication of Scramjet Combustor panel

(August 2019- January 2020).

¢ Balance 22.7 Kg of C-103 material is being used for further
coating tests.”

Vetting Comments of Audit

“The facts and figures mentioned in the reply to Questionnaire (PAC (2018-19)
131 Report (167 Lok Sabha) have been found correct, The Report is vetted”.

Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of Part B
(Irregular Sanction and Expenditure of ® 5.20 Crore on Construction of Vehicle Testing Ground
after Completion of the Project)

In regard to Para No 6.2 on "Irregular Sanction and Expenditure of = 5.20 Crore on
Construction of Vehicle Testing Ground after Completion of the Project", the Committee
observe that sanction was accorded for construction of a Vehicle Testing Ground at Vehicle
Research & Development Establishment (VRDE), Ahmednagar at a cost of 5.20 crore in
April 2014. The Project was based on VRDE’s proposal of March 2005 to meet the specific
requirement of testing the Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) being developed on 2.5 Ton ‘B’
vehicle. However, the UGV Project was already closed in February, 2008.

[Para No. 6 of Part ‘B’ of the 131% Report of-Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

It is submitted that the subject works for UGV (Un-manned Ground Vehicle)
Test track was an independent infrastructure development work and was not a part of
any sanctioned project. 2.5 Ton ‘B’ vehicle refers to the payload capacity while its
GVW (Gross Vehicle Weight) is 7.650 Ton. As such, the Statement of case for UGV
Testing Ground was generic in nature with design spec of max GVW of 10 Ton class
vehicles. Thus, the Statement of case’ (SoC)/specifications for UGV Testing Ground,
as permanent testing infrasttucture facility, covered mini to heavier UGV platforms, so
as to cater for similar projects in Tele-operated /Autonomous UGV systems for on-
going, in-pipeline, planned and futuristic projects. Therefore, development of this
infrastructure testing facility and the PDC of any specific project cannot be linked.
Vetting Comments of Audit

Reply is not tenable.as requirement of testing ground was projected in March
2005 specifically to meet the requirement of testing the UGV, for which TD project was


30

undertaken by VRDE. The said UGV was being developed on a 2.5 Ton ‘B’ vehicle
with GVW of 10 Ton at a speed of 82 kmph under UGV project sanctioned during April
2004. However, the UGV project was closed during February 2008 before sanction for
construction of testing ground was accorded.

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments

The UGV Testing Ground, being a permanent test facility, was initiated and
pursued with long term vision. At that point of time, reference was given in the SoC for
then on-going project. In addition to this, UGV Testing Ground was required for various
pipeline/ planned/ futuristic UGV projects/ activities, during the year 2006-2008, before
sanction of UGV Testing Ground. The supporting facts are as: The SoC for UGV
Testing Ground mentioned Remotely Controlled and Autonomous UGVs for multi-role
military applications. The TD UGV (based on 2.5 Ton ‘B’ vehicle with GVW 7.650 Ton,
Not 10 Ton, as brought by Audit) was a Remote Controlled UGV and development of
Autonomous UGV was planned/ pipeline activity. In addition to TD UGV project, other
UGV projects i.e. India Singapore collaboration project for Autonomous UGV phase-|
& phase-ll (pre-sanction activities started in 2006, Task force Minutes dtd 21Nov2006,
and Agreement signed under India—Singapore Defence Co-operation DSTA
singapore for phase-| on 22 Feb 2007 and UGV for NBC Reconnaissance under NBC
Def. Technologies programme (pre-sanction activities started in 2007, Peer review
minutes dtd 16 Oct 2007, were in pipeline and these projects required UGV Testing
Ground. UGV Testing Ground and Technologies for Autonomous vehicles were also
projected in DRDO’s Eleventh Five year plan (2007-2012), as planned activities.
User's positive response in the form of Robotic Requirement of Indian Army and
Minutes of Meeting with Additional Director General of Perspective Planning (ADGPP)
supports need of UGVs for multiple roles as a part of future combat system. These
activities before sanction of UGV Testing Ground in April 2009 , conclude that UGV
Testing Ground was planned to: be used for all then on-
going/planned/pipeline/futuristic activities.

It may be further noted that the aspects of creating UGV test ground was
explained to the PAC during Oral evidence by the Department of Defence (R&D).
Based on the explanation submitted by the Department of Defence (R&D) during Oral
evidence, PAC (2018-2019) in its One Hundred and Thirty First Report (Part — |, Para
6.2, Point No. 7) has noted that the UGV Testing Ground was proposed as a long term
vision for testing UGVs in lighter to heavier weight categories for current/planned
Huturistic projects (para1 of PAC’s Observation No. 2 refers). *

The conventional vehicle test track facility lacks-controlled, dedicated and
isolated testing environment for Tele-operated & Autonomous UGVs to ensure safe
operations, availability of UGV testing ground was necessity to pursue the research
and development activity in the field of UGVs. It may please be noted that due to non-
availability of dedicated UGV test ground during 2007-08 (during currency of then on-
going TD UGV project based on 2.5 Ton ‘B’ Class Vehicle), extensive safety



tee

31

arrangements were made on conventional test tracks and other testing activities were
stopped completely, vacated & shut down during UGV testing, which is not practical on
day-to-day/regular basis. Therefore, with the help of appropriate arrangement on
conventional test tack, the requisite testing of TD UGVs, were carried and thereby,
demonstrated the technologies of remote controlled TD UGV systems and stated
project objectives were met and project was closed.

. Subsequent to commissioning of the Test Ground, endurance trials (mileage
data: approx. 2950 km) of 2.5 Ton ‘B' vehicle based TD UGVs, not a part of the
original scope of project, were carried out to assess the reliability aspects. Further, this
Test Ground served the needs of other UGV projects undertaken by VRDE. Hence,
the Test Ground, as an infrastructure, has been gainfully utilized.”


32

CHAPTER IV :
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT. OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND

WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of Part A
(Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant)

Consequent to enquiring this subject, the Committee in general infer the need
to re-look in to the functioning of DRDO and its associate laboratories as they are of
the view that under confidentiality or secrecy, development of sensitive technologies
has been a very time consuming affair. They are of the view that DRDO needs its
operational freedom to function more effectively and deliver world class products on
time. Also, the Committee are of the specific view that synchronization is not effective
between the DRDO and the armed forces as they feel coordination among the
agencies has affected the systematic development of military hardware. The
Committee desire the administrative Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Defence to play a
proactive role in better synchronisation and coordination among the agencies as both
are mutually interdependent on each other and their association has direct bearing on
the overall security and preparedness of the Country. The Ministry may provide the
Committee steps/measures proposed to be taken in this regard.

[Para No. 4 of Part ‘A’ of the 1311 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Ministry
DRDO’s Mandate is to develop state of the art technology for the requirements
of user/Army. However the whole cycle for conceptualization, development, lab scale
experimentation, field level evaluation, demonstration to the user of sensitive
technology for usage in exotic /hazardous user environment pose major technology
challenges for DRDO. However this whole cycle require good amount of time to bring
the hardware to maturity level for induction.

In addition to the above, DRDO has evolved & complying to a policy for
pursuation & execution of various projects depending upon the product's technological
level/maturity in terms of S&T, TD & MM, as per the document ‘Procedures for Project
Formulation and Management - PPFM-2016’. The projects are being taken after due
review at various levels [Lab, Cluster & DRDO HQrs.] with clear definition of its scope
& objectives. Further “on the User's interactions, various proactive measures have
been taken by DRDO for close association with Army.

In order to ensure better coordination between DRDO and Army there are
various review mechanism in place like Quarterly Interaction Meeting (QIM) and Vice
Chief Review of projects Bi-annually. Apart from this, during review of each staff
project there is a presence of User representative in each project.


33

An exclusive Directorate [DISB] at DRDO HQrs. is nodal agency for
coordination of all the DRDO activities with the Armed forces. Army Officers and
Personals were posted at various Labs to support the R&D activities. Oflate, specific
deputation of Army Officers have been made to DRDO Labs. as part of PMG for major
projects. Recently, an recruitment call has been made to permanently position the
Army Officers at DRDO as Scientists. In addition to the above, Scientists at various
levels were attached to the different Army Regiments for two weeks attachment
training programme in their area of research & developmental activities. All the above
initiatives would help for better synchronisation and coordination for development of
state-of-art the Defence products.”

Comments of the Committee
Comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter |

Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of Part B
(Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System)

In their examination of Para 6.1 on “Development of an Integrated Aerostat
Surveillance System" based on the C&AG's Report No. 15 of 2017, the Committee observed
that the very purpose of import of a balloon made from laminated fabric was to attain the
objective of a medium sized aerostat without the constraints of endurance and shelf life as
experienced using a polyurethane (PU) coated fabric aerostat. However, the balloon imported
by the Aerial Delivery Research and Development Establishment (ADRDE), Agra for research
Purposes militates against the project's objective as consequently neither the aerostat was
deployed nor Communication Intelligence (COMINT) payload was tested for the duration
desired by the Army. Also, the claim about usage of the imported balloon with laminated fabric
as a spare to cater for the unforeseen circumstances is incomprehensible to the Committee as
the intended objective has not been achieved even after incurring to a total expenditure of *
49.50 crore, out of which an amount of * 6.20 crore pertained to importing of laminated fabric
balloon, which remained idle eventually.

[Para No. 1 of Part ‘B’ of the 1317 Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Ministry

The core objective of project Nakshatra was to Design and Develop an
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System-Medium Size with deliverable ‘One set of
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance Medium Size System’. The system comprises of
indigenous Laminated fabric balloon, COMINT payload, Winch and Mooring System,
Active Pressure Control Health Monitoring System, Power Management System,
Ground Control System, etc.

The statement of case (SOC) of the project proposal highlighted ‘Laminated
Fabric’ Development as ‘High Risk Area’. In order to mitigate the risk, in case of
unavailability of laminated fabric it was planned to import the laminated fabric. In the


34

meantime, the balloon was planned to be developed using PU coated nylon fabric
and COMINT payload was to be integrated and demonstrated. Further, it was
envisaged to realize total 03 nos. of balloons with 01 no. to be kept as spare.

The efforts were made to develop indigenous laminated fabric till mid 2013. In
spite of the best efforts put in by the lab, the indigenous laminated fabric development
didnot fructify due to technological complexity. In order to continue the project
activities it was decided to use the improved PU coated nylon fabric which was
concurrently developed by the lab (having 30% improved fabric life) and import one
laminated fabric balloon. To this effect, a cost enhancement was sanctioned vide
letter no. DARO/03/342/P/1/2710/D(R&D) dated 29/10/2013 with concurrence of MoD
Finance vide MoD (Fin)(R&D) vide Dy No. 958/MoD/Fin/(R&D) dated 24/10/2013.

The fabrication of balloon with indigenous improved PU coated fabric was
initiated in June 2013 and was realized in Feb 2015. The procurement of laminated
fabric balloon through import route was initiated in Dec. 2013 and was delivered in
Aug. 2015.

After procurement, the laminated fabric balloon was inflated and integrated
with. simulated payloads and other subsystems for conducting the performance
evaluation trials for 11 days. All the functional tests were carried out and the balloon
was made ready for flight. The interfaces of all the subsystems of integrated aerostat
system "Nakshatra" were made compatible to both PU coated and laminated fabric
balloon. In addition, DRDO scientists learnt various technological aspects of
laminated fabric balloon with respect to configuration, fabrication and sealing
technologies involved in laminated fabric, panel and joint analysis, pressure drop
study, inflation and deflation techniques, integration of interfaces, static balancing of
different loads in inflated conditions, etc. This facilitated the development of
indigenous laminated fabric and sealing technologies which have been subsequently
matured and available for future use . This proved to be an intangible benefit from the
imported balloon for maturing the indigenous laminated fabric balloon.

The integration efforts of Aerostat sub-systems on PU coated fabric balloon
was started in Feb. 2015 and the maiden flight of Nakshatra was conducted on 21
Oct. 2015.

The initial flight trial and test results were very encouraging with indigenous
balloon in terms of endurance requirement of 14 days meeting the QR provided by 51
Dte, Army Hqrs. Based on the encouraging results, the trials were continued to
mature all the indigenous technologies till April 2016 at Agra with user involvement.

During the 10" Executive Board meeting dated 27 April 2016, in concurrence
with user, it was decided to close the project within PDC of 30 June 2016 after
deployment of system at user site as per scope of the project. Accordingly, user
associated technical trials were conducted at user designated site at Tibri, Punjab.


35

The user endorsed that the user associated technical trials were successful and
suggested for few improvements/modifications in terms of payload configuration and
tether vide MoM 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 31 Aug. 2016.

10" EB also directed to initiate a new project under product support (PS)
category for 02 years duration, beyond PDC of current project, with 2-3 months of
extensive user participation. Considering the above directive, imported laminated
fabric balloon was kept as reserve to meet this ensuing requirement.

Subsequently, ADRDE pursued user for obtaining QR for taking up new project
under PS. However, the user now envisage that the operational utility of tactical
(small sized) Aerostat with COMINT payload shall be much more than medium
sized/large sized Aerostat based system as communicated vide letter no.
55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 30 Aug. 2017. The user has offered QR for
comments vide letter no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 1 Mar. 2018 for
medium sized Aerostat and clarifications have been sought through multiple
communications from ADRDE to the user. No firm QR is received from user till date.

In the meantime, other requirements emerged from DRDO sister
establishments, CABS, Bengaluru and IRDE, Dehradun to test and evaluate set of
sensors and Long Range Electro-Optic (LREO) device, respectively during Sept.
2018. In order to meet these requirements, the Nakshatra Aerostat system along with
imported balloon was deployed as per test requirements. ;

Therefore, the laminated fabric balloon was utilized and certain critical aspects
of laminated fabric balloon technology were learnt by our scientists facilitating
indigenous development of laminated fabric balloon.”

Vetting Comments

(i) "The core objective of the project 'Nakshatra' was to design and develop an
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance system using laminated fabric balloon.
However, decision of DRDO to use balloon with PU coated nylon fabric instead
of imported balloon with laminated fabric militates against the project
objectives. Further, the decision to close the project in June 2016 when user
acceptance to the User Associated Technical Trials was yet to be received was
not correct as users suggested improvements/ modifications in terms; of
payload configuration in August 2016 i.e. after closure of the project. Further
Executive Board (EB) before closure of the project (April 2016) deciding to
initiate new project using laminated fabric under product support involving
extensive user participation ‘showed that project was closed without meeting
the- project objective." ;


36

Department's Reply to Auditing Vetting Comments:

The core objective of the project 'Nakshatra' was to design and develop
an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance system- Medium Size. Design and
development of the surveillance system was started with the development of
laminated fabric balloon (which was one of critical technologies (High risk
Area) which was highlighted in the Statement of Case, but it could not fructify
due to technological complexity. In order to continue the project activities it
was decided to use the improved PU coated nylon fabric which was
concurrently developed by the lab (having 30% improved fabric life) and import
one laminated fabric balloon(as risk mitigation stratety. Technology
Demonstration (TD) projects are normally initiated by DRDO as feeder
technologies for future or imminent MM projects. These are funded and
monitored by DRDO with little or limited User inputs. The purpose is to
develop, test and demonstrate a particular technology. Project objectives of
this TD Project were met with indigenously developed improved PU coated
balloon. Thus during the 1Oth Executive Board meeting daled 27 April
2016 in concurrence with user, it was decided to close the project within PDC
of 30 June 2016 after deployment of system at user site as per scope of the
project and the project was closed in consultation with the user after
successful demonstration at user site.

Accordingly, User Associated Technical Trials were conducted at user
. designated site at Tibri, Punjab. The user endorsed that the user associated
technical trials were successful and suggested for few
improvements/modifications in terms of payload configuration and tether vide
MolVI 55340/ABC(Nakshatra) 91-1 1 dated 31 Aug. 2016. §10th.EB also
directed to initiate a new project under product support (PS) category for
02 years duration, beyond PDC of current project, with 2-3 months of
extensive user participation, as User requested to provide product support

Vetting Comment

(ii) "The ministry claimed that the Nakshatra Aerostat system along with
imported balloon was deployed as per test requirement and attached Annexure
- land Annexure - ॥ as supporting papers. On examination, it has been noticed
that Annexure - Il is the project proposal and Annexure - | is the sanction letter
of Project titled "Design & Development of Integrated Aerostat Surveillance
System - Medium Size (NAKSHATRA)".


37

Department’s Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

Nakshatra Aerostat system along with imported balloon was deployed as per
test requirement and attached as Annexure A & B, which are the test reports
submitted by DRDO labs (IRDE & CABS respectively).

Vetting Comment

(iii)"Ministry has not provided any evidence to support the claim that the
tests were carried out successfully”.

Department’s Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

The test reports submitted by DRDO labs (IRDE & CABS respectively) are
are testimony that the tests were carried out satisfactory". The first phase trials
with laminated fabric balloon of approx 60 days for electro optic payload and
sensors/payloads from CABS have been completed in May’ 2019. Another
phase was planned in March-April'2020 at Tiberi, Punjab which is kept on hold
due to Corona pandemic.

Vetting Comment

(iv)"The ministry's claim does not seem to be factually correct since
ADRDE stated (July 2018) that it was in dialogue with Navy and BSF for
demonstration & deployment of LREO payload on Aerostat system.
Further, ADRDE stated that it was in process of developing electrical &
mechanical interfaces for Aerostat platforms. However, IRDE stated
(August 2018) that Platform integration & evaluationi/trials was out of
scope of the MM project and the development of Electro-Optical Payloads
for Aerostat ‘Nakshatra’ was not linked with milestone of ADRDE project
for Nakshatra".

Department’s Reply to Audit Vetting Comments

Exisitng LREO payload from IRDE was chosen for conducting the trial (May
2019) on Nakshatra aerostat platform for exploiting its utility after the closure of
Nakshatra project. Also, ADRDE was in dialogue with Indian Navy and BSF
(July 2018) for demonstration and deployment of Electro Optic (EO) payloads
on different typés of aerostat platfarms including futuristic system like Large
size Aerostat. Although, platform integration & evaluation trials was out of
scope of the MM project, as stated by IRDE (Aug 2018), ADRDE had planned
to use LREO payload on available Nakshatra platform for installation and trials
as requested by IRDE (July 2018), and with CABS payloads, flown with the
imported laminated fabric balloon. The first phase of these trials was
completed in May 2019. The second phase of these trials were planned at
Tibri, Punjab in March-April'2020. However, the same could not be done due to


38

present pandemic situation. The second phase trials would commence as soon
as the pandemic situation improves.”

Observation/Recommendation No. 2of PartB ,
(Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System)

The .Committee note that the technical specification of project 'Nakshatra’
specified the use of laminated fabric for aerostat to sustain a working life of 5 years
and for continuous operability for 14 days. However, they are dismayed to note that
PU fabric coated balloon was used for trials which was of.a lower quality than imported
balloon made up laminated fabric. What can be more disconcerting for the Committee
than the fact that imported balloon; though of superior quality, was never put to any
field trial and was kept as risk mitigation strategy.

[Para No. 2 of Part ‘B’ of the 131" Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

As noted by the PAC, the technical specification of project Nakshatra specified
the use of laminated fabric to sustain the working life of 05 years and continuous
operability of 14 days. Also, it is agreed that PU coated fabric balloon was used
during project as observed by the committee.

However, it is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met
the project objectives viz., endurance of 14 days comparable with the imported
balloon. With respect to working life of 05 years achievable with imported balloon, the
same can be met with 02 nos. of improved PU coated fabric balloons.

The performance of improved PU coated fabric balloon was not known a
priority. But, during trials, improved PU coated balloon met the endurance requirement
of 14 days and performed consistently. Hence, it was decided to continue its usage to
explore its performance to full potential and complete the project. Therefore, the
imported laminated fabric balloon was not put for field trials and was kept as standby
and also for any future application. :

However, after procurement, the laminated fabric balloon was inflated and
integrated with simulated payloads and other subsystems for conducting the
performance evaluation trials for 11 days. All the functional tests were carried out and
the balloon was made ready for flight.

Later on, requirements emierged from DRDO sister establishments, CABS and
IRDE, to test and evaluate set of sensors and Long Range Electro-Optic (LREO)


39

device, respectively. In order to meet these requirements, the Nakshatra Aerostat
system along with imported balloon was deployed as per test requirements.

Hence it is submitted that the imported balloon was subjected to trials and

usage within and beyond project PDC of June 2016.”

Fees,

Vetting Comments of Audit
“The ministry stating that imported balloon was subjected to trials within
PDC was not correct as field trials using imported laminated fabric
balloon was not _ held within the PDC of the project. The Ministry itself
admitted that the fabric was kept as standby for any future application.
Thus, the import of laminated fabric balloon did not serve the desired
objective defined in the project i.e. to sustain the working life of 05 years
and continuous operability of 14 days within the PDC i.e. 30 June
2016. Moreover, later in August 2016, user suggested some Improvement
in the product after closure of the project".
This has been vetted vide DGADS UO NO. 438IDP-4912014-151(33)12014-15 dated
09 Jun 2020. °

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments

“It submitted again, that after procurement. the laminated fabric balloon was
inflated and integrated with simulated payloads and other subsystems for
conducting the performance evaluation trials for 11 days on ground. Functional
tests were carried out within PDC. It is agreed as stated by the committee that
the imported laminated balloon was not utilised for field trials within project
PDC. The performance of improved PU coated fabric balloon was.not known a
priori. But, during trials, improved PU coated balloon met the endurance
requirement of 14 days and performed consistently. Hence, it was decided to
continue its usage to explore its performance to full potential and complete the
project. Therefore, the imported laminated fabric balloon was not put for field
trials and was kept as standby and also for any future application. It is also
submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the project
objectives viz., endurance of 14 days comparable with the imported balloon.
. As far as working life of 05 years achievable with ‘imported balloon is
concerned, the same can be met with 02 nos. of improved PU coated
fabric balloons. Project objectives of this TD Project were met with indigenously
developed improved PU coated balloon. The user endorsed that the User
Associated Technical Trials were successful .Thus during the 10th Executive

Board meeting dated 27 April 2016 in concurrence with user, it was decided to
close the. project within PDC of 30 June 2016 after deployment of system at


40

user site as per scope of the TD project and the project was closed in
consultation with the user after successful demonstration at user site.”

Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of Part 8
(Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System)

The Committee do not concur with the assertion of either the Ministry or the DRDO that
the Project met its set objectives and hence the use of laminated fabric balloon was not
necessitated. The Committee are confounded at the fact that as to why, in the first instance,
the balloon was imported if the purpose could have been achieved with indigenous product. It
clearly depicts the lack of foresight and planning on the part of DRDO as at no stage of the
examination, the Committee could find DRDO coming up with the alternative use of the
imported balloon in case the domestic product proves to be successful.

[Para No. 3 of Part ‘B’ of the 131% Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government

It is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the project
objectives and the user endorsed vide Users MoM 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated
31 Aug. 2016 that the tests were successful, suggesting a few changes to get optimal
results from the system.

With respect to alternative use of imported balloon, the same was discussed
during 107" EB meeting held on April 2016 and it was suggested that the laminated
fabric balloon could be utilised for the product support project beyond PDC of
Nakshatra project.

However, the QR pertaining to the Product Support Project was under
discussion with the user over a protracted period of time extending till Feb. 2019. The
reply from the user is still awaited.

In the meantime, the requirements from the sister DRDO lab emerged for
alternative usage to test and evaluate sensors during Sept. 2018. In order to meet
these requirements, the Nakshatra Aerostat system along with imported balloon was
deployed in the field, demonstrating: and meeting the requirements for CABS and
IRDE.” i

Vetting Comments of Audit
"The ministry reply indicated that usage of imported balloon was discussed in
EB meeting (April 2016), which was held near the fag end of the closure of the
main project i.e. June 2016. It was suggested to use the same for product
support beyond PDC of Nakshatra project. Since, the QR pertaining to Product
Support Project was yet to be finalized, it indicates that till date, DRDO is yet to


Al

decide on the alternative use of the imported balloon. Moreover, it appears to
be an afterthought rather than a genuine need based usage of the imported
fabric. "

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments
“It is submitted that the indigenous improved PU coated fabric met the project
objectives and the user endorsed vide Users MoM 55340/ABC(Nakshatra) SI-1
1 dated 31 Aug. 2016 that the tests were successful, suggesting a few
changes to get optimal results from the system. With respect to alternative use
of imported balloon, the same was discussed during 10th EB meeting held on
April 2016 and it was suggested that the laminated fabric balloon could be
utilised for the product support project beyond PDC of Nakshatra project.
However, the QR pertaining to the Product Support Project was under
discussion with the user over a progracted period of time extending till Feb.
2019. The reply from the user is still awaited. In the meantime, the
requirements emerged for alternative usage of NAKSHATRA to test and
evaluate sensors/payloads. The first phase trials of approx 60 days was
completed in May' 2019. Another phase was planned in MarchApril'2020 at
Tiberi, Punjab which is on hold due to Corona pandemic. ”
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 4 of Part B
(Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System) है

Here, the Committee would also like to highlight the fact that the Army also expressed
reservations about the effectiveness of the balloon during the User Assisted Technical Trials
(UATT). The Committee has every reason to believe that DRDO was more interested in
developing/importing a foreign made balloon rather than ensuring that the end-user is fully
satisfied with the product delivery. Non-extending the trials further on the ground that
expenditure was not available for the same, is evidently an amiss on the part of the DRDO.
Instead they came out with alternative suggestions of seeking queries from the Army after
giving them for 2 years user trials across the country. The Committee also note with concern
that since the completion of project, the Army has still not finalized the qualitative requirements
(QR) for the aerostat project. The Committee, in this regard, recommend that an internal
inquiry be set by DRDO to find out the reasons for these lapses and the avoidable expenditure
which proved to be infructuous.

{Para No. 4 of Part ‘B’ of the 131* Report of Public Accounts Committee 16" Lok Sabha]

Action Taken by the Government
During 10" EB meeting held during April 2016, including Users (SI
Directorate), it was decided to close the Nakshatra project within PDC i.e. 30 June
2016, and a new project under product support category shall be taken up.
After project closure, in a meeting held at Army Hqrs in Aug. 2016 between the
scientists from ADRDE, Agra, DLRL, Hyderabad and the Users (91 Directorate),
DDGSI (५४2) informed the forum that the User Associated Technical Trials (UATT) of


Bee

42

the project Nakshatra held at Tibri Cantt was successful and suggested a few
changes pertaining to COMINT payloads and Tether to get optimal results from the
system. It is reiterated that the user was satisfied with the UATT vide Para 4 of MoM
dated Ref 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 31 Aug. 2016.

Further during this meeting, it was collectively decided to launch a
comprehensive Product Support Project for a period of 2 years in alignment with the
decision taken during the 10" EB meeting. DRDO communicated to users multiple
times to provide the QR for taking up Product Support Category Project. However, as
observed by PAC, the Army has still not finalised the QR for the medium size
Aerostat. In the meantime, the user has projected a requirement of Tactical (small
size) Aerostat, stating that operational utility of tactical (small sized) Aerostat with
COMINT payload shall be much more than medium sized/large sized Aerostat based
system as communicated vide letter no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 30 Aug.
2017.

The request for carrying out the User Associated Technical Trials (UATT) to be
conducted for a period of 03 months was projected during Oct. 2016 after the project
closure in June 2016 by the user. This request is in contradiction to decision taken
during 10" EB and also during meeting held at Army Hqrs during Aug. 2016. Also, it
is pertinent to mention here that without a project in place, it is difficult to carry out
expenditure towards the trials, product support, etc. for a long duration of 3 months
and beyond. The same was communicated to the Users.

It is agreed as stated by the committee that the imported laminated balloon was
not utlisied for trials within project PDC. However the project goals were met using
indigenously developed improved PU coated fabric. The imported laminated fabric
balloon was subsequently deployed and utlised for other DRDO projects as stated
earlier.

The laminated fabric balloon was utilized and certain critical aspects of
laminated fabric balloon technology were learnt by our scientists facilitating
subsequent indigenous development of laminated fabric balloon. Hence it is
requested not to consider the expenditure of Rs.6.2 Cr as infructuous.

Vetting Comments of Audit ह

“It appears that the decision to close the project within PDC was taken in a
hurry since the user i.e. Army as well as DRDO had not declared User
Associated Technical Trials successful within PDC/closure of the project in
June 2016. The user (91-11) had clearly stated in August 2017 to the lab
(ADR&DE) that the efficacy of COMINT payload mounted on the aerostat could
not be ascertained during the User Associated Technical Trials and a joint trial
for two to three months was essential before taking up a case for extended
product support for three years. Further, DRDO was silent on PAC direction to
conduct an internal inquiry.by DRDO to find out the reasons for the lapses and
the avoidable expenditure which proved to be Infructuous.


43

This has been vetted vide DGADS UO NO. 43810P-4912014-151(33)12014-15
dated 09 Jun 2020. "

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments
“During 10th EB meeting held during April 2016, including Users (SI
Directorate), it was decided to close the Nakshatra project within PDC i.e.30
June 2016, and a new project under product support category shall be taken
up. The request by Users in Oct'2016, for carrying out the User Associated
Technical Trials (UATT) for a period of 03 months before taking up a case for
extended product support was out of scope of the current TD project and is in
contradiction to decision taken during 10th EB in which Users was also part of
the decision and also during meeting held at Army Hars during Aug'2016. It is
pertinent to mention here that without a project in place, itis difficult to carry
out expenditure towards the trials, product support, etc. for a long duration of 3
months and beyond. The same was communicated to the User. An Internal
Enquiry Committee was constituted on 23.01.2019 and committee submitted
its report on 13.11.2019. Committee examined all the project documents
thoroughly. Internal committee found that the project is completed in line with,
set procedures and all the decisions are taken collectively involving Users. t is
agreed as stated by the PAC committee that the imported laminated balloon
was not utilized for trials within project PDC. | However, the project goals
were met using indigenously developed improved PU coated fabric. The
imported laminated fabric balloon was subsequently deployed and _ utilised for
other DRDO projects as stated earlier. Further the committee found that the
laminated fabric balloon was utilized and certain critical aspects of laminated
fabric balloon technology were learnt by DRDO Scientists facilitating
subsequent indigenous development of laminated fabric balloon. Hence, the
expenditure of Rs.6.2 Cr may not be treated as infructuous.”

Comments of the Commmittee
Comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter |

Observation/Recommendation Para No. 5 of Part B
(Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System)

Another glaring issue which has come up not only during the examination of this para
but in other subjects relating to DRDO. is the delays and cost escalation in their projects. This
particular project viz. Nakshatra was initially sanctioned in July 2011 at the cost of 48.80 crore.
However, the project cost was consequently revised to Rs. 58.80 crore in October 2013 with
the revised probable date of completion (PDC) June, 2016 instead of the original one, i.e.,
December, 2014. Although the project was completed at a cost of 49.50 crore finally, the
Committee are in a dithering state as to why the project cost was hiked to the tune of almost


44

10 crores and then the same was also not utilized. This is undoubtedly a case of wrong
financial projections and goes against the principles of prudent financial management. If seen
in the backdrop of extending the field trials for the Army by DRDO on the ground of lack of
funding, this issue assumes special significance. The Committee in no uncertain words
recommend 46 that the internal inquiry as recommended in the preceding paragraph should
also cover these aspects and responsibility be fixed, if required, under intimation to the
Committee. They also recommend that all-out efforts be made to obviate instances of such
nature which include wasteful expenditure as well as cost and time escalations. At least now,
they be apprised of the outcome of the Qualitative Requirements as finalized by the Army

Action Taken by the Government

It is agreed that the original sanctioned cost of the project was Rs.48.8 crores.
After two and a half years of project execution, it was realized that development of
indigenous laminated fabric balloon needed more time than anticipated. A decision
was taken to procure laminated fabric balloon. A budgetary offer of Rs.10 Cr. was
obtained from M/s RosAeroSystems, Russia. Accordingly, an additional fund of Rs.10
crores over the original sanctioned cost of Rs.48.8 crores was sought. The projec!
cost was revised to Rs.58.80 Cr. vide Govt. letter no. DARO/03/342/P/1/2710/D(R&D)
dated’ 29/10/2013 with concurrence of MoD Finance vide MoD (Fin)/(R&D) vide Dy
No. 958/MoD/Fin/(R&D) dated 24/10/2013.

Although the funds were available in the project, a considered decision was
taken in concurrence with the user in 107 EB to close the project after completion o
trials at Tibri within project PDC i.e. 30 June 2016 followed by a new Project ०0!
Product Support mode for 02 years.

DRDO communicated to user multiple times to provide the QR for taking up

Product Support Category Project. However, the Army has still not finalised the QR

for the medium size Aerostat. In the meantime, the user has projected a requirement

of Tactical (small size) Aerostat, stating that operational utility of tactical (small sized)

Aerostat with COMINT payload shall be much more than medium sized/large sized

Aerostat based system as communicated vide letter no. 55340/ABC/(Nakshatra)/SI-

11 dated 30 Aug. 2017. QR is still awaited from the user.

Cost overrun in DRDO projects are rare. However, time overruns are there.
DRDO projects are completed in sync with help from users, production agencies and
private agencies. Users provide platforms and trial support, OFB’s & Defence public
sectors are involved in production, QA agencies are responsible for timely clearance of
certification requirements. Some of the subsystem developments are undertaken with
the help of private vendors.

However, it may be noted that R&D is an area of uncertainty where certain
unknowns are explored. In addition to taking design projects where the subsystems
are already matured, DRDO also has to undertake Technology Development projects
and Science & Technology projects where the technology readiness levels may be at
in intermediate and low levels respectively increasing the risk of delays. Certain high
risk and high pay off projects and blue sky research has also been undertaken where
there is extremely high chance of delays and also failures.



45

However in recent past, several measures have been taken to mitigate the cost
& time overrun.

Vetting Comments of Audit

“An additional Rs 10 crore over the original sanctioned cost of Rs 48.8 crore for
the procurement of laminated fabric balloon was not utilized for project
objective. Further, DRDO was silent on PAC direction to conduct an internal
inquiry by DRDO to find out the reasons for the lapses & fixing the responsibility
for including wrong financial to projection".

Response of the Ministry to the Audit Vetting Comments

“The sanctioned cost of the project was Rs 48.8 crores. After two and a half’
years of project execution, it was realized that development of indigenous
laminated fabric balloon needed more time than anticipated. A decision was
taken to procure laminated fabric balloon. Accordingly, an additional fund of
Rs.10 crores over the original sanctioned cost of Rs 48.8 crores was
sought. The project cost was revised to Rs 58.80 Cr. vide Govt. letter no.
DARO/03/3421P11127101D(R&D) dated 291101201 with concurrence of MoD
Finance vide MoD (Fin)(R&D) vide Dy No. 958/MoD/Fin/(R&D)dated
2411012013. However only an amount of Rs 6.2 crores was utilised for. the
procurement of laminated ballon.

An Internal Enquiry Committee was constituted on 23.01.2019 and committee
submitted its report on 13.11.2019. All’ the project documents have been
examined thoroughly by the committee. Committee found that the project is
completed in line with set procedures and all the decisions were taken
collectively involving Users.
The internal inquiry has been conducted as directed by PAC and its findings as
incorporated in the ATN submitted to O/o DGADS are as follows:-
The import of laminated fabric balloon was part of project risk mitigation
strategy. The indigenously improved PU coated nylon fabric balloon was able to
demonstrate the COtVINT payloads successfully till the completion of project.
All the functional aspects of the system were demonstrated at Agra and at User
Designated site also during Users Associated Technical Trials(UATT). The
success of the o TO ect was also endorsed by Users Upon successful
demonstration and completion of project. The Users ‘suggested to incorporate
certain additional payloads and modifications dn the system and conduct
extended trials for two year. Accordingly, based on the deliberations with Army
draft QR was forwarded to Army for approval, in order to take up a new project.
As a consequence. the imported laminated balloon remained as standbv. After
completion of project. requirements emerged from other DRDO labs and the
Imported balloon was deployed continuously for 60 days as an airborne
platform for testing of important payloads. Moreover, as a spin-off of learning



46

from the study imported balloon, the development of indigenous laminated
fabric technology has been expedited, matured and is available for future
requirements. Hence. the expenditure on imported balloon may not be treated
as Infructuous.

Comments of the Committee
Comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I


47

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-

NEW DELHI; H ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
September, 2020 « Chairperson,

Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


heme


48

CONFIDENTIAL.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)
HELD ON 28TH AUGUST, 2020.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 280 August, 2020 from 1500

hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

Members
LOK SABHA

Shri T.R Baalu

Shri Subash Chandra Baheria

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Jayant Sinha

OMPNAAA WH

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Naresh Gujral
11. ShriC.M Ramesh
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar
2. Shri MLK Raja
~ Shri Paolienlal Haokip

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE

49

OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND

AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

Ms.Shubha Kumar
Shri K. Srinivasan
Shri Sanjay Kumar
Ms.Ritika Bhatia
Shri 5.५. Singh

a Fens

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

- Dy.CAG
- DG
- DG
- PD
- PD

tek

bike

tok

PART-I

Pees

1. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson, welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the

Members on the following Draft Reports:-

(a) «eee

(b) **e

(0) , **++*

(8) *##*e

(७) tee

PRE

RRR

अज म###

hii

thik

debe

Ahhh

debt

ebb

tok ik

(१ Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their 131% Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on the subject, “Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas
Generator Plant, infructuous procurement of material, development of
integrated aerostat surveillance system and irregular expenditure on
construction of vehicle testing ground”.


50

2. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without
any modifications/changes. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the
Reports in the light of factual verification/vetting comments, if any and present the

same to Parliament on behalf of the Committee.

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives of the
Office of the C&AG of India for assisting the Committee in the examination of the

subjects,

PART-II

kek peas aes Peres

The Committee then adjourned.


by

»

A

51]

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED

LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5 & 6 of Part ‘A’

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. 7 of Part ‘A’ and Para Nos. 6 & 7 of Part ‘B’

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 4 of Part ‘A’ and Para No. 1, 2,3, 4&5 of Part
‘BP

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies:

Para Nos.

Fee

OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
AND THIRTY-FIRST REPORT (SIXTEENTH

14

Total : 05
Percentage: 35%

Total : 03
Percentage: 21%

Total : 06
Percentage: 42%

Total : 00
Percentage: 00%