       142  
 
 
NATIONAL SOCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


PAC NO. 2372 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O U R T Y -
S E C O N D  R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
( SE VE NTEE NTH LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
        Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on: 29.04.2024         
                                                                         
Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:     
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
April, 2024 /Vaisakha, 1946 (Saka)  
 
NATIONAL SOCIAL ASSISTANCE 
PROGRAMME 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. INTRODUCTORY 1 
   
 PART II  
II Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  13-18 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 
17TH January, 2024. 
 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 
19th February, 2024. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
                                                           
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 
2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri ThalikkottaiRajuthevar Baalu 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant 1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. ShriTiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Vacant 2 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma                        -Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Partha Goswami                      -Director 
3. 
4. 
Dr. Faiz Ahmad                               -Under Secretary 
Shri. Prakhar Prakash Anand         -Assistant Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been authorised by the 
Committee, do present this One Hundred and Fourty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on “National Social Assistance Programme” based on C&AG Report No. 10 of 2023, relating to 
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). 
 
2.  The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the Parliament on 
8th August, 2023. 
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid subject for detailed 
examination and took oral evidences of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Department) on the subject on 17th January, 2024 and 19th 
February, 2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the draft report on the subject vide digital circulation on 20th 
April 2024 and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the same and present it to the Hon'ble 
Speaker. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form  Part-II of the Report. 
 
5.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Rural Development (Department of Development) for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
 
6.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 April, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
  
 
(iv) 
 
 
 

 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
This Report of the Committee is based on C&AG Report No.10 of 2023 on the subject, 
“National Social Assistance Programme”. 
PARA 3.1     
2.         The Committee have learnt that Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the 
State to provide public assistance to its citizens in case of unemployment, old age, 
sickness, disablement and in other cases of undeserved want within the limit of its 
economic capacity and development. Government of India launched the National Social 
Assistance programme (NSAP) to provide social security to the destitute, population 
living below the poverty line (BPL) and vulnerable groups in 1995.At present NSAP 
includes five sub-schemes, of which, three are pension schemes:-  
 (i) Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS),  
 (ii) Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS), and,  
 (iii) Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS).  
 
 The other two sub-schemes are not pension schemes, viz.  
 
 (iv) National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS) - a one-time assistance to the 
 bereaved family in the event of death of the breadwinner, and, 
 (v) Annapurna scheme - food security to the eligible old age persons who have 
 remained uncovered under IGNOAPS. 
The Committee found that the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) released NSAP 
funds based on the estimated number of beneficiaries under the NSAP sub-schemes to 
the Consolidated Fund of State/UT. NSAP is being implemented in both rural as well as 
urban areas by respective State Governments and UT Administrations. State/UT may 
utilize three per cent of the funds allotted for administrative expenses while remaining 
funds were to be utilized for pension disbursement and family benefit payment. The 
number of beneficiaries which can be covered under each sub-scheme through Central 
Funds in each State/UT has been fixed by MoRD based on the population figures of 
Census, 2001 and poverty ratio determined by the planning commission in 2004-05. In 
case, the State/UT has more deserving beneficiaries exceeding the cap on number of 
beneficiaries, the State/UT has the option to give them pension from its own resources. 
The Committee have noted that during 2017-21, Government of India allocated ₹ 
34,432 crore for NSAP. Further, States and UTs also allocated ₹ 1,09,573 crore as 
additional assistance for pension and for coverage of additional beneficiaries. NSAP 
reached out to 2.83 crore beneficiaries annually through central allocations and 
additional 1.82 crore beneficiaries through States/UTs funds on an average per year 
during 2017-21. NSAP aims to provide basic financial support to old age, widow and 
severely disabled persons from BPL list as well as to BPL families in case of death of 
primary breadwinner. The beneficiaries were to be selected from the BPL list till the 

Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) was finalized; however, the Committee have 
noted that the beneficiaries are being selected from BPL list even after finalization of 
SECC data even though these BPL lists are not being regularly updated. The 
Government of India is allocating NSAP funds as per cap fixed by MoRD asking the 
States/UTs to cover additional beneficiaries from their own resources.  
3. The Scheme aims universal coverage through proactive identification; however, 
the Committee have found that NSAP is being implemented in demand-driven mode as 
the benefits were provided to only those beneficiaries who applied for it. Due to non-
verification of existing beneficiaries as well as due to lack of data cleaning, verification 
and authentication, cases of ineligible beneficiaries drawing benefits were noticed in 
many States/UTs. Further, in many States/UTs, pension was not being paid on monthly 
basis. The Committee have found that the Scheme is not fully Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) compliant as pension is being paid in cash in some States. There were cases of 
over-payment, short-payment and multiple pension payments noticed in many 
States/UTs. 
4. In the light of the fact that the current population of India is around 1.4 billion, and 
considering the absence of a fresh population census, when the Committee desired to 
knowas to how does the Ministry plan to ensure that the schemes adequately cover the 
uncovered section of the population and whether there are any initiatives or proposals in 
place to address this gap, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“At present NSAP schemes cater about 3 crore beneficiaries (2.97 crore 
pensioners). The allocation of funds under NSAP schemes to States/ UTs is 
done on the basis of ceiling of beneficiaries (State Cap) or the number of 
beneficiaries digitized on the NSAP portal, whichever is lower. For calculating 
the State Cap for each State/UT, the population figures as per the census of 
2001 and the poverty ratio (2004-05) determined by NITI Aayog (erstwhile 
Planning Commission) have been taken into account. The ceiling/cap on the 
number of beneficiaries was intimated to all the States/UTs vide this 
Department's letter dated 8th November 2012, which was revised in Sept, 2022 
in regard to three pension schemes. As per NSAP Guidelines, if there are more 
deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State has the option to give them pension 
from its own resources. As per latest information collected from States/UTs, 
around5.86 crore additional beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through 
their pension schemes. At present, there is no proposal to increase the 
coverage of beneficiaries under NSAP schemes.” 
 
5. When the Committee wanted to apprised  about any plans to update the criteria 
used for allocating funds and determining the State Cap in the light of the population 
increase and potential changes in poverty ratios since the last census in 2001, and any 

schemes to remain responsive to the changing demographic and economic landscape, 
the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“As stated above, allocation of funds under NSAP schemes to States/ UTs is 
done on the basis of ceiling of beneficiaries (State Cap) or the number of 
beneficiaries digitized on the NSAP portal, whichever is lower. At present, there 
is no proposal of increasing coverage of beneficiaries (State Cap). However, as 
per NSAP Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the 
State has the option to give them pension from its own resources. As per latest 
information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional 
beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
 
 
6. Considering the concerns raised about the fairness and inclusivity of the current 
allocation methodology, when the Committee enquired the Ministry about the steps 
being taken by them to conduct a comprehensive review of the NSAP schemes to 
ensure that a larger proportion of the needy and poverty-stricken population is not left 
out, the Ministry replied as below: 
 
“As stated above, allocation of funds under NSAP schemes to States/ UTs is 
done on the basis of ceiling of beneficiaries (State Cap) or the number of 
beneficiaries digitized on the NSAP portal, whichever is lower. Further, as per 
NSAP Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State 
has the option to give them pension from its own resources. As per latest 
information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional 
beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
 
7. It was informed to the Committee that there was a revision of the ceiling/cap in 
September 2022 for three pension schemes. In the light of this, when the Committee 
asked the Ministry to elaborate on the nature of these revisions and how they address 
the challenges raised regarding the outdated population figures and poverty ratios, the 
Ministry answered as under: 
 
“The scheme-wise assistance under NSAP is sanctioned up to the number of 
digitized beneficiaries on NSAP portal or the State cap, whichever is lower. 
Over the years, with sustained efforts digitization reached to 96-97% of the total 
State ceiling/cap. To achieve 100% saturation under the pension schemes of 
the NSAP, the Department took the following two important policy decisions:  
 
(i) In November 2021, States/UTs were given flexibility to re-allocate 
beneficiaries under the three pension schemes within the overall ceiling/ cap of 
the respective States/UTs.  
 

(ii) In September, 2022, State Cap was revised up to the actual number of 
digitized beneficiaries in respect of the States/UTs which had digitization equal 
to or less than their ceiling in all the three pension schemes and the excess 
number of beneficiaries of these States/UTs consequent to this revision was re-
allocated to States/UTs that had digitization equal to or higher than their State 
Cap in all the three pension schemes on a pro-rata basis. As a result, all the 
three pension schemes of under NSAP have achieved 100% saturation in Sept, 
2022.” 
 
8. Given the absence of a fresh population census, on being asked by the 
Committee whether Ministry have plans to collaborate with relevant authorities to 
estimate and incorporate more recent demographic data into the allocation and 
beneficiary determination process, they furnished as below: 
 
“The Govt. while deciding the continuation of the NSAP schemes for the 15th 
Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), considered the proposal of expansion in 
coverage (by adopting SECC criteria of “Automatic Inclusion plus any two 
deprivations” in place of BPL criteria) as well. However, considering the 
available financial space, the Govt., approved the continuation of NSAP 
schemes in its present form. Hence, at present, the NSAP schemes cater 
around 3 crore beneficiaries with scheme-wise and State-wise cap. Further, as 
per NSAP Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the 
State has the option to give them pension from its own resources. As per latest 
information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional 
beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
 
9. Regarding the funds released under NFBS for the State of West Bengal, when 
the Committee asked the Ministry to clarify how the State Cap of 21,553 was 
determined, and whether this cap had been reviewed in recent years and what steps 
have been taken by the Ministry to ensure that State Caps are reflective of the actual 
number of deserving beneficiaries, they answered as below: 
 
“For calculating the State Cap for each State/UT under NSAP schemes, the 
population figures as per census 2001 and poverty ratio (2004-05) determined 
by NITI Aayog (erstwhile Planning Commission) were taken into account. As 
per NSAP Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the 
States have the option to give them pension from its own resources.” 
 
10. Regarding the constant number of beneficiaries in the State of West Bengal for 
IGNOAPS, IGNWPS, and IGNDPS, when the Committee asked the Ministry to provide 
insights into the process by which the State determines the allocation of benefits within 
the State Cap and whether there are any mechanisms in place to review and adjust 
these figures based on changing demographics or need, the Ministry stated as under: 
 

“As per information given by West Bengal, beneficiaries for IGNOAPS, 
IGNWPS, IGNDPS in the state are selected by considering the latest socio-
economic condition of SECC-2011 house listed persons by extensive physical 
verification in terms of inclusion indicators and deprivation indicators. The 
priority list of pensioners is prepared excluding the households as per exclusion 
criteria, by including the households as per inclusion indicators as well as by 
including the households having more number of deprivations. The details of 
eligible persons identified by the above process are digitized in the NSAP-PPS 
portal within the State CAP allotted by MoRD. Currently, the State is following 
the deprivation indicators of level 2, at least, for identification of eligible persons, 
besides considering the applications received under SAMBAL, UMANG App etc 
which are also verified physically following the same eligibility parameters.” 
 
11. Given the State/UT-wise Cap on the number of beneficiaries under NSAP, when 
the Committee desired to be apprised about the ways to ensure that deserving 
individuals are not excluded from the schemes due to these caps and about plans, if 
any, to revise or update these caps to address the evolving needs of the population, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Presently, NSAP schemes cater about 3 crore beneficiaries (2.97 crore 
pensioners). The allocation of funds under NSAP schemes to States/ UTs is 
done on the basis of ceiling of beneficiaries (State Cap) or the number of 
beneficiaries digitized on the NSAP portal, whichever is lower. For calculating 
the State Cap for each State/UT, the population figures as per the census of 
2001 and the poverty ratio (2004-05) determined by NITI Aayog (erstwhile 
Planning Commission) have been taken into account. As per NSAP Guidelines, 
if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State has the option to 
give them pension from its own resources. As per latest information collected 
from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional beneficiaries are covered by 
States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
 
12. On being asked by the Committee to elaborate on the criteria used to determine 
the State Cap for beneficiaries under NSAP schemes and how often are these criteria 
reviewed, and whether there is any flexibility for States/UTs to propose adjustments 
based on their specific demographic and economic circumstances, the Ministry 
elaborated as below: 
“Ceiling/Cap of beneficiaries was introduced with the inception of the 
Programme in 1995.  At the time of launch of NSAP, the Cap was 1.03 crore 
beneficiaries. Based on population projections and poverty ratios, it was revised 
from time to time. The existing Cap is based on the population figures as per 
the census of 2001 and the poverty ratio (2004-05) determined by NITI Aayog 
(erstwhile Planning Commission). The Govt. while deciding the continuation of 
the NSAP schemes for the 15th Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), 
considered the proposal of expansion in coverage (by adopting SECC criteria of 

“Automatic Inclusion plus any two deprivations” in place of BPL criteria) as well. 
However, considering the available financial space, the Govt., approved the 
continuation of NSAP schemes in its present form. However, as per NSAP 
Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State has 
the option to give them pension from its own resources. As per latest 
information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional 
beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
13. As per the Ministry’s information, about 4.7 crore additional beneficiaries covered 
by States/UTs through their pension schemes. Keeping this fact in view, when the 
Committee asked the Ministry to provide details on the nature and scope of these state-
run pension schemes, and whether there are plans to integrate or align them more 
closely with NSAP for a coordinated approach, they answered as below: 
 
“As per latest information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore 
additional beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension 
schemes. At present, there is no plan to integrate state run pension schemes 
with NSAP schemes.” 
14. According to para 2.4.1 of NSAP guidelines, the States/UTs were strongly urged 
to provide an additional amount, at least an equivalent amount to the assistance 
provided by the Central Government so that the beneficiaries can get a decent level of 
assistance. Accordingly, while some States/UTs were covering lesser number of 
beneficiaries than the cap, many States/UTs were covering beneficiaries beyond the 
said cap. 
15.  When the Committee enquired from the Ministry to provide more details on the 
frequency and process of updating the beneficiary database on the NSAP portal by 
States/ UTs and asked whether there are any challenges or bottlenecks encountered in 
maintaining an accurate and up-to-date database, and whether there are measures in 
place to address them, the Ministry stated as below: 
“Beneficiaries data has been uploaded by all State/UTs on NSAP-PPS portal. 
Only 17 States/UT are updating beneficiaries through NSAP-PPS portal 
through login access provided. Other states having their own state MIS are 
updating beneficiaries data through web service provided to State/UT.” 
16. Considering the importance of accurate beneficiary figures, when the Ministry 
was asked by the Committee that whether they have any plans to conduct an extensive 
review and audit of the current beneficiary database to ensure its accuracy and 
completeness and how do the Ministry verify the information provided by States/UTs to 
maintain the integrity of the data, they furnished as under: 
 
“At present, authenticated Aadhaar data of around 87% NSAP pensioners have 
been seeded, almost all States are DBT compliant and optimizing transactions 

under APB mode to ensure transfer of benefits only to eligible beneficiaries. 
Further, Aadhaar based Digital Life Certificate is in process of implementation to 
check the aliveness of each and every beneficiary. MobileApp based solution 
has been developed and it is in Implementation stage in 4-5 States on pilot 
basis.” 
 
17. The Government considered the proposal for expansion in coverage during the 
15th Finance Commission cycle but opted for continuation in the present form due to 
financial constraints. In the light of this when the Committee asked the Ministry to 
provide insights into the specific financial considerations and constraints that led to this 
decision, the Ministry replied as below: 
 
“The salient features of the proposal of revamping NSAP considered by the 
Govt. at the time of deciding continuation of NSAP schemes for 15th Finance 
Commission cycle (202126) are as under: 
 Identification of beneficiaries on the basis of SECC (Automatic Inclusion 
and any two Deprivations). Number of beneficiaries to increase from 2.98 
crore to 4.85 crore based on Automatic Inclusion (AI) plus any two 
deprivation indicators; 
 Minimum pension rates to be enhanced for elderly and widow pensioners 
from Rs.200/- to Rs.800/- per month and for Divyang from Rs.300/- to 
Rs.1000/- per month. For the elderly of 80+, it was proposed to be 
enhanced from Rs.500 to Rs.1200; 
 Revamped Scheme to be made Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with 
60:40 sharing arrangement with the States. For, North Eastern States 
and Hilly regions, the sharing arrangements to be on the basis of 90:10.  
 One-time lump sum amount of Rs.20,000 on the death of primary 
breadwinner to be enhanced to Rs.80,000.  
Total annual fund requirement for the Centre upon revamping the NSAP 
schemes was estimated to be approximately Rs.37,000 crore i.e. around 4 
times of the current annual budget outlay for NSAP schemes and therefore, the 
Govt. approved continuation of the NSAP schemes in its existing form till 2021-
26.” 
18. Given the reliance on population figures from the census of 2001 and poverty 
ratios from 2004-05,  when asked by the Committee whether there are any plans to 
expedite the process of conducting a fresh population census and updating poverty 
ratios to ensure more accurate and contemporary data for future allocations, the 
Ministry answered as under: 
 

“The Govt. while deciding the continuation of the NSAP schemes for the 15th 
Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), considered the proposal of expansion in 
coverage (by adopting SECC criteria of “Automatic Inclusion plus any two 
deprivations” in place of BPL criteria) as well. However, considering the 
available financial space, the Govt., approved the continuation of NSAP 
schemes in its present form. Hence, at present, the NSAP schemes cater 
around 3 crore beneficiaries with scheme-wise and State-wise cap. Further, as 
per NSAP Guidelines, if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the 
State has the option to give them pension from its own resources. As per latest 
information collected from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional 
beneficiaries are covered by States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
 
19. The Ministry has mentioned about the development of NSAP-PPS by NIC for 
beneficiary details. On being further asked by the Committee to elaborate on the 
functionalities and features of NSAP-PPS and how it contributes to the accuracy and 
efficiency of the beneficiary database, the Ministry replied as follows: 
“NSAP-PPS is beneficiary management system developed by NIC-MoRD which 
is linked with Public Financial Management System(PFMS) and UIDAI for 
Aadhaar authentication and is compliant to the Information Technology & 
Aadhaar Act 2016. 17 States are generating the pension payment order 
monthly by NSAP-PPS and disburse pension in their respective A/c through 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). PFMS ensures Bank/PO A/c details with 
respective Banks/POs before transferring pension in beneficiaries A/c. It also 
keeps track of each and every transactions i.e success/failed. NSAP-PPS is in 
built of arrear pension calculation method and automatic inclusion of 80 plus 
beneficiaries for higher assistance in monthly pension computation on NSAP-
PPS system.” 
20. Upon being further enquired by the Committee as to how does the Ministry 
ensure that States/UTs use the NSAP-PPS effectively, and also are there any training 
or capacity-building programs in place to enhance the capabilities of States/UTs in 
managing and updating the beneficiary database, they replied as below: 
 
“Physical Training on on-boarding NSAP-PPS was provided to field officers of 
State/UTs. Training through VC's was also conducted in past to a few states on 
their request.” 
 
21. Considering the proposal to adopt SECC criteria for expansion in coverage 
during the 15th Finance Commission cycle, when the Committee asked the Ministry to 
provide details on how this criteria change would have impacted the beneficiary 
database and whether it is still under consideration for future implementations, they 
stated as below: 

“The Govt. while deciding the continuation of the NSAP schemes for the 15th 
Finance Commission cycle (2021-26), considered the proposal of revamping 
NSAP schemes. Among various proposals, the proposal of identification of 
beneficiaries on the basis of SECC (Automatic Inclusion and any two 
Deprivations) was also considered. As per the proposal, number of beneficiaries 
was proposed to increase from 2.98 crore to 4.85 crore based on Automatic 
Inclusion (AI) plus any two deprivation indicators. However, considering the 
available financial space, the Govt., approved the continuation of NSAP 
schemes in its present form. Hence, at present, no proposal of expanding 
beneficiary coverage is under consideration. However, as per NSAP Guidelines, 
if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State has the option to 
give them pension from its own resources. As per latest information collected 
from States/UTs, around 5.86 crore additional beneficiaries are covered by 
States/UTs through their pension schemes.” 
22. The Committee learnt that in the absence of separate databases of beneficiaries 
for NSAP and State/UT schemes, the possibility of same beneficiary availing benefit 
from both NSAP and pension scheme of State/UT cannot be ruled out. Further, non-
segregation of finances of NSAP and State/UT scheme hinders the separate accounting 
of NSAP and desired transparency under both set of schemes. Interest earned on 
grant-in-aid received for NSAP, unspent balance at the end of the year could also not 
be ascertained due to consolidated maintenance of funds. 
23. On being asked to provide specific details on the challenges or reasons cited by 
the states that are lagging behind in completing the demarcation/flagging process for 
NSAP beneficiaries and whether there are there any common issues identified, and also 
what support or guidance is being offered to expedite the process, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“Department through various correspondences and meetings have been 
pursuing with the States/ UTs to complete the process of demarcation/flagging 
of NSAP beneficiaries at the earliest. As on 23.01.2024, under IGNOAPS, 10 
States are yet to complete the process of demarcation/flagging of NSAP 
beneficiaries. Similarly, 18 States and 14 States are yet to complete the process 
under IGNWPS and IGNDPS, respectively.” 
 
24. Upon being further probed, given the repeated requests and reminders to 
states/UTs, whether there are any consequences or penalties outlined for non-
compliance or delays in completing the demarcation/flagging process and how do the 
Ministry ensure accountability and adherence to timelines, the Ministry responded as 
below: 
 
“The concerned States/UTs are being requested regularly to complete the 
process at the earliest. The matter is taken up during the meeting of Nodal 
Officers and periodic Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings, etc.” 
  

25. When the Committee further asked that whether there are performance 
benchmarks or targets set for states/UTs regarding the completion of the 
demarcation/flagging process and how do the Ministry assess the progress of each 
state, and whether there are any incentives or recognitions for those states that 
demonstrate exemplary performance, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“NSAP Division monitoring the progress of flagging status in each NSAP 
scheme regularly. States has been facilitated the interface for flagging 
beneficiaries in NSAP-PPS database. States/ UTs, have been requested to 
demarcate/flag NSAP beneficiaries in NSAP-PPS portal from time to time. 
States/UTs are at different stages of flagging of beneficiaries.  As on 
23.01.2024, under IGNOAPS, 10 States are yet to complete the process of 
demarcation/flagging of NSAP beneficiaries. Similarly, 18 States and 14 States 
are yet to complete the process under IGNWPS and IGNDPS, respectively.” 
 
26. Considering the urgency expressed in the ATN to accomplish the task by 
December 2023, when the Committee enquired what measures are in place to monitor 
the progress of the states in real-time, and how frequently is the progress reviewed, the 
Ministry responded as below: 
 
“The concerned States/UTs are being requested regularly to complete the 
process of segregation of beneficiaries on NSAP portal quickly. The matter is 
taken up during the meeting of Nodal Officers and periodic Performance 
Review Committee (PRC) meetings, etc.” 
 
27. When the Committee asked the Ministry to provide insights into the specific 
actions or strategies it employs to assist states/UTs in overcoming challenges and 
expediting the demarcation/flagging process and also whether there are any capacity-
building initiatives or best practice sharing mechanisms in place, it stated: 
 
“States/ UTs have been requested to demarcate/flag NSAP beneficiaries in 
NSAP-PPS portal from time to time. NIC-DoRD assists the States/ UTs in case 
of any technical requirement/ clarification.” 
 
28. Further when enquired by the Committee as to how uniformity and 
standardization are ensured in the demarcation/flagging process across states/UTs and 
whether there are guidelines or protocols provided to states to ensure consistency in the 
implementation of this task, the Ministry responded as below: 
 
“States/ UTs have been requested to demarcate/flag NSAP beneficiaries in 
NSAP-PPS portal from time to time. NIC-DoRD assists the States/ UTs in case 
of any technical requirement/ clarification.” 

29. The Committee also found that according to NSAP guidelines, the States/UTs 
were required to maintain a database of eligible beneficiaries and upload it in the public 
domain. The beneficiary data should include all the details of the beneficiary including 
his/her photograph. The States should take efforts to achieve universal coverage of 
eligible beneficiaries by proactive identification of beneficiaries from the BPL lists by 
reaching out to their households. Though the beneficiaries were to be identified from the 
BPL lists, in many States/UTs, BPL lists were not maintained by implementing 
departments. Further, most of the States were not preparing database of eligible 
beneficiaries as envisaged. 
30. On being questioned whether there are any identified challenges or common 
issues faced by states, including West Bengal and Chhattisgarh, in preparing and 
maintaining the database of eligible beneficiaries and how these challenges are 
addressed and improvements facilitated, the Ministry replied as below: 
  
“West Bengal and Chhattisgarh both the states are on-boarded on NSAP-PPS 
portal and have digitized data of potential beneficiaries under NSAP on the 
portal. NIC-DoRD provides suitable assistance in case of any issue is raised by 
States in maintaining database.” 
 
31. Further when the Committee asked the Ministry to elaborate on the process of 
annual physical verification conducted in West Bengal, including the specific criteria 
used to identify beneficiaries and the role of Gram Panchayat officials in the verification 
process, they illustrated as below: 
“As reported by state of West Bengal, verification teams comprising of 
employees of Gram Panchayat (Executive Assistant, Secretary, Sahayak etc) 
are formed at Gram Panchayat level for door to door physical verificationof all 
the existing-eligible beneficiaries. During physical verification the Gram 
Panchayat personnel verify the living status and/or the existence of the 
beneficiary at the recorded address and check Aadhaar details, bank account 
details, disability percentage certificates and the marital status (forwidow 
pensioners). The current status of the beneficiaries, as verified, is updated in 
the NSAP-PPS portal by Block Development Offices. This entire process of 
Annual Physical Verification is done under supervision of senior officers of 
Sub-Division level and District level. 
The records of ineligible beneficiaries arising out of death, lack of permanent 
residential status or changed marital condition (due to remarriage of widow) 
are marked as discontinued in the NSAP-PPS portal. The resultant Gaps are 
filled up by newly identified eligible persons subsequently.” 
32. Given the identified gap in West Bengal due to the annual physical verification 
process, when the Committee enquired about the steps taken to ensure that deserving 
beneficiaries are not excluded from the NSAP schemes and whether there are 

mechanisms in place for periodic reviews and adjustments to address such gaps, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
“As reported by state of West Bengal, due care is taken during Annual Physical 
Verification to ensure that deserving 
existingbeneficiaryisnotexcludedfromgettingthebenefitsunderNSAP.Forthisreas
on,validdocumentary evidences like death certificates are relied upon in case 
of dead beneficiaries. If anyof the discontinued migrated beneficiaries return to 
his recorded address to reside permanently,thepension is reactivated 
intheportal afterphysical verification.The Gaps that remain are filled up by 
newly identified eligible persons within the State CAP.” 
33. Further when the Committee asked the Ministry about the ways in which they 
verify the accuracy and reliability of the data submitted by states/UTs, especially 
considering the variations in approaches to beneficiary identification and database 
maintenance across different regions, they replied as below: 
 
“Identification of beneficiary is the responsibility of the respective State/UT. This 
Department allocates funds to the State/UT as per State Cap or digitized 
number of beneficiaries on NSAP portal, whichever is lower.

 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTORY 
1. The Committee learn that the National Social Assistance Programme 
(NSAP), launched by the Ministry of Rural Development 27 years ago, stands as a 
crucial pillar in providing social assistance to the marginalized sections of 
society, including the elderly, disabled, widows, and families affected by the loss 
of the primary breadwinner. Over the years, NSAP has served as a lifeline for 
millions of beneficiaries, offering essential financial support in times of need. 
However, a recent audit of the program has unearthed several critical issues 
plaguing its implementation across states and union territories. The Committee 
specially note several shortcomings in the implementation of this scheme such 
as lack of verification and authentication processes, leading to instances of 
ineligible beneficiaries wrongfully accessing benefits in many regions. Moreover, 
deficiencies in data cleaning and maintenance have resulted in overpayments, 
short payments, and even instances of multiple pension disbursements in 
various states and union territories. Furthermore, the non-uniform 
implementation of NSAP, particularly the National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS), 
has left eligible beneficiaries in certain areas deprived of their entitled benefits. In 
light of these findings, the Committee has undertaken a comprehensive review of 
the NSAP to identify systemic challenges and formulate recommendations aimed 
at enhancing the efficiency, transparency, and inclusivity of the program and 
ensure that NSAP fulfills its mandate of providing social assistance to those in 
need across the nation.Consequent to the sifting of all the material and 
information available before them mainly from the written information and 
depositions made by the Ministry, Committee have made certain observations 
and recommendations which are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of this 
part of the Report. 
Revamping database for Resource Allocation 
2. The Committee note from audit observation that the NSAP's criteria for 
determining state caps for beneficiaries is based on outdated data from the 

census of 2001 and poverty ratios from 2004-05 which may not accurately reflect 
the current demographic and economic circumstances of states. The Ministry's 
reliance on historical data limits its ability to address the evolving needs of the 
population. Access to more accurate and contemporary data is essential for 
informed decision-making and resource allocation. This reliance on outdated 
population figures and poverty ratios underscores the importance of expediting 
the process of adopting data from the latest population census and updating 
poverty ratios. In the light of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
consider conducting periodic reviews and updates of the criteria used to 
determine state caps, incorporating more recent data sources to ensure accuracy 
and relevance. The Committee also note that the allocation of NSAP funds based 
on population figures from the 2001 census and poverty ratios from 2004-05 also 
fails to account for demographic changes and evolving poverty dynamics and 
thereby potentially leads to misallocation of resources and exclusion of 
deserving beneficiaries. Hence, the Committee, in no uncertain words 
recommend that the Ministry need to conduct a comprehensive review of the 
NSAP allocation methodology to update state caps based on the latest 
demographic data and poverty indicators. The Ministry should also explore 
options for revising allocation criteria to better reflect the needs of the 
population.  
Updating Beneficiary Lists for Effective Social Assistance 
3. The Committee note from audit observation that the Ministry's reliance on 
outdated BPL lists for beneficiary selection, even after the finalization of SECC 
data indicates a failure to update beneficiary lists regularly and thus makes 
transparency less meaningful. Despite considering proposals to expand coverage 
using SECC criteria during the 15th Finance Commission cycle, the Ministry 
approved the continuation of NSAP schemes in their present form due to 
financial constraints. The Ministry in their submission have stated that to make 
NSAP schemes more effective, transparent and result oriented, many efforts 
(policy reforms, increase in budgetary allocation, effective use of Information 
Technology, etc.) have been done. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
aforesaid outdated lists lead to the exclusion of deserving beneficiaries and 
undermines the program's effectiveness. Therefore, the Committee recommend 

that the Ministry should mandate states to update beneficiary lists regularly using 
the latest available data including that of the SECC, to ensure accurate targeting 
of beneficiaries and prevent exclusion of deserving individuals. The Committee 
opine that timely availability of accurate data will enable better targeting of 
beneficiaries and allocation of resources. Furthermore, despite guidelines 
promoting universal coverage and transparency in beneficiary identification, 
many states/UTs do not maintain databases of eligible beneficiaries or make them 
public. This lack of transparency obstructs accountability and may result in 
errors like exclusion of beneficiaries. Here, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should enforce compliance with guidelines requiring states/UTs to 
maintain and publicly share databases of eligible beneficiaries. The Committee 
also opine that the Ministry need to undergo an exercise in order to ensure that 
pension benefits provided under the NSAP schemes are periodically examined to 
ascertain the efficacy of the amount provided as pension and to find out whether 
it is being revised as per subsistence based guidelines/directions in order to 
make it more meaningful. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the action 
initiated/taken in this regard at the earliest.  
Quantum of Assistance 
4. The Committee strongly feel that the current amount of  pension being paid 
by the Central Government  under the IGNOPS , IGNDPS and IGNWPS is too 
meager and grossly inadequate.   Therefore, the Committee recommend that   in 
the first instance the Ministry should increase the amount of pension under 
IGNOPS , IGNDPS and IGNWPS to Rs 1000 per month. For qualified beneficiaries 
aged over 80 years, the minimum pension should be increased to Rs 1200 per 
month within these schemes. Furthermore, the Committee desire that  the 
pension amount under  NSAP schemes  should be indexed to inflation  and 
reviewed every five years to ensure that deserving beneficiaries are not excluded 
due to financial limitations for the program's effectiveness in addressing poverty 
and social deprivation. 
Compliance with Direct Benefit Transfer 
5. The Committee while analyzing the replies of the Ministry observe that 
despite the program's aim for universal coverage through proactive identification, 

NSAP is implemented in a demand-driven mode, with benefits provided only to 
those who apply. This approach contributes to non-verification of existing 
beneficiaries, resulting in cases of ineligible beneficiaries receiving benefits. The 
Ministry in their background note have submitted that the Aadhaar authentication 
and seeding of data of NSAP pensioners is over 86% of total NSAP pensioners. 
They also learn that the Department is making consistent efforts to achieve 100% 
Aadhaar seeding/authentication. The Committee also note the scheme's lack of 
full compliance with Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) standards, including cash 
payments in some states that poses challenges such as over-payment, short-
payment, and multiple pension payments, highlighting weaknesses in financial 
management and accountability. The Committee are of the view that NSAP should 
make transition from a demand-driven approach to proactive identification of 
beneficiaries, leveraging available data sources and technology for 
comprehensive beneficiary selection, verification, and authentication. While 
taking congnizance of all these facts, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
prioritize achieving full DBT compliance across all states, ensuring that pension 
payments are made digitally to prevent leakages and improve transparency and 
accountability in benefit disbursal. The Committee also opine that feedback from 
the stakeholders should be taken to ascertain the effectiveness of 
implementation of various schemes under the NSAP. 
Addressing Disparities in Social Security Coverage 
6. The Committee note that there is a wide variationin beneficiary coverage 
among different states/UTs, with some covering fewer beneficiaries than the cap 
while others exceeding it. This matterraises concerns about fairness and equity 
in accessing social security benefits. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should strive for more equitable coverage across states/UTs by 
addressing the discrepancies in beneficiary allocation and ensure that the 
deserving individuals receive sufficient support. Additionally, proactive efforts 
should be made to achieve universal coverage by identifying and reaching out to 
eligible households. Moreover, the Committee recommend conducting a third-
party or independent audit of beneficiary inclusion and exclusion to ensure 
transparency and fairness in the process.  It goes without saying here that it 

would be in all fitness of things if such audit invariably figures in the public 
domain.  
 
Need for separate databases for NSAP and State/UT schemes 
7. The Committee note from audit observation that the absence of separate 
databases for NSAP and State/UT schemes, coupled with non-segregation of 
finances hinders transparency and accountability. The Committee observe that 
there are chances of the same beneficiary availing benefits from both NSAP and 
state/UT schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry need 
to implement separate databases for NSAP and State/UT schemes to enhance 
transparency and accountability and for Improved Social Security Governance. 
They also recommend that the Ministry must also develop mechanisms to 
prevent the possibility of duplication of benefits and ensure efficient utilization of 
resources spread out to a wider outreach of the needy and vulnerable. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the positive steps initiated/taken in this 
regard. 
************ 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 April, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
 