74

GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AND
REGULATION

MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI

(Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY FOURTH

सत्यसेव जयने

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No. 2303

SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AND
REGULATION

MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI

(Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: .29..09- 2023
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 28,09: 2022

Ser

EOS t

सत्यमेब Aaa

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2023/ Bhadrapada , 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)
INTRODUCTION

REPORT
PART- |

OVERVIEW
MANAGEMENT OF GROUND WATER
(a) Extraction of Ground Water
(b) Assessment of Ground Water
(c) Ground Water Monitoring
(d) Assessment of Ground Water Quantity and Quality
(i) Assessment of water levels
(ii) Factors affecting Ground Water Quantity
(iii) Assessment of Ground Water Quality
(e) Model Bill on Ground Water and Legislative framework in
States/UTs
(f) Human Resource constraints faced by Central agencies
managing Ground Water
GROUND WATER REGULATION

(a) Projects granted Consent to Operate by State Pollution Control
Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) and
Projects granted license by Bureau of Indian Standards.
(b) Delay in processing of applications by CGWA for grant/renewal
of NOC in non-notified areas
(c) Non-receipt of applications for renewal on expiry of NOC
(d) Post NOC monitoring by CGWA and Authorised officers
IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES ON GROUND WATER
MANAGEMENT AND REGULATION (GWMR)
(a) Financial performance of GWMRS
(0) Targets of aquifer mapping and achievements and incomplete
aquifer mapping reports
(c) Non preparation of Ground Water Models
(9) Dissemination of NAQUIM outputs

(i) Designing of web-based system

(ii) Action by State Governments on Aquifer mapping reports

Pages


(e) Participatory Ground Water Management

(f) Capacity Building

(g) Schemesiinitiatives of States/UTs for management of Ground
Water

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND GROUND WATER

(a) Target 6.4 — Annual ground water withdrawal against net
annual availability

(b) Target 6.6 - By 2020, protect and restore water-related
ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers,
aquifers and lakes

(c) Target 6 b Local communities’ participation in water
management (Para 5.2.3)

OTHER ISSUES

(a) High Yielding Variety Seeds Consuming Less Water

(b) National Water System- Desalination And Sustainable
Exploitation Of Natural Water Resources. हि

(०) Reduction In Use Of Chemical Based Fertilizers

(d) Rain Water Harvesting

(e) Strengthening Of Central Ground Water Authority

PART-II

OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on
28.03.2022
Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on
15.06.2022 है
Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
18.09.2023


COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE OF
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
(2021-22)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

. Shri T. R. Baalu

. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
. Shri Sudheer Gupta

. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi’

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

hri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara?
hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
r. Satya Pal Singh

hri Jayant Sinha

hri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

hri Ram Kripal Yadav

५७2 ५0० ५02 7 ७ ७

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Dr. C.M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy?

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi*

‘El

* Elected w.e,

lected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021,
+ Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f, 07.07.2021.


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS LOM EVSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

ep eINnAnRYWN

aaa
WN Oo

=
री

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

a
“

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

148. Shri Derek O' Brien”
49. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Vijay Mishra - Executive Officer

—

* Blected w.e-f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this 74" Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Ground
Water Management and Regulation” based on C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 relating to
the Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation.

2. The C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 was laid on the Table of the House on
21.12.2021.
3. Public Accounts Committee (2021-2022) selected the aforesaid subject and took

oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the subject on
28.03.2022.Considering the gravity of the issues, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)
decided to carry forward the subject and took further evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry on 15.06.2022. Based on the oral evidence and written replies. the
Committee examined the subject in detail in 2023-24.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and adopted the draft
Report on the aforementioned subject at their sitting held on 18.09.2023. The Minutes of
the sittings are appended to the Report.

5 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- Il of the
Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence and
for obtaining information on the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information
to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject

8 The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
\& September, 2023 Chairperson,

27 Bhadrapada, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

PART-I

A. OVERVIEW

Water is essential for life, living and livelihood. Increasing population, growing
urbanisation and rapid industrialisation combined with the need for raising agricultural
production generates competing demands for water. है
2. Water Resources Scenario in India as on June 2022, was reported to be as under:-

a. Water availability - 1,126 Billion Cubic Meters (BCM), utilizable water (Surface
water) — 690 (BCM), Annual Groundwater recharge — 436 (BCM).

b. There is increasing water demand due to population growth, urbanization and
industrialization etc.

c. There is Spatial and temporal variability in availability of water.

d. 17% of world population, 15% cattle population Vs 4% of water resources.

e. India is the largest user of ground water in the world. GW extraction 245 Billion
Cubic Meters (BCM) - around 25% of global withdrawals.

f. Ground Water accounts for around 64 % of irrigation needs and 80 % of drinking
water needs

g. Total Assessment units as per 2020 Assessment are 6,965 which are
categorised as (i) Over exploited: 1,114 (16 %) , (ii) Critical: 270 (04%) , (iii)
Semi-critical: 1,057 (15 %); (iv) Safe: 4,427 (64 %) and (५) Saline: 097 (01 %)

3. Ground Water is defined as water which exists below the surface in the zone of
saturation and can be extracted through wells or any other means or emerges as springs and
base flows in streams and rivers. Efficient management of ground water is significant for

sustainable use of water.

4. India is also committed to achieving the targets under United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals by ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all.

5, National Water Policy for the development and management of water resources and
establishing a framework for creation of a system of laws, institutions and plan of action with a
unified national perspective was adopted in September 1987, which was updated and revised
in 2002 and 2012. The National Water Policy 2012 recognised that ground water was being

4


exploited inequitably and without any consideration to its sustainability leading to its over-
exploitation in several areas. The policy envisaged that there was a need to map the aquifers1
to know the quantum and quality of groundwater resources (replenishable as well as non-
replenishable) in the country which maybe periodically updated. This process should be fully
participatory, involving local communities. Further, the National Policy emphasised that
declining ground water levels in over-exploited areas needed to be arrested by introducing
improved technologies in water use, incentivising efficient water use and encouraging
community based management of aquifers. In addition, where necessary, projects for artificial
recharge should be undertaken so that extraction is less than the recharge, thereby allowing

aquifers to maintain ground water levels.

6. Water being a State subject, the legislation for regulation and development of ground
water is to be enacted by the State Governments/Union Territories (UTs). However, the
regulation of Ground water utilisation is done both at Central and State levels. At the Apex
level, the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
(DOWR,RD&GR) is allocated with overall planning and policy making for the development of
ground water resources and establishment of utilisable resources. In pursuance of the orders
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court (1996), the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) was
constituted (January 1997) for the purpose of regulation and control of ground water
management and development and to issue necessary directions for this purpose. In 13
States/UTs (as of March 2019), the regulation of ground water is done by the States

themselves through State Ground Water Authority or Government orders.

7. The Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is the national agency under DOWR,RD&GR
for assessment, management and development of ground water resources in the country.
Ground water resources are estimated assessment unit wise. As on 31st March 2017, out of
6,881 assessment units all over India, 1,186 have been categorised as Over-exploited, 313 as
Critical, 972 as Semi-critical, and 4,310 units as Safe. There are 100 assessment units which
are completely saline. The number of Over-exploited and Critical administrative units are
significantly higher in Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan. in Punjab, 80

per cent of the assessment units are critical or over-exploited.

8. CGWA releases guidelines for ground water abstraction from time to time. Under the
guidelines (November 2012/November 2015), which were in force at the time of audit, CGWA
had notified 162 critical/ over-exploited areas for the purpose of regulation of ground water
development. ॥ notified areas, abstraction of ground water was not permissible for any
purpose other than drinking and domestic use. In the non-notified areas, CGWA could permit
extraction of ground water for industrial/ infrastructural/ mining projects.

5


9. In pursuance of the directions of the National Green Tribunal, CGWA notified revised
guidelines in September 2020. The new guidelines now have pan-india applicability and will
prevail in case of any difference with the States’ guidelines. Some of the earlier provisions
such as notification of areas by CGWA have been dispensed with, while some new provisions,
such as differential charges for extraction of ground water in different categories of areas

(safe, critical, semi-critical and over-exploited) have been introduced.

10. A Central Sector Scheme on ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’ was
approved for implementation during XII Plan period (2012-17) with an estimated cost of =
3,319 crore and an overall objective of proper assessment and management of ground water
resources so as to ensure its sustainability. The scheme was continued during 2017-20 at an
estimated cost of = 992 crore. At the State level, State Governments implement their own
schemes for water supply, controlled irrigation, ground water recharge, reducing dependence

on ground water, reducing contamination of ground water, etc.

11. C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 (Performance Audit) on the subject ‘Ground Water
Management and Regulation’ pertaining to Union Government Ministry of Jal Shakti
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation contains
significant results of the Performance Audit of Ground Water Management and Regulation for
the period 2013-18. The Report deals with the mechanism for management of ground water in
the country; issues relating to regulation of ground water by CGWA and State Authorities;
implementation of schemes on Ground Water Management and Regulation and the extent of

achievement of relevant targets under SDG 6.

12. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the subject for detailed examination
and report. Considering the significance of the issues involved in the matter, the subject was
carried forward by the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23). In the process of examination of
the subject, the Committee obtained background material and detailed written replies from the
Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation. They also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti
and obtained post evidence replies. The issues so discussed are enumerated in the

succeeding paragraphs.

B. MANAGEMENT OF GROUND WATER
(a) Extraction of Ground Water
13. Audit had observed that the percentage of utilisation of ground water with respect to

recharge, known as stage of extraction of ground water in the country was 63 per cent (2017).

6


During the period 2004 to 2017, the stage of extraction of ground water had increased from 58
to 63 per cent. Four States/UTs (Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan) had a stage of
extraction of more than 100 per cent, indicating that extraction of ground water had surpassed
the recharge of ground water. At the district level, in 24 States/UTs, 267 districts had stage of
extraction more than 63 per cent ranging from 64 per cent to 385 per cent. During the same
period, the percentage of safe blocks had decreased while the percentage of blocks

categorised as semi-critical, critical and over-exploited has steadily increased.

14. When asked about the action been taken by CGWB to prevent high extraction of
ground water, especially in areas where it has crossed the stage of extraction of 100 per cent,

the Ministry informed as under:

“Though water is a State subject, Central Government has taken number of
measures for conservation, management of ground water including effective
implementation of rain water harvesting in the country, which can be seen at
URL:http://jalshakti-
dowr.gov.in/sites/default/files/Steps_to_control_water_depletion_Feb2021.pdf.

Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under Section 3
(3) of the “Environment (Protection) Act, 1986” for the purpose of regulation and
control of ground water development and management in the Country. CGWA
has advised States/UTs to take measures to promote/adopt artificial recharge to
ground water / rain water harvesting. CGWA grants No Objection Certificates
(NOCs) for ground water abstraction to industries, infrastructure units and mining
projects in feasible areas in certain States/UTs where regulation is not being
done by the respective State/UTs. The latest guidelines for control and regulation
of groundwater extraction with pan-India applicability was notified by the Ministry
on 24 September 2020.

Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater- 2020 has been prepared by
CGWB in consultation with States/UTs which is a macro level plan indicating
various structures for the different terrain conditions of the country including
estimated cost. The Master Plan envisages construction of about 1.42 crore Rain
water harvesting and artificial recharge structures in the Country to harness 185
Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) of monsoon rainfall. DPR has to be prepared by the
concerned line department at an implementable level like any other water supply
project or city development project. Implementation has to be done through
existing schemes of Central/State governments.

CGWB has taken up Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme during XII
Plan, under the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation. The
Aquifer Mapping is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and their
characterization for preparation of aquifer/ area specific ground water
management plans with community participation. The management plans
including agriculture sector like crop diversification, sprinkler system, drip
irrigation, etc. are shared with the respective State governments for taking
appropriate measures / implementation. Further, Public Interaction Programs
(PIP) are being organised at grass root level for disseminating the tenets of the
Aquifer Management Plans as part of the National Aquifer Mapping and


Management (NAQUIM) Programme for the benefit of the stakeholders including
farmers.

CGWB has taken up various artificial recharge projects for demonstrative
purposes. These projects can be replicated by the state government at similar
hydro-geological settings.

Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in 2019 in 256 water
stressed districts in the country. Further, the campaign “Jal Shakti Abhiyan:
Catch the Rain” (JSA:CTR) was launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 22
March 2021. The JSA campaign for the year 2022 has been launched by Hon'ble
President of India on 29 March 2022.

Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY), a Rs. 6,000 crore scheme with World Bank funding,
for sustainable management of ground water with community participation is
being taken up in the identified over-exploited and water stressed areas falling in
the States of Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. This scheme is expected to contribute significantly
towards water and food security of the participating States.

In addition, a number of States have done notable work in the field of water
conservation/harvesting such as ‘Mukhyamantri Jal Swaviamban Abhiyan’ in
Rajasthan, ‘Jalyukt Shibar' in Maharashtra, ‘Sujalam Sufalam Abhiyan’ in
Gujarat, ‘Mission Kakatiya’ in Telangana, Neeru Chettu’ in Andhra Pradesh, Jal
Jeevan Hariyali in Bihar, ‘Jal Hi Jeevan’ in Haryana, 'Pani Bachao, Paisa Kamao'
in Punjab and Kudimaramath scheme in Tamil Nadu etc.

The Annual Ground Water Extraction for all uses is 245 BCM, out of which 218
BCM (90%) have been utilized for irrigation activities. A participatory approach
for sustainable ground water management appears to be more productive
keeping in view the large number of farmers dependent on groundwater based
irrigation system. In view of this, States/UTs have been advised to review their
free/subsidized electricity policy to farmers to discourage over-extraction of
groundwater, bring suitable water pricing policy and may work further towards
crop rotation/diversification/other initiatives to reduce over-dependence on
groundwater."

15. 116 Ministry also informed that other important steps taken by the Central Government
for sustainable ground water management including prevention of over-exploitation of the
ground water in the country to contro! water depletion and promote rain water harvesting /

conservation are as under:

“a. Hon'ble Prime Minister has written a letter to all Sarpanchs on 08.06.2019
regarding the importance of waier conservation and narvesting and exhorted
them to adopt all appropriate measures to make water conservation a mass
movement.

b. Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in 2019, a time
bound campaign with a mission mode approach intended to improve water

availability including ground water conditions in the water stressed blocks of 256

8


districts in India. In this regard, teams of officers from Central Government along-
with technical officers from Ministry of Jal Shakti were deputed to visit water
stressed districts and to work in close collaboration with district level officials to
undertake suitable interventions.

c. National Water Policy (2012) has been formulated by Department of Water
Resources, RD & GR, inter-alia advocates rainwater harvesting and
conservation of water and highlights the need for augmenting the availability of
water through direct use of rainfall. It also inter-alia, advocates conservation of
river, river bodies and infrastructure should be undertaken in a scientifically
planned manner through community participation. Further, encroachment and
diversion of water bodies and drainage channels must not be allowed and
wherever, it has taken place, it should be restored to the extent feasible and
maintained properly.

d. In compliance to the decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries, an ‘Inter
Ministerial Committee’ under the Chairmanship of Secretary (WR, RD & GR) has
been constituted to take forward the subject of ‘Push on Water Conservation
Related Activities for Optimum Utilization of Monsoon Rainfall’.

e.. Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable them to
enact suitable ground water legislation for regulation of its development, which
also includes provision of rain water harvesting. So far, 19 States/UTs have
adopted and implemented the ground water legislation.

f. Best practices of water conservation by various entities including private
persons, NGOs, PSUs etc have been compiled and put on the web site of the
Ministry for the benefit of general public. An interactive link on best practices has
also been created for receiving inputs from public, which, after necessary
evaluation/validation are put on the website for the benefit of the public.

g. Department of Water Resources, RD& GR has instituted National Water
awards to incentivize good practices in water conservation and ground water
recharge.

h. Mass awareness programmes (Trainings, Seminars, Workshops, Exhibitions,
Trade Fares and Painting Competitions etc.) are conducted from time to time
each year under the information, Education & Communication (IEC) Scheme of
DoWR, RD & GR in various parts of the Country to promote rain water
harvesting and artificial recharge to ground water. है

i. The Ministry of Rural Development in consultation and agreement with the
Department of Water Resources, RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture &

Farmers’ Welfare has developed an actionable framework for Natural Resources
9


Management (NRM), titled ‘Mission Water Conservation” to ensure gainful
utilization of funds. The Framework strives to ensure synergies in Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Pradhan
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), erstwhile integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) now PMKSYWatershed Development
Component and Command Area Development & Water Management (CADWM),
given their common objectives. Types of common works undertaken under these
programmes/ schemes are water conservation and management, water
harvesting, soil and moisture conservation, groundwater recharge, flood
protection, land development, Command Area Development & Watershed
Management.

j. Central Government supports construction of water harvesting and
conservation works primarily through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana — Watershed Development Component (PMKSY-WDC).

k. A joint advisory of Department of Rural development (DoRD), Department of
Water Resources, RD & GR (DoWR, RD & GR), Department of Land Resources
(DoLR) and Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DoDWS) has been
issued on 24.04.2020 to all States/UTs to emphasize efforts in the area of water
conservation and water management in the country. The activities include
augmentation of existing water sources(s), ground water recharge, rainwater
harvesting and grey water management and recharge.

|. Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL) 2016 circulated by Ministry of Housing &
Urban Affairs include provisions for Rainwater Harvesting and it has been shared
with all the States / UTs. So far 33 States / UTs have adopted the provisions of
rainwater harvesting of MBBL-2016.

m. Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under Section
3 (3) of the “Environment (Protection) Act, 1986” for the purpose of regulation
and control of ground water development and management in the Country.
CGWA has advised States/UTs to take measures to promote/adopt artificial
recharge to ground water / rain water harvesting. CGWA grants No Objection
Certificates (NOCs) for ground water abstraction to Industries, Infrastructure
units and Mining projects in feasible areas in certain States/UTs where regulation
is not being done by the respective State/UTs. The latest guidelines for control
and regulation of groundwater extraction with pan-India applicability was notified
by the Ministry on 24 September 2020.”

10


16. On being asked to elaborate on the actual action being taken across the country
for implementing policies relating to ground water recharging, the Ministry informed as

under:-

"Water being a State subject the actual action for implementing
policies for groundwater recharge need to be taken by States/UTs.
However, Central Government has taken a number of important
measures for conservation, management of ground water including
effectiveimplementation of rain water harvesting in the country, which
can be seen at URL:http://jalshakti-dowr.gov.in
/sites/default/files/Steps_to_control_water_depletion_Feb202 1.pdf.
Some of the important steps initiated by the Central governmentto
help the States in policy formulation and implementation of recharge
initiatives on ground are given in succeeding paras.

(a) Important major policy initiatives by the Central Government

are as under:

i, National Water Policy (2012) has been formulated by Department of
Water Resources, RD & GR, inter alia, advocates rainwater harvesting and
conservation of water and highlights the need for augmenting the availability of
water through direct use of rainfall. It also advocates conservation of river, river
bodies and infrastructure should be undertaken in a scientifically planned
manner through community participation.

ii, Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has formulated guidelines
for the States to adopt measures suitable to local conditions, such as Unified
Building Bye Laws (UBBL) of Delhi, 2016, Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL),
2016 and Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and
Implementation (URDPFl) Guidelines, 2014, wherein adequate focus hasbeen
given on requirement of rainwater harvesting and water conservation
measures. As per MBBL, all buildings having a plot size of 100 sq.m. or,
more shall mandatorily include the complete proposal of rainwater harvesting.
33 States/ UTs have adopted the features of these Bye Laws.

iii. This Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable
them to enact suitable ground water legislation for regulation of its
development, which also includes provision of rain water harvesting. So far, 19
States/UTs have adopted and implemented the ground water legislation.

(b) To implement these policies, the Central Government works in
collaboration with the States/UTs through various Central
Sector/Centrally sponsored schemes and_ suitable technical
assistance/advisories. Important initiatives in this regard can be
summarized as under:

i, National Aquifer Mapping and Management program (NAQUIM) is being
implemented by CGWB as part of Ground Water Management andRegulation
(GWM & R) scheme, a Central Sector scheme. NAQUIM envisages mapping of
aquifers (water bearing formations), their characterization and development of
Aquifer Management Plans to facilitate sustainable management of
groundwater resources in the country. NAQUIM outputs are shared with
States/UTs for suitable interventions.

11


ii, Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in 2019, a
timebound campaign with a mission mode approach intended to improve water
availability including ground water conditions in the country. In this regard,
teams of officers from Central Government along-with technical officers from
Ministry of Jal Shakti are deputed to visit districts and to work in close
collaboration with district level officials to undertake suitable recharge and other
related interventions. Jal Shakti Abhiyan 2021 with the theme ‘Catch the Rain
- Where it Falls, When it Falls' was launched by Hon'ble Prime Minister on
22.03.2021. Jal Shakti Abhiyan 2022 was launched by Hon'ble President on
29.03.2022.

iii. Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, RD & GR
(DoWR, RD & GR) is implementing Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal), a Rs. 6,000
crore Central Sector Scheme, for sustainable management of ground water
resources with community participation. Atal Jal is being implemented in certain
water stressed districts/Gram Panchayats of seven States viz. Gujarat,
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh. The scheme includes innovative recharge structures including rain
water harvesting structures.

iv. Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), in consultation with States/UTs,
has prepared ‘Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater - 2020’. The
Master Plan — 2020 is a macro level plan indicating various structures for the
different terrain conditions of the country. The Master Plan - 2020 envisages
construction of about 1.42 crore rain water harvesting and artificial recharge
structures in the country to harness 185 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM).

v. Central Ground Water Board takes up various demonstrative projects in
the country to showcase the effectiveness of recharge techniques which can be
replicated by the States/UTs. Recently, they have taken up innovative schemes
for aquifer rejuvenation in select blocks of the Aspirational Districts and also in
Rajasthan. Water harvesting and recharge augmentation have alsobeen carried
out through a new technique, bridge-cum- bhandaras in parts of Maharashtra."

17. As regards, the other steps being taken by the Department to see that the
people of an area categorized as‘over-exploited’ get water in the time of need, apart

from increasing the existing network of wells, the Ministry informed as under:-

i. “Water being a State subject, management of water resource including
providing water to the people is mainly responsibility of the respective
State Governments. To facilitate efforts of State Government, Central
Government has taken various important steps for sustainable ground
water management in the country including over-exploited areas.

ii Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in
2019, a time bound campaign with a mission mode approach
intended to improve water availability including ground water
conditions in the water stressed blocks of 256 districts in India.
In this regard, teams of officers from Central Government
along-with technical officers from Ministry of Jal Shakti were
deputed to visit water stressed districts and to work in close
collaboration with district level officials to undertake suitable
interventions.

12


iii.

vi.

vii.

viii.

In addition, Ministry of Jal Shakti has taken up the “Jal Shakti
Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” (JSA:CTR) with the theme “Catch
the Rain - Where it Falls When it Falls” to cover all the blocks
of all districts (rural as well as urban areas) across the
country during 22nd March 2021 to 30th November 2021. The
campaign was launched by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on
22.03.2021 (World Water Day). The "Jal Shakti Abhiyan:
Catch the Rain" for 2022 was launched by Hon’ble President
of India on 29.03.2022.

National Aquifer Mapping and Management program
(NAQUIM) is being implemented by CGWB as part of Ground
Water Management and Regulation (GWM & R) scheme, a
Central Sector scheme. NAQUIMenvisages mapping of
quifers (water bearing formations), their characterization
and development of Aquifer Management Plans to facilitate
sustainable management of groundwater resources in the
country. NAQUIM outputs are shared with States/UTs for
suitable interventions including planning of wells, recharge
initiatives etc. Further, to generate groundwater aquifer
related information in a faster manner, Heli-borne survey has
beentaken up in certain Arid/Semi-Arid areas of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and Haryana. The NAQUIMsurvey for the
entire country has been targeted to be completed by March,
2023.

Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was
launched duringthe year 2015-16. Two major components of
PMKSY, namely, Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP) and Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) are being implemented
by this Ministry. PMKSY-AIBP scheme has been continued
during 2021 to 2026 with an outlay of Rs. 9,306.80 crore.

Under AIBP, 99 ongoing Major/Medium Irrigation (MMI)
projects spread in 18 States were prioritized. As on date, 46
MMI projects have been reported to be completed by different
States. Out of 99 ongoing prioritized projects, 59 MMI projects
benefit Drought Prone Areas. The Ultimate Irrigation Potential
(UIP) of these 99 projects is 76.03 LakhHa. During 2016-
2021, an additional potential of 22.74 Lakh Ha has been
created through these projects.

A special package for completion of irrigation projects to
address agrarian distress in Vidarbha and Marathwada and
other chronically drought prone areas of rest of Maharashtra
was sanctioned by Government of India in July, 2018. On
completion of the balanced works of these projects, additional
irrigation potential of 3.77 Lakh Ha would be created.

Since August, 2019, Government of India in partnership with
13


xi.

States is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) to make
provision of potable water to every rural household through
tap water connection, including those in water scarce areas
across the country, by 2024.

For ensuring tap water supply in drought-prone areas/areas
with inadequate rainfall or dependable ground water sources,
provisions have been made under JJM for planning and
implementation of bulk water transfer from long distances and
regional water supply schemes. In addition, provisions have
been made for source recharging, viz. dedicated bore well
recharge structures, rain water recharge, rejuvenation of
existing water bodies, etc., in convergence with other schemes
such as MGNREGS, Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)), 15th Finance Commission tied grants to
RLBs/PRIs, State schemes, CSR funds, etc.

In order to enhance recharge of aquifers, especially in arid and
semi- arid areas, State Governments have been urged to
strengthen/extend existing canal networks and / or build
canals so as to transfer surplus flood waters from dams /
reservoirs to ponds / lakes and other water bodies and also
recharge groundwater during monsoon season.

Further, for villages in water-scarce areas, in order to save the
precious fresh water, States, are also being encouraged to
plan new water supply scheme with dual piped water supply
system, i.e. supply of fresh water in one and _ treated
grey/waste water in another pipe for non-
potable/gardening/toilet flushing use."

18. While reporting the Improvement in Ground Water Resources, the Ministry during
the course of examination in their presentation informed as under:-

19.

ii.
iti.

iv.

Annual groundwater recharge in the country has increased by nearly 4.29
BCM

Annual groundwater extraction has decreased by 3.77 BCM.

The overall stage of groundwater extraction level in the country has also
decreased from 63.33 % to 61.6 %.

overall improvement observed in groundwater situations in around 576
Assessment units out of 6965 Assessment Units in the country.

While delineating the water availability vis-a-vis ground water scenario in the

country, the representative of the Ministry, during the course of evidence before the

Committee stated as under:-

जज we are having a total 1126 bcm of water resources in India, out of which

surface water constitutes 690 and groundwater is 436. But this is not evenly

14


available throughout India and throughout all seasons. There is a temporal as
well as special variability. Sir, the important thing is that we have got only four
per cent of total resource of the world, but we support 70 per cent population and
15 per cent of the cattle population of the world. In addition, to support the
ground water situation in India, we are the largest user in the world and we
consume one-fourth of the total withdrawal. Our extraction is 245 billion cubic
metres (BCM). Ground water supports 65 per cent of the irrigation and 80 per
cent of the drinking water needs of India. Bhakra is having a storage of 10 BCM.
Recently, in 2020, we have assessed the ground water resources of India. About
35 per cent of the assessment units are OCS blocks — over-exploited, critical and
semi-critical blocks. Out of this, OE constitute 16 per cent. If we see the
distribution of the resource, 70 per cent resource is in the northern part which is
in the alluvial aquifer. It is restricted to majority of eight basins, namely, Ganga,
Indus, Godavari, Brahmaputra, Krishna, Mahanadi, Narmada and Cauvery. Rest

of the basins have contributed only a very small amount."

(b) Assessment of Ground Water

20. Audit scrutiny revealed that as per the approved (August 2013) Expenditure
Finance Committee(EFC)memorandum for 2012-17, the assessment of ground water
resources in terms of ground water quantity, utilisation pattern, stage of extraction of
ground water, categorisation of units, etc. was to be done every two years by CGWB.
Based on this data, Dynamic Ground Water Assessment Report was to be compiled, to
enable further planning and management of ground water by CGWB.
During the audit period, CGWB conducted such assessments for 2013 and 2017 and
published the Reports in June 2017 and July 2019 respectively. CGWB did not carry
out this assessment for 2015 resulting in a gap of four years in assessment between
2013 and 2017.DoWR, RD&GR stated (October 2019) that it had awarded the work
related to automation of estimation of these resources to the Indian Institute of
Technology, Hyderabad which is likely to reduce the time period substantially for this
process. The Department added (January 2020) that the Department was considering
undertaking such assessments through use of better technologies such as heli borne
surveys which are expected to be more efficient and thereby help in reducing the time
taken for such assessments. Audit observed that regular assessment is essential to
take up timely interventions for management of ground water. Inability to do the same
would hamper the regulation of ground water as the scenario is dynamic in nature.

15


21. On being asked about the reasons for not conducting assessments of ground

water as per norms, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee-1997 (GEC-1997)
recommended ground water resource assessment to be carried out once in
every five years. National Water Policy (2012) emphasized that the availability of
water resources and its use by various sectors in various basins and States in
the country need to be assessed scientifically and reviewed at periodic intervals,
say every five years. Therefore, Ground Water Resource Assessment (GWRA)
has been carried out for assessment year 2004 and 2009. Further, Ministry of Jal
Shakti decided to carry out Ground Water Resource Assessment once in every 2
years and consequently assessment for 2011 and 2013 were carried out as per
GEC 1997 methodology. In 2015, Ground Water Resource Estimation
Committee was constituted to review and revise GEC-1997 methodology. The
Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee-2015 (GEC-2015) recommended
more frequent assessment of ground water resources keeping in view of rapid
change in ground water extraction. The committee observed that the
comprehensive assessment of ground water resources is a time intensive
exercise and recommended that the resources should be assessed once in
every three years. Based on GEC-2015 methodology GW Resource Assessment
has been carried out for year 2017 and 2020. Due to revision of GEC-1997
Methodology and final publication of GEC-2015 Methodology in 2017, CGWB
could not carry out resource assessment for 2015. Process for assessment of
ground water resources for the current year 2021-22 has already been initiated
and subsequently these assessments are proposed to be done on an annual
basis."

22. As regards the methods being utilized for assessing ground water availability
and whether these methods are in conformity with the topography of the country, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"The methodology recommended by “Ground Water Resource Estimation
Committee-2015 (GEC-2015) constituted by the Ministry is being utilized for
assessing ground water availability. It is based on the principle of water balance
i.e. Inflow — Outflow = Change in Storage (of an aquifer). The methodology is in
conformity with the topography of the country. It is recommended that hilly areas
wherever slope is greater than 20% may not be considered for ground water
recharge. In inhabited hilly areas, where surface and sub-surface runoff is high
and generally water level data is missing, it is difficult to compute the various
components of water balance equation. Hence it is recommended that wherever
spring discharge data is available, the same may be assessed as a proxy for
‘ground water resources’ in hilly areas."

23. When desired to know as to how the CGWB is ensuring the assessment of

water resources on a regular basis, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

"The Dynamic Ground Water Resources of the country are being periodically
assessed jointly by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and State Government
Ground Water Departments under the guidance of State Level Committee at
State levels and under the overall supervision of Central Level Expert Group. A
cloud-based system for assessment “INDIA-Groundwater Resource Estimation
System (IN-GRES)” has been put in place for more accurate and timely
completion of assessment of ground water resources. INGRES is a software/web
based application developed by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) in

16


24.

collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology-Hyderabad (IIT-H) to provide
common and standardized platform for Ground Water Resource Assessment for
the entire country based on Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee-2015
(GEC-2015) methodology. It has also reduced the time lag between data
collection/compilation and final publication. Dynamic Ground Water Resources of
India, 2020 have been assessed through ‘IN-GRES’ and have been published in
time.

It has been decided that 2022 onwards Groundwater Resource Assessment for
the country will be carried out annually for every water year (June previous year
to May next year). A Resolution dated 08 Feb 2022 has been notified in the
Gazette of India by this Department on 19 Feb 2022 for constitution of a Central
Level Expert Group (CLEG) for overall supervision of the assessment process."

While delineating the features of the "India-Groundwater Resource Estimation

System", Ministry further informed as under:-

25.

“The assessment involves computation of Annual Ground Water Recharge and
Annual Extractable Ground Water Resources, Total Annual Ground Water
Extraction (utilization) and the percentage of utilization with respect to Annual
Extractable Ground Water Resources (Stage of Extraction, SoE). The
assessment units (blocks/taluks/mandals/tehsil/firkas etc.) are categorized based
on the Stage of Extraction (SoE) i.e ‘Safe’ if SoE< 70 %; ‘Semi-critical if SoE> 70
and <= 90 %; ‘Critical’ if SoE>90 and <=100 % and ‘Over-exploited’ if SoE>100
%. “INDIA-Groundwater Resource Estimation System (IN-GRES)” is a
software/web based application developed by Central Ground Water Board
(CGWB) in collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology-Hyderabad (IIT-H)
for assessment of ground water resources to provide common and standardized
platform for Ground Water Resource Assessment for the entire country based on
Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee-2015 (GEC-2015) methodology.
Main features of INGRES include i) facility for online entry of data at various
levels including field level, ii) easy and error free calculations directly through the
software, iii) approvals at various levels and iv) publication of the results. The
software also acts as a dissemination platform. Computed results are available
for visulation through a GIS based interface. The system provides information on
assessment-unit wise Annual Ground Water Recharge, Annual Extractable
Ground Water Resources, Ground Water Extraction, Stage of Extraction and
Categorization of the assessment units etc. Thematic map (GIS) based on the
Annual Ground Water Recharge, Annual Ground Water Extraction and
categorization of assessment units etc. are also available. The system has
resulted in minimizing manual errors in estimation process and reducing the time
taken for the assessment exercise.”

About the periodicity of assessment of Ground Water Resource, the

representative of the Ministry, during the course of evidence, stated as under:-

“As suggested by the hon. CAG that our resource estimation should be frequent,
we have developed a software in consultation with IIT, Hyderabad and from this
year onwards we will be doing it every year.”

(c) Ground Water Monitoring

26.

Audit noticed that CGWB assesses the water level in the country through its

observation wells. In the approved Cabinet Note for the Ground Water Management &

17


Regulation Scheme (GWMRS) for the XII Plan period (2012-17), CGWB proposed to
increase monitoring of wells to measure ground water level from 15,653 wells to 50,000
wells (by March 2017) through an approved scheme called Ground Water Management
& Regulation Scheme (GWMRS) for the XII Plan period (2012-17) having an outlay of *
3,319 crore. CGWB also proposed to undertake Real time Ground Water Monitoring in
various aquifers across the country through purpose built wells equipped with Digital
Water Level Recorders (DWLRs) and Telemetry in convergence with the ground water
component under National Hydrology Project (NHP). It was observed that as of March
2020, CGWB was still planning and was yet to undertake real time Ground Water
monitoring through DWLRs and Telemetry which indicated that progress in this area
was not as per targets of the GWMR Scheme. Audit also pointed out that as of 31
March 2019, a network of only 15,851 observation wells for monitoring water quality
were established. Thus, CGWB was falling behind its targets for establishing monitoring
wells and for undertaking Real Time Ground Water monitoring, both of which are crucial

for efficient management of ground water resources.

27. When asked about the measures that have been taken by CGWB to increase
the number of observation wells and equipping these with DWLRs and Telemetry, the

Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"“CGWB has planned to construct 9,000 Piezometers under GWM&R scheme
under project mode. Apart from this, around 7,600 Piezometers have been
planned in around 7,600 water stressed Gram Panchayats in the States of
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh under Atal Bhujal Yojana. Further, CGWB has planned to install
21,860 DWLRs with telemetry system (9,000 under GWM & R scheme as
mentioned above through project mode, 7,600 under Atal Jal and balance 5,260
under convergence with NHP). The contract for 3,400 DWLRs out of 5,260
DWLRs under NHP has been finalized.

28. As regards the current status of number of observation wells, the Ministry in a

written reply stated as under:-

"CGWEB periodically monitors the groundwater levels throughout the country on a
tegional scale, four times in a year during the months of March/April/May,
August, November and January through a network of monitoring wells. At
present, CGWB has a network of 22,835 monitoring wells (As on March 2021).
Further, the State Governments also have their own ground water level
monitoring network of around 43,500 stations making the total number of ground
water monitoring stations in the country around 66,000.”

29. The Committee desired to know whether concerned department has undertaken
any assessment to gauge the requirement for installation of DWLRs with telemetry
system across the country. In this regard, the Ministry informed as under:-

18


"CGWB & States have worked out the requirement of DWLRs with telemetry
system for Over-exploited, Critical & Semi-critical (OCS) and other priority areas.
Considering the heterogeneous and varied hydro- geological conditions of the
country, the requirement of DWLRs with telemetry varies with higher density in
the OCS, urban agglomeration, industrial clusters and coastal areas etc. and
lesser density in the safe and other areas and accordingly the requirements of
DWLRs have been planned.

Upon installation of the envisaged DWLRs with telemetry, the density of
automated monitoring is likely to improve with one automated monitoring station
in every 50 sq km in OCS area and other priority areas."

30. Giving the current status of installation of 21,860 DWLRs with telemetry system,

the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"Provision of around 33,000 DWLRs under various Central schemes is under
different stages of implementation/planning by CGWB and States. Out of this
around 6,000 DWLRs have already been installed at sites."

(d) Assessment Of Ground Water Quantity And Quality
{i) Assessment of water levels

31. CGWB measures ground water levels four times a year during January,
March/April/ May, August and November. Ground water samples are collected from
these observation wells once a year during the month of March/April/ May to obtain
background information of ground water quality changes on regional scale, which is
used for planning ground water development and management programmes.

32. Audit observed that the number of observations wells having water depth more
than 40 metres was significant in Rajasthan (20 per cent), Delhi (10 per cent) and
Haryana (five per cent). On the other hand, ground water depth was less than five
meters in Meghalaya (100 per cent), Nagaland (100 per cent), Puducherry (100 per
cent) and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (99 per cent). A comparison of depth to water
level of post-monsoon 2018 with the decadal mean of post-monsoon (2008-17) relating
to data available from 14,387 observation wells of CGWB indicated that in 5,115 (about
36 per cent) wells there was a rise in water level. However, 9,260 (about 64 per cent)
wells showed decline in water level. In 12 wells, there was no change in water level.

(ii) Factors affecting Ground Water Quantity

33, Audit pointed out that factors affecting ground water quantity were available in
respect of 14 States/UTs (Punjab, Assam, Haryana, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Rajasthan,
Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Puducherry, West Bengal, Haryana,
Bihar and Tamil Nadu). In these States/UTs, power subsidy for agriculture, cultivation of
water intensive crops, rainfall deficit and urbanisation/population growth and extensive
use of water in irrigation/industries were identified by the States/UTs as the major
reasons affecting the quantity of ground water, For the States/UTs in which this
assessment was not conducted, the specific factors affecting ground water quantity
were not identified, which could pose a constraint in development of effective strategies

for management of ground water.
19


(iii) Assessment of Ground Water Quality

34. Audit scrutiny revealed that CGWB is required to monitor the water quality every
year during the pre-monsoon season. Samples are collected in bottles (one litre) after
thoroughly rinsing the bottle with the samples to be collected and the bottles are sealed
at the site. Collected ground water samples are analysed for major parameters like
Calcium, Magnesium, Potassium, Arsenic, Carbonates, Chlorides, Nitrates, Sulphates,
Iron, Fluorides, Electrical Conductivity, pH etc. Sample analysis is carried out as per
standard procedures outlined in American Public Health Association (APHA) manual.

35. Audit observed that as per the data for 2015 based on 15,165 locations in 32
States tested by CGWB, ground water had levels of contaminants higher than
permissible limits of Arsenic (697 locations), Fluoride (637 locations), Nitrate (2,015

locations), Iron (1,389 locations) and Salinity (587 locations).

36. When asked about the efforts made in the country to control the contamination of
ground water in excess of permissible limit and specifically in mineral-rich and coastal

areas, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"Water being a State subject, initiatives for water management, including its
quality is primarily the responsibility of the States. However, various steps have
been taken by the Central Government for facilitating ground water quality
improvement/ remediation of contamination in the country, as given below:

i. Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in 2019, a time bound
campaign with a mission mode approach intended to improve water availability
including ground water conditions in the water stressed blocks of 256 districts
in India. In this regard, teams of officers from Central Government along-with
technical officers from Ministry of Jal Shakti were deputed to visit water stressed
districts and to work in close collaboration with district level officials to undertake
suitable interventions. In addition ‘Jal Shakti Abhiyan — Catch the Rain’ campaign
was launched by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India on 22 March 2021. The
improved groundwater recharge due to construction of artificial recharge
structures and increased water harvesting is likely to significantly contribute
towards reducing the contaminants level in the aquifer waters.

ii. Data on ground water quality available with CGWB are being shared with
concerned State Governments for taking necessary remedial measures.

ii. .CGWB_ constructs wells for exploration of ground water. Successful
contamination-free wells are handed over to the State Governments for gainful
utilization.

iv. Under the National Aquifer Mapping Programme (NAQUIM) of CGWB, special
attention is being given to the aspect of ground water quality including
contamination by toxic substances such as Arsenic in ground water. Further,
under NAQUIM, CGWB constructs arsenic safe exploratory wells arsenic
affected parts of the States of West Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The
arsenic safe deeper aquifer zones have been identified and wells have been

20


vi.

vii.

viii.

constructed tapping the arsenic safe deeper aquifers using innovative cement
sealing technique. So far, 513 exploratory wells tapping arsenic safe aquifers
have been constructed under NAQUIM programme including 40 in Bihar, 188 in
West Bengal and 285 in Uttar Pradesh. In addition, the innovative cement
sealing technique of CGWB has been shared with the State agencies to utilize to
construct arsenic free wells.

Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation,
Ministry of Jal Shakti has issued guidelines for control and regulation of
groundwater extraction with pan-India applicability notified on 24 September
2020. The guidelines include clauses on ‘Measures to be adopted to ensure
prevention from pollution in the plant premises of polluting industries/projects’.
Further, as per the guidelines, in case of coal and other base metal mining the
project proponent shall use the advance dewatering technology (by construction
of series of dewatering abstraction structures) to avoid contamination of surface
water. In addition to this, all mining units shall also monitor the water quality of
mine seepage and mine discharge through NABL accredited/ Govt. approved
laboratories and the same shall be submitted at the time of self-compliance.

Further, the groundwater pollution owes its origin to contamination of surface
water sources also which upon percolation pollute the groundwater aquifer
system and therefore, various efforts have been made in the country to address
this by installing Sewage Treatment Plants, Effluent Treatment Plants and better
system of sewage networks etc. However, the adverse effects of the
groundwater pollution can be addressed to a large extent if safe water is made
available to public. With this aim, central Government in partnership with States,
is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) since August, 2019 to provide potable
tap water supply of prescribed quality to every rural household in the country by
2024

Further, while allocating the funds to States/ UTs in a particular financial year,
10% weightage is given to the population residing in habitations affected by
chemical contaminants including Arsenic and Fluoride, as on 31st March of the
preceding financial year. Since, planning, implementation and commissioning of
piped water supply schemes based on a safe water source likely to take time,
purely as an interim measure, States/ UTs have been advised to install
community water purification plants (CWPPs) in such habitations, to provide
potable water to every household at the rate of 8-10 litre per capita per day
(1000) to meet their drinking and cooking requirements.

The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DoDW&S) had launched a
National Water Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) on 227 March, 2017 as a part of
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), which has now been
subsumed under Jal Jeevan Mission, to provide safe drinking water to 27,544
arsenic/fluoride affected rural habitations in the country.

Under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)
launched on 25th June, 2015 in selected 500 cities with focus on development of
urban infrastructure in various sectors including water supply, States/UTs have
the option to take projects on special water supply arrangements for difficult
areas, hill and coastal cities, including those having water quality problems with
Arsenic, Fluoride etc.

Government of India has launched AMRUT 2.0 on 01 October, 2021 for the
period of 05 years (FY 2021-22 to 2025-26), with the objective of providing
universal coverage of water supply through functional household tap connections

21


in all statutory towns in the country. AMRUT 2.0 focuses on making cities’ water
secure through recycle/reuse of treated sewage, rejuvenation of water bodies
and water conservation."

37. Detailing the efforts being taken in the Arsenic affected areas, the representative
of the Ministry during the course of evidence stated as under:-

“In areas where there is arsenic issue, we have developed a technology wherein
the well drilled can be sealed against those aquifers that are polluting. So,
sealing those well aquifers, which are polluting the ground water, deeper aquifers
are being tapped and this technology is being used by West Bengal, Bihar, UP,
etc.”

38. Audit revealed that broadly, the quality of ground water is affected by
Anthropogenic (generated by human activity) and Geogenic (generated by geological
process) activities. The factors affecting ground water quality were available in respect
of 11 States/UTs. Audit also noticed that most of the States/UTs that conducted
assessment of change in quality of ground water reported excessive use of fertilizers
and pesticides, disposal of industrial and municipal waste and sea water intrusion as
factors for deterioration of ground water quality.

39. Audit observed that the number of cases of fluorosis was significant in Andhra
Pradesh, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh. West Bengal was also affected by the
problem of Arsenic poisoning. DOWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that monitoring
of ground water quality was done every year and the data shared through the India
WRIS portal. Audit however, noticed (October 2020) that the WRIS portal contained
data as of 2015-16 only.

40. To a specific query regarding the action taken to assess the factors affecting
ground water quality in the States/UTs where no such assessment has been done, the

Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"Central Ground Water Board generates ground water quality data on a regional
scale during various scientific studies and ground water quality monitoring
throughout the country. These studies indicate the occurrence of contaminants
such as Flouride, Arsenic, Nitrate, lron and Heavy Metals beyond permissible
limits (as per BIS) for human consumption in isolated pockets in various States /
UTs. The ground water contamination reported by CGWB is mostly geogenic in
nature and does not show significant change over the years. However, nitrate
contamination is mostly anthropogenic and its spread has been noticed in some
areas, particularly areas adjoining habitations. Nitrate contamination can also be
caused by excessive use of fertilizers”.

41. As regards the methodology adopted and the efforts being taken by CGWB for
monitoring the Ground Water Quality, representative of the Ministry during the course of
examination explained through a Power Point Presentation as under:-

22


Management of GW (84) - Ground Water Quality Monitoring

+ CGWB generates GW quality data on a regional scale which is shared with states/UTs.
+ Samples are collected and analysed once a year throughout the country.
+ Major contaminants reported:

5 पथ 5 5
shown as mat) <above 001 ont)
21% Samples 2% Samples
Beyond Permission Limits ‘Beyond Permission Limits

9% Samples 6.45% Samples.
Beyond Permission Limits | Beyond Permission Limits

Parts of 152 dstricis in

‘Anthropogenic actives like Dumping | Arsenic in aquifer matrix tron in aquifer matrix ‘Aquier matrix, water
‘of wastes, use offetiizers et. logging and Sea water
Ingress.

ide bearing minerals,
inthe aquifer matrix,

* 88 9 part of NAQUIM studies, CGWB has demonstrated the Cement sealing technology for construction of wells tapping Arsenic safe
aquifers in Arsenic affected areas. States are 880 replicating the technique

Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) is being implemented in which 10 % weightage for funds allocation in a year is given to quality affected
habitations.

National Water Quality Sub Mission was launched to cater for 27544 arsenic/Fluoride affected habitations.

As a part of the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) option to take projects including those having water
quality issues.

Guidelines for control and regulation of groundwater extraction also has provisions for prevention of pollution.

Promoting water conservation and artificial recharge, which also reduces the contaminants level.

Water being a State subject, State Govis take initiatives for treatment or providing water from allernate contaminant safe sources.

(e) Model Bill on Ground Water and Legislative framework in States/UTs

42. Audit noticed that to enable the States to enact Ground Water Legislation, DoWR,
RD&GR circulated (2005) a Model Bill to all the States/UTs for regulation and
development of ground water. However, the Model Bill was under review (December
2019) as per the suggestions of NITI Aayog. As of December 2019, 19 States/UTs had
enacted legislation for management of ground water. Audit observed that the lack of
clear guidelines from the Department impacted the legislations implemented by the
States.

23


43. When asked, why no proper guidelines were issued by the Department regarding

legislation for management of ground water, the Ministry in a written reply as under:-

"Ministry of Jal Shakti had earlier circulated Model Bill - 2005 for Regulation and
Control of Ground Water Development to all the States. So far 19 States/ UTs
have enacted Ground Water Act. The matter is being pursued with the
States/UTs. Further, the revised Model bill on Ground Water has been finalized
by the Department which is being clubbed with other Model Bills (of the
Department) to have a holistic comprehensive Model Bill on water management
(encompassing all matters of water falling in the domain of States/UTs) in the
country. Further, Ministry of Jal Shakti has issued new guidelines on
24.09.2020 for regulation and control of ground water extraction by industrial,
infrastructure and mining projects. These guidelines have pan-india
applicability."

44. As regards the challenges being faced by the Ministry vis-a-vis
centre-state co-ordination with regard to policy framework, the Ministry
in a written reply informed as under:-

"Water being the State subject, the actual implementation of recharge
works are to be taken up by the States/UTs. The Central
Governmenthas brought out advisories/model bills etc from time time
for the States/UTs; the groundwater related policy initiatives including
formulating/promulgating legal framework in the States are undertaken
by the State Governments. 19 States/UTs have implemented the
groundwater Model Bill circulated earlier by the Ministry. Further, the
groundwater regulation guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020 issued by the
Ministry are in implementation stage in certain States/UTs."

45. In this regard, while deposing before the Committee, the representative of the
Ministry further stated as under:-

०००० water is essentially a State subject. Our model Bill was supposed to be a
kind of a beacon, a kind of a suggestion to the States that in what way they
should legislate. But it is up to the States to decide. They can make certain
variations as per their ground conditions and their own imperatives."

46. When asked about the response of the States to the guidelines for control
regulation of groundwater extraction which was notified by the Ministry on 24th
September, 2020 and the mechanism in place to ensure that these guidelines are
followed by the States, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"States that had their own Groundwater Acts and/or had been regulating
groundwater prior to the 24 Sep 2020 notification are being pursued to adopt/ follow
the Central guidelines. States are also being requested to make the process of
NOC issuance online, in line with the NOCAP Portal of CGWA. Secretary, DoWR,
RD & GR has written D.O. letters to Chief Secretaries of respective States in this
regard. Matter is being pursued regularly through meetings by the CGWA with
State authorities. Further, States which are in the process of enacting Groundwater
Act and constituting State Ground Water Authorities are being pursued to adopt /

24


follow the Central guidelines. State of Haryana has adopted guidelines, whereas,
the States of Punjab and UP are in the process of adopting the guidelines."

47. In a detailed Note on the feasibility of Parliament formulating legislation on the
subject matter of "Ground Water Management’ with the concurrence of State

Governments the Ministry stated as under:-

“Brief Statement in favour of legislations by States on groundwater subject

2. The matter was examined in detail in the Ministry. In this regard, Ministry
referred to various provisions of the Constitution of India and recommendations
of various Commissions formed by Government of India time to time in this
regard.

3. Provisions of the Constitution: Various provisions regarding powers to
legislate on various matters have been mentioned in the Constitution of India.
Article 246 clearly brings out this aspect which is reproduced as under:

Article 246, Clause (1) - Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List | in the Seventh Schedule
(referred to as the “Union List’).

Article 246, Clause (2) - Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament,
and, subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State also, have power to make
laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List Ill in the Seventh
Schedule (referred to as the “Concurrent List”).

Article 246, Clause (3) - Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any

State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with

respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I! in the Seventh Schedule
” (referred to as the “State List”).

State List (List Il) :-

Entry no. — 17 of “State List” (List-Il) pertains to Water subject and states the
following:

“Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry
56 of List |”,

Union List (List | ):-
Entry 56 of Union List (List Il) pertains to Water subject and states the following:

“Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest”.

25


4. Further the matter on legislation by Parliament or by State Legislatures
on Water subject were examined by various committees in the past. The relevant
recommendations/suggestions of Sarkaria Commission and Panchhi Committee
in this regard are as under:

Sarkaria Commission: With a view to reviewing the working of the existing
arrangements between the Union and the States in the changed socio-economic
scenario, the Government of India vide Ministry of Home Affairs Notification
No.1V/11017/1/83-CSR dated June 9, 1983 constituted a Commission under the
Chairmanship of Justice R.S. Sarkaria with Shri B. Sivaraman and Dr. S.R. Sen
as its members. The Commission submitted its recommendations in January
1988. The relevant recommendations are as under: -

Excerpt from Para 17.04.02 - Management of water resources for the benefit of
people of a State is a matter of vital concern to that State. The present situation
is more a case of non-use of a given power by the Union than one of want of the
same. We are, therefore, of the view that the existing arrangements which allow
the States competence in regard to matters in entry 17, List lI—subject, however,
to Union's intervention when found necessary in public interest only in inter-State
river and river valleys—is the best possible method of distributing power between
the Union and the States with respect to this highly sensitive and difficult subject.
We are, therefore, unable to support the suggestion that Water’ should be
made a ‘Union subject’.

Punchhi Committee: The Government of India constituted a Commission on
Centre-State Relations under the chairmanship of Justice Madan Mohan
Punchhi, former Chief Justice of India on 27th April 2007 to look into the new
issues of Centre-State relations keeping in view the changes that have taken
place in the polity and economy of India. The Commission examined and
reviewed the working of the existing arrangements between the Union and
States, various pronouncements of the Courts in regard to powers, functions and
responsibilities in all spheres including legislative relations, administrative
relations, role of governors, emergency provisions, financial relations, economic
and social planning, Panchayati Raj institutions, sharing of resources including
inter-state river water etc. The Commission made 273 recommendations in its
seven volume report presented to Government on 30 March 2010.

The Commission deliberated on Water in Chapter ॥ of volume-IV of the report
and relevant recommendations are as under:

Para 2.6.03 - A view has been expressed that perhaps such a harmony can be
achieved by shifting ‘water’ to the Concurrent List or by “nationalization” of inter
State rivers. We do not see merit in these proposals. Items in the Concurrent List
can be acted upon both by the Centre and States. The Constitutional provisions
at present do not preclude this. Moreover such a shift in the case of water would
lead to similar demands say in the case of “land”. We are not in favour of
initiating such a ripple effect in Centre-State relations. We have made
recommendations on the section dealing with environment on the manner in
which harmonization of all natural resources should take and the policies which

26


_ Should guide national efforts. Moreover good governance calls for
decentralization, because of the variety of local problems and solutions. This is
more so in the case of water. The Constitution gives a direct responsibility to the
States and through Parts IX and IXA enjoins upon them to proceed with a further
set of devolutions to Local Bodies. This to our mind is the appropriate path to a
decentralized action on water related matters. Nationalization connotes
ownership and this is difficult to establish in the case of flowing water. What is
required is regulation of water use and for that nationalization is not a
requirement.

Para 2.6.06 - Courts have been making a distinction between proprietary rights
and the sovereign rights of the State. Exercising such sovereign rights the State
can regulate the supply of water in public streams so as to utilize it to the best
advantage.

Para 2.6.07 - This concept was further developed into that of ‘public trust’
wherein it was held that the State is a trustee of all natural resources which are
by nature meant for public use and enjoyment. The Supreme Court has further
expanded the doctrine of public trust and given it prominence over that of
eminent domain and said that natural resources (water bodies in this case) are to
be managed for communities.

5. It would be seen from the above position that subject matter of water
except as mentioned in entry 56 of List |, falls within the purview of State
legislatures as per the Constitutional provisions and various Commissions have
recommended maintenance of status quo.

6. Efforts of Central and State Governments for sustainable
management of water resources:

(i) Model bills like Model Groundwater Bill, Model Building Bye Laws etc have
been shared with States to enact their own legislation suiting local requirements
in broad conformity with the Model Bills. Various states have already legislated
as per the provisions of the Model Bills. So far, 19 States/UTs have adopted and
implemented the ground water legislation (viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha,
Punjab, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli, Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry).

Further, Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) grants ‘No Objection
Certificates’ (NOC) for ground water abstraction in 20 States/UTs as per the
guidelines issued on 24.09.2020. States/UTs where the regulation being done by
CGWA are Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Sikkim, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Bihar, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli,
Daman & Diu, Andaman & Nicobar Islands. In other States/UTs regulation of
ground water is carried out by the State Governments themselves as per their
extant guidelines/provisions.

27


(ii) The role of Central Government is generally advisory in nature and
necessary technical expertise are being shared with States from time to time to
improve upon the water management practices. Further, National Aquifer
Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) program being implemented as a part of
Ground Water Management and Regulation (GWM & R) scheme, a Central
Sector scheme, envisages mapping of aquifers (water bearing formations), their
characterization and development of Aquifer Management Plans to facilitate
sustainable management of groundwater resources in the country. Out of the
nearly 25 lakh sq km area identified to be covered under NAQUIM studies, so far
an area of 23.5 lakh sq km has already been covered.

Further, state level NAQUIM outputs are shared with State Ground Water
Coordination Committees (SGWC) and concerned district authorities at district
level. Further, Public Interaction Programs (PIP) are being organised at
grassroots level and so far 1306 Public Interaction Programmes, in which nearly
90,000 persons have participated, for disseminating the tenets of the Aquifer
Management Plans for the benefit of the stakeholders including farmers. In 2022-
23 six workshops involving States have been planned by the CGWB.

In addition, Assessment of Dynamic Ground Water Resources of each State/UT
is being carried out jointly by CGWB and State Nodal/Ground Water Department
periodically. The estimation for the year 2022 has been compiled by CGWB and
is being shared with States/UTs for suitable interventions. Further, the Ministry of
Jal Shakti has decided to carry out the Ground Water Resource Assessment
annually from 2022 onwards for initiating timely interactions by all stakeholders
for sustainable groundwater management.

(iii) Further, Central Government is implementing various schemes like Jal
Jeevan Mission, MGNREGA, Atal Bhujal Yojana, PMKSY-Watershed
development, AMRUT etc to supplement the efforts of the States to achieve the
goals of sustainable management of this precious resources. In addition, under
PMKSY-WDC a new activity named as Springshed Development have been
included to take care of depleting springs in hilly areas. In addition, Central
Government is implementing Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) since 2019 in
collaboration with States for water conservation and water harvesting in the
country. Further the JSA for the year 2021 and 2022 was launched by Hon'ble
Prime Minister and President respectively. As available on JSA-CTR portal,
under JSA 2022, during the period from 29" March 2022 to 09" November 2022,
around 7.24 lakh rainwater conservation & harvesting structures were created
and around 1.20 lakh traditional water bodies were renovated in the country.

(iv) A number of States have done notable work in the field of water
conservation/harvesting such as ‘Mukhyamantri Jal Swavlamban Abhiyan’ in
Rajasthan, ‘JalyuktShibar’ in Maharashtra, ‘SujalamSufalam Abhiyan’ in Gujarat,
‘Mission Kakatiya’ in Telangana, NeeruChettu’ in Andhra Pradesh, Jal Jeevan
Hariyali in Bihar, ‘Jal Hi Jeevan’ in Haryana, and Kudimaramath scheme in Tamil
Nadu etc.

28


7. Keeping in view the position outlined above, the Ministry of Jal Shakti is
committed to advising, guiding and supporting the States for sustainable
management of groundwater resources in the country. "
48. Giving the status of model bill circulated by DoWR,RD & GR in 2005, the
Ministry informed as under:-

“Model Bill have been enacted and implemented in 19 States/ UTs (14 States
and 5 UTs). Further, 13 States/ UTs (10 States and 3 UTs) have taken Initiatives
for enactment of Model Bill. "

(f) Human Resource constraints faced by Central agencies managing Ground
Water

49. Audit scrutiny revealed that there was some shortage of human resources in
scientific and engineering categories in CGWB and its regional and divisional offices.
As of March 2019, there was a vacancy of 37.51 per cent, 26.93 per cent and 26.60 per
cent in the scientific, engineering and ministerial categories respectively. However, to
take care of the deficiency in staffs a number of consultants/professionals have been
hired by the CGWB for efficient working of the organisation.

50. In this regard when asked about the steps being taken up by CGWB/Ministry to
fill the vacant positions in CGWB, the Ministry informed as under:-
"The following steps have been/are being taken by CGWB and the Department
to strengthen its manpower:

1. Action has been taken/being taken to fill up direct recruitment /
promotional vacancies.

2. Proposal for filling up 840 posts through Direct Recruitment /
Deputation / Promotion has been initiated in consultation with UPSC /
SSC and this Department.

3. To fulfill the immediate requirement of CGWB, the young
professionals and consultants are also engaged on a contractual basis."

C, GROUND WATER REGULATION

(a) Projects granted Consent to Operate by State Pollution Control Boards
(SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) and Projects granted license by
Bureau of Indian Standards.

51. Audit scrutiny revealed that out of a sample of 328 cases in 18 States where the
Consent to Operate (CTO) granted to a project proponent included a condition which
required NOC for Ground Water extraction, 253 projects (77 per cent) were operating
without NOCs.

29


52. Audit pointed out that in 15 States for which data was made available to Audit,
3,189 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) licenses were issued to packaged drinking
water units since 2013, of which in 2,475 cases (78 per cent), the project proponents
were operating without obtaining NOCs from CGWA.

53. — In this regard, when asked about the mechanism that has been put in place by
CGWB to strengthen its monitoring for such projects which are operating without

obtaining NOCs, the Ministry informed as under:-

"Public Notices have been issued in leading newspapers directing all groundwater
user units to apply to CGWA for NOC or, at least submit NOC applications by
30.06.2022. Monthly list of NOCs issued are sent to DMs/ DCs with the advice to act
against the violators/ units abstracting groundwater without the NOC. Directions are
also being issued to all State Pollution Control Boards to issue CTO to all
groundwater users units only after groundwater NOC has been obtained. List of all
existing projects was sought from concerned State departments/ agencies such as
SPCBs, Department of Industries, Indian Bureau of Mines etc. so as to find out
which units have not yet obtained NOC from CGWA. Some States have provided
lists and on the basis of the list random inspections are being carried out by CGWB
officers. Matter is being pursued with other States. Further, because of proactive
efforts of CGWA, penalty/environmental compensation to the tune of Rs 15.77 crore
has already been imposed by them against 1,341 proponents who were found
extracting groundwater illegally/violated NOC conditions since issue of new
guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020."

(b) Delay in processing of applications by CGWA for grant/renewal of NOC in
non-notified areas

54. Audit pointed out that during 2013-19, CGWA accorded 3,517 fresh NOCs and
renewed 320 NOCs for Ground Water withdrawal to various industry, mining and
infrastructure projects. As on 31 March 2019, 10,758 applications for grant of NOC and

144 applications for renewal were pending.

55. When asked about the reasons for pendency in processing applications, the
Ministry explained as under:-
“The pendency as on 31.03.2019 was owing to certain concerns/observations
raised by Hon’ble NGT in respect of over-exploited, critical and semi-critical
areas. Therefore, only the applications falling in safe category were being
cleared by the CGWA. However, after notification of new guidelines w.e.f.
24.09.2020, all pendency has been cleared."
56. Regarding the present status of all pending applications for NOCs the Ministry
had informed that 1,210 NOC applications are pending with CGWA as on 01.05.2022.

30


57. Toa specific query regarding the steps taken by CGWA to expeditiously process
all applications for grant/renewal of NOC, the Ministry stated as under:-

"CGWA has fixed timelines for processing of NOC application at each stage.
Currently, total time stipulated for issuance of NOC is 45 days (maximum) from
date of submission of application which is being monitored by them very closely.
The NOC portal (NOCAP portal) has been revamped for submission of NOC
applications by the project proponents and issue of all NOCs by the CGWA
through online mode. Further, the powers of issue of NOCs have been
decentralized among field functionaries to have faster processing/issue of NOCs.
In addition, to standardize the process of NOC issuance and to cut the
discretionary powers of officers, a booklet on Standard Operating Procedure
(SoP) has been issued by the CGWA which is updated time to time.”

(०) Non-receipt of applications for renewal on expiry of NOC

58. The Audit pointed out that in 474 cases, renewal of NOC was due during 2013-
18 but the project proponents did not apply for renewal. CGWA did not take any action
under section 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 against these project
proponents. Thus, even after expiry of the NOC, existing industries/projects continued

to draw Ground Water without any regulation.

59. | While enumerating the reasons as to why no action was taken by CGWA against
those project proponents who were extracting Ground Water without renewal of NOC,

the Ministry stated as under :-

“Prior to April, 2015, there was no online system for NOC application processing
and all the NOCs were being issued off-line. Record of such NOCs, therefore,
was not available online and it was difficult to manually keep track of all the
NOCs getting expired though all efforts were made by the CGWA in this
direction. Further, the inspection power of visiting industries/project proponents
were vested with handful staffs/officers of CGWA which has now been widened
by allowing this power to be delegated to other CGWB officers, DMs/DCs etc
which has resulted into better implementation of regulation measures."

60. On being asked whether any action against such project proponents is being

taken, the Ministry stated as under:-

“CGWA is issuing notices to projects whose renewal is due but have not applied
for same. Environmental compensation shall be levied from such projects for
illegal withdrawal of groundwater as per extant guidelines. Post 24.09.2020
(notification of new guidelines), 3200 notices have been issued to various project
proponents for not complying to ground water regulatory conditions and action
shall be taken based on their response and as per extant guidelines. Further,
penalty/environmental compensation to the tune of Rs 15.77 crore has already
been imposed against 1,341 proponents who were found extracting groundwater
illegally/violated NOC conditions since issue of new guidelines dated 24 Sep
2020.

31


61. When asked to explain the current procedure for issuing NOCs and ensuring
timely renewal of expired NOCs and how CGWA is renewing NOCs of the applicants
whose NOCs have expired and are not traceable, the Ministry informed as under:-

a) Entire NOC processing is online. CGWA has its own NOC Application
Processing (NOCAP) portal  https://www.cgwa-noc.gov.in. Project
Proponents (PP) have to apply online. The application is processed through
various levels as per quantum of groundwater extraction applied.

b) For faster processing of applications, the power has been decentralized
based on the quantum of extraction.

0) Timelines for processing has been fixed as per the quantum/ requirement of
documents. Maximum time limit has been fixed as 45 days, provided the
PP has submitted the application complete in all respect.

d) In order to ensure timely renewal of expired NOCs, auto-generated
messages are sent on registered e-mail Id and Mobile Number of PP in
advance, intimating the expiry of NOC and requesting to apply to renewal
timely.

e) List of NOCs issued are sent to concerned DM/ DC who have been
appointed as Authorised Officer by CGWA to ensure compliance and take
action against violations.

f) CGWA also issues public notices through newspapers etc time to time
urging the groundwater users without valid NOC to apply on NOCAP. Also,
as stated earlier, DM/ DC have been appointed as Authorized Officers to
ensure compliance, which includes timely application for renewal before
expiry of NOC. In case of NOCs issued earlier without validity date, Public
Notice was issued by CGWA on 06.10.2017 asking such PPs to apply
afresh, failing which existing NOC will be considered as cancelled.

(d) Post NOC monitoring by CGWA and Authorised officers

62. Audit pointed out that there were numerous cases in which conditions stipulated
in the NOCs were violated. Despite the widespread violations, CGWA issued (2013-18)
show cause notices to only 99 project proponents. During joint field visits to the
industries/project sites (other than individual households) for verification of compliance
with conditions laid out in NOCs, widespread non-compliance of conditions mentioned

in the NOC was noticed.

63. When asked to provide the details on the number of cases in which conditions

stipulated in the NOCs were violated, the Ministry informed as under:-

"There are 137 such cases in which conditions stipulated in the NOCs were
violated." ‘

32


64. Regarding the reasons for issuing show cause notice issued only to 99 projects
proponents, the Ministry stated as under:-

"Prior to April, 2015, there was no online system for NOC application processing
and all the NOCs were being issued off-line. Record of such NOCs, therefore, was
not available online and it was difficult to manually keep track of all issued NOCs
and their expiry dates."

65. When asked about the action being contemplated against project proponents
violating the conditions stipulated in the NOCs, the Ministry informed as under:-

"NOC is renewed only after the proponents have complied with all the conditions
specified in the previous NOC including installation of piezometers, data on
water level etc. In the previous guidelines (2012 and 2015), there was no
provision for imposition of penalty for violation/ non-compliance of NOC
conditions. However, penalty is being levied towards non-compliance of NOC
conditions at the time of renewal as per provisions of Environment Protection
Act, 1986 and notified guidelines 24.09.2020."

66. Regarding the measures being taken by CGWB to obviate occurrence of such
non-compliance, the Ministry informed as under:-

"In the new guidelines notified w.e.f. 24.09.2020, provision for penalty has been
kept for violation of NOC conditions and around 3,200 show cause
notices/notices have been issued since the new guidelines came into effect.
Since the new guidelines came into effect, EC/ Penalty has been imposed on
907 units including penalty for late submission.Mobile App has been developed
to enable project proponents to submit self-compliance with the facility for field
verification by CGWB officers.in pursuance to directions of Hon’ble NGT, CGWA,
vide Order dated 23.10.2017, appointed the concerned DM/DC as Authorized
Officers for enforcement of conditions in NOC and to initiate action against the
violations observed. "

67. On the issue of unauthorized extraction of water by industries, the representative
of the Ministry, during the course of evidence, stated as under:-

“Our effort will be to work more closely with the States to improve enforcement. It
is a big issue to suddenly criminalise it because industrial activity also has to go
on but it has to go on lawfully. They have to comply with the water norms.”

68. In this regard, Representative of the Ministry in a Power Point Presentation
furnished the following updated information:-

33


Ground Water Regulation (61) — Proponents working without NOC & Post NOC
monitoring.

Public Notices have been issued in leading newspapers to apply for NOC by 30.06.2022.
Monthly list of NOCs issued are sent to DMs/ DCs for suitable action.

oo

obtained.

NOC (Authorization Issued).
* The proposal for strengthening of CGWA is under advanced stage.
«EC are levied for illegal withdrawal of groundwater as per Regulation guidelines.
+ Post notification of new guidelines, 3,200 notices have been issued to various project proponents.

* Directions issued to all State Pollution Control Boards to issue CTO only after groundwater NOC has been

# Inspection and compliance monitoring is being carried out by CGWB/State/Revenue officers of units without valid

+ Proactive efforts of CGWA have resulted in imposition of penalty/ environmental compensation to the tune of Rs 28

crore on units extracting groundwater illegally or violating NOC conditions.

D. IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES ON GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AND
REGULATION (GWMR)

69. As per the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) note (June 2013),
the scheme “Ground Water Management and Regulation” (GWMR) had been proposed
for aquifer mapping and effective management of ground water with focus on
vulnerable areas. GWMR scheme was a Central Sector Scheme of DoOWR,RD&GR
during the XII plan (2012-17) with an estimated cost of 3,319 crore to be implemented
by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). The Scheme had four components: (a)
National Project on Aquifer Management (NAQUIM),(b)Participatory Ground Water
Management (PGW), (c) Technological up-gradation
and (d) Ground Water Monitoring, Assessment, Regulation, Publication, Seminars,
Awards, technical assistance to States and spill over work of the project of Artificial
Recharge & Exploration. The scheme was recommended by the Expenditure and
Finance Committee (EFC) in May 2013 and approved (August 2013) by the CCEA.

70. The scheme envisaged Aquifer mapping for an accurate and comprehensive”
micro-level picture of ground water in different hydro-geological settings of India by
using modern techniques like heliborne geophysical surveys, Geographic Information

System (GIS) based thematic maps, ground water modelling and real time digital water
34


level monitoring. The scheme also sought for PGWM through collaborative approach,
involving Central and State organisations, research institutes, Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs), Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and local community to
enable the community and stake holders to monitor and manage ground water

themselves.

71. The broad objectives of the GWMR scheme (2012-17) were as under:

i. Aquifer mapping for delineation of aquifer disposition in three dimension
along with their characterisation on 1:50,000 scale in 8.89 lakh sq.km and
further detailing up to 1:10,000 scale in some of the vulnerable (Over-
exploited, Critical, Semi-critical) areas. Prior to this, the mapping had been
done (before May 2013) at a scale of 1:250,000 and in two dimension scale.

ii. Formulation of Aquifer Management Plan to quantify water availability and
water quality in various aquifers for facilitating sustainable management of
ground water resources at regional and local level through participatory
management approach.

iii. Capacity building of functionaries of PRlIs, local community and grass root
workers.

iv. Up-gradation of technological capabilities and infrastructure of the CGWB to
align with proposed aquifer mapping and participatory management of ground
water approach.

v. Regulate and control ground water development.

72. |The EFC approved (March 2018) continuation of the scheme for 2017-20 at an
estimated cost of = 992 crore. However, PGWM62, which was one of the components
of GWMR scheme during the XII Plan Period was dropped from the scheme. Activities
to be carried out during 2017-2020 under GWMR scheme were (a) National Aquifer
Mapping and Management Programme; (b) Ground Water Monitoring, Resource
Assessment, Regulation, Information Dissemination, etc. including Workshops,
Seminars, Technical assistance to State and Central Organisations, etc.; and (e)
Strengthening of infrastructure for technological up-gradation (Machinery &
Equipment) through procurement of Hydro-geological, Geophysical and Chemical
equipment, Scientific Software, Computers, Drilling machines, Motor Vehicles and

ancillary equipment.

73... The Ministry further stated as under:
"The activities under the ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme
are of continuous nature. The Scheme has been approved for continuation for
the next five years (2021-26) with a total outlay of Rs 997 crore”.

(a) Financial performance of GWMRS

74. The Audit pointed out that the approved outlay for the Scheme 'Ground Water
Management and Regulation (GWIMR)" was 4,050.66 crore during 2012-19 against
35


which budget allocations were 2,349.48 crore, Against the budget allocation of 2,349.48
crore, the actual expenditure under the Scheme was Rs 1,109.73 crore during 2012-19.

75. When asked about the measures taken up to allocate funds to CGWB as per
sanctioned outlays and ensure timely utilisation of funds released to it, the Ministry
informed as under:-

"CGWB is now closely monitoring the tendering and procurement activities and
also engaged a Project Management Consultant (PMC) for tendering &
execution activities which has resulted in improved utilization of funds. Above
measures have resulted in improved average annual expenditure from Rs. 116
crore during 2012-17, to Rs. 220 crore during 2017-21".

76. When asked to explain in detail the monitoring system for the
tendering and procurement activities, the Ministry replied as under:-

"There is a dedicated procurement cell in the Central Head Quarters
of CGWB i.e. Bhujal Bhawan, Faridabad, which monitors the
tendering andprocurement activities. In addition to this, the progress
in this respect is also periodically monitored at the level of
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation. To ensure efficient utilization of the sanctioned
amount, a Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been engaged
for tendering & execution activities."

77. Regarding the Financial performance of GWMRS during the period 2007-12 to
2022-26, the Ministry during the evidence, in a Power Point Presentation, informed the
Committee as under:-

GUIM&R Scheme 160—Financial periormance

2020-22__'2022-26
2017-20 = ste, वीक
+ 283.Serttear 7 ०७

i.
2012-47.”
~ + AT62ertvear

~ 2007-12

+ $9.5er/ Year Average Annual Expenditure under the scheme has witnessed two fold
increase under successive plans

36


(9) Targets of aquifer mapping and achievements and incomplete aquifer
mapping reports

78.

e Aquifers are natural geological units that can hold and transmit water.

e There are two broad groups of aquifer systems

o Unconsolidated Formations or soft rock formations occupy nearly 30
% of the country and have high ground water potential.

० Consolidated/Semi-consolidated Formations or hard rock formations
occupy nearly 70% of the country. They have moderate to low
ground water potential.

Audit had pointed out that an area of 24.8 lakh sq. km was identified for Aquifer

Mapping in the country. CGWB covered an area of 13 lakh sq. km. (52 per cent) as of

September 2020. Further, Aquifer Mapping Reports for only 6.5 lakh sq. km. were

finalized.

79.

When asked about the action taken to ensure coverage of targeted area of 24.8

lakh sq.km and finalise all the remaining Aquifer Mapping Reports, the Ministry replied

as

80.

under:-

“Total geographical area of the country is around 33 lakh sq km, of which 24.8 lakh
sq km was identified to be covered under the NAQUIM studies. As of now (३1७
March 2022) 21 lakh sq km has already been covered and the targets set for
coverage has been achieved. The entire area identified for NAQUIM studies is
targeted to be covered by 31st March 2023.As regards reports of NAQUIM studies,
against an area of 16.33 lakh sq km covered till 31st March 2021, reports in respect
of 14 lakh sq km have been issued as on date. The delay in compilation of the
reports can be attributed to lack of adequate manpower and deployment of
concerned officers in additional activities like sharing of outputs with District
Authorities, Public Interaction Programmes etc. During the year 2021-22 an
additional area of 4.8 lakh sq km has been covered, reports for which will be issued
during the current year. Earnest attempts are being made to issue reports in respect
of the entire area covered as on 31st March 2022, by September, 2022."

When asked about the current status of finalisation of Aquifer Mapping Reports,

the Ministry informed as under:-

37


"Against an area of 16.33 lakh sq km covered till 317 March 2021, reports in
respect of 14 lakh sq km have been issued as on date. The delay in compilation
of the reports can be attributed to deployment of concerned officers in multiple
activities like sharing of outputs with District Authorities and Public Interaction
Programmes etc.). Earnest attempts are being made to issue reports in respect
of the entire area covered as on 31st March 2022, which is nearly 21 lakh sq km,
by September 2022. The steps taken in this regard include deploying more
number of officers to the regional offices where such requirements are there. The
progress is being reviewed at regular intervals at Central Head Quarters level."

81. Elaborating on the efforts made by the Ministry towards aquifer Mapping
Programme, the representative of the Ministry while deposing before the Committee
stated as under :-

"Sir, as suggested by the C&AG team, we are expediting the completion of the
national aquifer mapping programme. We will be completing all the activities by
2023. To take up the activity at finer scale, we have taken up the heli-borne
survey in parts of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana and Punjab. 4,00,000 sq. kms.
will be covered. Under this survey, a loop is attached to the helicopter, and that
picks up the signal from the earth, and for that, we get the information up to 300
metres.”

(c) Non preparation of Ground Water Models

82. Audit observed that ground water modelling work undertaken by CGWB was not
completed as scheduled. As such, CGWB could not provide a tool to estimate ground
water availability for various water use strategies and to determine the cumulative
effects of increased water use and drought conditions. In this regard, DOWR,RD&GR
stated (September 2020) that ground water modelling for ~3 lakh sq. km was expected
to be completed by 2022.

83. With regard to the current status of ground water modelling, the Ministry
informed as under:-

"So far ground water modeling for an area of 4.5 lakh sq km has been
completed. Of the said 4.5 lakh sq km, ground water modeling for 2.5 lakh sq km
has been carried out through in-house resources and the remaining has been
carried out in collaboration with IIT, Kanpur and IISC, Bengaluru."

84. While elaborating the steps being undertaken to ensure completion of ground

water modelling in a time bound manner, the Ministry informed as under:-

"In order to ensure timely completion of groundwater modeling studies, four
regional hubs at North (CGWB, Faridabad), South (CGWB, South Eastern
Coastal Region, Chennai), East (CGWB, South Eastern Region, Bhubaneswar)
& West (CGWB, West Central Region, Ahmadabad) for coordinating the
modeling studies have been created. Eight mentors have been identified, two
each in the 04 regional hubs for assisting and coordinating the modeling studies.
Fortnightly groundwater modeling talk series have been initiated with first
fortnight talk being delivered by experts in groundwater modeling and the second
fortnight talk being delivered from internal resources."

38


(d) Dissemination of NAQUIM outputs
(i) Designing of web-based system

85. Audit pointed out that though CGWB had published aquifer mapping reports, a
web-based system for easy dissemination of the information on the aquifer mapping

was not designed, as envisaged.

86. When asked about devising of any mechanism for disseminating aquifer
mapping information on the web, for easy understanding of the general masses, the
Ministry informed as under:-

"NAQUIM reports are being disseminated through CGWB website. Further, a
separate web-portal Aquifer Information and Management System (AIMS) has
been developed for easy dissemination of information on aquifer mapping. The
AIMS portal is being further upgraded by CGWB to have easier dissemination of
aquifer related information to the public at block levels. Further, groundwater
levels, water quality information can also be accessed through India-WRIS portal
maintained by National Water Informatics Centre."

(ii) Action by State Governments on Aquifer mapping reports

87. Audit observed that of the 201 reports included in the programme, Aquifer
mapping reports of only 168 districts were shared with District Administration till
November 2019. Many States did not take action on the recommendations made by
CGWB in the aquifer mapping reports due to constraints such as map scale being too
small to locate the areas, non-receipt of funds from CGWB or Central Government to

implement the reports in the field, etc.

88. When the Committee sought to know the status regarding Aquifer mapping
reports which have been finalised, the Ministry informed as under:-

"Against an area of 16.33 lakh sq km covered till 31४ March 2021, reports in
respect of 14 lakh sq km have been issued as on date. Earnest attempts are
being made to issue reports in respect of the entire area covered as on 31st
March 2022, which is nearly 21 lakh sq km by September 2022. The steps taken
in this regard include deploying more number of officers to the regional offices
where such requirements are there. The progress is being reviewed at regular
intervals at Central Head Quarters level."

89. When asked whether all these Aquifer mapping reports have been shared with
the District Administration, the Ministry informed as under:-

“To ensure better utilization of NAQUIM outputs, District wise findings are shared
with the District Administration. Sharing of NAQUIM outputs with District
Authorities, as a new activity was initiated in the year 2018. So far, NAQUIM
studies are complete in parts of 538 districts and outputs in respect of 385

39


90.

districts have already been shared. Ernest efforts are being made to share the
NAQUIM outputs in respect of all the covered districts with the district authorities
during the current year 2022-23.”

To a specific query regarding the number of States that had not taken action on

the recommendation made by CGWB on Aquifer mapping reports , the Ministry

informed as under:-

91.

"The NAQUIM outputs shared with the State Governments include information
about aquifers in the States, ground water level, ground water quality, ground
water resource availability etc along with a management plan. The information
contained in the report has potential for use by many agencies like water
resources, agriculture, irrigation etc. States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh are
using the information for ground water management planning and
implementation. NAQUIM outputs are also being used in the seven States
(Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh) where Atal Bhujal Yojana is being implemented."

In this regard, when further asked about the mechanism by which the Ministry

was engaging with the States to impress upon them to take requisite action on Aquifer
Management Reports and to help the states in difficulties related to funding/technical

aspects, the Ministry informed as under:-

92.

"The NAQUIM outputs are shared with the State Governments through the State
Ground Water Coordination Committees (SGWCC) which are headed by the
concerned Principal Secretaries of the respective States. From 2018, as per the
directions of the Ministry, CGWB has started sharing the NAQUIM
recommendations to the District Authorities and so far outputs in respect of 385
districts are already shared with the District authorities. Outputs are also being
shared with other central agencies for their effective utilisation. CGWB also
provides technical assistance to the State Governments, as and when requested
for such assistance. As regards funding, Ministry of Jal Shakti as a part of the
ground water component of the PMKSY-HKKP provides financial assistance for
construction of irrigation wells in areas that are identified as safe and where
additional development of ground water is possible. Ministry of Jal Shakti as a
part of Atal Bhujal Yojana provides technical assistance and financial support for
ground water management in identified water stressed areas."

When asked whether the Ministry was sending any alerts to areas

with depleted water tables based on information available on AIMS,
the Ministry informed as under:-

"As of now there is no such provision in AIMS. However, district-wise
findings of NAQUIM studies including management plans are being
shared with District Administration (DM/DC) highlighting the local
groundwater issues and remedial measures."

40


93. When asked whether any mechanism has been developed so that district/block
authorities may take immediate/suo-moto action based on the information available on
the AIMS, the Ministry informed as under:-

"The NAQUIM outputs shared with the State Governments include information
about aquifers in the States, ground water level, ground water quality, ground
water resource availability etc along with a management plan. The information
contained in the report has potential for use by many agencies like water
resources, agriculture, irrigation etc. States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh are
using the information for ground water management planning and
implementation. NAQUIM outputs are also being used in the seven States
(Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh) where Atal Bhujal Yojana is being implemented.A mechanism
has been put in place to share the recommendations with the State
Governments. The mechanism includes sharing the information at State Level
through the ground water coordination committees and at district level with the
District administration. The concerned authorities in the State/District can use
this information for planning and implementation of ground water management
interventions."

94. While elucidating the cases of use of NAQUIM outputs by several states, the
Ministry in a Power Point Presentation, during the evidence, informed as under:-

WMA Scheme (64)—Select cases ofuse ofNAQUIM outouts ;

Drinking water source finding and source sustainabi Maharashtra, Jammu and Kashmir

Artificial Recharge and water conservation interventions Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha

Artificial Recharge interventions in Urban Area Bengaluru

Rejuvenation of Hot spring Rajgir, Bihar

Safe Drinking water in Arsenic affected areas Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal

New areas with groundwater potential for irrigation Assam, Nagaland

Ground Water Regulation based on NAQUIM Tamil Nadu

recommendation

(e) Participatory Ground Water Management

95. According to Audit, although an outlay of 575.38 crore was provided for the
period 2013-17 under the component Participatory Ground Water Management
(PGWM) in accordance with the National Water Policy 2012, no expenditure was
incurred. The component was dropped:from the subsequent EFC memo of 2017-20 and -
is now being taken up as a separate scheme on participatory ground water
management through the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY). However, unlike the PGWM,

41


ABHY will be implemented only in few selected locations in seven States, therefore,

both in scale and size, the ABHY is not a replacement for PGWM which was dropped.

96.

When the Committee sought to know the reasons for not implementing the

component Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWW), the Ministry informed as

under:-

97.

“Participatory Ground Water Management Component as envisaged in the EFC
memo involved hiring the services of a Technical Support Agency (TSA), which
in turn was to deliver a set of consistent project management functions and
technical services (activities, programmes, guidelines, farmer water school
methodologies etc.) at State level. However, a suitable agency to serve as a TSA
was not available. Deliberations at various levels to evolve a modified strategy
for participatory ground water management resulted in a full fledged scheme Atal
Bhujal Yojana, which was launched in 2019."

On being asked about the details of the seven States where ABHY is being

implemented and the basis for selection of these States , the Committee informed as

under:-

"Atal Bhujal Yojana is being taken up in 8,562 water stressed Gram Panchayats
of 224 administrative blocks/ Talukas in 80 districts of seven States, viz.
Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. It is being implemented from 01.04.2022 for a period of 5
years.States for implementation of the scheme were finalized based on several
criteria including institutional preparedness, hydrogeological conditions in
addition to ground water over-exploitation / water stress conditions.

98. When asked about the Ministry's plan towards achievement of ground water
management at grass root level across the entire country, as envisaged by the National
Water Policy (2012), the Ministry in a written reply in the year 2022 responded as
under:-

"The scheme envisages active participation of the communities and panchayats
in the participating States in various activities such as formation/strengthening of
Water User Associations, monitoring and disseminating ground water data, water
budgeting and preparation of Gram-Panchayat wise Water Security Plans
(WSPs) & their implementation. The participation of women in water budgeting
and water security planning exercises has been kept at least 33% in the Gram
Panchayat-level Water User Associations. Mid-term review of Atal Bhujal Yojana
is scheduled to be held in this year and based upon the evaluation/feedback,
decision on extension of the Scheme to other areas will be taken. Further, Water
being a State subject the groundwater Regulation guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020
(with Pan-India applicability) notified by the Department talks about
implementation of participatory groundwater management in the country. The
States/UTs are being periodically advised to work in participatory approach to
achieve the objectives of sustainable groundwater management.”

42


(f) Capacity Building

99. According to Audit, the Expert Group’s Report on Benchmarking gave
(December 2012) 12 recommendations relating to capacity building in CGWB. All the
recommendations were accepted (August 2013) for implementation by the Review
Committee. However, out of 12 , no action was taken in respect of four
recommendations by CGWB which include (i) Selected CGWB officers/staff should
attend international conferences and present important findings.(ii) A mentorship
programme should be developed between CGWB and international experts to provide
one on-one training for specialized hydro-geologic techniques and applications. (iii)
Attendance at scientific conferences is an especially important aspect of capacity
building.(iv) CGWB should provide references on its website for self-training in the field
of hydrogeology. Audit observed that in spite of these recommendations being of
considerable importance for CGWB with respect to its future infrastructure and human
resource requirements, CGWB failed to take action on some of the significant
recommendations. The Department accepted (October 2019) that recommendations
were not implemented completely. It further added that CGWB would make all efforts to

implement these recommendations.

(g) Schemesi/initiatives of States/UTs for management of Ground Water

100. Audit observed deficiencies in schemes of some States. These included delay in
completion of schemes, lack of analysis of ground water level data before
recommending proposals for construction of tube wells (Bihar); delay in finalisation of
project on Ground Water Recharge action plan (Delhi); shortfall in the activities of State
Ground Water Conservation Mission, lag in achievement of targets for implementing the
use of sprinkle irrigation (Uttar Pradesh), etc. Audit also highlighted that while some of
the schemes implemented in the States were effective in improving the condition of
ground water levels in the States, there were schemes in which the envisaged targets
were not achieved and therefore, needed better control and implementation to ensure

the desired results.

E. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND GROUND WATER

101. The 193 Member States of the United -Nations (UN) officially adopted a new

sustainable development agenda entitled, “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda

for Sustainable Development” at the Sustainable Development Summit held at UN

Headquarters in New York in September 2015. This agenda contains 17 Goals and 169
43


targets. The action for achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) started
on 1 January 2016 and these are expected to be achieved by 31 December 2030. Of
these 17 goals, one goal i.e. Goal 6- ‘Ensure availability and sustainable management

of water and sanitation for all’ is related to clean water and sanitation.

102. NITI Aayog has been entrusted with the role to co-ordinate ‘Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ (SDGs). NITI Aayog is required
to periodically collect data on SDGs and to act proactively to fructify the goals and
targets quantitatively as well as by maintaining high standards of quality. Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) undertook a parallel exercise of
interaction with the Ministries to evolve indicators reflecting the SDG goals and targets.
To achieve these tasks, the draft mapping of the goals and targets vis a vis the Nodal
and other Ministries has been carried out in consultation with MoSPI. For Goal 6, the
targets identified by NITI Aayog for DOWR,RD&GR as related to ground water are as
under:-

Target 6.4 - By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all

sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address

water scarcity and substantially reduce the
number of people suffering from water scarcity;

Target 6.6 - By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including
mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes;

Target- 6.b Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in
improving water and sanitation management.(this target was not linked to a
scheme by NITI Aayog)

(a) Target 6.4 — Annual ground water withdrawal against net annual availability

103. Audit pointed out that against the target value for percentage annual ground
water withdrawal against net annual availability of 70 per cent under Target 6.4 for Goal
6 under Sustainable Development Goals issued by NITI Aayog, the national level was
at 63 per cent. However, there were eight States/UTs (Chandigarh, Delhi, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu) where this value was
higher than the target of 70 per cent. Out of 534 districts in 22 States/UTs, 202 districts

had stage of extraction ranging from 71 per cent to 385 per cent.

104. When asked about action taken by CGWB to achieve the target 6.4 in
states/districts having stage of extraction more than 70 per cent, the Ministry replied as
under:-

"Though water is a State subject, Central Government has taken a number of
measures for conservation, management of ground water including effective

44


implementation of rain water harvesting in the country, which can be seen at
URL:http://jalshakti-
dowr.gov.in/sites/default/files/Steps_to_control_water_depletion_Feb2021.pdf.G
overnment of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) for implementation of
suitable interventions based on scientific inputs in 2019 in 256 water stressed
districts in the country. Further, seeing the importance of sustainable
management of groundwater in the country, the campaign “Jal Shakti Abhiyan:
Catch the Rain” (JSA:CTR) was launched by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 22
March 2021. The JSA : CTR campaign for the year 2022 has also been launched
by Hon'ble President of India on 29 March 2022 and the progress is being
closely monitored by the Ministry.Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY is being
implemented in the identified over-exploited and water stressed areas falling in
the States of Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The scheme is expected to contribute significantly
towards water and food security of the participating States. CGWA has advised
States/UTs to take measures to promote/adopt artificial recharge to ground water
/ rain water harvesting. The latest guidelines for control and regulation of
groundwater extraction with pan-India applicability were notified by the Ministry
on 24 September 2020. Through the guidelines, the States/UTs have been
advised to promote crop rotation, crop diversification, bring suitable water pricing
policy and review the free/subsidized electricity to farmers to control excessive
extraction of groundwater. Further, CGWA is issuing NOC to project proponents
based on groundwater conditions and as per extant guidelines in 20 States/UTs.
CGWB is preparing the aquifer mapping and management plan (for
groundwater) for the entire country which is likely to be completed by 31 Mar
2023. The management plans including agriculture sector (like plans for crop
diversification, sprinkler system, drip irrigation etc.) are shared with the
respective State governments for taking appropriate measures / implementation
for sustainable groundwater management. In addition, a number of States have
done notable work in the field of water conservation/harvesting such as
‘Mukhyamantri Jal Swavlamban Abhiyan’ in Rajasthan, ‘Jalyukt Shibar’ in
Maharashtra, ‘Sujalam Sufalam Abhiyan’ in Gujarat, ‘Mission Kakatiya’ in
Telangana, Neeru Chettu’ in Andhra Pradesh, Jal Jeevan Hariyali in Bihar, ‘Jal
Hi Jeevan’ in Haryana, ‘Pani Bachao, Paisa Kamao' in Punjab and
Kudimaramath scheme in Tamil Nadu etc."

(b) Target 6.6 - By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including
mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes;

105. Audit observed that CGWB had, as a part of its ‘Ground water Management and
Regulation Scheme’ proposed a component of Aquifer Mapping and Preparation of
Aquifer Management Plan during XII Plan (2012-17) which was to be further continued
during 2017-20. Under the Aquifer Mapping, a combination of geologic, geophysical,
hydro-geologic, hydrologic and water quality data are integrated to characterise the
quantity, quality and distribution of ground water in aquifers. Audit pointed out that of
the total identified area of 24.8 lakh sq. km. to be mapped under NAQUIM, 13 lakh sq.
km. had been covered as of September 2020 but Aquifer-Mapping Reports in respect of
nearly 6.5 lakh sq. km. (i.e. 50 per cent of the area covered) for 29 States/ UTs only had
been finalised. Audit observed that considering the fact that CGWB has not been able
to prepare the maps for all the aquifers, Centre and State governments, in the absence
45


of these maps, may not be able to plan and implement strategies to protect these
aquifers as per target. It is pertinent to mention that this target is to be achieved by the
year 2020.

106. When asked about the action taken to ensure coverage of targeted area of 24.8
lakh sq.km and finalise all the remaining Aquifer Mapping Reports, the Ministry inter-
alia replied as under:-
“Total geographical area of the country is around 33 lakh sq km, of which 24.8 lakh
sq km was identified to be covered under the NAQUIM studies. As of now (31st
March 2022) 21 lakh sq km has already been covered and the targets set for

coverage has been achieved. The entire area identified for NAQUIM studies is
targeted to be covered by 31% March 2023.

(c) Target 6 b - Local communities’ participation in water management

107. According to Audit, the National Water Policy (2012) also envisages that
declining ground water levels in over-exploited areas need to be arrested by introducing
improved technologies of water use, incentivising efficient water use and encouraging
community based management of aquifers. Accordingly, DOWR,RDGR had, as _ part of
its ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme’ proposed a component of
participatory management during XII Plan (2012-17). Participatory management was
envisaged to enable the community and stake holders to monitor and manage the
ground water as common pool resources themselves. This required a coordinated effort
involving Government departments, research institutes, Panchayati Raj Institutions, civil
society organisations and stakeholders at village level. However, no action on this
component was taken by the Department. Further, in the context of extension of this
scheme for 2017-20, this component, which had a pan-India scope was removed and
included under another scheme Atal Bhujal Yojana, launched in December 2019, but
limited to seven States only. Hence, there was delay in government initiative in respect
of this target and as such, target 6 b remains unachieved in respect of ground water

108. On a specific query regarding any action taken to support and strengthen local

communities in water management, the Ministry replied as under:-

"To support and strengthen local communities in water management, following
actions have been initiated:

a) The Government is implementing Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal), a Rs.
6,000 crore Central Sector Scheme with World Bank assistance, for
sustainable management of ground water resources with community
participation. The scheme is being taken up in select areas that
include 80 districts, 224 administrative blocks and 8,565 water
stressed Gram Panchayats of seven States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat,

46


Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh from 01.04.2020 for a period of 5 years. The scheme can be
extended in other water stressed areas based on efficacy/outcomes.

b) Water being a State subject the groundwater Regulation guidelines
dated 24 Sep 2020 (with pan-India applicability) notified by the
Department talks about implementation of participatory groundwater
management in the country. The States/UTs are being periodically
advised to work in participatory approach to achieve the objectives of
sustainable groundwater management.

0०) Organising Public interaction Programmes: Initiated in 2018, so far
1,093 programmes have been conducted in which nearly 90,000
persons participated.

d) CGWB under the aegis of Rajiv Gandhi National Ground Water
Training and Research Institute (RGNGWTRI) conducts tier ॥ (block
level) training programmes to sensitize and motivate the public to
undertake water harvesting and conservation measures. Initiated in
2012, so far RGNGWTRI has conducted 510 such programmes in
which more than 70,000 persons have been imparted training."

109. While informing about the steps taken towards achievement of Sustainable
development Goals, the representative of the Ministry, during the course of the
evidence, stated as under:-

“In addition, for attaining the SDG, various activities are being taken up by the
Ministry. These include the Jal Shakti Abhiyan through which we are sensitizing
the public, we are promoting cleaning and revival of the water bodies, we have
taken up various programmes for demonstrative project of artificial recharge, and
we are focussing more on participatory approach under Atal Jal Yojana.”

110. Highlighting the efforts being undertaken to achieve SDG No. 6 regarding

“clean water and sanitation for all” by 2030, the Ministry in a written reply informed as

under:-

"Water being a State subject, management of water resources,
including providing clean water to the people is mainly the
responsibility of the respective State Governments.

Since August 2019, Central Government in partnership with
States is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission to make provision of
potable water to every rural household through tap water
connection in the country by 2024, a timeline which is well before
the SDG's timeline of 2030. As on date, out of 19.22 crore rural
households in the country, 9.70 crore have provision of tap water

supply.

Further, provisions have also been made for the States/UTs to
take up Community Water Purification Plants (CWPP) to provide
8-10 litre per capita per day of water to meet drinking and
cooking needs of households residing in villages/habitations
having water-quality issues and planning and implementation of
piped water supply in these areas will take time, purely as an
interim measure, till commissioning of regular water supply
scheme for providing potable water through tap connection to
every rural household.

47


iv. A DO letter M-11015/124/2021-CB dated 31 March 2022
has been written by the Secretaries of Department of Health &
Family Welfare, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Department of
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of Women & Child
Development, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Department of Water Resources, RD & GR, Department of Land
Resources & Department of Rural Development to Chief
Secretary of all States/UTs bringing out the urgent steps
needed to make the villages water sufficient to meet the SDG
goals.

v. Atal Bhujal Yojana being implemented in certain water stressed
areas of seven States envisages addressing four critical issues
relating to sustainable ground water management, i.e. state-
specific institutional frameworks for sustainable groundwater
management; enhancement of groundwater recharge;
improvement of water use efficiency; and strengthening of
community-based institutions to foster ground water
management. This scheme will have positive impact on source
sustainability and thereby contribute in SDG 6 regarding “clean
water and sanitation for all”.

vi. To create a long-term impact, National Mission for Clean Ganga
(NMCG) is currently preparing a National Framework on the
Safe Reuse of Treated Wastewater. Several State Governments
such as Maharashtra, Gujarat etc. have already brought out the
water reuse policy. States such as Bihar are in process of
developing their policy. The medium and short-term
initiatives taken by NMCG include encouraging its
stakeholders to adopt a circular economy approach in the
water/ waste sector.

vii IWRM studies are being done/ being planned by the Central
Water Commission for some of the basins to undertake short
term, medium term and long term initiatives. The basin-wise
water availability studies have been completed in June, 2019,
using latest space inputs and latest methodology.”

111. When asked about the steps being taken to increase participation of the local
communities in ground water management especially in the areas where resources

are depleting, the Ministry replied as under:-

i. Atal Bhujal Yojana is being implemented in certain water
stressed areas of seven States in the country. The essence of
Atal Bhujal Yojana can be summed up as “Sustainable Ground
Water Management with Community participation”. District
Implementation Partners (DIPs) or, NGOs have been engaged
by the participating States for awareness generation and
sensitization of the local communities. Subsequent tothis the
DIPs are facilitating (i) community participation in planning
sustainable management of ground water; ii) development of
Gram Panchayat (GP) level water budgets; and iii) preparation

48


ili.

of GP-level Water Security Plans (WSPs).

A DO letter M-11015/124/2021-CB dated 31 March 2022
has been written by the Secretaries of Department of Health &
Family Welfare, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Department of
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of Women & Child
Development, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Department of Water Resources, RD & GR, Department of
Land Resources & Department of Rural Development to Chief
Secretary of all States/UTs bringing out the urgent steps
neededto make the villages Water sufficient to meet the SDG
goals by engaging the communities through participatory
mode.

Since 2018 to facilitate dissemination of ground water
management plans at grassroots level to increase the
participation of local communities in groundwater management,
CGWB started organizing public interaction programmes (PIP).
So far 1,093 public interaction programmes have been
conducted by CGWB in which nearly 85,000 persons
participated.

The groundwater regulation guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020
issued by the Ministry with pan-India applicability advocate
participatory groundwater management in agriculture sector.
The States have been accordingly being advised regularly to
follow this aspect while resorting to groundwater management.

112. While highlighting the improvement in Ground Water resources in
the Country, the representative of the Ministry, in a power point
presentation stated as under:-

“(i) Improvement in GW resources

a.

BCM
b.
c.

d.

Annual groundwater recharge in the country has increased by nearly 4.29

Annual groundwater extraction has decreased by 3.77 BCM.

The overall stage of groundwater extraction level in the country has also
decreased from 63.33 % to 61.6 %.

overall improvement observed in groundwater situations in around 576

Assessment units out of 6965 Assessment Units in the country.

(ii) It could be seen that the country appears to move in a positive direction
and matter is further being pursued appropriately with all concerned including the
States/UTs to achieve the targets of SDGs.”

F. OTHER ISSUES

{a} High Yielding Variety Seeds Consuming Less Water

113. As regards the steps being taken to popularize use of high yielding variety of

wheat and paddy seeds that consume less water, the Ministry in a written reply stated

as under:-

49


(b)

“Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has identified/developed high yielding
short duration varieties of wheat and paddy seeds that consume
less waterand can provide breeder seed on submission of indent by
the State Government. Central government issues advisories to
States/UTs from time to time to promote crop rotation, crop
diversification and use of less water intensive crops to reduce
excessive water use. The groundwater guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020
issued by the Department also advise States/UTs for promoting crop
diversification/rotation/other initiatives to reduce over-dependence on
groundwater. This Department is implementing the Atal Bhujal
Yojana in certain water stressed Gram Panchayats (GPs)/Districts of
seven States in the country. The scheme gives special emphasis to
participatory groundwater management and preparation of water
security plan at GP level and judicious use of groundwater in
irrigation is appropriately being addressed to ensure judicious
utilization by all concerned."

National Water System- Desalination And Sustainable Exploitation Of

Natural Water Resources

114.

On a query as to whether India is exploring possibilities of developing a National

Water system that provides strategic combination of water supply based on desalination
and reuse with sustainable exploitation of natural water resources on the lines of
countries like Israel, the Ministry informed as under:-

(c)

115.

“Department of Science & Technology (DST) has been identified as the nodal
agency for Desalination Mission and in accordance with this, DST has launched
national calls for proposals to identify and assess the role of desalination for
India’s water security and evolve time-bound research, development,
assessment and demonstration of the program for desalination technologies at
various stages of Technology Readiness Levels. Further, DST has supported a
field demonstration project to mitigate water problems in the Ausa town of
Marathwada region in Maharashtra for the production of potable water by
providing a desalination facility integrated with reject water management, which
has been successfully handed over to the local Administrative body for further _
operation and maintenance."

Reduction In Use Of Chemical Based Fertilizers

Regarding the efforts being made to educate/discourage/disincentivize farmers

in order to reduce use of Chemical based fertilizers, the Ministry informed as under:-

"The Indian Council Agricultural Research (ICAR) under Department of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare recommends soil test based balanced and
integrated nutrient management through conjunctive use of both inorganic and
organic sources (manure, biofertilizers etc.) of plant nutrients to reduce the use
of chemical fertilizers. In addition, split application and placement of fertilizers,
use of slow releasing N- fertilizers and nitrification inhibitors, growing leguminous
crops and use of Resource Conservation Technologies (RCTs) are also
advocated. The ICAR also imparts training, organizes front-line demonstrations
etc. to educate farmers on all these aspects."

50


(d)

Rain Water Harvesting

116. Regarding the steps taken by the Central Government to contro! water
depletion and promote rain water harvesting / conservation, the Ministry stated as
under:

a) Hon'ble Prime Minister has written a letter to all Sarpanchs on 08.06.2019
regarding the importance of water conservation and harvesting and exhorted
them to adopt all appropriate measures to make water conservation a mass
movement.

b) Government of India launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in 2019, a time
bound campaign with a mission mode approach intended to improve water
availability including ground water conditions in the water stressed blocks of
256 districts in India. In this regard, teams of officers from Central Government
along-with technical officers from Ministry of Jal Shakti were deputed to visit
water stressed districts and to work in close collaborationwith district level
Officials to undertake suitable interventions. In addition, ‘Jal Shakti Abhiyan —
Catch the Rain’ campaign has been launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister of
India on 22 March 2021. Further, ‘Jal Shakti Abhiyan — Catch the Rain-2022’
launched by Hon'ble President of India with focused interventions viz. 1. Water
conservation and rainwater harvesting, 2.enumerating, geo- tagging & making
inventory of all water bodies; preparation of scientific plans for water
conservation based on it, 3. Settingup of Jal Shakti Kendras in all districts,
4.intensive afforestation and 5. awareness generation.

c) National Water Policy (2012) has been formulated by Department of Water
Resources, RD & GR, inter-alia advocates rainwater harvesting and
conservation of water and highlights the need for augmenting the availabilityof
water through direct use __ of rainfall. It also inter-alia, advocates conservation
of river, river bodies and infrastructure should be undertaken ina scientifically
planned manner through community participation. Further, encroachment and
diversion of water bodies and drainage channels must notbe allowed and
wherever, it has taken place, it should be restored to theextent feasible and
maintained properly.

d) In compliance to the decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries, an
‘Inter Ministerial Committee’ under the Chairmanship of Secretary (WR, RD &
GR) has been constituted to take forward the subject of ‘Push on Water
Conservation Related Activities for Optimum Utilization of Monsoon Rainfall’

e) Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable them to
enact suitable ground water legislation for regulation of its development, which
also includes provision of rain water harvesting. So far, 19 States/UTs have
adopted and implemented the ground water legislation.

f) Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under Section 3

(3) of the “Environment (Protection) Act, 1986” for the purpose of regulation and

control of ground water development and management in the Country. CGWA

has advised States/UTs to take measures to promote/adopt artificial recharge
to ground water / rain water harvesting. CGWA grants No Objection Certificates

(NOCs) for ground water abstraction to Industries, Infrastructure units and

Mining projects in feasible areas in 20 States/UTs where regulation is not being

done by the respective State/UTs. The latest guidelines for control and

regulation of groundwater extraction with pan-India applicability was notified by

the Ministry on 24 September 2020.

Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater- 2020 has been prepared by

CGWB in consultation with States/UTs which is a macro level plan indicating

various structures for the different terrain conditions of the country including

@

5i


estimated cost. The Master Plan envisages construction of about 1.42 crore
Rain water harvesting and artificial recharge structures in the Country to
harness 185 Billion Cubic Meter (BCM) of monsoon rainfall.

h) CGWB has taken up Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme during XII

Plan, under the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation. The
Aquifer Mapping is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and their
characterization for preparation of aquifer/ area specific ground water
management plans with community participation. The management plans are
shared with the respective State governments for taking appropriatemeasures /
implementation. Further, Public Interaction Programs (PIP) are being organised
at grass root level for disseminating the tenets of the Aquifer Management
Plans as part of the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM)
Programme for the benefit of the stakeholders.

Best practices of water conservation by various entities including private
persons, NGOs, PSUs etc have been compiled and put on the web site of the
Ministry for the benefit of general public. An interactive link on best practices has
also been created for receiving inputs from public, which, after necessary
evaluation/validation are put on the website for the benefit of the public.
Department of Water Resources, RD& GR has instituted National Waterawards
to incentivize good practices in water conservation and ground water recharge.
Mass awareness programmes (Trainings, Seminars, Workshops, Exhibitions,
Trade Fairs Public Interaction Programmes etc.) are conducted from time to
time in various parts of the Country to promote rain water harvesting and
artificial recharge to ground water.

The Ministry of Rural Development in consultation and agreement with the
Department of Water Resources, RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture &
Farmers’ Welfare has developed an actionable framework for Natural
Resources Management (NRM), titled ‘Mission Water Conservation” to ensure
gainful utilization of funds. The Framework strives to ensure synergies in
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS), Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), erstwhile
integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) now PMKSY
Watershed Development Component (WDC) and Command Area Development
& Water Management (CADWM), given their common objectives. Types of
common works undertaken under these programmes/ schemes are water
conservation and management, water harvesting, soil and moisture
conservation, groundwater recharge, flood protection, land development,
Command Area Development & Watershed Management.

m) Central Government supports construction of water harvesting and

conservation works primarily through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana — Watershed Development Component (PMKSY-WDC).

n) A joint advisory of Department of Rural development (DoRD), Department of

0,

Water Resources, RD & GR (DoWR, RD & GR), Department of Land
Resources (DoLR) and Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DoDWS)
has been issued on 24.04.2020 to all States/UTs to emphasize efforts in the
area of water conservation and water management in the country. The activities
include augmentation of existing water sources(s), ground water recharge,
rainwater harvesting and grey water management and recharge.

Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL) 2016 circulated by Ministry of Housing & —
Urban Affairs include provisions for Rainwater Harvesting and it has been
shared with all the States / UTs. So far 33 States / UTs have adopted the
provisions of rainwater harvesting of MBBL-2016.

p) The Government has approved Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL), a Rs. 6000

52


crore Central Sector Scheme with World Bank assistance, for sustainable
management of ground water resources with community participation. The
scheme is being taken up in select areas that include 80 districts, 224
administrative blocks and 8562 water stressed Gram Panchayats of seven
states, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The scheme envisages active participation of
the communities, in various activities such as formation/strengthening ofWater
User Associations, monitoring and disseminating ground water data, water
budgeting, preparation of Gram-Panchayat wise water security plans & their
implementation through convergence of ongoing schemes and IEC activities
related to sustainable ground water management.

(e) Strengthening Of Central Ground Water Authority

117. When asked about the formulation of any proposal for strengthening of Central
Ground Water Authority, the Ministry stated as under:-

"A proposal for creation of separate Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA)
has been formulated. 116 posts have been proposed out of which 6 are already
sanctioned. Thus, 110 additional posts are proposed to be created. The proposal
is currently under consideration of Government."

53


PART II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

Introductory

Ground water is the backbone of India’s agriculture and drinking water
security. Therefore, efficient management of ground water is significant for

sustainable use of water.

C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 (Performance Audit) on the subject 'Ground
Water Management and Regulation’ pertaining to Ministry of Jal Shakti
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
contained significant results of the Performance Audit of Ground Water
Management and Regulation for the period 2013-18. The Report dealt with the
mechanism for management of ground water in the country; issues relating to
regulation of ground water by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) and State
Authorities; implementation of schemes on Ground Water Management and
Regulation and the extent of achievement of relevant targets under Sustainable
Development Goal 6 (ensuring availability and sustainable management of water
and sanitation for all). The Report and the issues contained therein have been
examined by the Committee and commented upon suitably in the succeeding

paragraphs.

MANAGEMENT OF GROUND WATER

Extraction of Ground Water

1. Audit noticed that during the period 2004 to 2017, the stage of extraction of
ground water had increased from 58 to 63 per cent in the country. Four
States/UTs (Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan) had a stage of extraction of
more than 100 per cent, indicating that extraction of ground water surpassed the
recharge levels of ground water. At the district level, in 24 States/UTs, 267
districts had stage of extraction ranging from 64 per cent to 385 per cent. The
Committee note that to prevent high extraction of Ground Water, several
initiatives in collaboration with States/UTs have been taken up. The Committee

also note that many State Governments have implemented their own schemes for
54


water resources management, including ground water. In the light of India being
the largest user of ground water in the world, where Ground Water extraction
stands at 245 billion cubic metre (BCM) accounting for around 25 percent of
global withdrawals and where Ground Water is pegged at around 64 percent of
irrigation needs and 80 percent of drinking water needs of the country, the
Committee feel that there is a need for translating the initiatives into concrete
results. The fact that four states had exceeded 100% extraction and 267 districts
had stage of extraction ranging from 64 per cent to 385 per cent, is a clear
indication of the failure to prioritize sustainable water use. The Committee
strongly urge the Ministry to persuade the State governments to take immediate
and stringent measures to curb excessive extraction of ground water and ensure

long-term viability of groundwater resources.

2 Keeping in view, the heterogeneous nature of topography, rainfall and
state specific policy on Ground Water across the country, the availability of water
may vary from State to State. While there are drought prone regions with very
minimal rainfall, there are also regions in the country where there is excess
precipitation. The Committee while noting that certain State governments have
successfully utilised floodwater for recharging groundwater recommend that
such practices may be emulated, wherever feasible, through creation of a series
of reservoirs across the floodplains of affected rivers, during monsoon season,
for recharging the ground water and for mitigating the flood situation. In order to
encourage prudent groundwater extraction practices, the Committee also
recommend that the government incentivize and expedite groundwater projects
that have demonstrated a tangible impact on ground water extraction levels. The
Committee further observe that uncontrolled use of bore well technology leads to
exploitation of groundwater at higher rates than the rate of water recharge, which
may cause drastic depletion of groundwater. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that installation/ use of bore wells be regulated and consider making

it mandatory for placing metering systems with all the bore-wells.

Periodicity of Assessment of Ground Water

3. The Committee note that as per the approved Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) memorandum for 2012-17, the assessment of ground water

resources in terms of ground water quantity, utilisation pattern, stage of

55


extraction of ground water, categorisation of units, etc. was to be done every two
years by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). Based on this data, Dynamic
Ground Water Assessment Report was to be compiled, to enable further planning
and management of ground water by CGWB. Audit however noticed that during
the audit period 2013-2018, CGWB conducted such assessments for 2013 and
2017 and published the Reports in June 2017 and July 2019 respectively. CGWB
did not carry out this assessment for 2015 resulting in a gap of four years in
assessment between 2013 and 2017. The Committee have been informed that a
cloud-based system for assessment “INDIA-Groundwater Resource Estimation
System (IN-GRES)” has been put in place. Besides, a Resolution dated 08 Feb
2022 has been notified in the Gazette of India for constitution of a Central Level
Expert Group (CLEG) for overall supervision of the assessment process. The
Committee have further been informed that post 2022 assessment of
groundwater resources has to be done on an annual basis. The Committee
recommend the Ministry to ensure that the assessment process is conducted
invariably, on annual basis, with prompt publication of the assessment reports
for effective planning and management of Groundwater. The Committee also
desire that the parameters used in these assessments be periodically reviewed to

improve the accuracy and reliability of the data.

Ground Water Monitoring

4. The Committee are constrained to note that as against the target of
monitoring of 50000 wells by March 2017, CGWB as on March 2021, had a
monitored network of only 22,835 wells. Even for undertaking Real Time Ground
Water monitoring, CGWB has not made much headway even after lapse of 5
years, as various projects of CGWB are still in the planning stage. The Committee
while noting that the Ministry is yet to achieve the targets of monitoring wells
planned for 2012-17, feel that despite the approved schemes and substantial
funds allocated for these purposes, the actual implementation has been sluggish,
leading to a significant shortfall in the number of wells monitored. The Committee
while observing that monitoring is a key tool to secure that contaminated water is
not used for consumption or irrigation and to keep track and control if water
resources are exploited sustainably, desire the Ministry to identify the reasons
for the delays and take time-bound action to expedite the implementation of the

schemes and apprise the Committee thereof.

56


Assessment of water levels and factors affecting Ground Water Quantity

5. The Committee are deeply concerned about the declining water levels in
the majority of monitored wells, both at the national and state levels. The
Committee further note that in 14 States factors affecting ground water quantity
were reported to be available which inter-alia include power subsidies for
agriculture, water-intensive crop cultivation, rainfall deficit, urbanization, and
excessive water use in irrigation and industries. The Committee note that factors
affecting quantity of ground water could not be identified for the States/UTs in
which assessment was not conducted. It is astonishing that these states are
managing their water requirements without a comprehensive understanding of
the factors influencing ground water availability. In the absence of pan-India data
on factors affecting ground water quantity, the Committee are of the opinion that
it will be difficult to devise effective strategies to address the issue of declining
water levels. The Committee therefore feel that there is a need to ensure that
factors affecting ground water quantity be ascertained and made available for
framing national level policy. The Committee desire that regular and thorough
assessments of the factors affecting ground water quantity in all the states be

conducted to ensure efficient utilization of this precious resource.

Assessment of Ground Water Quality

6. The Committee note that the factors affecting ground water quality were
available in respect of 11 States/UTs only. Most of the States/UTs that conducted
assessment of change in quality of ground water reported excessive use of
fertilizers and pesticides, disposal of industrial and municipal waste and sea
water intrusion as factors for deterioration of ground water quality. The
Committee note with concern that a significant number of locations, especially in
West Bengal and Punjab, have been identified with high levels of arsenic,
fluoride, and salinity, surpassing permissible limits. Further, the Committee note
that monitoring of ground water quality was done every year and the data shared
through the India Water Resource Information System (WRIS) portal by
department of River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (RD&GR) with States.
However the Water Resource Information System (WRIS) portal contained data as
of 2015-16 only. In the considered view of the Committee, non-availability of
reliable and authentic data not only results in lack of comprehensive

understanding of the threats posed by ground water contamination but also
57


prevents evolving effective measures to deal with them. In view of the foregoing,
the Committee recommend that (i) findings of the Central Ground Water Board
(CGWB) and the States be integrated to obtain reliable indicators of the ground
water quality nationwide; and (ii) Water Resource Information System (WRIS)
data may be updated on real time basis to facilitate informed decision-making

and the implementation of appropriate ground water management strategies.

7. Audit observed that as per the data for 2015 based on 15,165 locations in
32 States tested by CGWB, ground water had levels of contaminants higher than
permissible limits of Arsenic (697 locations), Fluoride (637 locations), Nitrate
(2,015 locations), Iron (1,389 locations) and Salinity (587 locations). The number
of cases of fluorosis was significant in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and
Madhya Pradesh. In the absence of any such assessment by the remaining
States/UTs, the threats due to contamination of ground water could not be
ascertained in these States/UTs. Regarding the action taken to assess the factors
affecting ground water quality in the States/UTs where no such assessment has
been done, the Ministry stated that Central Ground Water Board generates
ground water quality data on a regional scale during various scientific studies
and ground water quality monitoring throughout the country. These studies
indicate the occurrence of contaminants such as Flouride, Arsenic, Nitrate, Iron
and Heavy Metals beyond permissible limits (as per BIS) for human consumption
in isolated pockets in various States / UTs. The Committee note that the
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DoDW&S) had launched a National
Water Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) on 2271 March, 2017 as a part of National
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), which has now been subsumed
under Jal Jeevan Mission, to provide safe drinking water to 27,544
arsenic/fluoride affected rural habitations in the country. It has also been
informed that Government of India launched Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and
Urban Transformation (AMRUT 2.0) on 01 October, 2021 for the period of 05 years
(FY 2021-22 to 2025-26) which focuses on making cities’ water secure through
recycle/reuse of treated sewage, rejuvenation of water bodies and water
conservation. The Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that under NAQUIM,
CGWB constructs arsenic safe exploratory wells in arsenic affected parts of
some States including West Bengal and the arsenic safe deeper aquifer zones
have been identified and wells have been constructed tapping the arsenic safe
deeper aquifers using innovative cement sealing technique. As per the
information made available to the Committee, 513 exploratory wells tapping

58


arsenic safe aquifers have been constructed under NAQUIM programme
including 40 in Bihar, 188 in West Bengal and 285 in Uttar Pradesh. Further, the
innovative cement sealing technique of CGWB has been shared with the State
agencies to utilize the technique to construct arsenic free wells. In light of the
above, the Committee recommend that (i) all out effort to enhance the number of
wells tapping arsenic safe aquifers, may be made. As regards the cement sealing
technology, the Committee desire that a study may be conducted to ascertain the
efficacy of the efforts made to ensure quality water availability to the inhabitants
of the affected States (ii) The Ministry may take steps towards the assessment of
water quality by all the States/UTs to ensure that the threats due to contamination
of ground water are ascertained in all States/UTs across the country and (iii)
Committee may be apprised of the resultant impact on provision of safe drinking

water to the population covered under AMRUT 2.0 and Jal Jeevan Mission.

Mode! Bill on Ground Water and Legislative framework in States/UTs

8. The Committee note that to enable the States to enact Ground Water
Legislation, DoWR, RD&GR circulated in 2005, a Model Bill to all the States/UTs
for regulation and development of ground water. However, the Model Bill was
under review till December 2019. As of December 2019, 19 States/UTs had
enacted legislation for management of ground water. In this regard, Ministry of
Jal Shakti apprised the Committee that the revised Model bill on Ground Water
has been finalized by the Department which is being clubbed with other Model
Bills (of the Department) to have a holistic comprehensive Model Bill on water
management (encompassing all matters of water falling in the domain of
States/UTs) in the country. Further, Ministry of Jal Shakti has issued new
guidelines on 24.09.2020 for regulation and control of ground water extraction by
industrial, infrastructure and mining projects. These guidelines have pan-India
applicability. The Ministry also added that 13 States/ UTs (10 States and 3 UTs)
have taken Initiatives for enactment of legislation on the basis of the Model Bill.
The Committee are optimistic that new guidelines issued on 24.09.2020 for
regulation and control of ground water extraction by industrial, infrastructure and
mining projects with pan-india applicability, have played a key role in addressing
other related issues of the States/UTs thereby paving the way for enactment of-
legislation based on the Model Bill by the remaining States/ UTs. The Committee
also desire that the Ministry may expedite the efforts to convince remaining
States to take suitable steps in this direction.
59


Human Resource constraints faced by Central agencies managing Ground Water

9. The Committee note that there was shortage of human resources in
scientific and engineering categories in Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and
its regional and divisional offices. To take care of the deficiency in staff, the
Ministry informed that various steps have been/are being taken by CGWB and the
Department which inter-alia include initiation of the proposal for filling up 840
posts through Direct Recruitment / Deputation / Promotion in consultation with
UPSC / SSC and engagement of young professionals and consultants on a
contractual basis. Noting that as a part of Human Resource Development
measures, the Ministry have also resorted to hiring of consultants/professionals
in addition to other initiatives, the Committee would like to point out that ad-hoc
arrangement of engaging young professionals and consultants on a contractual
basis may be a short term measure to cater to the immediate requirement of
CGWB. For efficient working of the organization, the Central agencies and its
departments should look for long term solution by engaging permanent
stafffexperts. In light of the above the Committee desire that action to fill up
direct recruitment / promotional vacancies be expedited and proposal for filling
up 840 posts in scientific and engineering categories in CGWB be finalized with
due promptitude. The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of the

action initiated by Ministry in this regard.

GROUND WATER REGULATION

Projects granted Consent to Operate by State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/

Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) and Projects granted license by Bureau of
Indian Standards.

10. Audit scrutiny revealed that out of a sample of 328 cases in 18 States,
where the Consent to Operate (CTO) granted to a project proponent included a
condition which required NOC for Ground Water extraction, 253 projects (77 per
cent) were operating without NOCs. Audit had also pointed out that in 15 States
for which data was made available to Audit, 3,189 Bureau of Indian Standards
(BIS) licenses were issued to packaged drinking water units since 2013, of which
in 2,475 cases (78 per cent), the project proponents were operating without
obtaining NOCs from CGWA. The Committee are of the view that projects, which
operate without NOCs reflect on the poor control exercised by CGWA. The

60


Committee emphasize that there is an urgent need to further enhance the
inspection and compliance mechanism of CGWB. They recommend the Ministry
to establish a robust monitoring mechanism which may also be utilized by the
general public/NGOs/other stakeholders to report/ send photos/videos of illegal
extraction of ground water and violation of other NOC conditions by project

proponents.

Delay in processing of applications by CGWA for grant/renewal of NOC in non-
notified areas

11. Audit pointed out that during 2013-19, Central Ground Water Authority
(CGWA) accorded 3,517 fresh NOCs and renewed 320 NOCs for Ground Water
withdrawal to various industry, mining and infrastructure projects. As on 31
March 2019, 10,758 applications for grant of NOC and 144 applications for
renewal were pending. Citing reasons for pendency in processing applications,
the Ministry explained that the pendency as on 31.03.2019 was owing to certain
concerns/observations raised by National Green Tribunal in respect of over-
exploited, critical and semi-critical areas and after notification of new guidelines
w.e.f. 24.09.2020, all pendency had been cleared. The Ministry informed that to
expeditiously process the applications, CGWA has inter-alia fixed timelines for
processing of NOC application at each stage, the NOC portal (NOCAP portal) has
been revamped for submission of NOC applications by the project proponents
and issue of all NOCs by the CGWA through online mode, the powers of issue of
NOCs have been decentralized among field functionaries and a booklet on
Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) has been issued by the CGWA to
standardize the process of NOC issuance and to cut the discretionary powers of
officers. While acknowledging the initiatives taken for expeditiously processing /
issuing NOCs within 45 days through NOC portal, the Committee are of the
opinion that merely revamping the NOC portal and decentralizing powers among
field functionaries may not be enough to address the systemic inefficiencies and
discretionary practices. The Committee desire thorough and recorded field
inspections to ensure transparent implementation of the guidelines issued w.e.f.
24.08.2020 and the SoP meant for field functionaries. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the impact of the measures taken on the average time taken by the
CGWA for issuing NOCs. ;

61


Non-receipt of applications for renewal on expiry of NOC

12. The Committee note from Audit findings that in 474 cases, renewal of NOC
was due during 2013-18 but the project proponents did not apply for renewal.
CGWA did not take any action under section 15 of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 against these project proponents. Thus, even after expiry of the NOC,
existing industries/projects continued to draw Ground Water without any
regulation. While enumerating the reasons, the Ministry stated that prior to April,
2015, there was no online system for NOC application processing and all the
NOCs were being issued off-line. Record of such NOCs, therefore, was not
available and it was difficult to manually keep track of all the NOCs getting
expired though all efforts were made by the CGWA in this direction. Further, the
inspection power of visiting industries/project proponents were vested with
handful staffs/officers of CGWA which has now been widened by allowing this
power to be delegated to other CGWB officers, DMs/DCs etc which has resulted
in better implementation of regulation measures. The Ministry stated that CGWA
has issued 3200 notices to various project proponents for not complying with
ground water regulatory conditions and penalty/environmental compensation to
the tune of Rs 15.77 crore has already been imposed against 1,341 proponents
who were found extracting groundwater illegally/violated NOC conditions since
issue of new guidelines dated 24 Sep. 2020. The Ministry's submission that it was
difficult to manually keep track of all the NOCs getting expired prior to 2015 is
unacceptable. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken against
the remaining project proponents for not complying with ground water regulatory
conditions. The Committee expect the online system for NOC application
processing to facilitate tracking of NOCs' expiry and proactive action for timely
renewal and would like to be apprised of the resultant impact in application and
renewal of NOCs. The Committee also insist on the timely finalization and

implementation of the proposal to strengthen the CGWA.

62


Post NOC monitoring by CGWA and Authorised officers

13. The Committee express deep concern over the lack of enforcement of
conditions stipulated in NOCs by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA). The
Committee note that joint field visits exposed widespread non-compliance with
NOC conditions, however despite widespread violations, CGWA issued show
cause notices to a paltry number of 99 project proponents during 2013-2018.
The Ministry have informed that apart from issuing of notices and levying of
penalty since the new guidelines came into effect, a Mobile App has also been
developed to enable project proponents to submit self-compliance with the
facility for field verification by CGWB officers. The Ministry must demonstrate
unwavering commitment to ensuring compliance with NOC conditions. The
Committee insist on rigorous adherence to guidelines and desire that a detailed
report on the extent of penalties, offences registered, and inquiries initiated in

last five years be furnished to them .

IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES ON GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AND
REGULATION (GWMR)

Financial performance of GWMRS

14. The Committee note that the approved outlay for the Scheme ‘Ground
Water Management and Regulation (GWMR)" was Rs. 4,050.66 crore during 2012-
19 against which budget allocations were Rs. 2,349.48 crore. Against the budget
allocation of Rs. 2,349.48 crore, the actual expenditure under the Scheme was
Rs. 1,109.73 crore during 2012-19. As regards the measures taken up to ensure
full utilisation of funds released to it, the Ministry during the course of
examination informed that CGWB is closely monitoring the tendering and
procurement activities and has also engaged a Project Management Consultant
(PMC) for tendering & execution activities which has resulted in improved
utilization of funds. The Ministry further stated that these measures have resulted
in improved average annual expenditure from Rs. 116 crore during 2012-17, to
Rs. 220 crore during 2017-21. In view of the activities envisaged under the
scheme having a direct impact on livelihoods and survival of millions of citizens
of the country, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may ensure optimum
fund utilization, within prescribed timelines. The Committee desire to be apprised

of the specific steps taken in this regard.

63


Targets of aquifer mapping and achievements and incomplete aquifer mapping
Teports

15. The Committee note from Audit revelation that an area of 24.8 lakh sq. km
was identified for Aquifer Mapping in the country, Central Ground Water Board
(CGWB) covered an area of 13 lakh sq. km. (52 per cent) as of September 2020.
Further, Aquifer Mapping Reports for only 6.5 lakh sq. km. were finalized. It has
been informed that as on 31st March 2022, 21 lakh sq km had already been
covered and the targets set for coverage had been achieved. It has also been
informed and that the entire area identified for NAQUIM studies is targeted to be
covered by 31st March 2023. As regards reports of NAQUIM studies, against an
area of 16.33 lakh sq km covered till 31st March 2021, reports in respect of 14
lakh sq km had been issued as on date. The Ministry have cited lack of adequate
manpower and deployment of concerned officers in additional activities like
sharing of outputs with District Authorities, Public Interaction Programmes etc.
as the reason for the delay in compilation of the reports. It has also been
reported that during the year 2021-22 an additional area of 4.8 lakh sq km had
been covered, reports for which were to be issued during the year 2022. The
Ministry assured that earnest attempts were being made to issue reports in
respect of the entire area covered as on 317 March 2022, by September, 2022. The
Committee note that the Ministry have taken steps like temporary deployment of
officers alongwith hiring of young professionals to assist in NAQUIM studies. The
Committee would like to be apprised whether targets of acquifer mapping have
been achieved by 31st March 2023 and whether the reports for the same have
also been issued. The Committee desire that the findings of NAQUIM studies so
conducted and the action envisaged thereon be shared with them within three

months of presentation of this report to the Parliament.

Non preparation of Ground Water Models

16. The Committee note that Ground water models provide a tool to estimate
ground water availability for various water use strategies and to determine the
cumulative effects of increased water use and drought conditions. A ground
water model is a numerical representation of the aquifer system capable of
simulating historical and predicting future aquifer conditions. The purpose of
the NAQUIM programme was to provide an Aquifer Response Model that can be

64


used to develop reliable and timely information on ground water availability for
the region to ensure adequate supplies or recognise inadequate supplies over a
15 year planning period. The Committee note that although CGWB has
conducted aquifer mapping in a significant area, the completion of ground water
modeling is limited to only 4.5 lakh sq. km. The Ministry's progress in
groundwater modeling is visibly slow, and the Committee desire that urgent
action may be taken to prioritize and expedite this crucial project within a

specific timeframe.

Dissemination of NAQUIM outputs

Designing of web-based system

17. Audit pointed out that though CGWB had published aquifer mapping
reports, a web-based system for easy dissemination of the information on the
aquifer mapping was not designed, as envisaged. In this regard the Ministry have
informed that NAQUIM reports are being disseminated through CGWB website.
Further, a separate web-portal Aquifer Information and Management System
(AIMS) has been developed for easy dissemination of information on aquifer
mapping. The AIMS portal is being further upgraded by CGWB to have easier
dissemination of aquifer related information to the public at block levels. In
addition to this, groundwater levels, water quality information can also be
accessed through India-WRIS (Water Resource Information System) portal
maintained by National Water Informatics Centre. While noting the steps taken
regarding setting up of a web-based system for easy dissemination of
information on aquifer mapping, the Committee desire that the Ministry ensure
that information available on the portal is regularly updated and establish a
feedback mechanism on the system so designed to ensure that the system meets
the envisaged criteria and useful information is disseminated to various

stakeholders to enable upgrading the system on a continuous basis,

Action by State Governments on Aquifer mapping reports

18. Audit had observed that of the 201 reports included in the programme,
Aquifer mapping reports of only 168 districts were shared with the District
Administration concerned till November 2019. The Committee further note from
the reply of the Ministry that NAQUIM studies are complete in parts of 538

districts and outputs in respect of 385 districts had been shared and earnest
65


efforts were being made to share the NAQUIM outputs in respect of all the
covered districts with the district authorities during the year 2022-23 The
Committee have also been informed that the NAQUIM outputs shared with the
State Governments include information about aquifers in the States, ground
water level, ground water quality, ground water resource availability etc along
with a management plan. States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh are using the
information for. ground water management planning and implementation.
NAQUIM outputs are also being used in the seven States (Gujarat, Haryana,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh) where
Atal Bhujal Yojana is being implemented. The Committee note from the audit
findings that many State Governments have not acted on the aquifer mapping
reports due to various constraints such as map scale being too small to locate
the areas, non-receipt of funds from CGWB or Central Government to implement
the reports in the field, etc. Given the fact that the information contained in the
report has potential for use by many agencies engaged in managing water
resources, agriculture, irrigation etc., the Committee recommend that alongwith
sharing of information with the District Authorities a web-based interface may be
utilised to ensure timely resolution of issues such as scale being too small and to
enhance coordination between various agencies at central and state levels for
implementation of the recommendations made in the National Aquifer Mapping
project reports. The Committee further desire the Ministry to expedite the transfer
of funds to the state governments to enable them to implement the

recommendations contained in NAQUIM reports.

Participatory Ground Water Management

19. Audit had pointed out that although an outlay of Rs. 575.38 crore was
provided for the period 2013-17 under the component Participatory Ground
Water Management (PGWM) in accordance with the National Water Policy 2012,
no expenditure was incurred. The component was dropped from the subsequent
EFC memo of 2017-20 and is now being taken up as a separate scheme on
participatory ground water management through the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY),
a Rs. 6,000 crore scheme with World Bank funding which was launched in 2019.

The scheme lays emphasis on community participation and demand side

66


interventions for sustainable ground water management in identified water
stressed areas in seven States of the country. The Committee note that ABHY is
being implemented in 7 states only and is being taken up in 8,562 water stressed
Gram Panchayats of 224 administrative blocks/ Talukas in 80 districts of seven
States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. It is being implemented from 01.04.2020 for a
period of 5 years with mid-term review scheduled in 2022. Based upon the
evaluation/feedback, decision on extension of the Scheme to other areas was to
be taken. Since the mid-term review of ABHY was scheduled in 2022, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the results of the same with the details of
expenditure incurred .The Committee while noting that the participatory ground
water management is envisaged to make a significant step in ground water
management at grass root level to enable the community and stake holders to
monitor and manage the ground water as common pool resources themselves
desire that based on the positive results of the Scheme, the scope of the Scheme
be augmented to other areas for gradually covering the entire country. The
Committee also recommend that best practices of participatory Ground Water
management being followed in states may be documented at the Central level
and the same may be replicated in the other States as well. The Committee
further desire that special awareness campaigns may be organised especially in
rural areas for including students of the schools as brand ambassadors of water
conservation initiatives. Suitable steps may be initiated in consultation with the
Ministry of Education to include workshops on ‘Water Conservation’ in the school
syllabi to spread awareness for water conservation amongst the future citizens of
the country. The Ministry may also take steps to organise ‘Jal Pakhwada' for 15
days in a year, in schools, educational institutions, and government institutions
across the country for spreading awareness about Ground Water conservation
and recharge. During the ‘Jal Pakhwada' events like quiz competitions, debates,
essay writing competitions, showcasing of best practices on groundwater
recharge and conservation etc. may be held to encourage participatory Ground

water management...

Capacity Building
20. Audit observed that no action was taken on four out of 12
recommendations made by an Expert Group constituted for benchmarking of

various activities of CGWB with international best practices, on capacity building
67


in CGWB. These four recommendations included attending of international
conferences and presentation of important findings by selected CGWB
officers/staff; development of a mentorship programme between CGWB and
international experts to provide one on-one training for specialized hydro-
geologic techniques and application; attendance at scientific conferences; and
providing of references by CGWB on its website for self-training in the field of
hydrogeology. Thus, in spite of these recommendations being of considerable
importance for CGWB with respect to its future infrastructure and human
resource requirements, CGWB failed to take action on these recommendations.
The Department accepted that recommendations were not implemented
completely. The Committee are of the considered opinion that state of the art
infrastructure and world class technological knowhow in the field of Ground
water management are crucial for preserving one of the most crucial natural
resources available for the citizens of the country. The Committee therefore
recommend that Central Ground Water Board may take expeditious action to
ensure that recommendations of the report of the Expert Group for augmenting
its infrastructure, technological upgradation and for capacity building are
implemented without further delay. The Committee are of the opinion that out of
these four recommendations the Ministry should initially strive to develop the
mentorship programme between CGWB and international experts as well as
providing references for self training in the field of hydrogeology. The Committee
also recommend that the department may initiate suitable steps to bring best
practices being followed across the world in the field of ground water
management to the country. The Ministry may also consider technology
exchange with friendly countries which are following the latest technologies in

the field of Ground Water Management.

Schemesi/initiatives of States/UTs for management of Ground Water

21. The Committee note that to tackle the problems affecting quality and
quantity of ground water, States/UTs implemented various schemes for water
supply, irrigation, ground water recharge, effluent treatment, etc. It has been
highlighted by audit that while some of the schemes implemented in the States
were effective in improving the condition of ground water levels in the States,

there were schemes in which the envisaged targets were not achieved and

68


therefore, needed better control and implementation to ensure the desired
results. Audit observed deficiencies in schemes of some states. These included
lack of analysis of ground water level data before recommending proposals for
construction of tube wells (Bihar); delay in finalisation of project on Ground
Water Recharge action plan (Delhi); shortfall in the activities of State Ground
Water Conservation Mission, lag in achievement of targets for implementing the
use of sprinkle irrigation (Uttar Pradesh), etc. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that apart from necessary handholding of States, the Ministry
may augment efforts towards turning Ground Water Management into a National
Mission for all stakeholders and impress upon the State Governments to review
the performance of their schemes related to ground water and take measures to
ensure that the envisaged results are achieved by adopting an integrated

approach for recharge/augmentation of ground water.

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND GROUND WATER

22. Sustainable development is a crucial goal that requires collective efforts to
ensure a prosperous and resilient future for people and the planet. The United
Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, consisting of 17
goals and 169 targets. Goal 6 specifically focuses on ensuring the availability and
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. While the responsibility
for managing water resources lies with the state governments, the Central
Government has taken steps to achieve SDG 6 through initiatives like the Jal
Jeevan Mission and Atal Bhujal Yojana. While taking note of the steps taken by
the Government towards achieving SDG No. 6, the Committee urge the
Government to expedite the efforts to ensure that clean water and sanitation for

the citizens of the country is available within a time bound manner.

Targets relating to Ground Water

Target 6.4 — Annual ground water withdrawal against net annual availability

23. The Committee note that the NIT] Aayog is responsible for coordinating the
SDGs in India. For Goal 6, the targets identified include increasing water-use
efficiency, protecting water-related ecosystems, and supporting local community
participation in water management. Regarding annual ground water withdrawal
against net annual availability (Target 6.4}, the audit revealed that the annual

groundwater withdrawal had increased, with several districts exceeding the

69


target of 70% withdrawal against net annual availability. While the Ministry
reported some improvement in the overall stage of Ground Water extraction level
in the country, the Committee emphasize the need for concerted efforts to
achieve the SDG targets and reduce groundwater extraction to the desired extent.

Target 6.6 - By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including

mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes

24. Regarding Target 6.6, the Committee have been informed that CGWB is
preparing the aquifer mapping and management plan (for groundwater) for the
entire country which is likely to be completed by 31 Mar 2023. It has also been
communicated that for facilitating States to take appropriate measures for
sustainable groundwater management, the management plans including those in
the agriculture sector (like plans for crop diversification, sprinkler system, drip
irrigation etc.) are being shared with the respective State Governments. In this
regard, the Committee note that the target 6.6 was to be achieved by 2020. Hence
there is already a delay in meeting a global commitment within timelines with
regard to Target 6.6. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure that
coordinated efforts, both at the Centre and State level are taken to finish aquifer
mapping and management plan in a time bound manner. Further, the Committee
desire that sustainable ground water management plans like crop diversification,
sprinkler system and drip irrigation may be given large scale publicity especially
in rural areas to promote judicious use of water and to arrest indiscriminate

wastage of ground water in the country.

Target 6 b - Local communities’ participation in water management __

25. Regarding Target 6-b, the Committee note that the National Water Policy
(2012) envisages that declining ground water levels in over-exploited areas need
to be arrested by introducing improved technologies of water use, incentivising
efficient water use and encouraging community based management of aquifers.
The Committee highlight the lack of action taken on promoting local community
participation in groundwater management, which was initially proposed under
the Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme. Although the Atal Bhujal
Yojana has been launched in seven states, the Committee urge the Ministry to
expand its scope to cover the entire country and provide updates on the
outcomes achieved through the scheme. As the participatory management was
envisaged to enable the community and stake holders to monitor and manage the

ground water as common pool resources themselves, a coordinated effort
70


involving Government departments, research institutes, Panchayati Raj
Institutions, civil society organisations and stakeholders at village level is a pre-
requisite. The Committee urge the Ministry to involve local communities in
coordination with Members of Legislative Assemblies, Panchayati Raj Institutions
and State government functionaries at the village level in cleaning, desilting and
restoring water bodies which can act as natural recharge points. The local
administration may be instructed to monitor water levels in reservoirs/ponds/
wells/baolis etc. through use of technologies like Geo Tagging and Remote

Sensing.

OTHER ISSUES

High Yielding Variety Seeds Consuming Less Water

26. The Committee note that Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR),
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has identified/developed high yielding
short duration varieties of wheat and paddy seeds that consume less water and
can provide breeder seeds on submission of indent by the State Government.
The Committee also note that Central government issues advisories to
States/UTs from time to time to promote crop rotation, crop diversification and
use of less water intensive crops to reduce excessive water use. The
groundwater guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020 issued by the Department also advise
States/UTs for promoting crop diversification/rotation/other initiatives to reduce
over-dependence on groundwater. The Committee have also been informed by
the Ministry that the Department is implementing the Atal Bhujal Yojana in certain
water stressed Gram Panchayats (GPs)/Districts of seven States in the country to
ensure judicious utilization of by all concerned. The Committee in this regard are
of the considered opinion that keeping in view the fact that major component of
Ground Water in the country is utilised for irrigation related activities in the
agriculture sector, it is imperative that the farmers of the country are encouraged
to take up crops that are not water intensive. The Committee also note that the
Government has decided to celebrate 2023 as the year of Millets. In this regard,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry support this mission by aligning it
with policy measures, including budgetary support and financial incentives for

the farmers of the country.

71


National Water _system- Desalination and sustainable exploitation of natural

water resources

27. The Committee note that Department of Science & Technology (DST) has
been identified as the nodal agency for Desalination Mission. Further DST has
launched national calls for proposals to identify and assess the role of
desalination for India’s water security and evolve time-bound research,
development, assessment and demonstration of the program for desalination
technologies at various stages of Technology Readiness Levels. The Committee
also note that a field demonstration project to mitigate water problems in the
Ausa town of Marathwada region in Maharashtra had been supported by DST for
the production of potable water by providing a desalination facility integrated
with reject water management. While noting that the desalination facility in Ausa
Town of Maharashtra has been successfully handed over to the local
Administrative body for further operation and maintenance, the Committee desire
that the Government must seriously consider replicating the same in areas
having similar water situations across the country after assessing the outcome of
project in Ausa Town.The Committee strongly recommend that technological
interventions in the field of desalination for India's water security must be given

top priority.

Rain Water Harvesting

28. Regarding initiatives on Rain Water Harvesting, the Committee have been
informed about Jal Shakti-Abhiyan-Catch the Rain, Atal Bhujal Yojana,
Guidelines issued to all states on 24th September 2020 etc. The Committee also
note that Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has formulated
guidelines for the States to adopt measures suitable to local conditions, such as
Unified Building Bye Laws (UBBL) of Delhi, 2016, Model Building Bye Laws
(MBBL), 2016 and Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and
Implementation (URDPFl) Guidelines, 2014, wherein adequate focus has been
given on requirement of rainwater harvesting and water conservation measures.
As per MBBL, all buildings having a plot size of 100 sq.m. or,more shall
mandatorily include the complete proposal of rainwater harvesting. 33 States/
UTs have adopted the features of these Bye Laws. While noting the efforts made
72


towards ground water recharge and rainwater harvesting, the Committee strongly feel
that the Government needs to do much more in this direction. The Committee desire
that concerted efforts with renewed vigour may be taken to explore the feasibility of
building rainwater harvesting structures and for taking up water conservation
measures on the existing Government buildings both at the Centre and at the State
level. The Committee also recommend that steps be initiated to persuade all state
governments to ensure construction of rainwater harvesting structures in buildings
that are to be constructed in future across the country, in harmony with Model Building
Bye Laws and relevant guidelines, to facilitate rainwater harvesting for secure future of
the country with regard to Ground Water. A status report may be furnished to the
Committee.

Conclusion

29. Ground Water being a lifeline of the populace of the country and also the engine
of growth for the nation’s economy, its efficient management is of paramount
importance and Ground Water Management and Regulation (GWMR)"scheme launched
by the government during the Xu Five Year Plan (2012-17) was a welcome step
towards this end. During the implementation of the Scheme, it has been observed that
to achieve the envisaged objectives of Ground Water Management, plethora of related
schemes have been floated both at the Centre and the States such as ‘Atal Bhujal
Yojana’, “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain”, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana,
‘Mukhyamantri Jal Swaviamban Abhiyan’ in Rajasthan, ‘Jalyukt Shibar’ in Maharashtra,
‘Sujalam Sufalam Abhiyan’ in Gujarat, ‘Mission Kakatiya’ in Telangana, Neeru Chettu’ in
Andhra Pradesh, Jal Jeevan Hariyali in Bihar, ‘Jal Hi Jeevan’ in Haryana, ‘Pani Bachao,
Paisa Kamao' in Punjab and Kudimaramath scheme in Tamil Nadu etc. As perused from
the records, most of these Schemes have been brought in with designated objectives.
The Committee while noting the well intentioned Schemes of Central as well as State
Governments, are of the opinion that there is a need to synchronise these schemes to
the larger objective of achieving sustainable Ground Water management. The
Committee therefore recommend the Ministry to devise a robust coordinating
mechanism at the Central level and impress upon the States to follow suit.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
September, 2023 Chairperson,
Bhadrapada, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

73