72

IRREGULARITIES IN AWARDING OF
MAJOR WORKS OF SEEPZ, SEZ
AUTHORITY, MUMBAI

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY SECOND —

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


1 PAC NO. 2301

SEVENTY SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IRREGULARITIES IN AWARDING OF
MAJOR WORKS OF SEEPZ, SEZ
AUTHORITY, MUMBAI

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

Presented to Lok Sabha on: lo. -~63- 2042

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: / 6} OF — 2023

“LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) (i)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE IV (FINANCE) OF PAC (2021-22) (ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iv)
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
PART- 1
[A | Introductory 01
|? | Award of Major works of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority to ineligible agency 01
NFCD;
Cc Issue of work order without approval of Authority [oe
| > | Weak mechanism for quality control , 41
a Letter 9f Permission /Letter of Approval issued to SEZ units without 14
scrutinizing mandatory norms
PART - II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 22-2:

APPENDICES

Minutes ‘of the Sitting of Sub-Committee IV of Public Accounts Committee
2021-22) held on 28.04.2022

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on
23.09.2022

|” |

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held :
09.08.2023 |



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

fori T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi’

9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara”
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy?
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi*

OSNODARWN

1 Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
07.07.2021.
2 Elected w.c.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
07.07.2021.
3 Elected w.c-f, 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
07.07.2021.
* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f.
07.07.2021.

0)


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-IV (FINANCE) OF PAC

(2021-22)
1. , Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Convenor
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria - Member
4. Dr. C.M. Ramesh - Member
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai - Member
6. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Member

Gi)


“SOMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)
Shri Adhiv Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara

© M@NoaAYN

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

aaa ao
की ७ ७४ ०

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

a

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh

20. — Shri Vijayasai Reddy
21... Dr. M Thambidurai

22... Dr.'Sudhanshu Trivedi

(iil


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shr? Jagdambika Pal
Shi Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Latan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
1
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. Ml. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

क MNOAAA DD

»

Shri Jayant Sinha

=

SECRETARIAT
4. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Executive Officer

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy Second Report
(Seventeerith Lok Sabha).on ‘Irregularities in awarding of Major Works of
SEEPZ, SEZ Authority, Mumbai’ based on Para No.6.2 of C&AG Report 17
of 2019 relating to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

2. The C&AG Report No. 17 of 2019 was laid on the Table of the House
on 03.02.2020.

3. Public Accounts Committee (2021-2022), selected the aforesaid subject
and allocated the same to one of their Sub-Committees viz. Sub-Committee —
1५ (Finance) for examination.

4. The Sub-Committee - IV (Finance) of the Public Accounts
Committee (2021-22) held a briefing from Audit on the subject matter on 2g
April, 2022. Considering the gravity of the issues involved in the matter, Public
Accounts Committee (2022-23), at the request of Sub-Committee - IV
(Finance) of the Public Accounts Committee (2021-22), decided to carry
forward the subject for detailed examination during 2022-23 and took oral
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry and
obtained ‘vritten replies on the same on 30.11.2022. Based on the orai
evidence and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in
detail in 2023-24.

5. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 09.08.2023
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations anc
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part- Il of the Report.

7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for taking oral
evidence and obtaining information on the subject.

8. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information in connection with the examination of
the subject.

9. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the

assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
09 August, 2023 Chairperson,
18 Sravana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(४)


REPORT

; PART-I
A. Introductory

The C&AG Report No. 17 of 2019 for the year that ended on March 2018
contains significant results of the compliance audit of the Department of Revenue-
Customs under the Ministry of Finance and Director General of Foreign Trade
under Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Chapter VI of the Report deals with
Irregularities in awar ling of Major works of SEEPZ, SEZ Authority, Mumbai”

2. According to Audit, it was observed from Financial Accounts of Santacruz
Electronics Export Processing Zone (SEEPZ) Authority that during the year 2015-
16 and 2016-17 substantial amount was booked under ‘Advances on Capital
Account’ (% 637.08 lakh in 2015-16 and ₹ 3304.39 lakh in 2016-17) and under
Capital works in progress’ (% 3087.41 lakh in 2015-16 and % 5197.56 lakh in 2016-
17). Hence, during the regular compliance audit (January/February 2018) of the
SEEPZ SEZ Authority (herein after referred as “the Authority”) special focus was
given to the transactions reported under these heads.

3. During scrutiny, Audit noticed following major issues:-
(i) Awarding of works to ineligible agency;
(il) Issue of work order without approval of Authority;
(iii) Weak mechanisms for quality control;

(iv) Letter of Permission (LOP)/Letter of Agreement (LOA) issued to SEZ units
without scrutinizing mandatory norms and other miscellaneous irregularities.

B. Award _of Major works of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority to ineligible agency
(NECD)

4. Audit observed that as per the Government of India office memorandum
issued on 2 November 2010 read with rule 1 of General Financial Rules (GFR)
2017, provisions ccrtained in GFR are deemed to be applicable to Central
Autonomous Bodies except to the extent of the bye laws of an Autonomous Body
for separate Financiai Rules which have been approved by the Government. In the
absence of any specific provision relating to awarding of works related to
Major/Minor construction/repair works in the SEZ Rules 2009, provisions of GFR is
applicable to the Authority. Further, as per sub rule 2 and 3 of Rule 133 of GFR,
2017 a Ministry or Department may, at its discretion, assign repair works estimated
to cost above % 30 lakh and original/minor works of any value to any Public Works
Organization (PWO) such as Central Public Works Department, State Public
Works Department, others Central Government organizations authorized to carry
out civil or electrical works or to any Public Sector Undertakings (PSU) set up by
the Central or State Government or any other Central/State Government
organisation/ PSU which may be notified by Ministry of Urban Development



2

(MoUD) after evaluating their financial strength and technical competence. For
award of work under the sub rule 3, competition among PSUs/organizations shall
be ensured.

Audit scrutiny revealed that SEZ Authority had awarded in February 2017
the works of structural repair and allied civil works and water proof treatment to
National Co-operative Construction and Development Federation (NFCD) of India
Ltd amounting to हैं 74.85 crore. Advance payment of & 56.14 crore had been
made to the agency upto December 2017. Audit noticed that NFCD was only not
on the list of agencies notified by MoUD, and the selection of the agency was also
done without any competitive bidding. It was seen that NFCD is an agency
registered under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act 2002, Department of
Agriculture and Co-operation, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India. On
pointing out this aspect, the Authority in their reply stated in February 2018 that the
Authority was enacted under the provisions of SEZ Act, 2005 and Section 51 of
the SEZ Act, 2005 has an overriding effect in respect of any’ other law or
instruments etc. It further stated that it has power to incur expenditure above the
threshold limit of 50 lakh and had decided to engage NFCD on deposit work
basis to carry out maintenance and repairs work because earlier the repair and
maintenance work of the building was with MIDC which resulted in delays in
execution. According to Audit, reply of the Authority is not acceptable because
under Rule 7 of SEZ Rules, the Authority is permitted to incur expenditure on
minor and maintenance works upto २50 lakh only. Further, as far 55 the procedure
to be followed while incurring the expenditure for awarding works iri excess of हैं 30
lakh is concerned, the GFR provisions continue to be applicable to the Authority.
Audit added that since NFCD is an agency registered under Wilti State Co-
operatives Society Act it was not eligible being not on the list of agencies notified
by MoUD for carrying out the maintenance works of government autonomous
body. Moreover, no competitive process was followed to select the agency. In a
further response received from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, it was
stated that the appointment of NFCD was under examination by the Ministry's
Vigilance Section, as to whether GFR Rules have been followed or not.

5. When the Committee desired to know about the composition of SEEPZ -
SEZ Authority and their functions and powers in awarding the major/minor/other
works, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, in a written reply stated as under:

“Composition of SEZ Authority is stipulated under sub-section 5 of section 31
of SEZ Act, 2005, which is as follows.

(a) the Development Commissioner of the Special Economic Zone over
which the Authority exercises its jurisdiction—Chairperson, ex officio;


3

(b) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by that
Government having knowledge of, or experience in, dealing with matters
relating to Special Economic Zones—Members, ex officio;

(०) an officer of the Government of India in the Ministry or Department dealing
with commerce on matters relating to Special Economic Zone—Member, ex
Officio; 4

(d) not more than two persons, being entrepreneurs or their nominee, to be
nominated by the Central Government—Members, ex officio

Functions of Authority are stipulated under provisions of section 34 of SEZ
Act, 2005 which is as follows.

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of each Authority
to undertake such measures as it thinks fit for the development, operation
and management of the Special Economic Zone for which it is constituted.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
measures referred to therein may provide for—

(a) the develop: ient of infrastructure in the Special Economic Zone;
(b) promoting exports from the Special Economic Zone;
(०) reviewing the functioning and performance of the Special Economic Zone;

(d) levy user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of properties
belonging to the Authority;

(e) performing such other functions as may be prescribed;

Powers of the Authority to Expenditure are stipulated under provisions of s
Rule 7 of the SEZ Authority Rules, 2009 which is follows.

(1) All expenditure of the Authority except as specified in the sub-rule (2)
below, shall be approved by the Authority.

(2) The Chairperson shall have,-
(i) powers to approve minor works and maintenance works of the Zone;
(0) powers to aporove recurring expenditure in connection with-
‘ (a) Salaries,
(b) Overtime allowances,

(c) Travel Expenses,


6.

(d) Advertisement and Publicity,
(e) Rent, Rates, Taxes,
(f) Professional services and legal expenses, and

Explanation - Minor works and maintenance works mentioned at clause (i)
above means work costing less than rupees fifty lakhs per work.

(iii) powers to approve contingent expenditure both recurring and non-
recurring:

Provided that the expenditure so incurred doesnot exceed rupees fifty
lakhs at a time.

Provided further that the Authority concerned shall be competent to
incur such expenditure beyond rupees fifty lakhs.”

To a query on the basis of selection of NFCD, an agency registered under

Multi State Co-operatives Society Act 2002, Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in their
written reply stated as under:-

7

“SEEPZ SEZ informed that NFCD, in its proposal, had enclosed a copy of
the letter no. L.11012/3/2013-CET dated.10.05.2013 (Annexure-I) issued by
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India addressed to All National Level
Co-operative Federations and other organization/work awarding agencies of
the State Govt. mentioning that NFCD has been registered as Multi State
Cooperative Society under the Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002
by the Central Registrar w.r.t. awarding the civil construction work. This was
also taken on record that the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India
had conveyed, vide letter dated 21.02.2014 (Annexure-Il) to Rural
Development Department, Government of Maharashtra, to
empanel/nominate NFCD for civil construction work. Accordingly,
SEEPZ SEZ Authority, in its 30th meeting held on 18.11.2016 (Annexure-
Ill), chaired by the then Chairperson Shri. N.P.S. Monga approved NFCD as
an implementing agency for executing various projects on behalf of SEEPZ
SEZ Authority.”

To a question whether NFDC was selected on the basis of competitive

bidding, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“No, NFCD was not selected by competitive bidding. However, they had
submitted their proposal in 2016 for on boarding and the same was
approved in the 30" Authority meeting on 18.11.2016.”


8.

5

On being questioned on the factors that were taken into consideration

before making the advance payment of % 56.14 crore (75%) for a work costing =
74.85 crore to National Co-operative Construction and Development Federation
(NFCD) of India, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as

under:

9.

“As per the available records, it is observed that it was decided in the
project monit: ring meeting to frame timeline for payment and it was agreed
upon to grant 50% advance payment and 25% after half of the work
completion and balance 25% on submission of all the papers and issuance
of satisfactory certificate.”

On being asked on how the areas for structural repair were identified before

awarding of contract for major works, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

10.

“The buildings in SEEPZ SEZ being more than 40 years old, MIDC had
carried out the structural audit of the Govt. leased buildings through IIT
Mumbai in Dec-2015 wherein they had inspected and conveyed to demolish
Standard Designed Factories (SDF)-I and reconstruct the said building. For
rest of the buildings, it was conveyed that major structural repairs and
strengthening-and non-structural repairs will be required on urgent basis as
per the methodology suggested by IIT Mumbai.”

Asked to furnish details of instances when delays in carrying out repair and

maintenance work 9७ MIDC were observed, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in
a written reply stated as under:

“The details of the delayed projects of MIDC are as follows:-

Nature of work {Completion date Status as on July
2017

Construction of 20.11.2015 Delayed by

SDF-8, approx. 1 and half
year

06.03.2013 Delayed by aa

approx. 4 years

CCTV camera and 3 months _|

CCTV Electronic 08.05.2014 Delayed by

Surveillance approx. 3 years
, System _ गाव 2 months

Access Control
System with

Details of Cancellation of projects of MIDC:-

4. Development of garden of lakeside strips alongwith main


road
2. Repairs to fire fighting system SDF-I to VI
Repairing to external/internal walls with painting and other
allied works to SDF-VI
Providing water proofing treatment to Terraces of SDF-I to VI
Repairs to SDF-Ill in SEEPZ SEZ
Strengthening and repairs to SDF-IV in SEEPZ SEZ
Remolding and refurnishing of conference hall at SEEPZ

NOs

Service Centre

The said delay of projects and cancellation of the project was placed
in the 33" Authority Meeting held on 10.07.2017.”

11. Asked about punitive actions that may have been taken against MIDC on
account of delay in repair and maintenance work, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“MIDC had delayed the projects viz. SDF-8, Access Control System and
Electronic surveillances system, therefore no payment was released for M&R
works till the work was completed. Further, = 11.48 crore related to M&R
work were withheld and after due reconciliation and approval of the Authority,
were released only in 2022. The balance of approx. हैं 62 lakhs will be
released only after compliance of documents and verification and approval of
the Authority.”

42. .When asked whether any scientific method was followed for determining
cost estimates for repair works, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written
teply stated as under:

“Before the formation of SEEPZ SEZ Authority, cost estimates were
submitted by the Special Planning Authority, MIDC and the same was
approved by the competent authority viz. Development Commissioner. In
the case of NFCD, the cost estimate was provided by NFCD and the same
was placed in the SEZ Authority meeting for approval. Presently, the cost
estimates prepared by the PSUs which are functioning as PMCs are verified
by institutes like IIT Mumbai, VJTI, VNIT, etc. who scrutinizes the cost
estimates and provides the scientific backing for the methodology proposed.
It is reiterated that presently, SEEPZ SEZ Authority are strictly following the
GFR 2017 read with Manual for procurement of works.”

13. In reply to a question about when the matter of irregular appointment of
NFCD was referred to the Ministry's Vigilance section for ascertaining whether


7

GFR Rules were being complied with, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

14

Vigilance Division of Department of Commerce has received various
complaints about the irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority, Mumbai, vide letter dated 30.11.2017, from Shri Binod
Aggarwal, from the CVC dated 11.5.2018 and from PMO and DoPT.
Shri Baldev Singh, former DC, SEEPZ SEZ had submitted a
confidential note dated 83.2018 against Shri NPS.
Monga,, ITS (Retd.), former DC, SEEPZ SEZ on this matter
too. Shri Mahesh Yadav, then working as DDC, SEEPZ SEZ had
also made similar allegations vide complaints dated 21.5.2019 and
28.5.2019. Shri G.S. Bhandari, an employee of SEEPZ, SEZ had
also made similar allegations vide complaints dated 28.5.2019 and
29.5.2019.

A team of officers from Department of
Commerce visited SEEPZ SEZ for inspection on 26
& 27 December, 2017 and submitted an inspection report dated
5.1.2018 where irregularities have been pointed out.”

During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and

Industry further stated as under:-

15

“Sir,
CVC advised us to proceed with major penalty proceedings, and therefore,
we had issued charge sheet to the Development Commissioner who is an
officer of the Department of Commerce while the other officer who was Joint
Development Commissioner, we also asked CVC, they advised us major
penalty against the Development Commissioner, they also advised us to
look into the lapses of other officers. Therefore, we looked into the lapses of
other officers."

we have referred the matter to the CVC and the

On being asked whether the probe of the Vigilance section has since been

completed, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under.

“Presently, the’ Inquiry is going on against the suspected officers and the
vigilance division has observed that the appointment of NFCD was not
made in accorciance with the existing rules.

i. During the examination by vigilance Division, it was found that
prima facie three officers were involved in these irregularities
and these are Shri N.P.S. Monga, ITS (Retd), former
Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai; Shri V.P
Shukla, IRS, former Joint Development Commissioner.
SEEPZ SEZ Mumbai; and Shri Baldev Singh, IAS


16.

8

(Retd), former Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ
Mumbai.

ii. Accordingly, the complaints against former officers of SEEPZ
SEZ, Mumbai were examined in Vigilance Division,
Department of Commerce and it was proposed for putting
these officers under suspension and also referring the matter
to CBI for detailed investigation. However, as a rule, it was
decided by the Disciplinary Authority for seeking the
preliminary explanation of Shri N.P.S. Monga and Shri Baldev
Singh, former Development Commissioners of SEEPZ SEZ,
Mumbai.

Enquired on the status of the charge sheet issued and proceedings initiated

against the errant officials, the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and
industry stated during oral evidence held on 23.09.2022 as under:-

17.

“One charge-sheet was issued in July 2018 just before the
officer was to retire. Subsequently, ....... , in 2021 another senior officer who
was handling that was charge sheeted based on the CVC advice.
On the first charge-sheet, ........ the inquiry is still going on. There have
been a number of changes with regard to inquiry officers over a period of
time. In May, .. ., we have appointed a new officer as the inquiry Officer
and the inquiry proceedings have started. The charged officer has sought
certain documents, which is under process.”

Questioned on the process presently being followed by SEEPZ-SEZ

Authority in awarding contracts for major works to agencies, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“It is submitted that the Authority is presently following the due procedure as
detailed hereunder for awarding and monitoring projects:

(a) Tender is floated for engaging the Project Management Consultant
(PMC) and on selection of the PMC, the proposal is placed before
the Authority for approval.

(b) After approval of the Authority, the PMC is awarded the contract as
per the Manual for Procurement of Works.

(c) A MOU furnished by the PMC is placed before the Authority and
after due approval of the Authority, the same is executed.

(9) Technical Cell of SEEPZ prepares the scope of work and the details
ह of the works to be executed and forwards the same to PMC.

(e) PMC provides the Preliminary Project Report (PPR).


9

(fy Based on the approval of the PPR, the PMC submits the Detailed
Projec:: Report (DPR) for administrative approval.

(9) The DPR submitted by the PMC is discussed along with respective
Unit holders for their comments.

(h) The DPR thus submitted is placed before the Authority for approval.

(i) On approval of the DPR, the PMC floats the tender and award the
contract to the L1 bidder.

0) The work thus executed is monitored by PMC as well as Technical
cell of SEEPZ.

(k) Based on the PMC's certification related to quality of the work, the
bills are scrutinized and payment is released as per the schedule of
the MOU.

It is reiterated that presently, all the works are being taken up as per due
procedure prescribed in the Manual of Procurement of Works and services.”

Cc. Issue of work order without approval of Authority
o

18. Authority had:approved an expenditure of = 40.48 crore including five per
cent contingency for structural repair and allied civil works of Standard Designed
Factories (SDF) buildings and Gems and Jewellery buildings. However, NFCD
was issued work order in February 2017 for = 44.58 crore. Thus, work order for an
excess amount of % 4 crore was issued without approval of the Authority. Further,
an additional amount of हैं 7.77 crore was sanctioned for structural repairs without
approval of the Authority. In reply, the Authority stated (April 2018) that the
proposal for additione! amount of 27.77 crore was to be taken up in the agenda of
the subsequent meeting of Authority for deliberation and discussion. However, the
Authority was under reconstitution and the letter of approval was issued by the
administration due to oversight. Authority further stated that the approval had been
withdrawn in April 2018 and would be taken up in the next Authority meeting for
deliberations and that no additional payment/budget had been released to M/s.
NFCD on this account. Ministry replied (July 2019) that the Committee of Members
of the Authority reconstituted to look into the matter held the view that the
appointment of M/s NFCD was already under examination by Vigilance Section. It
was further stated that the Institute of Technology (IIT), Mumbai which conducted
a third party structural audit had in its report attributed the escalation in cost to the
fact that the structural and non-structural repair works in the buildings had been
carried out at the places which were appearing to be good at the time of initial
audit and inspection and those were not considered in the initial estimates. The
irregularities in awarcing of contract for major works indicated serious deficiencies


10

in the financial management of the Authority for which responsibility needs to be
fixed.

419. The Committee noted that Authority had approved an expenditure of 340.48
crore including five per cent contingency for structural repair and allied civil works
of Standard Designed Factories (SDF) buildings and Gems and Jewellery
buildings. However, NFCD was issued work order in February 2017 for 244.58
crore.

20. On being asked whether the progress of work carried out by NFCD was
reviewed by the Authority, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply
stated as under:

“M/s. Cospro, being the PMC appointed by NFCD, had inspected and
furnished the progress report. However, the same was not reviewed by the
Authority.”

21. When asked about the steps taken by the Authority upon corning to know of
the fact that the work order issued did not match the approved expenditure and
was in excess of approved expenditure by % 4 crore, the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“The estimate was approved for = 40.48 crores. The lowest bid on floating
the tender was 241.10 crores. The work order was issued on 16.02.2017
with Structural Consultant Fees @ 2%, PMC fees @3.30%, 5% contingency
on estimated cost NFCD Centage charges @ 3% totally to $44.58 crores.”

22. Toapointed question on the authority on whose approval additional amount
of हैं 7.77 crore was proposed for structural repairs, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“NFCD, vide letter dated 18.08.2017, had informed that acc::rate quantities
of repairs cannot be quantified but with prior experience of similar work we
could quantity the estimate within the range of +/- 10% variation. However,
in the middle stage of the project, it was found that the repairs to terrace
slabs is requiring more efforts and the quantity estimated for that areas has
increased inordinately due to the excessive damage and deterioration of
terrace slabs. In the letter, NFCD has attached the final cost of the repairs
along with the proposed extra items required for few units as the slab there
are beyond repair and the extra items are necessary based on the condition
of the unit area which are dangerously placed requiring additional special
repairs. NFCD has, therefore, requested to provide approval of additional
quantities and extra items. It is noticed that Competent Authority has
approved the cost escalation proposal of NFCD for placing the same in the
Authority meeting. However, the then Estate Manager has issued the
work order for additional amount of % 7.76 crores.”



1

23. When asked whether work orders, which were in excess by crores, were
issued without approval of the Authority, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

“The excess amount proposal of 27.77 crores was approved in the file and
to be placed in the Authority meeting. However, the same was not placed
in the Authority meeting as there was a re-constitution of the Authority and
based on the approval letter for excess amount was issued on 06.11.2017.
However, on knowing the same, a withdrawal letter was issued on
27.04.2018.”

24, On being asked about factors that prompted the Authority to withdraw the
proposal and deciding to not release the additional amount of 2 7.77 crore,
Ministry of Commerc'2 and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“The proposal of cost escalation was approved on 22.09.2017 and to be
placed in the Authority meeting. However, since the Authority was under
re-constitution, the Authority meeting was not conducted since July 2017 to
April 2018. However, the proposal of increased estimated cost of structural
repair work i.e. cost escalation was placed in the 34" Authority meeting held
on 11.05.2018. It was informed to the committee that the letter dated
06.11.2017 in respect of approval of additional amount of = 7.76 crore for
structural repair was issued to M/s. NFCD due to oversight since the
Authority was under reconstitution. However, the same has been
withdrawn by this office vide letter dated 27.04.2018. Further, payments to
NFCD will be subject to approval of Committee and concurrence of
Ministry.”

0. Weak mechanism for quality control

25. According to Audit, Disaster Management Advisor (DIMA) of the Authority
had inspected (November 2017) all the structural and waterproofing works of SDF
and Gems and Jewellery buildings completed by NFCD’s contractors. They
submitted inspection, report highlighting major structural discrepancies in all the
buildings which inclided defective columns and beams and incomplete work.
Though the Authority had taken up the matter with NFCD several times to rectify
the deficiencies, no action was taken by NFCD till the date of audit. Since no MoU
was signed between the Authority and NFCD and no Bank Guarantee
(BG)/Performance Guarantee (PG) was taken, Authority could not enforce action
against NFCD. The Authority also stated that the NFCD was in the process of
taking corrective action in regard to discrepancies as pointed out by DMA. With
respect to MoU, the Authority stated that the draft MoU was under process of
~ finalization. Ministry further stated (July 2019) that to ensure the execution of the
work was as per the given quality standards and technical specification, a third
party audit through Department of Civil Engineer, Indian (IIT), Mumbai was carried


12

out. Fact remains quality control mechanism failure was evider:: from the IIT,
Mumbai inspection report which stated that repairs were carried cut even at the
places which were appearing to be good, which resulted in escalation of costs.

26. In this regard, the Ministry, in their written note mentioned as under:-

“It is incorrect to say that there was absence of mechanism for quality control.
M/s NFCD on. behalf of SEEPZ-SEZ appointed the Project Management
Consultant (PMC) to check the quality of the work being carried out by the
agencies awarded contract for structural repair. The financial progress and
physical progress report of the work were submitted by the PMC of M/s
NFCD for review on regular basis. Periodical review was also taken with the
M/s NFCD considering the urgency of the work and in view of the onset
monsoon. It is also stated that a Committee comprising the PMC, Engineer,
NFCD, DMA and Caretaker was also constituted for review of the physical
work carried out by the agencies. Further the SEEPZ Authority, had also
decided to conduct 3” party audit of all the structural works executed through
NFCD, so as to ensure the work execution are as per the given quality
standards and technical specification. Accordingly vide letter dt. 23.02.2018,
SEEPZ SEZ Authority carried out 3 Party Audit through Department of Civil
Engineer, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai. In view of
the above, it is stated that checks and balances were exercised.”

27. On being asked to specify the number of inspections conducted by the DMA
cf the Authority while the structural and civil works were on-going, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“As per record no inspection report is placed in file. However, compliance
report dated 27.02.2018 of Disaster Management Adviser (DMA) along with
the NFCD officials including Caretaker of SEEPZ SEZ is available wherein
they have specified that structural work of all SDF and G&J Complex is
done properly. It is also mentioned in the compliance report that some
debris and light fittings were not completed.”

28. On being asked whether the authority agrees with the observations of IIT
Mumbai, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“Yes, IIT in its report had correctly mentioned the corrective measures to be
taken. A third party audit was conducted by M/s. VNIT whose report was
also not conclusive.”

29. On being asked about the quantum of escalation of costs noticed from the
initial estimates due to structural and non-structural repair works in the buildings
having been carried out at the places which were appearing to be good at the time
of initial audit, Ministry of Commerce and ‘Industry in a written. “eply stated as
under:


13

“Escalation of costs was not quantified by IIT.”

30. Asked about the report of any other third party's audit of the structures apart
from the one conducted by IIT-Mumbai, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated ag under: है

“Yes. M/s. Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur had
submitted the 37 party audit of valuation work of existing building
repaired/retrofitted by NFCD. The observations are as follows:-

(a) Since detailed scope statement and the repair methodology/method
statement, location taken in the estimate to be repaired was unable to
distinguish between scope allotted and the work accomplished by the
contractor.

(b) Repaired and retrofitting were same, so difficult to distinguish the
exact location where repair or retrofitting work is carried out by
contractor.

(c) No refere 108 to check the total quantity executed by each contractor.

31. The Committers: noticed that neither MoU was signed between the Authority
and NFCD nor Bank Guarantee (BG)/Performance Guarantee (PG) taken. On
being asked about the reasons thereof, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

“The draft MOU submitted by NFCD in Nov. 2017 could not be finalized. It is
observed from records that NFCD has provided the xerox copy of the
statement of the Bank guarantee/Performance guarantee/security deposit of
structural and; water proofing work which was valid upto 31.03.2018
executed with Contractor.”

32. On being asked as to what actions were taken by the Authority against
NFCD for their non-rectification of the deficiencies pointed out by the DMA,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“25% payments of NFCD were withheld and not paid.”

33. | On being asked whether the draft MOU was finalized before the completion
of project, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“Draft MOU could not be finalized. The work executed by NFCD was
monitored by the PMC and certified by them and they furnish the monthly
progress report.”

34. Asked about the approving authority for appointment of Project
Management Consulant (PMC) by M/s NFCD on behalf of SEEPZ-SEZ for quality


14

control purposes, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as
under:

“Authority in its 30" Authority meeting approved the charges for
appointment of PMC. NFCD had appointed the PMC.”

35. On being asked about the level at which the financial progress and physical
progress report of the PMC of M/s NFCD was examined in SEEPZ Authority,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“As per the directions of the then Estate Manager, vide note dated
49.02.2018, the inspection was carried out by DMA and the compliance
report was submitted to the Competent Authority. Further 3° oarty audit was
conducted by IIT Mumbai and furnished the report in May 24.18.”

36. On being asked whether any shortcomings in structure were highlighted in
these reports, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as
under:

"Yes, The shortcomings in the structural repair were rectified by NFCD.”

37. The Committee noted that a Committee comprising the PMC, Engineer,
NFCD, DMA and Caretaker was also constituted for review of the physical work
carried out by the agencies.

38. On being asked why there was no Representation from the Authority on the
Committee so constituted, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply
stated as under:

“The Caretaker is a govt. employee and DMA is the outsourced Advisor for
the SEEPZ SEZ Authority who represented the Authority.”

E. Letter of Permission / Letter of Approval issued to SEZ units without units without
scrutinizing mandatory norms

39. Audit observed that Rule 17 and 18 of SEZ Rules 2006 contains provisions
regarding allotment of units in SEZ which provides for applying to the Development
Commissioner for setting up of unit in SEZ inter alia with allotment of
land/industrial sheds in the SEZ along with approval for water connection,
Registration- cum Membership certificate (RCMC), proof of registration with
Central Pollution Control Board, Power connection, . Building approval plan,
approval from inspectorate of factories, pollution control clearance and NOC from
fire department beside Export projections and past performance, if the applicant is
existing SEEPZ unit etc.

Audit noticed (February 2018) that the Authority had invited (May 2017)
applications for allotment of units in building SDF VIII (New Tower) even before


‘ 15

occupation certificate was issued by the MIDC. Approvals were accorded to 18
SEZ Units (12 fresh LOPs, six existing units were allowed Broad banding/
additional space) in July 2017 by Unit Approval Committee (UAC) although the
requisite clearances like Occupation Certificate (OC), water and power connection,
pollution control clearance, fire clearance and RCMC certificates had not been
obtained. Allotment :f units in the SDF VIII even before getting OC was irregular.
Further, no busines: operation could be commenced by any SEZ Unit as there
was no water and-power connection and allotments were put under review
because of non-sub nission of requisite approval certificates by the units. Audit
noticed that the subsequent UAC held in August 2017, decided to review all
allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-fulfilment of terms
and conditions laid down in the Provisional letter of SEEPZ authority e.g.
acceptance of conditions by the allottee, making of payment within stipulated time
and also cases of application for additional space because of capacity
enhancement on the grounds that “there appears to be no-correlation between
projected export and space allotted to the units with respect to their past
performance, existing installed capacity and space utilized by them.

40. On being asked how the UAC accorded approvals to 18 SEZ Units (12
fresh LOP’s six existing units were allowed Board banding/additional space) in July
2017, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“As per the SEZ Rule, the Unit has to obtain the provisional offer/allotment
letter from the Developer and thereafter, the UAC has approved the
proposal based on the submission of the documents along with provisional
offer letter issued after approval of the Authority.”

41. | When asked about the composition of Unit Approval Committee and the
methodology followed for constituting it, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

“Section 13(2; of the SEZ Act, 2005 stipulates as follows.
Every Approval Committee shall consist of —
(a) the Development Commissioner - Chairperson, ex-officio;

(b) two officers of the Central Government to be nominated by the
Central Government - Members, ex-officio;

(c) two officers of the Central Government to represent the Ministry or
Department dealing with revenue — Members, ex officio;

(qd) one officer of the Central Government to be nominated by that
Government to represent the Ministry or Department dealing with
the economic affairs (financial services) - Members, ex Officio;


16

(e) two officers of the State Government concemed to be nominated
by that Stated Government ~ Member, ex officio;

(f) a representative of the Developer concerned — Special Invitee”

42. Audit noticed that the subsequent UAC, held in August 2017, decided to
review all allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-
fulfillment of terms & conditions laid down in the provisional section of SEEPZ
Authority.

43. On being asked whether the review has been completed, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“The review was completed and based on the same, a report was submitted
to the Ministry on 08.03.2018. Ministry vide letter dated 21.03.2018,
directed to cancel the allotment and accordingly, the LOPs were also
cancelled. On completion of the review, following steps initiated:-

(i) As per the decision of the BOA dated 29.07.2021 and the decision in the

50th Authority meeting held on 16.11.2021 for allotment of space with

restrictions due to the nature of construction, advertisement was hosted on

the website and in newspapers and wide publicity was given in Dec 2021,

based on which applications were received even from entrepreneurs other

than the Unit holders in SEEPZ SEZ in the first attempt itself with all the -
restrictions and the Undertaking as specified in the advertisement dated

31.12.2021.

(ii) All the entrepreneurs have agreed to the restrictions and shortcomings
and then applied for the space for work to be carried out based on the load
bearing capacity and pre-fabricated nature of the building.

(iii) The units have also submitted individual undertaking not to carry out any
operations which are not allowed in the said building.

(iv) In addition to that, an SOP has been issued for the Units allotted in
SDF-8 for compliance by Security and Customs to ensure the following:

न Only one gate to remain open for movement in and out of the
building at a time.
° Trained guards to be posted at the open gate to check the

material being taken inside the building and to ensure that no
machines/materials to be allowed inside the building which may damage the
pre-fabricated structure of the building

. Undertaking submitted by Unit holders to be followed.

. Scrap and other material being carried out of the building to
be checked for chemical and other debris produced during processing.
न CCTVs have been installed on the only gate’ to monitor that

compliance is being done properly.


17

44. When asked as to what corrective actions were taken thereon, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“Ministry, vide letter dated 21.03.2018, had approved and conveyed the
cancellation of the allotment. Accordingly, the provisional allotment letter
was cancelled and placed in the Authority meeting. Subsequent to the
cancellation of provisional allotment, LOAs were also cancelled. MIDC on
completion of the work of SDF-8 had handed over the building on
30.09.2021 with all the statutory compliance and then advertisement was
floated in newSpapers and on website stipulating the conditions w.r.t. nature
of the construction. Accordingly, on receipt of the applications, the
Committee thus constituted had examined and maintained the transparency
and hosted the report on the website. On approval of the Authority,
provisional allotment was issued.

45. When asked further on the measures that may have been taken to ensure
impartiality by UACs, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated
as under:

“Complete transparency was maintained to ensure impartial due process
was followed. ‘The Committee was constituted to examine the applications
for allotment of space and the Committee's report was hosted on the
website seeking comments from the Trade within 15 days and thereafter.
the same was submitted before the Authority. Further, after the approval of
Authority, provisional allotment letters are issued. On issuance of the
provisional allotment letter, the project was examined by the Approval
Committee. The Unit had also furnished an undertaking that they would not
undertake the activities which are not permitted in the said building due to
the nature ofthe pre-fabricated structure. Accordingly, LOAs were issued
to adhere to the said conditions of the circular no. 9.”

46. ‘It was noted that as per CPWD norms & Central Vigilance Commission
guidelines, Mobilization advance shall not exceed 10% of the value of work & shall
require a Bank guarantee of 110%. In this case, advances of 50 % (₹ 37.43
crore) and 25% (₹ 17.70 crore) were paid, which was in gross violation of CVC
guidelines.

47. On being questioned as to how the Ministry is ensuring full compliance by
all SEZ authorities with the guidelines for such advances, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“SEZ Authorities are competent to award works in due compliance with all
regulations including GFR, Manuals for procurements for goods, works and
services as well as relevant provisions of SEZ Act, 2005 as well as SEZ
Authority Rules, 2009. Besides, any communication in this regard received


46.

18

from Ministry of Finance, CVC, Vigilance Division of DoC are also shared
with all Authorities. Moreover, such matters are also sensitized during the
periodic review meeting of DCs.”

On being asked on the action that may have been taken by Ministry to

ensure non- recurrence of such major irregularities in future, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry in a written reply stated as under:

49.

“Issues pertaining to awarding contracts by following due process in
compliance with all the relevant statutory provisions as well as other
regulations / guidelines are sensitized during the course of periodic review
meeting of DCs. Besides, any issue of irregularities which comes to the
notice of Ministry is taken up for due examination and necessary corrective
action, as appropriate, in consultation with the Vigilance Division. Vigilance
Section, DoC vide its OM dated 13.10.2022 has circulated a copy of CVC
Circular No. 14/07/22 dated 11.07.2022 regarding updated Manual on
Procurement, Goods, Services, Works and Consultancy to all the Divisions,
Attached Offices, Subordinate Organizations, PSUs under the Department
of Commerce for information and strict compliance. The Tender Guidelines
issued by the CVC and the Department of Expenditure have been
hyperlinked on the Department's website at ttp://commerce.gov.in>>Tender
Guidelines for information and strict compliance of all concerned.”

Audit scrutiny revealed that a preliminary charge sheet was issued by

vgilance section to the officers concerned and letter of approval was withdrawn.

59.

When asked about the current status in regard to the Charge sheets filed

against erring officials, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated
as under:

“() Action taken against Shri N.P.S.Monga, ITS, former DC,
SEEPZ SEZ ह

i. A Charge Memorandum dated 27.7.2018 for major penalty
proceedings was issued to Shri N.P.S. Monga.
ii. Shri N.P.S. Monga superannuated on 31.07.2018.

iii, _ Shri N.P. 5. Monga submitted his Written Statement of
Defence on 8.8.2018 denying the charges.

iv. On 7.9.18, the Disciplinary Authority appointed the then CEO,
GeM as Inquiring Authority and also appointed a Presenting
Officer on 7.9.2018. है

v. Consequent to the repatriation of the IA, the Disciplinary
Authority appointed former Special Secretary, Department of
Commerce as Inquiring Authority on 28.11.2019.


19

vi. Due to retirement of Inquiring Authority, the Disciplinary
Authority appointed former Principal Adviser (Cost),
Department of Commerce as the Inquiring Authority on
25.8.2020.

vii, Due to retirement of the Presenting Officer, the Disciplinary
\uthority appointed a Director, Department of Commerce as
ihe Presenting Officer on 13.9.2021.

viii. . The Inquiring Authority was promoted and transferred on
31:12.2021.

ix. On 19.1.2022, the Presenting Officer informed that the
Inquiring Authority has been transferred.

x. On 10.5.2022, the Disciplinary Authority appointed the
Principal Adviser (Cost), DGTR, Department of Commerce as
the Inquiring Authority. है

xi. The inquiry proceedings are in progress. The Department has
directed the Inquiry Authority vide communication dated
23.09.2022 and 11.10.2022 to complete the inquiry
proceedings within one month.

xii. The Department has also directed the Presenting Officer vide
communication dated 26.09.2022 and 11.10.2022 to take
hecessary action to complete the enquiry proceedings within
cne month.

xiii. [1 the case of Shri N.P.S. Monga, former DC, SEEPZ-SEZ, all
retirement benefits including leave encashment have been
withheld as disciplinary case is pending against
him. However, the officer is currently getting provisional
pension.

(Il) Action against Shri V.P. Shukla, IRS, former Joint Development
Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ

i. The Disciplinary Authority, after considering the First Stage
Advice of the CVC dated 18.7.2019, had approved for initiation
of major penalty proceedings against Shri V.P. Shukla. Shri
V.P. Shukla is an IRS officer whose Disciplinary Authority is
the Hon'ble Minister of Finance. Accordingly, the Department
of Commerce forwarded a proposal along with draft charge
sheet to the CBIC, Department of Revenue on 16.8.2019.The
Disciplinary Authority in the Department of Revenue approved
issue of charge sheet on 18.5.2021. Accordingly, a Charge
Memorandum dated 21.5.2021 was issued to Shri V.P. Shukla
for major penalty proceedings.


20

ii. The Charged Officer, Shri V.P. Shukla submitted his Written
Statement of Defence on 31.5.2021 denying all the charges
levelled against him in the charge sheet.

iii. The Disciplinary Authority in the Department of Revenue had
appointed an Inquiry Authority on 3.9.2021 and a Presenting
Officer on 3.9.2021.

iv. On 22.11.2021, the Presenting Officer change:!. On 5.7.2022,
a Presenting Officer was appointed.

v. The Department of Revenue has informed that the inquiry is in
progress and 14 hearings have been conducted by the
Inquiring Authority. है

vi. Shri V.P. Shukla is in service and his date of retirement is
31.03.2024.

vii. Department of Revenue has been requested vide
communications dated 23.09.2022, 11.10.2022, 12.10.2022
and 13.10.2022 to direct the Inquiring Authority to complete
the inquiry proceedings within one month expeditiously.”

51. On being asked whether there is any time frame within which disciplinary
departmental proceedings are to be completed, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry in a written reply stated as under:

“As per the CVC Guideline issued on 06.10.2021, the inquiry report should
be submitted within six months from the date of appointment of Inquiring
Authority. In addition to the time limit, a period of one more month may be
taken if required.”

52. When asked about the current status of the ongoing departmental
proceedings at, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a written reply stated as
under:

“Departmental proceedings are still going on and it is yet to be completed
and we have asked the concerned Inquiry officer to complete the same
within a period of one month. Any punishment against the erring official will
be taken based on the finding in the Inquiry Report. However, all retirement
benefits including leave encashment have been withheld against Shri NPS
Monga and the officer is currently getting provisional pension. Further, Shri
V P Shukla is still in service so any punishment against him would be taken
based on the finding in the Inquiry Report.”

53. To a pointed question whether the Department has any reservation if this
matter is examined or investigated by an independent agency, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry in a written reply inter alia stated as under: ,


54.

#

21

“The Department of Commerce has no reservations in getting the matter
examined or investigated by independent agency viz. the CBI. The Hon'ble
Minister of Commerce & Industry has approved for handling over the entire
matter to CBI for a detailed investigation.”

On being asked to furnish a copy of minutes of the Meeting wherein the

decision for abandoning MIDC (a State Government undertaking) and deciding to
go in for a new entity namely NFCD, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in a
written reply stated as under:

55.

“MIDC being the Special Planning Authority and the implementing agency
continued to execute all the works of SEEPZ SEZ Authority till 2015 even
on enactmen’ of the Authority. SEEPZ SEZ Authority had noticed that
MIDC had deiayed projects and could not complete within the stipulated
time inspite of repeated reminders on discussions. Also, MIDC would levy
12.5% ETP charges & 5% contingencies to the estimated cost.
Subsequently, in 2016, NFCD had submitted their proposal and the same
was approved in the 30" Authority meeting held on 18.11.2016 as service
provider and executor for all kinds of civil engineering works and will provide
the services under one umbrella. It was noticed that the other charges
levied by NFCD were lower than the one charged by MIDC. However, there
is no decision taken for abandoning MIDC and going in for a new entity
namely NFCD. Presently, all the major/minor works are being awarded after
due examination and approval of the Authority and following the guidelines
and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works
and the CPWD Works Manual to the extent applicable.”

Subsequently, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of

Commerce) in a written reply dated 07 July 2023 informed the Committee that
matter relating to irregularities observed in the C&AG Paras 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit
Report No. 17 of 2019 has been referred to CBI for detailed investigation on
28.10.2022 and CBI investigation is ongoing.


22

PART Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

oT eeeeeeeeEeEeEeEeE——e————ee—————eE—eEeee

The Committee note that Santacruz Electronics Export Processing
Zone (SEEPZ) Authority, in violation of Rule 7 of SEZ Rules and sub rule 2
and 3 of Rule 133 of GFR, 201, had awarded in February 2017 the works of
structural repair and allied civil works and water proof treatment amounting
to ₹ 74.85 crore to National Co-operative Construction and Development
Federation (NFCD) of India Ltd, an agency registered under Multi State Co-
operatives Society Act 2002, Department of Agriculture and Co-operation,
Ministry of Agriculture and made advance payment of = 56.14 crore to the
agency upto December 2017. Audit added that NFCD being an agency
registered under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act was not eligible to be
on the list of agencies notified by MoUD for carrying out the maintenance
works of a government autonomous body. Moreover, no competitive
process was followed while selecting the agency.

Further, the Authority had approved an expenditure of हैं 40.48 crore
including a five per cent contingency amount for structural re2air and allied
civil works of Standard Designed Factories (SDF) buildings «ad Gems and
Jewellery buildings. However, NFCD was issued work order in “ebruary 2017
for € 44.58 crore. Thus, work order was issued in excess by an amount of 4
crore without approval of the Authority. An additional amount of @ 7.77 crore
was also sanctioned for structural repairs without approval of the Authority.
it has also been pointed out that the Institute of Technology (IIT), Mumbai
which conducted a third party structural audit had, in its report, attributed
the escalation in cost to the fact that the structural and non-structural repair
works in the buildings had been carried out at the places which appeared to
be good at the time of initial audit and inspection.

The Committee observe that Disaster Management Advisor (DMA) of
the Authority had inspected (November 2017) all the structural and
waterproofing works of SDF and Gems and Jewellery buildings completed
by NFCD’s contractors. They submitted the inspection report highlighting
major structural discrepancies in all the buildings which included defective
columns and beams as also incomplete work. Though the Authority had
taken up the matter with NFCD several times for rectifying the deficiencies,
no action was taken by NFCD. Since no MoU was signed between the
Authority and NFCD and no Bank Guarantee (BG)/Performance Guarantee
(PG) was taken, the Authority could not enforce remedial action against
NFCD.

The Committee further observe that the Authority had invited (May
2017) applications for allotment of units in building SDF VII (New Tower)


23

even before occupi:tion certificate was issued by the MIDC. Approvals were
accorded to 18 SEZ Units (12 fresh LOPs, six existing units were allowed
road banding/ additional space) in July 2017 by Unit Approval Committee
(UAC)5354555657although the requisite clearances like Occupation
Certificate (OC), water and power connection, pollution control clearance,
fire clearance and ‘RCMC certificates had not been obtained. Allotment of
units in the SDF VII! prior to getting the OC was irregular. Further, no
business operation could be commenced by any SEZ Unit as there was no
water and power connection and allotments were put under review because
of non-submission of requisite approval certificates by the units. Audit
noticed that the subsequent UAC held in August 2017, decided to review all
allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-fulfilment of
terms anc conditions laid down in the Provisional letter of SEEPZ authority
@.g acceptance of conditions by the allottee, making of payment within
stipulated time and also cases of application for additional space because of
capacity enhancement on the grounds that “there appears to be no-
correlation between projected export and space allotted to the units with
respect to their past performance, existing installed capacity and space
utilized by them”.

The Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that the matter of
entrusting the work to NFCD was referred to the Ministry’s Vigilance section
after various comp’aints on irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority, Mumbai were received from different quarters including the PMO
and DoPT. Further, a team of officers from the Department of Commerce had
also pointed out the irregularities in their report submitted on 5.1.2018.
During the examination by vigilance Division, it was found that prima facie
three officers two of whom being former Development Commissioners and
one a former Joint Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ Mumbai were
involved in the irregularities. The Vigilance Division, Department of
Commerce had proposed putting these officers under suspension and
referring the matter to CBI for detailed investigation. However, as per rules, it
was decided by the Disciplinary Authority to seek the preliminary
explanation of former Development Commissioners of SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai.
ft was further submitted by the representative of Ministry of Commerce
during the oral evidence that one charge sheet was issued to 2 Development
Commissioner initially and that the matter was also referred to CVC and on
the basis of the recommendation of the CVC, charge sheet had been issued
to the other former Development Commissioner as well, and role of other
officers was also being inquired into.

The Committee took serious note of the fact that appointment of NFCD
was made in outright violation of the GFRs and that there were blatant
irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai viz.


24

awarding of work of structural repair and allied civil works and water proof
treatment work to an agency not on the list of agencies notified by MoUD on
nomination basis without following due procedure of competitive bidding;
making an advance payment of % 56.14 crore (75%) for a work whose total
cost was < 74.85 crores; sanctioning of additional amount of € 7.77 crore for
structural repairs without approval of the Authority; not signing/ finalizing an
MoU with the NFCD; not insisting on submission of Bank Guarantee/
Performance Guarantee by NFCD; cost escalation due to structural and non-
structural repair works at places which appeared good at the time of initial
audit; inadequate monitoring that led to major structural discrepancies in all
the buildings including defective columns and beams and incomplete work.
The Committee on the basis of the oral evidence tendered by the official
representatives, expressed the view that the role of the officials of NFCD and
other stakeholders in misappropriation of public property need to be
enquired into, and therefore, felt that an investigation of the matter by the
Central Investigative Agency was required.

Subsequently, the Ministry informed the Committee that matter
ralating to irregularities observed in the C&AG Paras 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit
Report No. 17 of 2019 has been referred to CBI for detailed investigation and
CBI investigation is on-going. While acknowledging that in pursuance of the
view expressed by the Committee, the matter is since under probe by the
CBI, the Committee would expect the Ministry and SEEPZ-SEZ Authority,
Mumbai to ensure all possible support to CBI in its inquiry by providing all
ralevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority, Mumbai as required by them so that the culprits are booked and
prosecuted as per prevalent law.

In view of the flagrant lapses observed in the award of major works of
SEEPZ-SEZ Authority due to issue of work order without approval of
Authority, weak quality control mechanism and issue of LOP/LOA to SEZ
units without scrutinizing mandatory norms and scant regar1 to GFR and
CVC Guidelines were accorded, the Committee desire tha: the Ministry
devise a robust administrative monitoring mechanism to ensure scrupulous
compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the
Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manua! to the extent
applicable by autonomous bodies like SEEPZ SEZ. Further, the Committee
desire that necessary action should be taken for strengthening the internal
audit control and quality control mechanism to obviate recurrence of such
lapses in other SEZs in future.

ebook


23

even before occupation certificate was issued by the MIDC. Approvals were
accorded to 18 SEZ Units (12 fresh LOPs, six existing units were allowed
road banding/ additional space) in July 2017 by Unit Approval Committee
(UAC)5354555657although the requisite clearances like Occupation
Certificate (OC), water and power connection, pollution control clearance,
fire clearance and RCMC certificates had not been obtained. Allotment of
units in the SDF VIII prior to getting the OC was irregular. Further, no
business operation could be commenced by any SEZ Unit as there was no
water and power connection and allotments were put under review because
of non-submission of requisite approval certificates by the units. Audit
noticed that the su'ssequent UAC held in August 2017, decided to review all
allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-fulfilment of
terms and conditions laid down in the Provisional letter of SEEPZ authority
eg acceptance of conditions by the allottee, making of payment within
stipulated time and iso cases of application for additional space because of
capacity enhancement on the grounds that “there appears to be no-
correlation between projected export and space allotted to the units with
respect to their paSt performance, existing installed capacity and space
utilized by them”.

The Committee note from the Minisiry’s repiy that the matter of
entrusting the work to NFCD was referred to the Ministry’s Vigilance section
after various complaints on irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority, Mumbai were received from different quarters including the PMO
and DoPT. Further, a team of officers from the Department of Commerce had
also pointed out the irregularities in their report submitted on 5.1.2018.
During the examination by vigilance Division, it was found that prima facie
three officers two of whom being former Development Commissioners and
one a former Joint Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ Mumbai were
involved in the i regularities. The Vigilance Division, Department of
Commerce had proposed putting these officers under suspension and
referring the matter to CBI for detailed investigation. However, as per rules, it
was decided by the Disciplinary Authority to seek the preliminary
explanation of former Development Commissioners of SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai.
16 was further submitted by the representative of Ministry of Commerce
during the oral evidence that one charge sheet was issued to a Development
Commissioner initially and that the matter was also referred to CVC and on
the basis of the recommendation of the CVC, charge sheet had been issued
to the other former Development Commissioner as well, and role of other
officers was also being inquired into.

The Committee took serious note of the fact that appointment of NECD
was made in outright violation of the GFRs and that there were blatant
irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai viz.


24

awarding of work of structural repair and allied civil works arid water proof
treatment work to an agency not on the list of agencies notifie1 by MoUD on
nomination basis without following due procedure of competitive bidding;
making an advance payment of % 56.14 crore (75%) for a wark whose total
cost was & 74.85 crores; sanctioning of additional amount of 2 7.77 crore for
structural repairs without approval of the Authority; not signing/ finalizing an
MoU with the NFCD; not insisting on submission of Bank Guarantee/
Performance Guarantee by NFCD; cost escalation due to structural and non-
structural repair works at places which appeared good at the time of initial
audit; inadequate monitoring that led to major structural discrepancies in all
the buildings including defective columns and beams and incomplete work.
The Committee on the basis of the oral evidence tendered by the official
representatives, expressed the view that the role of the officials of NFCD and
other stakeholders in misappropriation of public property need to be
enquired into, and therefore, felt that an investigation of the matter by the
Central Investigative Agency was required.

Subsequently, the Ministry informed the Committee that matter
relating to irregularities observed in the C&AG Paras 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit
Report No. 17 of 2019 has been referred to CBI for detailed investigation and
CBI investigation is on-going. While acknowledging that in pursuance of the
view expressed by the Committee, the matter is since under probe by the
CBI, the Committee would expect the Ministry and SEEPZ-SEZ Authority,
Mumbai to ensure all possible support to CBI in its inquiry by providing all
ralevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority, Mumbai as required by them so that the culprits are booked and
prosecuted as per prevalent law.

In view of the flagrant lapses observed in the award of major works of
SEEPZ-SEZ Authority due to issue of work order without approval of
Authority, weak quality control mechanism and issue of LOP/LOA to SEZ
units without scrutinizing mandatory norms and scant regard to GFR and
CVC Guidelines were accorded, the Committee desire that the Ministry
devise a robust administrative monitoring mechanism to ensure scrupulous
compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the
Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual to the extent
applicable by autonomous bodies like SEEPZ SEZ. Further, the Committee
desire that necessary action should be taken for strengthening the internal
audit control and quality control mechanism to obviate recurrence of such
tapses in other SEZs in future.

NEW DELHI: — ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
09 August, 2023 Cnairperson;.. .

18 Sravana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts ‘Sommittee


साप्ज सवा-क्रस्ठ Wad renee
Annusvac नाई:

it

Picture-745x10241p9 (7451024)

3 oth
% No.L.££012/3/2013-CET :
+ Gs ment of India | . dus
Mi nig of Ais
Department culture & Cooperati
i Krishi New Delhi
3 aa 0% May, 2013
and other
of the State
Subject: Civil Labour supply works to Labour Cooperative
Societies- R
Sir,
The National ६:
‘edration of India ie oer, State
Cooperative. Society under -State Cooperati' : Att,
fees het Geniral Regitwrat, हैं: कं है है Socié as Ministry at ‘a
कं
ee
- मर (Coop) ‘
conde ion mena at ce - 9॥1-2538७1510)
|
-2९-
— a a Be


622548/2022/SEZ

‘Sir,

Annexure - I:

Date: 21.02.2044 i
To, t

The Prin.:ipal Secretary,
Department of Rural Development,
Government of Maharashtra,
Mumbai

Subject: Empanelment./ nomination of National Cooperative Constiuction and
Development Federation, of India Ltd. (NFCD) for awarding ci onstruction.
works.

Multi-state Cooperative Society: registeré a
Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 in Ministryof Agriculturs,.
and Cooperation vide its Registration number MSCS/CR/44:
operaticn of Federation is throughout India.

2 As. per the registered bye-laws, NFCE
activities,

10) To obtain and execute construction’ work of buildings “of every nature and: *
description from the Central Government, The state goyernments,, state owned:
corporations. local bodies, Private and: Public Sector Undertaking; and, other
Cooperative Societies: i

onstruction of roads;
Civil Engineering: work:

( To! obtairy labour Contracts, for.:the’ ‘coristricti
description;.roads, culverts, bridges.an flyovers: ete

(४): "Fo ‘get maps; ‘drawings.and-désign prepared through: At
provide’ the. same-to. the consumers ‘with or without -@ contract f
constr ictional_activities uridertaken of-th and desk
const. ners. के हि

(४ +1०.झ19०ए६

(vi) - To: provide ‘technical Know-ho
building and other structures to. the consumers.

26


622548/2022/SEZ

3. A copy of the request letter of 1700 made to this Department is enclosed
herewith along with supportive documents.

4, The NFCD possesses experience in. wide ranging jobs such as multi-storied
building, residential complexes, institution, school building, interiors, site
development, roads, culverts, canals etc, of large magnitude with good financial
standing we are in a position to offer services even on tumkey basis.

You are requésted to kindly. empanel / nominate (NFGO) for awarding civil

construction works available within the purview of the State. Government.

Enceld: As above

“Director (Coop.)
Tel, Fax. 23381557,

Yours i‘:

‘(Vineet K. Verma):

QF -



APAnenunr as
SEEPZ-SEZ/Estate/ AM/26/2015-17

622548/2022/SEZ

MINUTES OF THE 305 AUTHORITY MESTL
HELD ON 18% November, 2016 AT 11.30

NG OF THE SEEPZ SEZ AUTHORITY
uM

The following were present:

1). Shri V.P. Shukla- Secretary
Estate Manager /Secretary
2) Shri. Abhay Doshi, (MD)- .. Trade Member Representating

M/s, Fineline Circuit Ltd.

3) Shri. Prem Kothari, (CMD)- Trade Member Representating
M/s. Fine Jewellary Manufacturing Ltd.

Agenda I: Fees Structure of Consultant and NFCD charges. charges.

It was discussed in the meeting, NFCD is service provider and executor of the
all kind of civil engineering works. Organization shall provide following services
under the one roof.

1. Architectural Coasultants  __ कि दि हि
2. Structural Cons:
3. Project Manageniznt/ Construction Management Services (PMC)

NFCD shall provide the above mentioned service under one-umbrella for that
NFCD is charging 3% of total expenses incurred in executing the work.

Other fee structure is as under: \

Sr. Type of | NFCD PMC Architect | | Structural | |
No. | work/works/u, है Consultant |.
pto : : oe ES
50.00 L 3.00% 8.00% 5.00% 1.00% 2.00% ee
2 51.00 1, - 3.00% 5.00% 5.00% 1.00% 2.00%
100.00 L a 4
3 101.00 L- 3.00% 5.00% 4.20% 1.00% 2.00% i =}
150.00 L gy
4 151.00 L 3.00% 4.20% 4.20% 1.00% 2.00%
500.00L
5 501.00 L and 3.00% 3.30% 3.30% 1.00% 2.00%
above .

Each consultant will be appointed with approval of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority



622548/2022/SEZ

SEEPZ-SEZ/Estate/AM/26/2016-17

Decision: The Authority epproved the fees Structure of NFCD, ए३/ ०, Architect
aad Structural Consultant. -

Agenda Il: Day to day maintenance of SEEPZ quartezs, BFC building, SC
building and Gate no. 1,2,3 at SEEPZ-SEZ premises.

The Committee noted that the proposal for day to day maintenance of SEEPZ
quarters, BFC building, SC building and Gate no. 1,2,3 at SEEPZ-SEZ
premises dated 21.10.2016 and recommended M/s. Sunita Fabrication Plastic

Company as the lowest bidder on the basis of NFCD recommended.

The NFCD has submitted an estimate of Rs. 51,04,890/- for day to day

maintenance,
The Budget Estimation received from NFCD

| Sr.No | No Description Amount
x Ld
FA | Cost of Following work ~
1 Comparitive Statement of services for day to 45,99,000.00
day maintenance of SEEPZ quarters, BFC .
building, SC building and Gate no. 1,2,3 at”
SEEPZ-SEZ premises.
Total cost 45 99,000.00
[3 | PMC @ 8%@ A 3,67 ,920.00
Cc NFCD charges @ 3% @A 1,37,970.00
[0० | | Total (A to 0) 51,04,890/-

Decision: After detailed discussion the Authority approved the proposal.

yy
Ss

K
A

}
हि

\.-
Ye

eur

25 -