75
ISSUES RELATED TO CULTURAL INSTITUTIONS

MINISTRY OF CULTURE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. _2304

SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ISSUES RELATED TO CULTURAL

INSTITUTIONS

MINISTRY OF CULTURE

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2023 /Bhadra, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) ........................... ..---
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-
7 मम पदक दमन अर पर पल तप Loncecmeenee neem

॥शार000०10/....................
REPORT
PART |
1. ॥00क्‍प०८०५.................. ... .------- >> cesaeueeceeseeeeseeteeeaeeeeeeesenee

A. Schemes for Promotion and Preservation of Cultural Heritage

a) Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Heritage and Diverse
Cultural Traditions of India (ICH scheme)

b) Scheme for Financial Assistance to Cultural Institutions

B. National Museum, New Delhi: Poor cash management and irregular parking
of funds outside Government Account.

९. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata: Excess contribution to employees’ provident
fund

0. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal: Avoidable payment
on electricity charges

PART II
Observations/Recommendations नम
APPENDICES

1. Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee - | of Public Accounts
Committee (2022-23) held on 03.01.2023

fl. Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee - | of Public Accounts
Committee ((2022-23) held on 27.01.2023

I. Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee - | of Public Accounts
Committee (2022-23) held on 17.02.2023

IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on

(v)

(vii)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2: Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal
5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
is Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9. Shri Brijendra Singh
10. — Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11... Dr. Satya Pal Singh
12. Shri Jayant Sinha
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
15. | Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. | Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik
19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh
20. Shri Vijayasai Reddy
21. Dr. M Thambidurai
22. — Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi


COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE | OF PUBLIC ACCOUTNS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
i. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
ii. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor
iii. | Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram = Member
iv. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara - Member
v. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav - Member
vi. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Member

vii. | Dr.Sudhanshu Trivedi - Member


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

oNOAR YN

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien’
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Executive Officer

1 Blected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
6


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this 75" Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on "Issues
related to Cultural Institutions" based on Chapter VI of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2018
relating to the Ministry of Culture

2. The C&AG Report No. 4 of 2018 was laid on the Table of the House on
04.04.2018

3. Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the aforesaid subject and
allocated the same to one of their Sub-Committees, i.e Sub-Committee | for examination
and Report.

4. The Sub-Committee — | of Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) took briefing by
Audit on 03.01.2023. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee took oral evidences of the
representatives of the Ministry of Culture on the aforementioned subject on 27.01.2023
and 17.02.2023. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) decided to continue

5. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and adopted the aforesaid
Report at their Sitting held on 18.09.2023. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to
the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of
the Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Culture for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Sub-Committee-I in connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
18 September, 2023 Chairperson
27 Bhadrapada, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

PARTI

1. INTRODUCTORY

The C&AG Report No. 4 of 2018 for the year that ended on March 2017 contains
significant results of the compliance audit of the various Ministries of Union Government.

2; Public Accounts Committee (2022-2023), decided to examine Chapter VI of the
aforementioned Report which deals with Ministry of Culture and allocated the same to one of
their Sub-Committees viz. Sub-Committee - | for examination.

3. The Chapter VI containing four paras - 6.1 to 6.4 dealing with various issues related
to Cultural Institutions under the Ministry of Culture covers audit review for the period 2012-
13 to 2016-17. In Para 6.1 of this Chapter, Audit noticed that in a scheme for ‘Safeguarding
the Intangible Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India (ICH scheme) being
implemented by Sangeet Natak Akademi, only 35 out of 324 projects which were sanctioned
during 2013-14 to 2015-16 had been completed while 96 grantees did not furnish even the
first reports as of March 2017. It was also noticed that the Akademi had reported to the
Ministry of Culture expenditure of Rs. 5.77 crore against the actual expenditure of Rs. 4.25
crore under the ICH Scheme. Further, Grants under another Scheme of Financial
Assistance to Cultural Institutions were sanctioned in violation of scheme guidelines and a
majority of the project proposals were not being routed through State
Akademies/Governments and approvals were being accorded without due documentation. In
Para 6.2, Audit observed that National Museum, New Delhi, failed to comply with Central
Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983, relating to handling of
government receipts. Further, it did not route receipts through the cash book nor did it
undertake any reconciliation with bank accounts. As a result, Rs. 2.26 crore was irregularly
kept outside government accounts for a prolonged period of time. While in the Audit Para 6.3,
Audit noticed that the Asiatic Society, Kolkata, deposited excess provident fund contribution
of Rs. 1.19 crore in respect of 160 employees in contravention of the Employees Provident
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Scheme, 1952, in the Audit Para 6.4, Audit observed
inaccurate assessment of contract demand by Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav
Sangrahalaya, Bhopal, and delayed action for reducing the contract demand resulted in
avoidable expenditure of Rs. 82.95 lakh towards electricity charges.

4. The Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Culture on
the subject at their Sittings held on 27.01.2023 and 17.02.2023.


A. Schemes for Promotion and Preservation of Cultural Heritage

5. The Para No.6.I relates to two schemes of the Ministry of Culture i.e. (i) Scheme for
Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India (ICH
Scheme) being executed by the Sangeet Natak Akademi on behalf of the Ministry of Culture
(MoC) and (ii) Scheme for Financial Assistance to Cultural Institutions and Individuals-
Akademi’s own scheme.

6. When asked about the role and functions of the Ministry of Culture and Sangeet Natak
Akademi under the Schemes for promotion and preservation of cultural heritage, the Ministry
in a written reply stated as under:

“The Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and Diverse
Cultural Traditions of India (ICH Scheme) is a Ministry of Culture scheme, with
Sangeet Natak Akademi as the Implementing agency. Enclosed Ministry of Culture
Order vides F.No. 2-4/2013-UNESCO dated 5" November 2013. (Annexure- |)”

a On being asked about the monitoring mechanism put in place in the Ministry to ensure
implementation of the schemes as per the guidelines/instructions issued therefore and
consequent release of funds to the SNA, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The provision given in the scheme:
Scheme Point 16: Monitoring Mechanism

An appraisal/ inspection of the beneficiary may be done by the Expert
Committee/ Sub-Committee or any other designated agency/. officials including
Ministry of Culture or any of its organizations at any point of time. Ministry of Culture
will be kept informed, through periodical reports/ returns, etc. of the progress of the
implementation of the scheme. Joint Secretary concerned in the Ministry of Culture
may call at any time, any detail/ information including officials concerning the Scheme.

8. When asked whether the Ministry/ SNA undertake review meetings, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as under:

“Yes, SNA conducted review meetings where the project reports were
evaluated by the expert committee and evaluations were sent for consideration by the
Ministry.”


a) Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Heritage and Diverse
Cultural Traditions of India (ICH scheme)

9. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry of Culture sanctioned the ICH scheme in
November 2013 to support and strengthen the efforts of various stakeholders in ensuring
wider recognition and acceptance, dissemination, preservation and promotion of the rich
cultural heritage of India. The scheme provides for assistance in the form of non-recurring
grants in three instalments in the ratio of 50:25:25. The scheme was to be implemented by
the Akademi during the XII" Five-Year Plan and has been extended by MoC upto September
2017.The scheme provided that applications/proposals received in the Akademi for grants
should be placed before an Expert Committee (EC) constituted by MoC every two years.
Recommendations of the EC were to be approved by MoC after which first instalments would
be released to the approved grantees. The scheme guidelines required the EC to fix a time
frame for completion of the activity proposed for submission of claims for second/third
instalments. An appraisal of the project was to be undertaken by the EC or any other
authority designated by MoC prior to the release of second instalment. Final instalment was
to be released after completion of the project and submission of documents as proof thereof.

10. When asked of the latest status of the scheme, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:

“The ICH Scheme time period was for the duration/years 2013-14, 2014-15 and
2015-16. No new proposals were taken up from 2016-2017 onwards. The next cycle
for implementing the scheme is to be initiated by the Ministry of Culture by providing
an expert committee and restart the scheme. The scheme is not operational at
present.”

Incorrect accounting of funds received under ICH scheme

11. | Audit noticed that MoC released % 5.57 crore to the Akademi under the ICH scheme
during the period from 2013-14 to 2015-16. The funds received vis-a-vis utilisation under the
scheme as on March 2017 was as in Table No. 1 below:

Table No. 1: Release of Grants and their Utilisation

57,23,284
1,92,84,926
1, 57

2013-14
2014-15

| 67,67,250

2,49,00,000 [2,48.9,669 |
311

Scrutiny of records revealed the following:


6)

(ii)

(iii)

12

The Akademi was required to maintain separate accounts for the funds received under
he scheme. The Akademi, however, did not maintain separate accounts and merged
the expenditure incurred on the ICH scheme with its regular expenditure. During the
period 2013-14 to 2015-16, Akademi had incurred an expenditure of हैं 4.25 crore
under the scheme but furnished incorrect Utilisation Certificate for ¥ 5.77 crore.

n March 2015, MoC released = 50.95 lakh to the Akademi for carrying out activities
related to ‘Buddhist Chanting and Thatheras of Punjab’ under the ICH scheme. The
sanction of MoC stipulated that the funds should be utilised within the same financial
year and the unspent balance, if any, should be intimated to the Government.

The Akademi furnished a _ consolidated UC of ICH scheme _ of
% 2.49 crore for the year 2014-15 including expenditure incurred on the activity of
Buddhist Chanting and Thatheras of Punjab with unspent balance of हैं 0.40 lakh.
However, in December 2016, the Akademi intimated MoC that it had utilised only
र₹ 16.27 lakh out of ¥ 50.95 lakh on the above activity. Thus, not only did the Akademi
furnish an incorrect UC to MoC, it also failed to refund the unspent balance or seek
MoC’s specific permission to spend the unutilised amount of the grant in subsequent
years.

In reply, the Ministry stated that due to practical operational problem SNA did not open

a separate bank account for the purpose. On the direction of the Ministry of Culture, SNA has
now opened a separate bank account to bring more transparency in the account in respect of
future grant. SNA have initiated the process to examine the receipt and expenditure of
identifying the activities which were not covered under the ICH scheme but were ICH
activities executed by SNA and to revise UCs to consider for adjustment in future release.

13.

When asked what practical operational problem was faced by SNA in opening

separate accounts for the funds received under the scheme, the Ministry in a written reply
stated as under:

14.

“The ICH Scheme funds were credited to the main account of the Akademi. The
ICH Scheme Expert Committee meetings recommended the projects for release of
grant installments from that account itself. A proper internal account maintenance
mechanism via separate Tally ledgers was utilized till the time the funds were received
from the Ministry. As there were various other activities, plans like TSP etc were
operating; SNA was and still manages the F&A with limited staff and to maintain
separate books of account for effective control purpose, After EDCIL evaluation
followed by C&AG Audit’s Action Taken Report, SNA had started operating via
separate account (out of the few accounts it has).”

When asked when directions were issued from the Ministry for correcting the

accounting lapse, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:


“The Ministry understood from the Akademi that the problem was not to open a
separate bank account but to open a separate bank account as well as to keep and
maintain separate books of account for different scheme. The working staff at the time
did not find it feasible and practical to maintain separate books of account for different
schemes for control purpose. (b) SNA has now opened a separate bank account and
the process of bifurcating the expenditure incurred on activities under ICH and on
other activities is expected to bring more transparency in the account in respect of
future grant.

15. To a query whether the Ministry has fixed any timeframe for SNA to examine the
receipt and expenditure of identifying the activities which were not covered under the ICH
scheme but ICH activities were executed by SNA and to revise UCs to consider for
adjustment in future release, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The revised guidelines suggested by the 2™ EC included a ‘flow of the project’
as a timeframe as the original scheme did not mention on it. These draft review
guidelines pertaining to the ICH Scheme for any fresh projects or a new cycle for
implementation, on advice by the 2 EC, have been sent to Ministry and is under
consideration.”

16. When desired to know whether the Akademi has furnished the revised UCs, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The Akademi submitted the revised UCs on 3% March 2021, with the
Submission of ATN on C&AG Audit Para No. 6.1 - Schemes for Promotion and
Preservation of Cultural Heritage. The UCs are enclosed. (Annexure —II/)”

17. To a pointed question whether opening a separate bank account will be sufficient to
address the issue, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“For implementation of new/fresh cycle of the ICH Scheme the directives of
having a separate account will be appropriate and Akademi’s accounting mechanism
will ensure a streamline control and monitoring.”

18. On being asked whether the Sangeet Natak Akademi has provision for internal Audit,
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Yes.”

19. Audit noticed that in March 2015, MOC released % 50.95 lakh to the Akademi for
carrying out activities related to Buddhist Chanting and Thatheras of punjab, under the ICH
scheme. The sanction of MOC stipulated that the funds should be utilised within the same
financial year and the unspent balance, if any, should be intimated to the Government.

5


However, the Akademi furnished a consolidated UC of ICH scheme of %2.49 crore for the
year 2014-15 including expenditure incurred on the activity of Buddhist Chanting and
Thatheras of Punjab with unspent balance of ~ 0.40 lakh. However, in December 2016, the
Akademi intimated MOC that it had utilised only ¥16.27 lakh out of ~ 50.95 lakh on the above
activity. In reply, SNA has been instructed to regularise the "Buddhist Chanting and
Thatheras of Punjab" funds and to return the unspent balance to the Ministry.

20.

When asked when the instruction was issued to regularize the "Buddhist Chanting and

Thatheras of Punjab" funds and to return the unspent balance to the Ministry, the Ministry in
a written reply stated as under:

21.

“The Akademi invited the stakeholders, experts, artisans etc., of Thatheras of
Punjab and Buddhist Chanting to various festivals, programs, workshops, exhibitions
organized by the Akademi. Program schedules of some festivals are enclosed. The
ICH elements are related to the ICH domain Traditional Craftsmanship (Thatheras)
and Oral traditions and expressions and knowledge and practices concerning man
and universe (Buddhist Chanting). Akademi as the national academy of performing
arts had made all efforts to include these cultural expressions in various festivals and
events where the Government of India campaigns like Make in India was presented
through traditional craftsmanship. ICH related activities were organized keeping the
presentations of all inscribed elements of India on the Representative List of ICH of
Humanity, UNESCO 2003 Convention. India as the member state of the UNESCO
2003 Convention had to submit periodic reports on the developments and progress
made on all inscribed elements. In the spirit of implementation of endeavors to
enhance the country’s ICH related policies, all elements were considered for
presentation and promotion, including Thatheras and Buddhist Chanting, in festivals,
events, programs etc.

Current status: The unspent balance on support to Thatheras and Buddhist Chanting
as on 311 March 2019, have been utilized by the Akademi in other related ICH
activities, including the above named ICH elements. ex-post facto approval for these
items were duly sought with the request that the said unspent amount were utilized by
the Akademi for ICH activities (festivals, workshops, events, ICH meetings, reports to
UNESCO which entails collating information from communities, stakeholders, related
state bodies, experts, field visits etc.) and offset with such expenditure incurred.”

When asked reasons for failing to refund the unspent balance or seek MoC's specific

permission to spend the unutilized amount of the grant in subsequent years by SNA, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“At the onset it may be noted that any expenditure on programmes incurred by
the Akademi falls under Indian Cultural Heritage. The major purpose is to enhance the
policy of the government and the national interest through the said scheme. The

6


22.

Akademi has itself devised its various schemes such that it covers that expenditure
under ICH which is of research in nature and is meant for UNESCO convention. While
allowing grant to Institutions/ Individuals under the ICH scheme, the Akademi has
been following the MoC sanctioned guidelines in this regard. The Akademi had
assured the Ministry that it has already taken steps to remove those deficiencies and
will take care in future not to recur such kind of irregularity once any new or fresh cycle
of ICH Scheme is started in the future. In order to adopt corrective measures and
considering the matter of difference of common understanding with ultimate common
objectives as a way forward, the Ministry was of the opinion that all expenditure
incurred for the purpose of achieving its overall objectives in the public as well as
nation’s interest and accordingly the Ministry has decided to give one time post facto
approvals in all appropriate transactions and allowed to the Akademi to offset unspent
balance among schemes, with the result it has been presumed that the excess
payment made by the Akademi under the scheme has been met out of general fund
provided by the Ministry and therefore the same need not be reimbursed to the
Akademi.As mentioned, as per the recommendations of the Investigation Committee
of the Ministry of Culture had stated under the utilization of funds received for ICH,
SNA will get the administrative expenditure separately (ex-post facto) approved from
the competent authority of the Ministry and release of funds utilized by SNA for both
administrative expenses and other expenses under the Schemes of ICH. Ex-post
facto letters were accordingly sent to the Ministry for the 7.४ 2019-20 and 2020-21, for
the Competent Authority's approval.”

When asked about the steps taken by Akademi to remove the deficiencies and to

avoid recurrence, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

23.

“Adhering to the EDCIL (3४ party evaluation conducted by MoC) and the C&AG
Audit held in 2020-2021 and under the guidance of the expert committee, Akademi
had blacklisted the individuals and organizations that had not completed their projects.
The review meetings of the expert committee had evaluated all reports and used to
provide inputs on projects that needed to be reworked and researched again. Akademi
had also notified the defaulting grantees for recovery of grants. It is also submitted that
most of the grantees have submitted the reports, however reports submitted after the
rectification suggested by the expert committee, are in the custody of the Akademi and
most of them have been added to the national inventory of ICH.”

Regarding status of updating of its books of accounts by Akademi, the Ministry in a

written reply stated as under:

“Yes”


Deficient implementation of the scheme

24. MoC approved 324 projects during 2013-14 to 2015-16 against which the Akademi
had released % 3.69 crore till March 2016 (Annexe-lll). No fresh projects were sanctioned
after 2015-16. Audit noticed the following:

(i) Dismal rate of completion of projects

(a) Only 35 out of the 324 projects approved during 2013-14 to 2015-16 have been

completed. Further, not even first reports have been received from 96 grantees as
of March 2017.

(b) The scheme guidelines required the EC to fix time frame for completion of the

activity proposed for submission of claims for the second/third instalments. In case
of non-adherence to the time-line, disqualification/recovery may be effected.
However, no such time limit was found recorded in the minutes of meetings of the
EC. In the absence of any time limit, no action could be taken for revoking of
approvals for incomplete projects and recovery of funds as envisaged in the
scheme guidelines. Audit observed that MoC had instructed (March 2017) the
Akademi to initiate necessary action immediately to recover the grants released to
such grantees who had not submitted their first or reworked reports and convey an
update to the Ministry as well as to blacklist such grantees. However, no such
action had been taken by the Akademi as of October 2017.

MoC stated (December 2017) that the scheme guidelines would be revised
to include provisions for recovering funds from grantees who had failed to
complete their projects. Further, Akademi would be directed to strictly adhere to
the time frame given to the grantees for submission of reports.

(c) The scheme guidelines were silent about sanctioning fresh projects to grantees

(d)

who had not completed their earlier projects. Audit noted that 54 projects of 25
grantees involving grant of = 1.06 crore were approved in successive years without
ensuring completion of their earlier projects.Of these, 38 projects (70 per cent)
were yet to be completed as of March 2017. These included four grantees who
were sanctioned projects in each of the three years from 2013-14 to 2015-16.
Sanctioning projects to grantees even before the completion of their earlier
projects could contribute to poor rate of completion of projects.

MoC assured (December 2017) that suitable amendments in the scheme
guidelines would be done to comply with the audit observation.

The broader objectives set out in the scheme included systematically
safeguarding, promoting and propagating the intangible cultural heritage. The

8


Akademi did not initiate any steps to document, archive or publish the
reports/material received in respect of the completed projects so as to disseminate
the research output as intended in the scheme.

Akademi accepted (November 2017) that material received from the grantee
institutions has not been utilised in any way. However, it added that it was in the
process of developing a website for uploading the material received from the
grantees. MoC reiterated (December 2017) the Akademi’s assurance in this
regard.

25. As per Background Note furnished by the Ministry, SNA has sent letters to all the
grantees who have failed to submit/complete their reports/projects. Many have finally
submitted their reports after reminders. Recovery proceedings are also being initiated in the
case of defaulters. Now, it is regularly monitored. Further, SNA has also started the process
of recovering the granted money under the ICH scheme. SNA have started blacklisting those
grantees who fail to complete the project and ignore the reminders. In future, a timeline will
be fixed on the entire projects recommended under ICH scheme for 2nd and 3rd
installments.

26. When asked about the composition of the Expert Committee, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as under:

“Ministry of Culture constituted the Expert Committee for the ICH Scheme, for
tenure of 2 years. The MoC constituted the first Expert Committee vide order 2-
4/2013-UNESCO dated 12 March 2014. The second Expert Committee was
reconstituted vide order F.No. U-11/122/2018-UNESCO dated 29 July 2019. Orders
enclosed. (Annexure V)

27. On being asked about the mechanism in place to ensure that grants are utilized for the
purpose for which they are given, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Sangeet Natak Akademi is the implementing body for the ICH Scheme. The
Expert Committee constituted by the MoC reviews and recommends projects for
grants. The Expert Committee had while considering the project proposals and
appraising the various reports of the beneficiaries had deliberated extensively and
methodically and had made all the recommendations based solely on the merit of the
proposal or the report accordingly. All the recommendations were duly sent further to
the Ministry of Culture for due consideration and approval. The Expert Committee
ensured that the grants were utilized for the purpose of the projects. The reports were
scrutinized by the committee and further grants were sanctioned only when the
Committee recommended it after an appraisal. The sanction letter given to the
grantees noted that the Progress report of work done out of the 1° installment
received will have to be submitted along with other relevant documents, work reports,
documentation (Audio-Video or any other format), ensuring a proper mechanism for

9


examination of reports and the grant utilization. Moreover, the Akademi had
formulated a Blue Print for the grantees for submission of reports, which noted that the
grants sanctioned will be utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned.
Utilization certificates were mandated to be submitted by the grantees. Akademi also
acted in a handholding manner, where all the doubts regarding the process, grants,
enquiry pertaining to the process of documentation, survey, and data creation were
cleared as and when the grantees had approached the Akademi via telephone or
emails.”

28. Audit observed that the scheme guidelines were silent about sanctioning fresh
projects to grantees who had not completed their earlier projects. Audit noted that 54 projects
of 25 grantees involving grant of हैं 1.06 crore were approved in successive years without
ensuring completion of their earlier projects. Ministry of Culture assured (December 2017)
that suitable amendments in the scheme guidelines would be done to comply with the audit
observation. In the Background Note it is stated that SNA has been instructed to take utmost
care, to not consider any such proposals, which are ongoing/repeated for the
individual/institution who is an earlier applicant.

29. When asked whether Ministry/ SNA ever noticed during review meetings or otherwise
that the scheme guidelines were silent about sanctioning fresh projects to grantees who had
not completed their earlier projects, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Akademi followed the instructions as per the scheme guidelines and the EC
evaluated the projects accordingly.

30. Audit pointed out that the broader objectives set out in the scheme included
systematically safeguarding, promoting and propagating the intangible cultural heritage. The
Akademi did not initiate any steps to document, archive or publish the reports/material
received in respect of the completed projects so as to disseminate the research output as
intended in the scheme. As per the Background Note, Akademi has created a website for the
purpose. The completed projects, appraised by the Expert Committee are in the process of
being uploaded. Some projects have already been uploaded.

31. | When asked reasons for failing to ensure achievement of the intended objectives of
the scheme by the Ministry, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Sangeet Natak Akademi as the nodal agency of Ministry of Culture for ICH
related matters facilitates various aspects that are pertaining to the dissemination of
ICH of the country. The erstwhile ICH Scheme, which was operational from 2013-16
was to enrich the National Inventory of ICH of India. The completed projects and
related materials paved way for a National Inventory (Work in Progress) as may be
explored via the web link: https://www.sangeetnatak.gov.in/sections/ICH. The
grantees were provided with a National Inventory Register Form which they were

10


32.

required to fill and duly submit for the purpose of enriching the ICH Inventory. The
Akademi has also been uploading the completed projects. Many completed projects
have already been uploaded. Furthermore, the Akademi assisted the MoC in
formulating a National ICH register which was collated from the projects sanctioned
under the aforementioned scheme (web link: https://www.indiaculture.gov.in/national-
list-intangible-cultural-heritage-ich)It is informed that a report includes written
materials, photos, videos and related documents that a grantee may consider vital for
its report. This is tantamount to having data in GBs for each report. Akademi’s website
has many other sections information also, a separate server was felt needed for
exclusive ICH dissemination so that this may be implemented.”

When asked about the action taken to timely upload the completed projects, appraised

by the Expert Committee, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

33.

“Adhering to the directives given by the Expert Committee, the digitization of all
the completed projects were under taken. It is informed that a report includes written
materials, photos, videos and related documents that a grantee may consider vital for
its report. This is tantamount to having data in GBs for each report. Akademi’s website
has many other sections information also, a separate server was felt needed for
exclusive ICH dissemination so that this may be implemented. The Akademi has
requested MoC for related funds time and again. This is to inform that the collective
reports of ICH scheme projects includes written documentation, reports, AV
documentation, photographs, hard copy reports which may be scanned and digitized
etc, the quantity of data is more than 200-250 GB. A semblance of ICH element
descriptions, short videos/reels, documentation as Meta data and representative
photographs can be added for dissemination and representation purpose.”

When asked about the status of remaining 141 projects, the Ministry in a written reply

stated as under:

“For the three years of the scheme, 324 projects were approved by the first
Expert Committee of ICH Scheme (constituted by MoC Order F. No. 2-4/2013-
UNESCO, 12" March 2014).

At present, the total number of projects completed for the following 3 cycle
years are:

2013-14-61 projects

2014-15-— 66 projects

2015-16- 56 projects

183 projects complete (Includes grantees to which final instalments are yet to
be released + grantees to which all instalments released) By the MoC Order F. No.U-
11/122/2018-UNESCO dated 29" July 2019, the Re-constituted Expert Committee

was formed and a meeting was conducted on 16-20 October 2019 (adhering to the
11


34.

EDCIL and the C&AG Audit held) to review the backlog reports of the grantees that
were awaiting evaluation due to the non-reconstitution of the EC. Following the action
taken reports along with the project reports submitted by the grantees. Subsequently,
a Sub-Committee was formed and evaluated and reviewed the backlog reports from
the cycle year 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. Nonetheless, the Expert Committee
had directed the grantees to submit their final report for the purpose of inventorying
and digitalization. Many of the grantees submitted their final reports. However, the
Reconstituted EC in its following Committee meeting for Fixing of Responsibility held
in 2019-2020 and 2020-21 decided not to release any further instalments to any
grantee but suggested to utilise the project materials (Videos, photographs, written
documentation) as archival property of the Akademi. Further it also been suggested to
get all the pending projects completed.

a) National Inventory (Work in Progress was to provide the description of the
element/diverse cultural expressions obtained through the scheme projects)

b) 96 Projects from the 141 cases are included in the ICH Inventory.”

When enquired regarding the action being taken by the Sangeet Natak Akademi to

complete the remaining 141 projects under the ICH Scheme, the Ministry stated as under:

“The remaining 141 projects under the scheme are considered for completion
with the guidance of the experts of the particular projects and the remaining
installments may be considered for release after evaluation by an ICH Expert
Committee. Cautionary reminders are sent to all the grantees for completion and
submission of the project reports.

Status of remaining projects (141):

é Out of 141 projects, 86 are included in the National Inventory

e Other 55 projects will be included in the national inventory by October
2023

. All 55 grantees have been contacted to submit reports for evaluation and

the final outcome will be processed for updating on the National
Inventory (work in progress)”

The Ministry further submitted that revised guidelines for ICH Scheme with

supplementary inputs for salvaging the 55 projects have been issued.

35.

When asked the latest status of release of all three installments to the grantees

pertaining to the year 2013-14 to 2015-16, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“All three instalments (50%+25%+25%) released to:

12


2013-14 cycle — 37 grantees
2014-15 cycle — 16 grantees”

36. | When asked what monitoring mechanism has been put in place by the Akademi/MoC
to ensure achievement of scheme objectives, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Sangeet Natak Akademi was the implementing body for the ICH Scheme. The
Expert Committee constituted by the MoC reviews and recommends projects for
grants. The Expert Committee while considering the project proposals and appraising
the various reports of the beneficiaries had deliberated extensively and methodically
and had made all the recommendations based solely on the merit of the proposal or
the report accordingly. All the recommendations were duly sent further to the Ministry
of Culture for due consideration and approval.The Expert Committee ensured that the
grants were utilized for the purpose of the projects. The reports were scrutinized by
the committee and further grants were sanctioned only when the Committee
recommended it after an appraisal. The sanction letter given to the grantees noted
that the Progress report of work done out of the 1* instalment received will have to be
submitted along with other relevant documents, work reports, documentation (Audio-
Video or any other format), ensuring a proper mechanism for examination of reports
and the grant utilization. Moreover, the Akademi had formulated a Blue Print for the
grantees for submission of reports, which noted that the grants sanctioned will be
utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned. Utilization certificates were
mandated to be submitted by the grantees. Akademi also acted in a handholding
manner, where all the doubts regarding the process, grants, enquiry pertaining to the
process of documentation, survey, and data creation were cleared as and when the
grantees had approached the Akademi via telephone or emails. The Akademi in order
to fulfill the purpose of the ICH scheme had designed an Inventory Form for circulation
among the grantees when sanctioning grants, for them to duly fill and submit the form
for enriching the Inventory. Sangeet Natak Akademi as the nodal agency of Ministry of
Culture for ICH related matters facilitates various aspects that are pertaining to the
dissemination of ICH of the country. The erstwhile ICH Scheme, which was
operational from 2013-16 was to enrich the National Inventory of ICH of India. The
completed projects and related materials paved way for a National Inventory (Work in
Progress) as may be explored via the web link:
https://www.sangeetnatak.gov.in/sections/ICH. The grantees were provided with a
National Inventory Register Form (enclosed) which they were required to fill and duly
submit for the purpose of enriching the ICH Inventory. This is to inform that the
collective reports of ICH scheme projects include written documentation, reports, AV
documentation, photographs, hard copy reports which may be scanned and digitized
etc, the quantity of data is more than 200-250 GB. A semblance of ICH element
descriptions and representative photographs can be added for dissemination and
representation purpose. The Akademi has also been uploading the completed
projects. Many completed projects have already been uploaded. Furthermore, the

13


Akademi assisted the MoC in formulating a National List of ICH which was collated
from the projects sanctioned under the aforementioned scheme (web link:
https://www. indiaculture.gov.in/national-list-intangible-cultural-heritage-ich)

37. | When asked about the reasons for not uploading project related materials and steps
being taken by Akademi to ensure uploading of all the project reports, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as under:

“It may please be appreciated that a report includes written materials, photos,
videos and related documents that a grantee may consider vital for its report. This is
tantamount to having data in GBs for each report. Akademi’s website has many other
sections information also. A separate server was felt needed for exclusive ICH
dissemination so that this may be implemented. This is to inform that the collective
reports of ICH scheme projects includes written documentation, reports, AV
documentation, photographs, hard copy reports which may be scanned and digitized
etc, the quantity of data is more than 200-250 GB

To upload all the project a separate website is needed. Now, funds have been
released which includes the updating and ugradation of the ICH-SNA Website with
enhanced server space. The work has been initiated and will be completed within six
months.”

38. When asked about the mechanism in place to ensure that grantees of completed
projects upload all relevant materials on the website in a timely manner, the Ministry stated
as under:-

“Akademi had earlier created a separate ICH website other than its official
website. Keeping in focus the quantum of data of reports, approx. 200-250 GB,
following is the mechanism considered:

4: Enhancement of ICH Website server space
2. Purchasing and renewal of the domain and enhancement of the website
3. Enhancement of Technical Team, AV editing, content uploading and

maintenance on regular basis.
SNA has commenced the process for a separate website for ICH”

39. In respect of the number of projects under ICH Scheme that have been uploaded in
the National Inventory, the representatives of the Ministry submitted during oral evidence as
under:

14


40.

“Sir, except for 45, all the grantees have submitted their final report, which has
also been hosted on the website”

When asked whether the Revised Guidelines are approved and implemented now, the

Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

41.

“The Reconstituted Expert Committee (2019-2021) drafted the Revised ICH
Scheme Guidelines based on the recommendations of the EdCIL and the discussion/
Minutes of the various Expert Committee Meetings. Sangeet Natak Akademi had sent
the Revised Guidelines to the Ministry of Culture for approval. Meanwhile the Scheme
itself is on hold now. The review and approval of the Revised Guideline couldn't take
place due the non reconstitution of the General Council of SNA. However the new
council has been constituted in November 2022.

During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry also submitted that the

revised draft guidelines are still under consideration by the newly constituted Council. The
representatives further apprised the Committee that all changes that have happened in the
Scheme at the level of UNESCO, of which India is a member, as well as at the internal level
will be considered by the Committee before sending it for approval.

42.

When asked whether Akademi has identified all the incomplete projects wherein

recovery to be made, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

43.

“Yes. Sangeet Natak Akademi had sent letters to grantees who had not
submitted any report and those who had not completed their projects. Devendra Singh
Solanki returned INR 50,000/- (his 11 instalment amount) for not submitting any
report.The Ministry of Culture had directed to Blacklist those grantees of the Scheme
who have not submitted any report and to circulate their names among all
organizations under the Ministry, so as to debar these grantees from applying under
any Scheme implemented by the Ministry of Culture. Action taken was initiated and
the list of the Blacklisted grantees was circulated to all organizations under the MoC.

In respect of the blacklisted grantees and the amount to remaining to be recovered the

Ministry submitted as under:

“Rs.7,12,500/- (Rs. Seven Lakh Twelve Thousand Five Hundred only) The
aforementioned blacklisted grantees were given the 1° Installment, i.e. 50% of the
total sanctioned amount. The blacklisted grantees are the ones who have not
submitted any report since receiving the 17 installment. Letters/ emails have been
sent to them for recovery of money.

1. Western Star Arts and Sports Club (grantee 2013-14) — 12,500/-

15


. DINESH YADAV (grantee 2015-16) — 1,00,000/-

Nirman Kala Manch (grantee 2015-16) — 2,50,000/-
SANKALP (grantee 2015-16)- 1,00,000/-

YAMINI CULTURAL SOCIETY (grantee 2015-16)- 1,00,000/-
BASHIR AHMED BAGAT (grantee 2015-16)- 50,000/-
ShantaSerbjeetSingh(Deceased)

(grantee 2013-14) — 1,00,000/-

73 9 ७ # ७० ७

The defaulting grantees have been blacklisted. The grantees have not returned
the sanctioned grants. However the new dispensation of SNA is of the opinion of
salvaging the projects by giving one more chance upto October 2023 and include
them in the national inventory. It has been decided to extend time till October 2023 to
55 grantees to finish their project failing which recovery proceedings will be summarily
initiated within a Month.

44. When asked if the revised scheme guidelines are still not approved, how Akademi is
ensuring that fresh projects are not sanctioned to grantees who had not completed their
earlier projects, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The Scheme is on hold. The ICH Scheme was operational for the cycle years
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. No new proposals were taken up from 2016-2017
onwards.

45. When asked about the steps taken to avoid such cases of oversight/overpayment in
future, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The ICH Scheme is yet to be initiated by the Ministry of Culture for future cycle
years. The Reconstituted Expert Committee (2019-2021) prepared Revised
Guidelines for the ICH Scheme keeping in perspective an improved and effective
system of monitoring mechanism and standard operating procedures.”

46. On being pointed out by the Audit, reply is not tenable as neither the recommendation
of EC nor the final report was available on record. Internal checks have been put in place to
ensure that final installment of grant is released only after receipt of final report, the Ministry
in a written reply stated as under:

“The Expert Committee constituted by the MoC reviews and recommends
projects for grants. The Expert Committee had while considering the project proposals
and appraising the various reports of the beneficiaries had deliberated extensively and
methodically and had made all the recommendations based solely on the merit of the
proposal or the report accordingly. All the recommendations were duly sent further to
the Ministry of Culture for due consideration and approval. The Expert Committee
ensured that the grants were utilized for the purpose of the projects alone. The
reports were scrutinized by the committee and further grants were sanctioned only

16


47.

when the Committee recommended it after an appraisal. Utilization certificates are
mandated to be submitted by the grantees. The final instalment (25%) of the grant is
disbursed after completion of the project/ activity and submission of relevant
documents as proof thereof along with the Utilization Certificate and audited statement
of accounts together with statement of Expenditure incurred out of the Akademi’s
grant for the stipulated financial year of the sanction of the grant. As per the cases
mentioned in 6.1.2.2 (ii) (c), the Akademi records exhibit that the grantees Ajit Kumar
Jha (case 4); Ajit Kumar (case 5); and Kalicharan Yadav Rawat Nach Mahotsav
Samiti (case 6) had duly submitted their reports on the basis of which the EC had
recommended the release of instalments.

When asked what checks/ internal control have been put in place to ensure that

subsequent installments of grants are released only after receipt of previous reports, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

48.

“The reports were scrutinized by the expert committee and further grants were
sanctioned only when the Committee recommended it after an appraisal. The sanction
letter given to the grantees noted that the Progress report of work done out of the 1°
instalment received will have to be submitted along with other relevant documents,
work reports, documentation (Audio-Video or any other format), ensuring a proper
mechanism for examination of reports and the grant utilization. Accordingly =
instalments were released on the recommendations of EC.On receiving the full reports
(written and AV documentation included), the EC used to consider the finalization of
the project and in certain cases recommended the grantees to rework the reports
accordingly. Moreover, the Akademi had formulated a Blue Print for the grantees for
submission of reports, which noted that the grants sanctioned will be utilized for the
purpose for which it was sanctioned. Utilization certificates were mandated to be
submitted by the grantees before the release of the final instalment. Furthermore, the
reconstituted expert committee drafted the Revised ICH Scheme Guidelines based on
the recommendations of the EdCIL and the discussion/ Minutes of the various Expert
Committee Meetings. The reconstituted Expert Committee provided the timeline for
each research cycle as minimum 6 months and maximum one and half years. The
committee also provided a ‘Flow of Projects’ in the revised guidelines for the
systematic submission of the reports and the installments.”

When asked whether the responsibility has been fixed and action taken, the Ministry in

a written reply stated as under:

“As per the Minutes of the Fixing Responsibility Meeting the members of the
Sub-Committee stated that the reconstituted Expert Committee will not be involved
with the earlier cases/applications/ files and financial implications of the ICH Scheme.
They requested Sangeet Natak Akademi to forward the matter to MoC for final
closure. Letters/ emails have been sent to the MoC for final decision on the cases.

17


The MoC vide F.No. U-11/12/2020-UNESCO dated 8" March 2021 stated that the
Expert Committee may take a decision for the final closure of the 26 cases pertaining
to the cycle year 2015-16. The Reconstituted Expert Committee were apprised about
the MoC decision and were presented with the 26 cases for their perusal and decision.
However, the tenure of the EC ended in July 2019. The final closure/decision on the
aforementioned cases is pending due to the non reconstitution of an expert
committee. It is found that out of 141 cases 96 are finding a place in the National
Inventory of ICH and all the material and documents are available with the akademi .
SNA has now proposed that if allowed all the incomplete projects can be revived and
completed without any expenditure. If there are grantees still who wouldn't able to
complete the project legal action for recovery can be initiated. Strict administrative
memos are being issued to those in charge and the then member secretary of the
project who was exclusively posted on contract for the ICH scheme will be issued a
show cause notice.

49. When asked about action taken regarding recovery of grants from other two other
parties, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Communication/letters were sent to both parties for recovery of grants.
However, both parties have already submitted their final reports, stating utilization of
the 1* installment for completion of the project. They were not released the 2 and 37
installment.

Violation of scheme guidelines

50. Audit noticed irregular release of funds totalling Rs.5.25 lakh to grantees without
complying with scheme guidelines. The scheme guidelines provides for assistance in the
form of non-recurring grants in three installments in the ratio of 50:25:25. Recommendations
of the Expert Committee were to be approved by Ministry of Culture after which first
instalments would be released to the approved grantees. An appraisal of the project was to
be undertaken by the EC or any other authority designated by Ministry of Culture prior to the
release of second instalment. Final instalment was to be released after completion of the
project and submission of documents as proof thereof.

51. To a query whether the Expert Committee conducted appraisals or some other
authority was designated for the purpose, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The Ministry of Culture constituted the first Expert Committee in 2013. The
tenure of the committee is 2 years. The Committee recommended projects for the
sanction of grants for the cycle years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. The Committee
appraised and reviewed reports of the grantees; they deliberated extensively and
methodically and had made all the recommendations based solely on the merit of the
proposal or the report accordingly. The committee recommended reworking of reports

18


wherever required. The term of the committee expired in March 2016. Due to non
reconstitution an Expert Committee by the MoC, the reports of the grantees from the
three cycle years remained unapprised. A special meeting of the Expert Committee
was called on 317 March 2017 with the approval of the MoC to review the pending
reports of 2014-15 and 2015-16 (due to the non reconstitution of the EC, even the 1%
report of the grantees from 2015-16 were pending for appraisal). Installments were
released to grantees for both cycle years as recommended by the EC. Thereafter, the
pending reports remained unapprised due to the non reconstitution of a committee.
The MoC reconstituted an Expert Committee on 29" July 2019. The Reconstituted EC
(2019-21) decided against reviewing and granting installments to all the grantees from
the three cycle years.

52. Audit found that as per the scheme guidelines, only 50 per cent of the sanctioned
amount was to be released in the 1st instalment to the approved grantees. Audit noted two
cases where 100 percent of the sanctioned grant amounting to Rs.3 lakhs (Rs.1.5 lakhs
each) was released (March 2015) in the first instalment itself. Further, one of these grantees
was also released 2nd instalment of Rs.37,500 in February 2016 resulting in overpayment.
Audit noticed that final instalment of Rs.37,500 was released by the Akademi (February
2016) to a grantee which was not recommended by the EC as the grantee had not submitted
the final report. The EC recommended (December 2015) release of 2nd instalments to three
grantees who had not furnished the first reports. The instalments amounting to Rs.1.5 lakhs
(Rs. 50,000 each) was released in February 2016 to all the three grantees in violation of the
scheme guidelines.

53. In action taken reply, the Ministry stated that SNA has been instructed to examine all
the cases of overpayment and violations. So far, payment of Rs.75,000/- has been received
from Ms. Eli Doye with regards to overpayment.

54. | When asked about the current status of the examination of the cases of overpayment
and violations and the extent of recovery made thereafter, the Ministry in a written reply
stated as under:

“The Akademi Records exhibit that the entire grant amount was released in the
1st installment due to oversight in the case of Ramakrishna Mission Lokshiksha
Parishad (case 1) and Ms.Eli Doye (case 2). Payment of = 75,000/- has been received
from Ms. Eli Doye with regards to overpayment. However, it may be noted that both
the grantees had duly submitted all their reports related to the project grant. The
release of the final grant for Mathru Bhoomi Foundation (case 3) was as per the
recommendation of the EC after evaluation of their final report. The grantee
organization had duly submitted their final report, based on which the EC
recommended the final installment. The Akademi records exhibit that the grantees Ajit
Kumar Jha (case 4); Ajit Kumar (case 5); and Kalicharan Yadav Rawat Nach

19


Mahotsav Samiti (case 6) had duly submitted their reports on the basis of which the
EC had recommended the release of installments.

Documentation for evaluation of projects

55. Audit found that out of 324 projects sanctioned during 2013-14 to 2015-16, test-check
of 47 cases on random basis revealed that the respective files were not maintained properly
and did not contain information such as file noting, copies of sanctions, details of approvals;
status of reports received, etc. In 14 cases, the project proposals did not contain complete
documents required to be submitted with the application despite which the projects were
sanctioned in violation of the scheme guidelines. No justifications were found recorded in the
minutes of meetings of the EC for recommending these projects.

56. In response, the Ministry stated that SNA has conveyed that as per practice all
proposals received whether complete or incomplete were placed before the Expert
Committee with the data sheet on the top indicating the facts of the requisite available
details. SNA has been instructed to maintain files/documents properly and to not place the
incomplete proposals before the Expert Committee for appraisal.

57. When asked whether SNA has devised any system to ensure strict compliance
of the instructions/ directions of the Ministry, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Sangeet Natak Akademi has a dedicated ICH Cell, which maintains proper
records of all concerned files, notings as per the protocols of the Akademi. SNA
guarantees that the ICH Scheme files/documents are properly maintained and
ensures strict compliance of the instructions of the Ministry.

Incorrect depiction of EC recommendations

58. The Audit noticed that while considering the minutes of EC’s recommendations
(September 2015), MoC decided (November 2015) to review 37 proposals (valuing Rs. three
lakh and above) out of 116 recommended proposals for the year 2015-16. After the review,
MoC reduced the grants in respect of 14 proposals; increased the grants in three proposals
and rejected two proposals citing lack of justification by the EC. The revised list showing EC
recommendations as well as decisions taken after the aforesaid review by MoC was
submitted to the Minister for approval who accorded his approval in December 2015. Audit
observed that one case which had not been recommended by the EC was shown in the
revised list as having been recommended by EC for Rs. three lakh which was a
misrepresentation of facts. Based on the revised list, the proposal was eventually approved
by MoC for Rs. two lakh. Audit scrutiny of the proposals other than the ones reviewed by
MoC (having value less than Rs. Three lakh) further revealed four cases where
recommendations of EC were changed by the Akademi in the minutes of EC meeting sent to
MoC. Out of the said four cases, in three cases the Akademi reduced the recommended

20


amounts while a proposal not recommended by EC was incorporated as recommended for
Rs. two lakh. These four proposals were approved by MoC based on_ incorrect
recommendations of EC submitted by the Akademi.

59. In the Background Note, the Ministry stated that explanation was sought from the
concerned official and it seems the discrepancy was not misrepresentation of facts but
happened possibly due to an oversight, while formatting/ cutting-pasting the tabular details
during processing. All officials have now been instructed to be extra careful while dealing
such matters in the future. Further, SNA has conveyed that the mistakes occurred
inadvertently and has been instructed to avoid recurrence of such mistakes in future.
SNA has sent letters to the concerned applicants for recovery of grants.

60. When asked whether any assessment of the extent of excess amount of grant
released to project proponents due to oversight by officials was made, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as under:

“The Audit Report of 2018 revealed that out of the 26 cases, 18 cases were
such where the Ministry of Culture made necessary changes in the grant amount. The
rest are cases where Expert Committee recommendations were incorrectly depicted in
the minutes submitted to MoC. The Investigation Committee had recommended that
the Ministry should examine all the cases pointed by Audit and fix the responsibility for
lapses. A Sub-Committee for Fixing of Responsibility was formed from within
Reconstituted Expert Committee to look into the matter. As per the Minutes of the
Fixing Responsibility Meeting the members of the Sub-Committee stated that the
reconstituted Expert Committee will not be involved with the earlier cases/applications/
files and financial implications of the ICH Scheme. They requested Sangeet Natak
Akademi to forward the matter to MoC for final closure. Letters/ emails have been sent
to the MoC for final decision on the cases. The MoC vide F.No. U-11/12/2020-
UNESCO dated 8" March 2021 stated that the Expert Committee may take a decision
for the final closure of the 26 cases pertaining to the cycle year 2015-16. The
Reconstituted Expert Committee were apprised about the MoC decision and were
presented with the 26 cases for their perusal and decision. However, the tenure of the
EC ended in July 2019. The final closure/decision on the aforementioned cases is
pending due to the non reconstitution of an expert committee.”

61. | When asked details of cases where applicants concerned declined to pay recovery
amount as a follow up action by SNA and the extent of incidental cost incurred due to
initiation of recovery proceedings, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Letters were sent to the concerned two cases- Manoj Kumar Das and Dr.
Tuisem Shimrah for recovery of grants. Both Manoj Kumar Das and Dr. Tuisem
Simrah have already submitted their final reports, stating that they utilized the 1st
installment for completion of the project. They were not released the 2nd and 3rd

21


installment. As per the decision of the Expert Committee the two cases along with the
other aforesaid cases mentioned in the previous question were sent to the Ministry of
Culture for final closure. The MoC vide F.No. U-11/12/2020-UNESCO dated 87 March
2021 stated that the Expert Committee may take a decision for the final closure. The
decision is pending due to the non reconstitution of an EC.”

b) Scheme for Financial Assistance to Cultural Institutions

62. Audit scrutiny revealed that the scheme provides for financial support to institutions
engaged in training in the fields of music, dance and drama and to encourage production of
new plays and ballets etc. A committee of experts’ viz. Grants Committee considers the
applications and makes recommendations including the quantum of grants. As per the
scheme, financial assistance is to be released in two instalments of 75 per cent and 25 per
cent. The recommendations of the Grants Committee are placed before the Executive Board
(EB) of the Akademi for approval as per procedure adopted by the Akademi. However, this
procedure has neither been defined in the scheme nor in the Rules and Regulations of the
Akademi. The quantum of financial assistance for the projects has also not been defined
under this scheme. As a result, there was no consistency in the amounts approved for
financial assistance which ranged betweenz 20,000 and one lakh in the test checked
cases. No justifications were found recorded by the Grants Committee while deciding the
quantum of financial assistance to institutions. During 2012-13 to 2016-17, a total of 2,101
grantees were sanctioned ¥ 8.54 crore.

63. Audit noticed that test-check of 210 cases involving ~ 88.55 lakh revealed the
following:

(i) In six cases, though the grantees had sought financial assistance ranging between
%10 lakh and % 43.80 lakh, the financial assistance sanctioned ranged from only
₹ 30,000 to 80,000. On the other hand, in a test-checked case, the financial
assistance sanctioned by the Akademi was more than what was sought by the
grantee without recorded justifications.

Akademi stated (November 2017) that quantum of financial assistance is case
sensitive and varies as per the actual need. Reply is not acceptable as no
justifications were found on record to assess the actual need of the grantees.

(ii) The project proposals were required to be submitted through state Akademies or
State Governments, where there were no state Akademies. Audit noticed that 166
out of 210 proposals (79 per cent) were not submitted to the Akademi through state
Akademies or State Governments in violation of the scheme provision.

Akademi stated (November 2017) that though involving state Akademies confirms an
institution's existence but in many cases the route gets tougher and some needy
aspirants do not get the assistance. The scheme provides for submission of an

22


advance copy of form directly to the Akademi and the same is examined by the
Expert Committee and surprise checks are also conducted on regular basis.

The reply is not acceptable as majority of the cases (79 percent) were not found
routed through State Akademi/Government. Consequently, the Akademi was not in a
position to verify the bona-fides of the applicants. Further, no inspection reports for
surprise checks were found available on record.

(iii)The applications were required to be accompanied with details related to the
institutions, audited statements of accounts for previous year, particulars of
financial assistance received from Akademi and their utilisation, activity reports and
details of project proposals, etc. Audit noticed 21 test checked cases where
approvals were accorded though the documents/details required to be submitted
along with the applications were not furnished by the grantees.

(iv) As per the guidelines, where any grant have been given in the previous years, the
first instalment of the current year’s grant is to be released on receipt of UCs for
past grant(s) along with detailed statement of expenditure. Audit noticed 18
proposals that were sanctioned and grant released even though the UCs for the
past grants were pending from the grantees.

(v) The scheme does not provide for submission of any report by the grantees on
completion of the project. No completion/activity report was available in respect of
94 grantees out of 210 test checked cases. Thus, it could not be ensured whether
any fruitful results were derived under the scheme.

64. MoC stated (December 2017) that the Akademi is being advised to resort to corrective
measures to wipe out such irregularities while considering the proposals of grantee
organisations for release of financial assistance to them. The Akademi is also being advised
that a “Monitoring Committee” to ascertain the veracity of activities of the institutions against
which the funds are released has to be set up by the Akademi so that the purpose of the
releases may not be defeated. As per the Action Taken Notes, the Ministry had submitted
that keeping in view the budget constraints and mandate of the scheme, token assistance is
given to Grantees with the assumption that the rest of the expenses will be borne by the
Grantees. The Ministry have stated that in future, the Akademi will place the justifications of
the committee for the grant for every proposal.

65. When asked of the concrete initiatives taken towards ensuring transparency in giving
grants and the mechanism in place to verify the justifications of the Grants Committee, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“It is worth mentioning that the Grants Committee of the Akademi is equipped
with experts from the performing field of Music, Dance, Drama, Puppetry. The
recommendations of the Grants Committee are placed before the General Council of
the Akademi which is equipped with Government nominees besides experts of the

23


performing arts of the country from the field of music, dance, drama and puppetry.
Ministry has instructed all akademies to streamline the UC and as of now no further
grant will be allotted without UC. Ministry has also advised akademies to keep
representatives from other institutions giving other grants of MoC in the Grants
committee of the respective akademi.”

66. When asked what system has now been adopted by Akademi to ensure full recorded
justification of the Committee for sanction of grant for every proposal, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as under:

“The Grants Section of the Akademi after checking the applications in all
aspects, forward the same application(s) to the concerned Deputy Secretaries of the
activity section of the Akademi for expert views. The concerned Deputy Secretary after
assessing the work of the institution(s) and the project, gives their views on the files.
All the applications are then placed before the Grants Committee for recommended
the grant to the cultural institutions.”

67. When asked whether the project proposals are now being submitted through
Akademies/Governments, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“The Akademi is accepting all the applications, received from cultural
institutions forwarded by the State Governments/ Governments or directly by the
Cultural institutions.”

68. When asked what system has been adopted to ensure that the approvals are now
being accorded to only complete applications, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“As per the guidelines of the scheme only the complete applications are
accepted for consideration.”

69. When asked what directions were issued by the Akademi to the Grantees for timely
submission of UCs before release of subsequent grants, the Ministry in a written reply stated
as under:

“After the approval of the minutes of the Grants Committee, a sanction letter is
issued to the Grantee institutions alongwith the assurance certificate, utilization
certificate & with other documents, with the instructions that the Ist installment will be
released after receiving the assurance certificate and the IInd installment is released
after the receiving of UCs and audited accounts with the supporting documents of the
events.”

70. When asked what action has been taken by the monitoring committee to monitor/verify
activities of grantee institutions, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

24


“The final installment of the grant is released by the Akademi only after
submission of UCs, audited accounts by the CA and with the documentary
proof of the event, for which the grant was released to the institution.”

71, | When asked whether the grantee institutions are now submitting reports of the
completed projects, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Yes.”

72. When asked how Akademi ensures access to the lowest strata of society residing
farthest corners of the country to avail the benefits of the scheme, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as under:

“The Akademi also consider applications received directly from the cultural
institutions other then the applications recommended by the State Akademies. On
the basis of applications received and keeping in view the activities and standing of
the institution(s) and having due regard to the type of activities proposed the Grants
Committee recommended grant to the institutions. From the last few years it is
observed that the applications received in the Akademi for the financial assistance
are increasing. There are many grantees from the lowest strata of the society and
the total grantees represent the diverse and vast composition of our country and all
regions are considered for the grant. To increase the number of cultural institutions
to take the benefit of this scheme, the Akademi will send application(s) to the Zonal
Cultural Centers & State Akademies for distributions among their places.”

B. National Museum, New Delhi: Poor cash management and irregular parking of
funds outside Government Account

73. The Central Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983, stipulates
that all receipts of Government shall, without undue delay, be paid in full into the accredited
bank for inclusion in the Government Account. These receipts will not be utilised to meet
departmental expenditure or otherwise kept apart from the account of the Government. It
also provides that a bank account can be opened by civil ministries or department under
order issued by the Financial Advisor of the Ministry or Department concerned in consultation
with the Controller General of Accounts. Further, all monetary transactions should be entered
in the cash book and withdrawals can be made only on presentation of prescribed bills.

The National Museum, New Delhi, (Museum) is under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Culture (MoC), and is required to abide by the above cited Rules. It had been
brought out in the Comptroller & Auditor General's Report No. 18 of 2013 that money
received on account of audio guide services was deposited in the personal account of some
Officials from October 2005 to August 2007. In its Action Taken Note, MoC had accepted
(December 2013)-that the account was erroneously opened in the-name of two officials
instead of the National Museum and intimated that the error had since been rectified and the

25


amount transferred to the account of the Museum. The Museum was operating a sales
counter from where sale of tickets, publications and replicas is made. Payments at the sales
counter were received in cash or through Electronic Data Capture (EDC) Machine/swipe
machine installed at the sales counter. Payments against sales received through the swipe
machine got automatically credited into an account opened with Bank of Baroda (EDC
Account) in August 2007. Audit scrutiny of records of the Museum revealed the following:

(i) Contrary to the assurance given to the Public Accounts Committee through the ATN in
December 2013 that the receipts from audio guide service were now being credited
into the account of the Museum, the Museum began depositing the receipts into
Government account on monthly basis only from February 2016. Further, out of
receipts of ¥ 1.38 crore pertaining to period prior to February 2016, हैं 1.23 crore was
deposited belatedly in the Government account in June 2017 and an amount of = 15
lakh was still lying in this account as of October 2017.

(ii) The Museum received payments through swipe machine/EDC machine at the sales
counter aggregating ~ 1.03 crore during November 2007 to May 2017. In violation of
the Central Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983, these
receipts were neither routed through the cash book nor credited into the Government
Account. Instead receipts were credited into an account in Bank of Baroda which had
provided the EDC machine. It was only after the matter was pointed out by audit that
the balance in this account was transferred to the Government Account in May 2017.

(iii) | The EDC account showed the address of the account holder as that of the then
Director's residential address instead of the official address of the Museum. The
Museum was also unable to produce records with regard to opening the account
stating that the same were untraceable. As such, it could not be verified if the account
had been opened in accordance with the Central Government Account (Receipts and
Payments) Rules, 1983 with the approval of the Financial Advisor of the Ministry.

(iv) Though receipts were being credited regularly in the EDC account, it was shown as
being in dormant condition since December 2010 and the bank was continuously
debiting ‘account dormant charges’ from this account since September 2013. The
Museum authorities neither appeared to be aware of the transactions involving this
account nor did they undertake any verification of receipts between the EDC account
and their own records.

The Museum thus persistently failed to comply with the Central Government Account
(Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983 in handling Government receipts. It also failed to
exercise basic internal controls in the matter of cash management by failing to route receipts
through the cash book and not undertaking any reconciliation with bank accounts. As a
result, an amount of ~ 2.26 crore was irregularly kept outside Government account for a
prolonged period of time. The Museum stated (June 2017) that हैं 1.03 crore lying in the EDC
Account and ~ 1.23 crore in the Audio Tour Guide account had been credited to the

26


Government account. No explanation was given for not recording all receipts in the Cash
Book and for not depositing receipts into Government account for prolonged periods. This
matter was reported to the Ministry (October 2017);its reply was awaited (December 2017).

74. | When asked whether instructions have been issued to avoid similar instances of
opening of accounts in other institution, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
“Instructions have been issued by National Museum New Delhi to avoid similar
instances of opening of accounts in other institutions to all concerned on 31.01.2023”

75. When asked reason for keeping the National Museum's हैं 2.26 crore outside
government accounts and depositing in the personal account of some officials from October
2005 to August 2007, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Detailed bank statement is attached. The account(Government) No.
26030100006181(EDC) and Account No. 26030100006118(Audio Video) were
opened in the year of 2007 instead of 2005 in Bank of Baroda. A challan copy is
also. enclosed where Rs. 2,26,07,266.38(% 10349262.38(EDC A/c) +
% 12258004.00(Audio Video A/c)= ₹ 2,26,07266.38) submitted to third account that
related to Government account of National Museum(Canara Bank, Delhi) in the
year 2017. Besides that from the EDC account No. 26030100006181, ₹ 2.00
Lakhs and % 2.40 lakhs were debited in the year 2008. The first amount i.e. = 2.00
lakh was transferred in the Government account of National Museum vide challan
No. dated 26.06.2008. Second amount of %2.40 lakhs was_ inadvertently
transferred in the National Museum Institute account which was recovered back
vide letter No. NMI/Fin/Cr/2017-2018/633 dated 01.08.2017 and the same was
deposited vide National Museum challan No. NM-III/69/2017 dated 02.08.2017 in
the Government account of National Museum. These accounts have been
dormant account and no personal transaction done from these accounts. An
amount of %1,22,58,004.00 from Audio Video Account was submitted to
Government Account at Canara Bank, New Delhi in year 2017. After this
deduction an amount of ~15.00 lakhs left in the Audio Video account till
06.06.2017. This amount with interest ¥ 16,22,105.00 was submitted through
NEFT on dated 24.10.2017 to Government account at Canara Bank, New Delhi.
Thereafter Audio Video Account closed. The EDC account was current account
and no interest accrued thereon.”

८. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata: Excess contribution to employees’ provident fund

76. Para 29(1) of the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Scheme,
1952 (Scheme), provides that the contribution payable by an employer under the Scheme
shall be 12 per cent of the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance, if any,
payable to each employee to whom this Scheme applies. Para 26A(2) of the Scheme further
stipulates that the contribution payable by the employee and employer shall be limited to the

27


amount payable on a monthly pay of 6,500 (enhanced to ~ 15,000 from 01 September
2014). Para 29 (2) of the Scheme stipulates that the contribution payable by an employee to
whom the Scheme applies could, if he so desires, be an amount exceeding the above limit
subject to the condition that employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any contribution
over and above his contribution payable under the Scheme. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata,
(Society), is fully financed by the Ministry of Culture, Government of India (Gol), through
grants-in-aid. The by-laws of the Society provide that the provident fund of its employees will
be guided by the Scheme. As per the scheme, out of 12 per cent of wages, 8.33 per cent is
deposited in Employees’ Pension Scheme (EPS) and balance 3.67 per cent is transferred to
the Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF). Accordingly, the Society was required to restrict its
employer's contribution to हैं 1,800 per month i.e.12 per cent of the maximum wage ceiling of
₹ 15,000 per month in respect of those employees who were drawing pay more than
= 15,000 per month.

Audit noticed (December 2016) that the Society contributed its share of provident fund
to the employees at the rate of 12 per cent of total pay instead of restricting it to the
maximum wage ceiling of हैं 15,000. Although the share of EPS of the total employers’
contribution was 8.33 percent of maximum wages of ~ 15,000, the whole balance amount i.e.
12 percent of actual wages which meant wages more than हैं 15,000 p.m. (-) 8.33 percent of
wage ceiling of ¥ 15,000 was transferred to EPF which resulted in excess contribution of
% 1.19 crore towards employer's share of provident fund in respect of 160 employees who
were members of the Scheme and were drawing monthly salary of more than हैं 15,000
during the period from April 2015 to March 2017.

The Society stated (July 2017) that(i) the employer's contribution till April 2001 was
restricted to 12 per cent of maximum wage ceiling of ¥ 6,500 which was enhanced to 12 per
cent of total pay as per Society's order of May 2001; (ii) the higher contribution was made on
the request received from the employees of the Society with reference to Para 26(6) and
26(A) of the Scheme with prior intimation to Regional Provident Fund Commissioner,
Kolkata; (iii) since larger coverage under EPF is of private sector employees, employer's
contribution is specified in such a way that on one hand it guarantees the minimum
contribution by employer and on other hand it limits the wage ceiling for limiting the
employer's liability. The reply is not tenable because(i) Para 26A(2) does not empower the
employer to contribute over and above the limit fixed under Para 29(2) and relaxation allowed
in Para 26(6) is for employee’s contribution and not for employer's contribution; (ii) the
procedure for enhancement of contribution stipulates that an officer not below the rank of an
Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner may, on the joint request in writing, of any employee
and his employer, allow him to contribute more than the prescribed amount. The prior
intimation in this instant case was not a joint request but only a communication from the
President of its apex body viz. Council forwarded to Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
for seeking clarification on employer's contribution as per the demand of Employees’ Union
on which no response was received from EPFO; and (iii) neither any approval had been
obtained by the Society from its Council nor from its administrative Ministry nor from the

28


Ministry of Finance for contributing employer's share of provident fund over and above the
statutory limit provided in the Para 26A(2) of the Scheme. The Ministry stated (July 2017)
that the Society had been asked to look into the matter.

77. | When asked on what corrective actions have been taken in this regard, the Ministry
in a written reply stated as under:

“The Asiatic Society, Kolkata vide its letter Ref.No.7897 dated 06.02.2023 has
informed that in pursuance of the decision taken by the Council of the Society in its
meeting held on 31.01.2023 and its Office Order No. 38 dated 06.02.2023, the
Employer's Contribution to the EPF will be made at the prevailing prescribed rate to 12
% on EPF Wages (Comprising Basis Pay & D.A.) applying the EPF Wage limit of Rs.
15,000/- per month in terms of the existing provisions of the EPF Scheme. The ASK’s
Order dated 06.02.2023 inter-alia says that the employees to whom the Scheme
applies will however be allowed to continue an amount (i.e. Employees’ share of
contribution) over and above the statutory ceiling limit (computed at 12 % of actual
Basic Pay + DA) in terms of Para 29 of the scheme and the Asiatic Society will bear
the prescribed administrative charge payable to such employees under intimation to
the Assistant Provide Fund Commissioner as per provisions in Para 26 (6) of the
Scheme.

However, the Asiatic Society, Kolkata’s decision that as employer, (Asiatic
Society, Kolkata) will bear the administrative charge payable to such employees under
intimation to the Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner, as per provisions in Para
26 (6) of the Scheme, again this is something which is not in consonance with the
rules, the Ministry of Culture did not support it. The Ministry vide letter dated
20.02.2023 directed the ASK to revisit EPF Scheme and initiate action for recovery of
excess payment made to the employees till now.

Meanwhile, the Ministry vide letter dated 17.02.2023 asked Ministry of Labour &
Employment to intervene in resolving this issue and return the excess contribution
made by Asiatic Society to this Ministry as excess contribution has been made from
the Government Grants in blatant contravention of the EPF scheme.

The Asiatic Society, Kolkata vide its letter Ref. No. 8113 dated 03.03.2023 has
informed that the excess contribution to EPF by the employer has been stopped with
effect from the month of February, 2023 and they had also written to EPFO for
recovery of excess payment.”

78. | When asked what action have been proposed to be taken by the Ministry/EPFO to

recover the excess share paid beyond the ceiling by the Asiatic Society, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as under:

29


“Ministry of Culture been taken up the matter with Asiatic Society, Kolkata since
May 2017 for the settlement of Audit Para and stoppage of the employer's contribution
over and above the statutory limit. Detailed instructions for stopping the excess
payment made in the EPF accounts of the employees, fixing responsibility for lapse
etc. has been issued to ASK vide letter dated 25.01.2023. Further vide letter dated
30.01.2023, ASK has been requested to keep the matter regarding stopping of the
excess payment being made in the EPF account of the employees and recovery of the
excess payment already made before the Council Meeting scheduled on 31.01.2023
as a "Special Agenda". The Asiatic Society, Kolkata vide email dated 02.02.2023 has
informed that that the matter was discussed in the Council Meeting of the Asiatic
Society, held on 31.01.2023.The Asiatic Society in its Council meeting held on
31.01.2023 decided that for the existing EPF subscribers of the Society, the
Employer's continuation to EPF, as per Para 29 (1) and 26 A (2) of EPF scheme, will
be made at the rate 12 % (comprising basic pay & DA) on EPF Wages applying the
EPF wage limit of हैं 15,000/- as per Society's Order No. 38 dated 06.02.2023. The
ASK’s Order dated 06.02.2023 inter-alia says that the employees to whom the
Scheme applies will however be allowed to continue an amount (i.e. Employees’ share
of contribution) over and above the statutory ceiling limit (computed at 12 % of actual
Basic Pay + DA) in terms of Para 29 of the scheme and the Asiatic Society will bear
the prescribed administrative charge payable to such employees under intimation to
the Assistant Provide Fund Commissioner as per provisions in Para 26 (6) of the
Scheme. However, the Asiatic Society, Kolkatahas not taken any action on the
recovery of excess payment made towards EPF contribution, which was committed to
by them in the preliminary meeting in the Ministry. Para 26 A(2) of the Scheme
stipulates that the employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any contribution
over and above the prescribed limit fixed under Para 29 (2). However, relaxation
allowed by the Society as per para 29 should be restricted only for the employees
NOT EMPLOYERS contribution and bearing the administrative charges payable for
such employees is not in consonance with the letter and spirit of the Act and does not
have the sanction of the Ministry. The Ministry is not liable to extend any grant support
towards a blatant violation of the provisions of the Central Act. Any legal or financial or
statutory consequences arising out of wrongful contravention/violation of Act will be
the sole responsibility of ASK, including non compliance of this Ministry's continued
pursuance for abidance to the provisions of the Act. The Ministry vide letter dated
08.02.2023 directed ASK to follow all the provisions of the EPF scheme in light of
specific observations made by the Audit and to stop with immediate effect the
employer's share over and above the stipulated rate and wage limit in violation of EPF
rules and also to initiate recovery of excess payment made in EPF accounts. ASK vide
letter dated 09.02.2023 has informed that the Council in its meeting held on
31.01.2023 decided to constitute a committee to look into other issues including the
matter of recovery keeping in view the para-5 of this Ministry's letter dated
25.01.2023. ASK also forwarded a copy of Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner
(Compliance), EPFO, Regional Office, Kolkata letter No. EPFO/RO/CC/WB/15600/431

30


dated 07.10.2022 regarding recovery issue stating that the employer cannot recover
the excess amount paid over and above ceiling amount from the employee concerned
as per provision under Para 31 of EPF Scheme 1952 read with Section 12 of The EPF
& MP Act, 1952. EPFO, Kolkata has further added that the instant Act & Schemes
framed there under do not spell anything in the matter of refund of contribution already
deposited with the Statutory Fund. The Ministry is also taking up the matter with
Ministry of Labour and Employment for intervention in directing the EPFO to return the
excess contribution made by Asiatic Society from the Government Grants in
compliance to the C&AG observations. Matter relating to Peer review of the Asiatic
Society Kolkata (Autonomous Body) is being submitted separately.”

D. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal: Avoidable payment on
electricity charges

79. Audit pointed out inaccurate assessment of contract demand by Indira Gandhi
Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal, and delayed action for reducing the contract
demand resulted in avoidable expenditure of ¥ 82.95 lakh towards electricity charges.
Audit analysis of electric load revealed that the actual consumption was persistently
lesser by 37 per cent to 79 per cent than the contract load between May 2007 and
November 2016. On being pointed out in February 2016, the IGRMS conducted fresh
energy audit and reduced the contract demand to 300 KVA from December 2016. Thus,
failure of IGMRS to align its contract demand with actual power consumption resulted in
avoidable expenditure of ~ 82.95 lakh.

80. When asked how the first assessment was made, the Ministry in a written reply
stated as under:

“Initially, the IGRMS was having an original 11 KV (100 KVA load) near guest
house building & another connection of 11 KV (60 KVA load) near Gate No.2
(Lakeview) upto 2002 for operational of the above exhibitions/office building excluding
Veethi Sankul (Indoor Museum Building). The Executive Council of the RMSS, in the
year 1988, had approved, in principle, a conceptual design of the Indoor Museum
building which was to be constructed in about 28,056 sq.mt (296272 Sqft.). However,
the Executive Council, in the year 1992 has decided that the construction of the first
phase of the Museum building in about approx 10,000 sq.mt. (107600 Sqft.) is to be
constructed in phase-I and rest of the area may be constructed in phase-ll after
completion of phase-I. When the Indoor Museum Building (Veethi Sankul) of approx
area of 10000 sqmt. was under construction, the Architect/Technical Consultant has
submitted the detailed load calculation of 33 KV (600 KVA) for operational of Indoor
Museum building as per approved Master Plan of 200 Acres by Executive Council of
the RMSS in the year 1988. The Indoor Museum Building was constructed in about
28056 Sqmt. The load has been increased by IGRMS 33 KV (600 KVA) as per the
report of Architect/electrical consultant in year 2002 after partial completion of Indoor
Museum Building. However the old HT connection of 11 KV (100 KVA) load and 11

31


81.

KV (60 KVA) load has been disconnected by IGRMS after fully operational of
substation of 33 KV (600 KVA load). IGRMS had approached to Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Board (MPEB) in 24" January, 2005 to reduce electrical current load i.e.
600 KVA to 300 KVA for fully utilization of actual load which is being used by the
IGRMS along with the fresh agreement & all other relevant document desired by
MPEB to reduced load for 600 KVA to 300 KVA. However, it has been observed that
with the running of Indoor galleries the load varies upto 349 KVA (April, 05) due to that
it was observed in view of commencement of AC plant 195 KVA, the demand is likely
to be increased in future, so after reviewing of electrical load and proposed expansion
projects, the final decision was taken by IGRMS in May, 2005 to retain load of 600
KVA in the interest of the organization keeping in the view of future expansion &
infrastructure development. After detailed scrutiny by Engineering Section in July,
2015 in view of optimum utilization electric loads the fresh energy audit was initiated
by IGRMS through ४.7. Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd., and MANIT, Bhopal. In year 2016 the
electrical load was reduced to 300 KVA. In view of the above fluctuation in load as per
actual consumption at site which is varied to every month, it is very hard to fix a
optimum level of load the necessary corrective action has already been taken by
IGRMS and electricity billing has been reduced considerably. The Ministry of Culture
vide letter dated 30.01.2023 has requested all the organizations including Indira
Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal to assess the consumption/load of
electricity, water etc in their organisation from time to time so that optimum utilisation
of these facilities may be ensured.”

When asked of the action taken by the Ministry to ensure accurate estimation of power

requirement by all institutions/organizations under its jurisdiction in future, the Ministry replied
as under:

“The Ministry of Culture vide letter dated 30.01.2023 has requested all the
organizations including Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal to
assess the consumption/load of electricity, water etc in their organisations from time
to time so that optimum utilisation of these facilities may be ensured. Some
organizations like Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, New Delhi has
assessed load of electricity and water etc. and actual consumption for the same is
within the optimum utilization. Due to installation of solar energy plant and construction
of rain water harvesting system, the rebates for the same are also being taken in bills
from respective organizations.”

32


PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

Sangeet Natak Akademi: Incorrect accounting of funds received under the
Intangible Cultural Heritage (ICH) Scheme

4s Audit scrutiny revealed that the Sangeet Natak Akademi failed to maintain
separate account for the funds received under the ICH Scheme. The Akademi merged
the expenditure incurred on ICH Scheme with its regular expenditure which led to
incorrect accounting of funds received under the Scheme. During the period 2013-14
to 2015-16, the Akademi had incurred an expenditure of Rs.4.25 crore under the
Scheme but furnished incorrect Utilisation Certificates for Rs.5.77 crore. In response,
the Ministry stated that there were various other activities including plans like TSP etc
that were operating and SNA was continuing to manage the F&A with limited staff.
Owing to these reasons, a separate bank account was not opened for the ICH Scheme
and the funds for the scheme were credited and released from the main account of the
Akademi. The Committee note that consequent to the Educational Consultants India
Limited (EDCIL) evaluation followed by C&AG Audit, SNA had started operating the
ICH Scheme through a separate account. The Committee wish to point out in this
regard that a separate bank account will ensure financial discipline by enabling
monitoring of the expenditure under the scheme vis-a-vis the receipts. The Committee
further believe that time bound and regular examination of the receipts and
expenditure of SNA is a necessity so as to ensure that the funds have actually been
utilized for the objectives envisaged. The Committee, while noting that the SNA
manages the Finance & Accounts with limited staff desire that the concern of the SNA
may be taken up by the Ministry for being addressed appropriately. The Committee
also note that draft review guidelines pertaining to the ICH Scheme for any fresh
projects or a new cycle for implementation which have been formulated on advice by
the 2"! EC, are under consideration. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
present status of the same. Further, as informed, the SNA has initiated the process of
examining the receipts and expenditure for identifying the activities which were not
covered under the ICH Scheme but were executed by the Akademi and revise the UCs
for considering adjustment in future release. The Committee desire that funds on ICH

activities not yet covered under the ICH Scheme but were executed by the Akademi be

33


adjusted, with the concurrence of the Ministry. The Committee wish to be apprised of

the developments in this direction.

pa Audit had observed that under the ICH Scheme, the Ministry of Culture had
released Rs.50.95 lakh to the Akademi for carrying out activities related to Buddhist
Chanting and Thatheras of Punjab in March 2015. The sanction of the Ministry
stipulated that the funds should be utilized within the same financial year and the
unspent balance, if any, should be intimated to the Government. However, the
Akademi furnished a consolidated UC of ICH scheme of Rs.2.49 crore for the year
2014-15 including expenditure incurred on the activity of Buddhist Chanting and
Thatheras of Punjab with unspent balance of Rs.0.40 lakh. Later, in December 2016,
the Akademi intimated the Ministry that it had utilised only Rs. 16.27 lakh out of Rs.
50.95 lakh on the above activity. In their response, the Ministry stated that SNA has
been instructed to regularise the “Buddhist Chanting and Thatheras of Punjab" funds
and to return the unspent balance to the Ministry. The Committee note from the replies
of the Ministry that the unspent balance on Buddhist Chanting and Thatheras of
Punjab as on 31 March, 2019 have been utilized by the Akademi for other ICH related
activities, as well, on account of which ex-post facto approval was duly sought.
Considering that the unspent balance has been utilized by the Akademi for ICH
activities other than the ones identified, the Committee desire to be apprised whether
UCs for the sanctioned amount have since been reconciled and submitted to the
Ministry. The Committee are also of the opinion that irregularities in accounting of ICH
arose due to non maintenance of separate expenditure heads for each component of
the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that, henceforth, the Ministry and
the Akademi invariably maintain separate expenditure heads for each component of
the ICH Scheme with a view to ensuring transparency in the implementation of the

Scheme.

Deficiencies in implementation of the scheme

3. The Committee note that for the three years of the ICH Scheme (2013-14, 2014-
15 & 2015-16), out of 324 projects approved by the first Expert Committee of the ICH
Scheme, 183 projects were completed. Further, the remaining 141 projects and release
of installments relating thereto are under consideration for completion after evaluation

by an ICH Expert Committee and with the guidance of the experts of particular
34


projects. The Committee also note that out of 141 projects, 86 have been included in
the National Inventory and 55 projects will be included in the inventory by October,
2023. In this regard, the Ministry further submitted that the new dispensation of SNA
held the view that with a view to salvaging the projects, the grantees may be given one
more chance upto October, 2023. The Committee express concern on the prolonged
delay in implementing the projects under the scheme. They further opine that had the
Ministry and SNA fixed a deadline for completion of projects and monitored the
progress of each project, such inordinate delay in project completion could have been
avoided. Moreover, the Ministry and SNA ought to have kept strict vigil on release of
grants and ensured that subsequent installments were released only after receipt of
UCs. The Committee, therefore recommend that henceforth SNA may fix a deadline for
completing each project under the ICH Scheme and establish a strict monitoring
mechanism for all ongoing projects. The Committee are also hopeful that the Ministry
and SNA will ensure that the remaining projects will be completed and included in the

National Inventory by October, 2023.

4. The Committee note that grantees of the 183 completed projects have submitted
their final reports for inventory and digitization and many reports have since been
uploaded. In this regard, the Ministry informed that except for 45 projects, all grantees
have submitted their final reports and the same have also been hosted on the website.
Further, according to the SNA, a report of a completed project includes written
materials, photos, videos and related documents that a grantee may consider vital for
its report, which amounts to having voluminous data (in GBs) for each report.
Therefore, the Akademi have been requesting the MoC for funds enable maintaining to
a separate server exclusively for ICH projects. The Committee wish to be apprised of
the present status of setting up a separate server for projects under the ICH Scheme
and the status of uploading the reports of remaining completed projects under the ICH
Scheme. The Committee also desire that grantees of the remaining 45 projects be
directed to submit their final reports within a stipulated timeframe so that the same are
also uploaded on the website and used towards achieving the envisaged objectives of

the Schemes.

5. The Committee note that the Reconstituted Expert Committee (2019-2021) of

SNA had drafted the revised ICH Guidelines based on the recommendations of the

35


Educational Consultants India Limited (EdCIL) and various Expert Committees of SNA
and sent to the Ministry of Culture for approval. However, the revised guidelines could
not be reviewed for approval as the General Council of SNA was not constituted due
to delay in nomination of their representatives by the States and also due to the covid
pandemic. The new council was constituted only in November, 2022. During oral
evidence, the Committee were also apprised that the draft guidelines are still under
consideration and all the changes that have happened in the ICH Scheme at the level
of UNESCO, of which India is a member, as well as at the internal level, would be
considered and appropriately incorporated in the guidelines before sending it for
approval. Noting that the ICH Scheme is on hold due to pending approval of the
revised guidelines, Committee express the urgent need to review and approve the
guidelines so as to ensure that eligible beneficiaries can avail the benefits of the
scheme and an opportunity is opened up for unrecorded/undocumented intangible
cultural practices to be included in the official archives of the country. The Committee,
therefore recommend that a deadline may be fixed for approval of the revised
guidelines so that the scheme may be enforced at the earliest, thereby enabling the
benefits of the scheme not only by the existing beneficiaries but also by other

potential beneficiaries.
Violation of Scheme Guidelines

6. The Committee note that the ICH Scheme guidelines provide for assistance in
the form of non-recurring grants in three installments in the ratio of 50:25:25. The
Expert Committee of SNA made recommendations for grant of funds, based solely in
the merit of the proposal of the potential grantee, to the Ministry of Culture for
approval after which the first installment would be released to the grantees. The
subsequent 277 and 3" installment of release of funds was to be made only after the
Expert Committee apprised and reviewed the reports of the grantees. However, Audit
had highlighted in two cases, 100 percent of the sanctioned amount was released as
part of the first installment itself. Further, one of these grantees was also released 27
installment thereby resulting in overpayment. Audit had also observed that final
installment was released to a grantee despite not having the recommendation of the
Expert Committee, as the grantee had not submitted the final report. Moreover, EC had

recommended for release of 2" installment to three grantees who had not furnished

36


the first report. As per the reply of the Ministry the SNA have been instructed to
examine all the cases of overpayment and violations of scheme guidelines. The
Ministry had submitted that the Akademi records exhibited that entire grant amount
was released in the first installment due to oversight and recovery has been made in
some cases. The Ministry further submitted that the grantees had duly submitted all
their reports related to the project grant. The Committee are not convinced with the
reply of the Ministry as the funds were released in contravention of the extant
guideline, which provided that grants were to be released in a staggered manner,
which is indicative of weak monitoring of release of funds. In this regard, the
Committee are of the considered opinion that responsibility needs to be fixed and
action taken against the officials concerned for violation of Scheme guidelines. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry and the management of SNA need to
work out a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure strict compliance of the scheme

guidelines as well as constant vigil on the flow of funds under the ICH Scheme.

Weak documentation for evaluation of projects

de The Committee find that random test checked cases of projects revealed that
related files were not maintained properly and did not contain the notings, copies of
sanction orders, details of approvals; status of reports received, etc. Other
discrepancies included project proposals that were made without mandated
documents that were required to be submitted with the application and were
sanctioned in violation of the scheme guidelines. Moreover, no justification was found
recorded in the minutes of meetings of the EC for recommending the projects. In
reply, the Ministry have stated that all proposals received, irrespective of whether they
were complete or incomplete were placed before the Expert Committee with a data
sheet on the top indicating the facts of the requisite available details. The Committee
were further apprised that SNA has been instructed to maintain files/documents
properly and to not place incomplete proposals before the Expert Committee for
appraisal. Moreover, the Committee were informed that Sangeet Natak Akademi has a
dedicated ICH Cell which maintains proper records of all concerned files, noting as
per the protocols of the Akademi. SNA also guaranteed that the ICH Scheme
files/documents are properly maintained and ensures strict compliance of the

instructions of the Ministry. The Committee observe that despite the existence of a

37


dedicated ICH Cell for record maintenance, there has been poor management of files
and records, which is indicative of weak functioning of the ICH Cell. The Committee
are of the view that to ensure thorough verification and review of project records and
data as well as the authenticity of data, a strong ICH cell is a necessity. Therefore, the
Committee exhort the Ministry as well as SNA to urgently strengthen the ICH cell by

maintaining a verified and authentic database.

Incorrect depiction of Expert Committee recommendations

8. The Committee note that out of the 116 project proposals recommended by the
Expert Committee for approval, the Ministry of Culture reviewed 37 proposals for the
year 2015-16. After the review, MoC reduced the grants in respect of 14 proposals;
increased the grants in case of three proposals and rejected two proposals citing lack
of justification by the EC. Audit scrutiny revealed that one case which had not been
recommended by the EC was shown as having been recommended by EC which was a
misrepresentation of facts. Audit also found that the Akademi had changed the
recommendations of the EC in four cases. Out of the said four cases, in three cases
the Akademi reduced the recommended amounts while a proposal, not recommended
by EC, was incorporated as recommended. These four proposals were approved by
MoC based on incorrect recommendations of EC submitted by the Akadenii. In reply,
the Ministry had submitted that explanation was sought from the errant officials and
found that the discrepancy occurred due to oversight, while formatting and cutting-
pasting the tabular details during processing. The Ministry had also instructed the
Akademi to be extra careful while dealing with such matters in future and SNA has
sent letters to the concerned applicants for recovery of grants. The Committee
express deep concern over the callous attitude of the officials of the Akademi while
submitting the list of applications for grants for approval by the Ministry. The
Committee recommend that a robust review mechanism may be put in place for
thorough scrutiny of all applications before sending the same to the Ministry for

approval and release of funds.

Scheme for financial assistance to cultural institutions

9; The Committee note that the Scheme for financial assistance to cultural

institutions provides for financial support to institutions engaged in training in the

38


fields of music, dance and drama and to encourage production of new plays, ballets
etc. Under the Scheme, funds are to be released in two installments of 75 percent and
25 percent. A committee of experts (Grants Committee) considers the applications and
makes recommendations including the quantum of grants, which are placed before
the Executive Board (EB) of the Akademi for approval as per procedure adopted by the
Akademi. Audit scrutiny had revealed that this procedure was neither defined in the
Scheme nor in the rules and regulations of the Akademi. The quantum of financial
assistance for the projects had also not been defined. As a result there was no
consistency in the amounts approved for financial assistance. Audit further found
irregularities like sanctioning of financial assistance in excess of the amount sought
by the grantee without recorded justifications, non-submission of project proposals
through State Akademies or State Government, as required, non-submission of
required documents by grantees, release of funds without receipt of UCs of past
grants, etc. Moreover, the Scheme does not provide for submission of any report by
the grantees on completion of project. In reply, the Ministry had submitted that
keeping in view the budget constraints and mandate of the scheme, token assistance
is given to Grantees with the assumption that the rest of the expenses will be borne by
the Grantees. The Committee note that there is ambiguity in the provisions for
implementation of the scheme in respect of quantum of funds to be released,
submission of project proposals etc. This has led to release of excess funds without
receipt of UCs, without proper documentation etc. The Committee are of the view that
the haphazard and unorganized manner of implementing the scheme is indicative of
non-committal attitude of the Ministry in achieving the objectives of the Scheme. The
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry urgently undertake an exercise of
reviewing and revising the guidelines of the scheme and incorporate necessary
provisions to streamline the processes on determining the eligibility of beneficiaries,
release of admissible quantum of funds per beneficiary, documents and reports

required to be submitted by beneficiaries etc.

National Museum: Poor cash management and irregular parking of funds outside

Government Account

10. Audit scrutiny revealed that the National Museum, New Delhi failed to comply

with the Central Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983 in

39


handling Government Receipts. The Museum had not exercised basic internal controls
in cash management, failing to route receipts through cash book and not undertaking
any reconciliation with the bank accounts. As a result, an amount of Rs. 2.26 crore
(Rs.1.03 crore in EDC (electronic data capture) account and Rs.1.23 crore in Audio
tour guide account) was irregularly kept outside Government account for a prolonged
period of time. In reply, the Committee were apprised that the account on audio guide
services was erroneously opened in the name of two officials and money received was
deposited in the personal accounts of the officials from October 2005 to August 2007.
The error has since been rectified and the amount, along with interest, has been
transferred to the account of the Museum albeit belatedly. The Committee also note
that payments received through swipe machine/EDC machine were neither routed
through the cash book nor credited into the government account during November
2007 to May 2017. Instead, receipts were credited to an account with the residential
address of the then Director, National Museum. The Museum has since credited the
amount along with interest accrued on the account to the Government account. The
Committee are concerned to note the blatant contravention of the Central Government
Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983, while creating the EDC (electronic data
capture) account and Audio tour guide account. The Committee are of the considered
view that such deviation from the rules resulted due to weak internal control
mechanism. The Committee, therefore recommend that officials responsible for not
adhering to the rules ought to be penalized to set an example and to avoid blatant
violations in future. The Committee also desire that the Ministry and the Museum
revisit the matter to rule out involvement of any vested interest on the part of the

errant officials and apprise them of the outcome.

The Asiatic Society, Kolkata: Excess contribution to employees’ provident fund

11. The Committee note that as per the Employees Provident Fund and
Miscellaneous Provisions Scheme, 1952, the contribution payable by an employer is
12 percent per month of the maximum wage ceiling of Rs.15,000 per month, i.e
Rs.1800 per month. Out of the 12 percent of wages, 8.33 percent is deposited in the
Employees’ Pension Scheme (EPS) and balance 3.67 percent is deposited to the
Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF). The Scheme also stipulates that the contribution

payable by an employee to whom the Scheme applies could, if he/she so desires, be

40


an amount exceeding the above limit subject to the condition that employer shall not
be under an obligation to pay any contribution over and above his contribution
payable under the Scheme. Audit scrutiny of the accounts of the Asiatic Society,
Kolkata revealed that in contravention of the Scheme guidelines, the Society
contributed its share of provident fund to the employees at the rate of 12 percent of
the total pay instead of restricting it to the maximum wage ceiling of Rs.15,000 which
resulted in excess contribution of Rs. 1.19 crore towards employer’s share of the
provident fund in respect of 160 employees who were drawing monthly salary of more
than Rs.15,000 during the period April, 2015 to March 2017. While examining the
subject, the Committee also highlighted the deviation from the scheme guidelines by
the Asiatic Society and recommended for early resolution. The Committee note that
the Council of the Asiatic Society had since taken a decision that the Employer’s
Contribution to the EPF would be made at 12 % on EPF wages applying the wage limit
of Rs.15,000. The Committee are further apprised that the Ministry of Culture are
taking up the matter of recovery of excess amount contributed with the Ministry of
Labour and Employment. While acknowledging the action taken by the Ministry and
the Society in rectifying the error of excess contribution, the Committee also desire
that matter relating to the recovery of the excess amount of Rs.1.19 crore contributed
by the Asiatic Society be resolved expeditiously and the Committee apprised of the

same.

Indira_Gandhi_ Rashtriya _Manav_Sangrahalaya, Bhopal: Avoidable Payment on
Electricity Charges

12. Audit noted that there was inaccurate assessment of contract demand by Indira
Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal, and delayed action for reducing the
contract demand resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 82.95 lakh towards
electricity charges. Audit analysis of electric load revealed that the actual
consumption was persistently lesser by 37 per cent to 79 per cent than the contract
load between May 2007 and November 2016. The Ministry had submitted that the
Architect/Consultant had submitted the detailed load calculation of 33 KV (600 KVA)
for operationalizing Indoor Museum Building as per the approved Master Plan of the
Executive Council of the Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya Samiti in 1988. The
Committee were apprised that in the year 2005 IGRMS approached the Madhya

41


Pradesh Electricity Board (MPED) to reduce the required load from 600 KVA to 300
KVA. However, keeping in view the varying load requirement of running the indoor
galleries going upto 349 KVA and requirement for the commencement of an AC plant
with 195 KVA and likely increase of electric load in future, a final decision was taken to
retain the load of 600 KVA in the interest of the organization in view of future
expansion and infrastructure development. Upon the matter being pointed out in
February, 2016, the IGRMS conducted fresh energy audit and reduced the contract
demand to 300 KVA in December 2016. The contract demand for electricity of 600 KVA
was based on the Master Plan of 1988. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view
that the contract demand for electricity ought to have been reviewed and revised
periodically based on the actual requirement. While acknowledging the action taken to
reduce the contract demand for electricity at the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav
Sangrahalaya, Bhopal, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take necessary action to
ensure optimum utilization of facilities like electricity, water etc. by all organizations
under its purview. The Committee also desire that the Ministry impress upon the
organizations to explore alternative sources of energy like solar energy, water

harvesting techniques etc. to supplement and augment their requirement.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
September, 2023 Chairperson,
Bhadrapada, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

42