76

SETTING UP OF NEW INDIAN INSTITUTES
OF TECHNOLOGY

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SEVENTY SIXTH

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2306

SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

SETTING UP OF NEW INDIAN
INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

Ne
'सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 18.12.2023

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 18.12.2023

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)

(i)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) {iv)
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
PART-I
A INTRODUCTORY 01
B CREATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE 02
c FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 36
D ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES AND RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 39
E FUNCTIONING OF OVERSIGHT MECHANISM 57
PART - Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 61-78
APPENDICES
1. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on

11.10.2022

I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee ((2023-24) held on
14.12.2023

(ii)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

‘Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy’
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

(iii)

1 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy elected w.e.f. 13.12.2022.


COMPOSITION. OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien?
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt.Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
(iv)

? Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023. :


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy Sixth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Setting up of new Indian Institutes of
Technology’ based on C&AG Report No. 20 of 2021 relating to the Ministry of
Education.

2. The C&AG Report No. 20 of 2021 was laid on the Table of the House
on 21.12.2021.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-2023), selected the aforesaid
subject for detailed examination and took briefing by Audit and oral evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry of Education on the subject matter on 11
October, 2022. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Committee
examined the subject in detail in 2023-24.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 14.12.2023.
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part- Il of the Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral
evidence and obtaining information on the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Education for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information in connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
14 December, 2023 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(v)


REPORT
PART-1
A. INTRODUCTORY

Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) are autonomous, apex institutions for
engineering education and research in India. As of March 2020, there are 23 IITs
across the country. Out of these 23 IiTs, seven IITs were set up between 1951-2001,
eight IITs during 2008 and 2009 while the other eight IITs were set up between 2012-
2016. The eleventh five-year plan (2007-12) envisaged setting up of eight new IITs for
the expansion and upgradation of institutions rendering technical education to meet the
skilled manpower needs of the country, while also providing for social equity. All IITs are
governed by the. ‘Institutes of Technology Act, 1961’ (hereinafter referred as Act) a
Central Statute, which declared the IITs to be institutions of national importance. The
Act envisages that the IITs provide for instruction and research in such branches of
engineering and technology, sciences and arts, as the IITs may think fit. It also lays
down that the IITs take steps for the advancement of learning and dissemination of
knowledge in such branches, to hold examinations, to confer honorary degrees, to
frame statutes and ordinances etc. In line with the provisions of the Act, IITs offer
Undergraduate programmes in various branches of engineering and technology,
Postgraduate programmes with specialization and Ph.D. programmes in engineering,
science and interdisciplinary areas. The IITs also conduct basic, applied and sponsored
research.

Salient features of the new eight IITs
2. Salient features of the new eight IITs are given below:

° Initiating construction of permanent campuses in the land allotted to new IITs by
the respective state governments which commenced their academic activities
initially from temporary campus.

° To undertake the infrastructure works like construction of academic buildings,
hostels, laboratories etc. in a phased manner in all IITs from 2012.

° Achievement of targets of infrastructure development in a timely manner along
with timely installation of equipment and proper fund management.

e Envisaging an overall target intake of 18,880 students in the initial six years
(2008-14) across eight IITs.


° To increase in sanction of faculty positions linked with the increase in students
ie., sanction of faculty posts to be increased by one for every increase of
students by 10 (1: 10 ratio)

न To increase the representation of students belonging to reserved categories
(SC/ST/OBC) in PG and Ph.D enrolment in all eight IITs.

. To attract substantial funding from government sources towards sponsored
research projects in all eight IITs.

3 C&AG Report No. 20 of 2021 (Performance Audit) on the subject ‘Setting up of
new Indian Institutes of Technology’ pertaining to Union Government, Ministry of
Education contains significant results of the Performance Audit on setting up of eight
new IITs during 2008-09 and covers the activities of these IITs pertaining to the period
2014-19. The Report assesses availability of land, creation of infrastructure for
achieving the envisaged student enrolment, procurement of equipment and services,
general financial management and academic/research activities of IITs besides
oversight mechanism in administering these IITs.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. Considering the significance of the issues involved in the
matter, the subject was carried forward by the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23). In
the process of examination of the subject, the Committee obtained background material
and detailed written replies from the Ministry of Education. They also took oral evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry of Education. It was decided by the Public
Accounts Committee (2023-24) to continue with examination of the subject and report.
The issues so discussed are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

B. CREATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE

5. Audit examined creation of infrastructure by eight IITs during the five-year period
2014-19 pertaining to (i) land allocation/availability (ii) planning by way of phasing the
construction activities by respective IITs (iii) execution of phase-wise construction
activities and (iv) supply and installation of equipment.

6. Audit observed that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of MoE (erstwhile MHRD)
provided that the new IITs would be residential institutes of an area about 500 to 600
acres each. The campus of each of these IITs would house the academic area and
residential area for students, faculty and staff. The campus of the IITs would also
contain facilities like guest house, health care (at the level of primary health clinic), small
shopping centre along with banks, sports facilities, postal facilities, elementary and

2


secondary schools for the children of faculty, staff and married students. The IITs were
also to be fully equipped with laboratory equipment and computing equipment for the
students to facilitate the learning process in line with the courses offered.

(a) Availability of Land

7. Government of India (Gol) requested (2006) the respective State Governments
to identify and allot 500-600 acres of land (preferably land in possession of the
Government) free of cost, to each of the eight IITs, with necessary social and physical
infrastructure like electricity, water, rail and road connectivity. The DPR also considered
availability of 500-600 acres while planning for infrastructure development.

8. From the data furnished by the IITs, Audit observed that the allotment and
transfer of land by the State Governments commenced during 2008-2012. As of
November 2020, allotment and transfer of land was completed in four IITs (IITH, IITI,
IITJ and ITP) while in four other IITs (IITBBS, IITGN, IIT Mandi and IIT Ropar), large
land portions were pending possession.

9. Further, in IITGN, although 399 acres of land had been allotted to the Institute,
150 acres of land was in unsuitable condition. Hence, 165 acres of land compensating
the unusable land was sought from the State Government.

10. The Committee desired to know as to why the availability of requisite suitable
land was not possessed from the State Governments before taking up large scale
expansion of the IIT System. In response, the Ministry of Education in their written
replies submitted as under:

“When an IIT is to be established in a State, Ministry of Education communicates
with the concerned State Government and requests to allocate 500-600 acres of
land free of all encumbrances. The State Government then identifies two or three
sites as per availability and a Site Selection Committee comprising of senior
Officials from the Ministry, representative from the concerned IIT/ Mentor IIT and
CPWD after visiting and inspecting the sites submits their recommendations,
based on which the site is finally selected. However, taking into account the past
experiences, in future, efforts would be made to impress upon the State
Governments for identification of suitable land for transfer for setting up of the
HT.”

11... Audit noted that in case of IIT Gandhinagar and IIT Mandi, the land availability is
far less than the envisaged 500-600 in DPR.

12. The Committee desired to know about the alternate plan to create infrastructure _
to meet the targeted intake of student strength. In response, the Ministry in their written
replies submitted as under:


“In case of IIT Gandhinagar, it is currently'in possession of 399 acre of land,
which is sufficient to support a student intake of 10,000, as per the decision of
the Committee for determination of land requirement of Central higher education
institutions. The matter relating to requirement of additional land was taken up
with the State Government at the level of Secretary, D/o Higher Education vide
letter No.11-10/2008-TS-1 (6) dated 28.10.2020. “

“In the case of IIT Mandi, it is already in possession of 501 acres of land.”

13. Audit scrutiny revealed that in case of IIT Gandhinagar, State Government
(Government of Gujarat) stated that there was no need for additional allotment of land.

In light of the above, the Committee sought to know whether any policy is
evolved by the Ministry to ensure that the minimum extent of land to be made to the
\ITs, which are Institutes of National Importance. The Ministry, in their written replies
stated as under:

“The Central Government vigorously follows up with the concerned State
Government.”

(b). Master Plans and construction activities - Delays in Phase-I and Il works
and other sampled works

14. Audit observed that each IIT developed their own Master Plan which was
approved by respective BoG/BWC. These Master Plans include detailed infrastructure
requirements and allocated land for various academic and non-academic purposes like
housing, transportation, infrastructure etc. and their development in phased manner.
The major construction works in all the eight IITs were undertaken in Phase-l and
Phase-II during 2012-19. The IITs have also executed other works like construction of
compound wall, shifting of power stations, construction of roads etc. To execute these
works, the IITs adopted two modes of execution i.e., (i) execution of works directly by
the IITs by engaging contractors and (ii) entrusting the work to public works agencies
like Central Public Works Department (CPWD), National Building Constructions
Corporation (India) (NBCC) Ltd. etc., on deposit basis.

(c) Phase-! and Il: Overall Delays in Construction

15. Phase-| and Phase-!! development in all the IITs comprised works.

Details of phase-wise works

a construction of academic buildings, student hostels, residential
accommodation for faculty and staff, laboratories in proportion to
student/faculty/staff population.

4



a construction of additional academic buildings, student hostels, faculty
housing, staff housing, laboratories, Incubation Parks, Technology
Research parks, guest houses, sports facilities etc. in proportion to the
student/faculty/staff population as per the Master Plan.

16. Regarding phase wise construction works, Audit observed the following:

(i) While construction activities under Phase-| were initiated in all the IITs during
2012, buildings under Phase-I were complete only in two IITs (IITBBS and IITJ),

while they were incomplete in remaining six IITs as of March 2019.

(ii) Phase-ll works were initiated during the period 2014-19 in five IITs (IITBBS, IITH,
lITI, IITJ and ITP). Audit observed delays in execution of Phase-ll building works
in two IITs, namely IITBBS and IITI.Phase-Il works were yet to be initiated in rest

of the three IITs (IITGN, IIT Mandi and IIT Ropar).

17. According to Audit, some of the facilities that were delayed in these IITs were
academic buildings including research facilities, hostels, health centres and sports
facilities. As such, envisaged campus development remained incomplete in IITs, despite

a lapse of seven years since initiation of construction activities.

Completion of buildings under Phase-! and Phase-ll as of March 2019

Name of the IITs Phase-| Buildings Phase-ll Buildings
Planned Completed Planned Completed

NTBBS 13 13 26 |_ ९0९ |

एठार 7 3 Not initiated Not initiated

TH | 5 |; [6६ | 6 | | 0 /।|

WT 43 12 1 | 0० ।|

TJs 19 19 32 7

वा Mandi 107 70 Not initiated Not initiated

TP 18 15 16 [lO

IIT Ropar 33 14 Not initiated Not initiated

Grand Total [28 [| [2 | | 7

18. The Committee asked about the steps that have been taken up by the
Ministry/IITs for completion of the planned buildings. In response, the Ministry in their
written replies submitted as under:



“IITs hold regular review meeting with the PMC on regular basis to assess the
progress of the work. PMC submit program activity indicating status of
construction and any other related issues.”

19. On being asked the present status of building completed as well as the number
of buildings remained incomplete till date, the Ministry in their written replies stated as

under:

“Out of the 8 IITs, IIT Jodhpur completed its campus establishment project by
31.07.2021. The progress of remaining IITs as on 31.10.2022 is as under:-

| Name of the| Number of ]Number of | Number of | % Estimated
N | 1Ts * | Buildings Buildings building Comple- | date of
0. proposed to | completed incomplete | tion Completion
be
constructed
as per DPR
1 | IIT Gandhinagar | 566 | 62 [| 4 | 94% 31.12.2022
2 वा | ४ | 47 11 87.00% 31.03.2023
Bhubaneswar
3 | IIT Hyderabad 41 41 | = | 100%
| 4 | IT Jodhpur [| 59 | | 58 [| | = | 100% | = |
| 5 | IIT Ropar 57 56 1 90.5 31.03.2023
| 6 | IIT Patna 61 52 | 38 | 96.50% 28.02.2023
7 | IIT Indore 36 36 | o-| 98%# 31/12/2022
[ 8 | NT Mandi 107 107 | oo | 100% | ऋ+ |

# mandated 2, 21,000 SQM area is constructed and occupied by the Institute.

Minor commissioning and rectification work is in

completed by 31.12.2022”

progress which will be

20. Audit observed that the IITs attributed the delays to time taken for finalization for
designs, obtaining regulatory clearances, statutory approvals, default on the part of
contractor, shortage of labor and remoteness of the area, etc.

21. When asked about the efforts made by the Ministry for speedy execution of
works, the Ministry of Education submitted as under:

“Most of the above mentioned reasons attributed to delay are for which
clearances need to be obtained and resolved at the Institute level. These
clearances are specific to the requirements of the State Government norms. IITs
need to do regular follow up with the State Government.”

22. The Committee further sought to know about the action taken against the
delinquent officers/contractors so as to ensure that such lapses do not occur in future.
In response, the Ministry in their written replies stated as under:

6



“Liquidated damages are imposed on the delinquent contractors including
encashment and forfeiture of Performance guarantees and even blacklisted the
firm, wherever applicable as per the agreement.”

(७) IIT-WISE SIGNIFICANT 6001 __ FINDINGS __IN__ INFRASTRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT

IIT BHUBANESWAR (IITBBS)

23. |ITBBS commenced its activities under the mentorship of IIT Kharagpur at the
latter’s campus with effect from 2008. The scheduled date of shifting was July 2015 and
the permanent campus of IIT Bhubaneswar (located at Arugul) started its academic
operations from the academic session 2015-16 onwards.

(i) Availability of land

24. Audit observed that Government of Odisha allotted (2009-10) 943.27 acres to
IITBBS and accordingly the master plan of the Institute was prepared for development
of infrastructure projects in phased manner. The allotted land included 305.11 acres of
forest land. Out of the forest land, 148.91 acres was not handed over to the IIT till
November 2020. As such, the reduction in availability of allotted land would prove to be
a limiting factor in future expansions.

25. The Committee desired to know the reasons for reduction in availability of land
allotted to IIT Bhubaneswar. In their written replies, the Ministry submitted as under:

“There is no such proposal to reduce the Land committed by State Government
to IIT Bhubaneshwar. IIT Bhubaneshwar has taken physical possession of entire
943.47 acre of agreed land. (Govt Land: 628.799 acre, Forest Land-302.377 acre
and Private land- 12.295 acre) from Govt of Odisha by 2011 in phases for its
permanent campus at Argul. Correction of RoR of 10.95 acre of private land in
the name of this IIT has also been completed.”

26. -On being asked about the efforts made by IITs/Ministry for possession of entire
allocated land with requisite process of conversion of Forest land, the Ministry in their
written replies stated as under:

“The State Govt has now sanctioned (January 2022) lease for 618.665 acre of
Government Land for which advance possession was given earlier. It has
claimed arrear ground rent, cess and cost of tree amounting to = 44,66,120 for
payment and then to sign the lease deeds. Lease deed for alienation of Govt
Land of 618.665 acre will be executed shortly after payment of the amount of
%44.66 lakh claimed by the State Govt."

(ii) “Execution of works


27 Audit noted that Phase-I works (11 works) in IITBBS were executed by CPWD.
Out of these, only four works (faculty housing and administrative building) were
completed as per schedule. The remaining seven works (lab complex, schools of
electrical sciences, mechanical sciences, infrastructure, basic sciences, boys’ hostel
and compound wall) scheduled to be completed by October 2013 to March 2016 were
however, completed by October 2014 to May 2016. Thus, the delay ranged between
one and twenty months (as of 31 March 2019).

28. Audit further found that Phase-Il works were executed by NBCC. Out of three
works, two works (boys’ hostel and package works) which were scheduled to be
completed by October 2018/February 2019 were not completed by March 2019. The
delay in completion ranged between one month and five months (as of 31 March 2019).
Further, third work of Sewage Treatment Plant was under progress as of March 2019
(Scheduled completion by November 2019).

29. The Committee sought to know as to why IITs, being new, were entrusted with
Architecture/ construction activities instead of a separate dedicated body to manage
MoUs/Construction contracts to allow IITs to devote full time to academic activities. In
response, the Ministry stated as under:

“It is a policy matter. IIT Bhubaneshwar had entrusted CPWD with execution of
works under Phase | (up to 2015). Due to delay in construction and midway
abandonment of a contractor, IIT BBS engaged NBCC as a project management
consultant for phase ॥ works from 2015 onwards. As a result, out of 58 buildings
(Phase | — 23, Phase Il — 35), all 23 buildings under Phase | have been
completed and handed over to the IIT. Nine buildings (phase I!) are in finishing
stage and are likely to be completed by 31.10.2022. Remaining two buildings
under Phase ॥ (LHC-2 and auditorium) are expected to be completed by
31.03.2023.”

30. On being asked about the specific reasons for the delay in completion of works
ranging from one month to twenty months, the Ministry replied as under:

“The delay in completion of works by NBCC under Phase II is primarily due to
deployment of inadequate manpower and on some plea or other. The matter has
been regularly and aggressively monitored and pursued. Besides, due to delay in
execution of work and midway abandonment, penalty of € 30.89 cr (Phase |
%4.52 cr and Phase ॥ हैं 26.37 cr) has been imposed and recovery has been
made from contractors through CPWD/NBCC.”

31. | Regarding the mechanism developed by IITs/Ministry to mitigate further delays in
ongoing works on these aspects, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:


“In order to mitigate further delays in ongoing works, it is intended to introduce a
robust monitoring mechanism through a team of experienced engineering and
contract management Professionals from reputed organization/PSUs.”

(iii) | Faulty execution of fire safety works

32. National Building Code, 2005 (NBC) provides that while taking up construction of
building projects, the design should include statutory fire-fighting strategies.

33. In IITBBS, a consultant (Consulting Engineering Service (CES) India Pvt. Ltd.)
was engaged (May 2010) to provide Project Development and Project Management
Services for various buildings like hostels, staff quarters, guest houses etc., under
Phase-l.

34. Audit observed that designs which were non- compliant with the fire safety norms
of NBC 2005 were adopted for construction and buildings were built, thereby exposing
the occupants to fire hazards. As a result, certain portions of six buildings already
constructed had to be dismantled (June 2015) at a cost of 232 lakh. Later, IITBBS
estimated that an additional 2.18 crore would have to be incurred for installing
firefighting systems to meet the requirements of NBC 2005.

35. | The Committee enquired whether any action has been taken against the Building
and Works Committee (BWC) for these lapses. In reply, the Ministry submitted as
under:

“Building and works committee is a statutory committee under clause 9 of the
First Statute of IITBBS. It also has representation of external technical experts. It
is a monitoring and advisory body. It has taken all steps with required due
diligence to minimize the delay in execution and to penalize the contractors for
delay.”

36. The Committee desired to know the status of हैं 92.55 lakh, which was not
teleased to the consultancy firm. In response, the Ministry in their written replies stated
as under:

“₹ 92.55 lakh payable to the Consultant M/s CES as calculated by the committee
has not been released to them. The Institute has decided not to release % 92.55
lakh to this consultancy agency due to deficiencies in its plan and design.”

37. |The Committee also desired to know as to whether the building is now fire safety
compliant and whether the students & faculty are utilizing the buildings for their
scheduled activities. In this regard, the Ministry submitted their replies as under:

“All. these. academic. and_hostel buildings are fire safety compliant with fire
hydrant, fire sprinklers system, overhead tanks etc. Portable fire extinguishers

9


have also been installed in these buildings in sufficient quantity to take care of
any fire hazard. Other fire safety works for the administrative buildings are under
execution.”

38. When enquired about the actual expenditure incurred for installing firefighting
systems against the estimate of हैं 2.18 crore to meet the requirements of fire safety
norms of NBC 2005, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“Out of estimate for हैं 2.18 ७, fire safety works valued at हैं 99.25 lakh has been
executed. The executed works include fire hydrants, fire sprinklers, fire alarms
system, fire extinguishers, overhead tanks etc. These have been made
operational to comply with the fire safety norms of NBC 2005.”

11 GANDHINAGAR

39. _ IITGN commenced its activities during August 2008 from a temporary campus at
Vishwakarma Government Engineering College, Chandkheda under the mentorship of
\IT Bombay. It later shifted to its permanent campus at Palaj, Gandhinagar during July
2015 to March 2016.

(i) Availability of land

40. Audit observed that the Government of Gujarat allotted (September 2010) 399
acres of land. Out of this, 150 acres was in ravines and prone to flooding and erosion. In
lieu of this 150 acres, a request was made by IITGN for 165 acres of alternate land,
which was not acceded by the State Government. Thus, only 249 acres suitable for
construction was available with IITGN as of November 2020. As such, the extent of land
allotted by the Gujarat Government (50 per cent) did not meet the required 500-600
acres of land to be made available to IIT as per the DPR. IITGN itself stated that the
shortage in land availability is detrimental to future expansion of the campus.

41. | The Committee desired to know as to why such a land which was in ravines and
prone to flooding and erosion was selected as a part of the allotted land to IITGN. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“Initially, 403 acres of land was allotted by the State Government to IIT
Gandhinagar and occupation thereof was given in July 2012. Subsequently, 04
acres of disputed land was taken back by the State Government. Out of 399
acres of land with IIT Gandhinagar, some of the area has ravines and, therefore,
entire land is not economical for construction work. IIT Gandhinagar nevertheless
has made efforts to reclaim the suitable portions for construction and developed
the ravine area appropriately to be used for non-construction purpose. A Site
Selection Committee was formed by the Ministry of Education (MHRD at that
. time) in May 2009 to assess the-sites identified by.the Government of Gujarat for
establishment of IIT Gandhinagar. Out of the three sites visited and assessed by

10


the Committee, the site at Palaj Village was recommended for establishment of
IIT Gandhinagar.”

42. On being enquired as to whether any further steps were taken by IITGN or MoE
with the State Government for additional transfer of land in lieu of unsuitable land. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“IIT Gandhinagar had made all possible efforts to get extra land allotted but
Government of Gujarat has not allotted additional land so far. IIT Gandhinagar
has been regularly following up on this issue. In July 2016, Government of
Gujarat wrote to MHRD that there is no need for additional transfer of land to IIT
Gandhinagar. Thereafter, IIT Gandhinagar has been regularly following up with
MHRD to pursue this matter with Government of Gujarat, as can be seen from
our letters dated 19 September 2016, 19 February 2020 and 24 February 2020 to
the Ministry (copy enclosed as Annexure 2, Annexure 3 and Annexure 4). MoE
(MHRD then) had also written to State Government of Gujarat vide D.O. letters
no. 11-10/2008-TS-I dated 29.04.2008, 13.05.2010, 02.03.2015 & 28.02.2020 to
consider the request of IIT Gandhinagar.”

(ii) | Execution of works in Phase-l

43. Audit observed that twenty-six works under Phase-l were initiated by IITGN. Out
of these works, 14 were completed (academic buildings, faculty/staff housing, boundary
wall, electrical connections, hostels etc.) and two works (Institute’s guest house and
Director's residence, amphitheater and sport facilities) were under progress. It was
seen that in respect of these 16 works executed, there was a delay ranging between
one month and thirty seven months as of 31 March 2019. The balance ten works (water
pipeline connection, HT connection and other allied activities) were completed within
scheduled time.

44, The Committee sought to know as to what steps have been taken by the MoE to
intervene in this matter so as to resolve the issues on time. In this regard, the Ministry
submitted in their written reply as under:

“Ministry has been convening review meetings to assess the progress of the
construction activities. The progress is also reported during the FC/BOG
meetings regularly wherein; representative of Ministry is also a member. Further,
after setting up of HEFA, the projects are regularly monitored before release of
funds/loans and for appraisal to the HEFA Board.”

(iii) Tendering and awarding of works

45... Rules 163 to 176.of. GFR.2005 stipulate the process of identification, shortlisting
and selection of consultants and outsourcing of services. CVC Circular No 23/7/07

11


dated 5 July 2007 also inter alia states that a tendering process or public auction is a
basic requirement for the award of contract by any government agency.

46. Audit scrutiny revealed that architectural consultancy services for five works
which included the construction of academic buildings, sports complex etc., in Phase-|
was awarded on nomination basis at a consultancy fee of %7.64 crore, without following
the said provisions of GFR. Further, it was also seen that the Owner's Architect and
later a company owned by the Owner's Architect were also appointed on a nomination
basis. A civil engineer from the company owned by the Owner's Architect was also
appointed on a nomination basis.

47. The Committee desired to know about the action taken on IIT’s statutory bodies
for violation of GFR in awarding the work on nomination basis and review the
consultancy work with regard to quality and meeting the timelines by the Ministry/IITs.
In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“It has already been clarified that the consultant in question M/s. Mitimitra initially
was selected on the basis of wide competition for comprehensive architectural
services for non-residential buildings comprising of Academic Buildings under
Phase-1A as per relevant provision contained in GFR-2005 for procurement of
Goods and Services. It would be relevant to quote the following extract of the
RFP for the above selection:-

IITGN envisages that in the first instance, it will assign the task of comprehensive
architectural services for Non-Residential Buildings comprising academic
buildings, laboratories, lecture halls and support facilities for about 1200 students
to the Consultant. Subsequently, IITGN will develop the remaining buildings and
facilities in a phased manner. Depending upon requirement, this may be
assigned to the same or any other consultant at the sole discretion of lITGN.

After having considered the performance(s) of all three architectural consultants
engaged by IITGN namely (i) M/s. HCP Design, Planning & Management Pvt.
Ltd. for Student Hostels (ii) M/s. VastuShilpa Consultants for Residential
Buildings (iii) M/s. Mitimitra Consultants for Academic Buildings in the light of
above provision, only M/s. Mitimitra Consultants was found suitable to be
considered for other works. Accordingly the consultant was awarded works of
Sports Complex, 1BHK 2BHK & Studio Apartments and Academic Buildings-2
after obtaining their willingness. As scope of the work in original RFP had already
been defined with a rider that further work under Phase-1 (i.e., Phase-1B) shall
be awarded based on performance under Phase-1A, the above works were

_ awarded. It would therefore not be reasonable to say that the said works were
awarded to M/s. Mitimitra Consultants on nomination basis.

12


Regarding owner's architect, as was clarified earlier that the initial appointment of
the consultant as owner's architect was on the basis of formal / informal search
for a professional consultant who was willing to initiate the process of selection of
various architect consultants i.e. for Master Plan, detailed architectural planning
of buildings and infrastructural development including bulk services. It may be
seen that the scope of his services was not that of a usual consultant but
different and somewhat open ended for which he was found to be suitable based
on experience, capabilities and willingness to undertake the role of an advisor
and coordinator in architectural matter including the process of selection of
various architectural consultants.In this regard it is clarified that the work had
physically completed by M/s. Torrent Power in July-2015 and campus energized.
The completion date of 26.10.2016 mentioned in the statement of the Audit is in
respect of final settlement of accounts with M/s. Torrent Power which took some
time in seeking clarification from them in regard to expenditure. In this regard it is
once again stated that Institute started functioning from the new campus from
July 2015 and buildings were occupied in phases along with services and thus
accomplished entire shifting from temporary campus to permanent campus in a
few months’ time. The institute has since been functioning from the new campus
since 2015 and keeping pace of infrastructural development with the requirement
of the institute.”

(iv) Blocking up of funds for Research Park

48. Department of Science and Technology (DST), Gol approved (September 2016)
Grant-in-Aid of 90 crore to IITGN for construction of a Research Park and released
%40 crore and %16.10 crore in September 2016 and March 2019 respectively.

49. Audit observed that although the funds were received by IITGN in September
2016, IIT released an advance of %29.60 crore to CPWD (as per the MoU) only in June
2018 for the construction of the Research Park. As such, there was a delay of 22
months on part of IIT in releasing the funds to CPWD which delayed the construction of

Research Park.

50. The Committee sought to know whether any initiative has been taken up at any
level to review the idling of grants with IITs/CPWD to prevent delays in research
infrastructure. In reply thereto, the Ministry submitted as under:

“The Research Park in IIT Gandhi Nagar has been established / funded by the
Ministry of Science & Technology and M/o Education is not having any role in its
funding.

However, it may be seen from the allotment of fund of € 90 Crore to IITGN for
Research Park project that हैं 3.00 Crore was made available to IITGN for
13


establishment of Temporary Research Park and Incubation Centre on temporary
basis till permanent building comes in position. While at one hand process of
engagement of an architect consultant for comprehensive consultancy services
was initiated soon after, the process of establishing the temporary centre also
was taken in hand in parallel to provide the facilities to various stakeholders
intended to make their establishment at IITGN. This work was completed in
shortest possible time and Research Park / Incubation Centre started functioning
from temporary centre w.e.f 31.10.2017. As many as 17 stakeholders have been
functioning since then. Besides an amount of हैं 5.45 Crore was remitted to
Ministry of Science & Technology as interest earned on their deposit. It may thus
be seen that the interest of stakeholders and that Ministry of Science &
Technology had been kept in mind while dealing this project. It may be
appreciated that no liability be incurred by the IITGN or CPWD unless availability
of fund is fully ensured and that Ministry of Science & Technology deposits the
fund installment with IITGN and in turn to CPWD on requirement basis.”

IIT HYDERABAD

51. Audit observed that IIT Hyderabad commenced its activities from a temporary
campus at the Ordnance factory estate, Yeddumailaram, during 2008 under the
mentorship of IIT Madras. Later, the Government of Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile) handed
over 575.04 acres of land during 2008-12 at Kandi village, Sangareddy district,
Telangana for permanent campus. As per the data made available to audit, the first
academic building was completed in June 2016 and other buildings, namely hostels,
dining, staff housing etc. were completed during February 2017 to April 2019.

(i) Execution of works: Delay in Phase-I construction

52. Audit pointed out that all the works under Phase-I were taken up as a single
contract (construction of permanent campus) during the year 2012 and were scheduled
for completion by November 2014. A building-wise analysis revealed that there were
delays ranging between two to five years in completion of the buildings like Chemical
Engineering block, Mechanical Engineering block, Civil Engineering block, hostel blocks
and residential housing. Only 31 per cent of agreement value amounting to 222.74
crore was spent within the agreement period of 24 months and none of the buildings
was completed within the original agreement period of 24 months. As a result, the
planned campus facilities as mentioned above could not be offered timely to
student/staff and other residents.

53. Audit observed that the delay in construction resulted in depriving the students
and faculty of the benefits. of full-fledged infrastructure. Audit-observed that at least
three batches of students starting from 2014 completed their graduation without availing

14


the complete benefit of the new campus like new academic buildings/laboratories and
permanent hostel facilities.

54.  Apprising the Committee about the reasons for such long delays in completion of
buildings, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“IIT Hyderabad (IITH) started functioning independently and operating
educational programs in 2011. There were some justifiable delays in construction
which are attributed to:

e The land dispute on a parcel of land located inside the main
campus affected the construction of service buildings. Due to the
pending court case, the electrical substation required to power
academic buildings had to be shifted and entire service lines
emanating from the substation had to be re-designed. This delayed
energizing the academic building.

e Bypass road to Nanded was passing through the campus and
across the main academic area. The road had to be diverted by the
district authorities before the start of construction of the academic
buildings.

e There were overhead High Tension (HT) electrical lines passing
through Academic areas. It took considerable time for shifting of
these power lines before construction could be started.

e Frequent Strikes over Telangana agitation for state formation
during the year 2013 had a high impact on the progress and
movement of goods, labour and materials.

e Occasions of hindrances due to natural calamities like severe
monsoons.

¢ General and state elections in 2014 caused labour exodus to their
home states.

e Demonetization in the year 2016 and Implementation of Goods
Services Tax (GST) in the year 2017 resulted in cash flow
problems, which also contributed to some delays. “

55. The Committee desired to know as to why funds were not made available to IIT
Hyderabad. In the written replies, the Ministry stated as under:

“There has been some delay in completion of the project. It is submitted that the
Ministry has been releasing funds, as and when demanded by the institute and
as per the Budget allocation for this purpose. Funds in the amount of = 368 Cr
were released and utilized up to FY 2015-16, which resulted in the completion of
hostels for 800 students and an academic building of 2.0 lakh sqft, including all
required services. The academic activity was shifted to the permanent campus in
2015. Subsequently, funds were released after the approval of the RCE
15


(approved vide letter no. D.O. No. 34-1/2016-TS-I dated 8th July 2016). The
project was completed in 2019.”

56. The Committee further desired to know as to whether the funds flow was
sufficient from Ministry to complete the work within two years (agreement period by
November 2014). In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“There has been some delay in completion of the project. However, Phase | was
planned and construction was initiated in 2012. The academic activity of the
students was planned and completed in a Phase-wise manner and the students
were not deprived of the benefits of the infrastructure. As mentioned before,
hostels for 800 students and an academic building of 2.0 lakh sq. ft, including all
required services was made ready and academic activity was shifted to the
permanent campus in 2015. Hostels and academic buildings to support the
activity of 1200 students were completely operational by 2016. Hostels for 2000
students were completed in all respects by 2017. The housing for faculty and
staff, however, were completed in 2019. Within three years of the approval of the
RCE, the total infrastructure, including the housing and all facilities for student
strength of 2000, had been completed and made operational.”

(ii) Inordinate delay in taking up of Phase-ll

57. Audit scrutiny revealed that Phase-ll works were estimated to cost 21,776.50
crore. Out of this, Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) sanctioned a loan of
%1,501.72 crore to Gol during January 2014. The remaining %274.77 crore was funded
by Gol and the release of funds started from 2013-14. The project period was four years
from 2013-14 to 2016-17. Phase-II works included, among other works, construction of
Laboratory complexes under Technology Incubation Park (TIP) and Technology
Research Park (TRP). TIP and TRP were intended to provide space for start-ups.

58. Audit observed that the work pertaining to Phase-II was however awarded during
March 2019, i.e., after five years from the date of loan agreement and scheduled to be
completed by March 2022 (36 months from March 2019). As a result of the delay, the
intended objective of advancement of academic and research activities in the Campus
could not be achieved till date. This reflected inaction on the part of BWC/BoG in
monitoring fund release and taking up of the construction activities in.timely manner.

59. On being asked as to whether the absorption capacity of the IIT to utilize the
JICA funds/loan provided was assessed by the Ministry before releasing the funds to
IITs. In response, the Ministry in.their written replies submitted as under:

“A detailed assessment was performed by JICA. It may be noted that Phase I! of

IITH campus development was taken up under the IITH Campus Development

Project funded by JICA. This work is on-going and will provide for additional
16


60.

facilities (academic, sports, incubation and innovation etc) and hostels space for
additional 2500 students. A draft EFC for IIT Hyderabad-Japan Collaboration
under the broader Indo-Japan Collaboration with ODA loan was prepared by
IITH. The EFC report was submitted by MoE (the then MHRD) to the Ministry of
Finance for its approval. A proposal was considered by the EFC at two meetings
of Expenditure Finance Committee. This was also reviewed by the PMO. The
recommendations were then placed before the Cabinet Committee for Economic
Affairs (CCEA) when it approved the proposal for a total cost of = 1776.50 of
which the loan amount was for हैं 1501.72, the remaining being the central share
of € 274.77. In this connection, it may be mentioned that the EFC had made
detailed examination.of the proposal both with regard to the need and capacity
and based on that, it had made its recommendation. The ITH has both the need
and capacity to utilize the JICA funds when the proposal for collaboration was
submitted in 2010, it was a newly born (2008) institute of National Importance,
which required funds for creating initial infrastructure like any IIT or a Central or
State University when they are created.”

When asked about the action taken against the concerned authorities

(BWC/FC/BoG or any other) for their inaction in respect of inordinate delay of five years
in awarding the contract (2019) after having signed the loan agreement with JICA in
2014, thereby limiting the infrastructure development. In their written replies, the
Ministry stated as under:

“Appointment of the contractors and consultants requires approval of JICA in
every stage such as approval of prequalification documents, evaluation, tender
documents and its scrutiny etc. This process could only be accomplished by
March 2019 for construction of buildings.

Documents and other. relevant information pertaining to the delay in
implementation have been evaluated and the delay has been found to be due to
the Institutional practices of JICA, which were not suited for the construction of
buildings with detailed architectural work. The framework for loan agreements
with JICA was suited for large infrastructure projects, which are decided after a
techno-economic analysis. The framework for the loan agreement did not have
provisions for the construction of buildings and procuring high-end equipment.
Therefore, considerable time was spent in determining the process of
implementation after the loan agreements were to be signed. The tendering
process was started in 2018 after the approval of the revised EFC in 2018 and
the construction was started in 2019.There was no lack of commitment from the

..Ministry.or ITH” जज

17


61. The Committee further sought to know whether any policy was devised to comply
with utilization of external aided loans in a timely manner. In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

“It is to be noted that the implementation of the JICA funded project is to be taken
up under the rules and agreement conditions of JICA. In addition to the
requirements of JICA, a Project Advisory Committee has been set up at IITH to
monitor the progress of construction. In addition, monitoring by BWC and BoG is
also ensured.”

(iii) Construction of STPs_ after occupancy of buildings due to delay in
tendering and avoidable expenditure of = 56.62 lakh

62. Two Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) were proposed (September 2014) by
BWC in the campus to meet sewage treatment requirements of hostels and academic
buildings. IITH intended to re-use the treated effluent for Heating, Ventilation and Air-
conditioning (HVAC), toilet flushing and horticulture in the permanent campus. The cost
was estimated at %17 crore for civil works of both STPs (%10 crore) and Electro-
Mechanical (EM) works for first STP (₹ seven crore).

63. Audit observed that although the BWC was aware that STPs were to be built
before occupancy of the buildings, it could not decide upon the appropriate technology
for their operation. As such, the work relating to STPs was not considered during the
tendering (August 2012) for Phase-! works. It was further observed that the STP works
(Civil works) were entrusted in September 2014 during the execution of Phase-| works,
to Phase-| contractor only. The contract was awarded as an additional item of work
instead of putting this work to tender. This was in violation of GFR whereby IIT lost the
opportunity of competitive prices. Moreover, the EM works of STP were separately
awarded in March 2018 and completed in June 2019. Meanwhile, as the buildings were
occupied during 2015, IIT planned for temporary sewage disposal by way of septic
tanks, dispersion channels, soak pits etc. at an expenditure of 56.62 lakh (2015-18).

64. The Committee sought to know about the direction/action, if any, initiated by the
MoE against the IIT Hyderabad’s statutory bodies/consultant for failure to provide
appropriate STP technology along with tenders floated for Phase-I despite engagement
of a consultant for finalizing the designs and appropriate technology and action taken
against the concerned persons for incurring avoidable expenditure of = 56.62 lakh on
temporary sewage disposal. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted
as under:

“The expenditure was incurred for disposing off sewage in a responsible manner,
before the STP was made fully operational. Further this did not create additional
financial burden considering the operational cost of the STP.-There is a minimum
load required to operate the STP efficiently. With increasing occupancy, the load

18


required to operate the STP efficiently was reached in 2019. In view of the
justification of IIT Hyderabad, no action was taken by MoE against IIT
Hyderabad.”

65. The Committee also desired to know about the action taken to avoid such lapses
in future. In replies, the Ministry stated as under:

“The observation is noted and it will be ensured that all necessary infrastructures
will be developed simultaneously.”

(iv) Instances of undue benefit to Consultants

* Avoidable financial burdern —% 12.86 crore

66. Audit scrutiny revealed that IITH appointed (September 2011) a consultancy firm
(M/s Tata Consulting Engineers Ltd.) as Project Management Consultant (PMC) for
providing consultancy services, prior to awarding of Phase-! construction works. The
consultancy fee for PMC was fixed at 1.81 per cent of the cost of construction works
and the consultant was engaged for 36 months. The contract also provided for the
payment of additional compensation for monitoring the progress of work even beyond
the contractual period. The contract for the construction project (Phase-I works) was
awarded in November 2012 at a contract value of %643.97 crore and was to be
completed within 24 months thereafter. Accordingly, the fee payable to PMC worked out
to 11.66 crore (1.81 per cent of 3643.97 crore) at the end of 36 months.

67. Audit observed that the contract work of construction project (Phase-l) could not
be completed within the stipulated period of 24 months (i.e., by November 2014) and
was inordinately delayed by five years before completion in April 2019. As the
consultancy fee for PMC was fixed at 1.81 per cent of the cost of construction works
(%643.97 crore), the consultant was paid %8.54 crore (09/2011 till 03/2019) for the
completed portion of the work. Additionally, the PMC was paid on monthly basis, a total
212.86 crore from 2015-16 to 2018-19 for delayed period beyond 42 months. As such,
the consultant got two parallel payments (from 03/2016 till 03/2019) i.e., the original
consultancy fee (@1.81 per cent of 637.97 crore) as well as monthly compensation
from the 43rd month for the same consultancy services without providing any additional
service. This led to avoidable payment on account of the additional compensation paid
to the consultant.

68. The Committee desired to know about the specific reasons for the delay of 5
years for completion of project and also enquired about the Ministry's failure to monitor
the pace of project so as to ensure timely completion thereof. In response, the Ministry
in their written replies submitted as under:

“As per the statutes of the Institute, the powers have been delegated to the

institute and there are various bodies like BWC, FC and BoG for regular

monitoring the progress of the infrastructure facilities. The problems / difficulties
19


any which are beyond the purview of these bodies are brought to the notice of
the Ministry, are addressed and taken up with the concerned agencies for
remedial /redressal.”

69. When asked about the action taken against the PMC for not monitoring the
progress of construction works, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“Overall, there has been no cost overrun in the construction (Phase |). The final
completion cost of the project is less than the tendered cost by ₹ 8.29 Cr. The
savings in the completion costs could be possible by strict monitoring due to the
full deployment of PMC over the project duration.”

70. On being asked why the consultant was paid हैं 8.54 crore (from 09/2011 till
03/2019) for the completed portion of work, the Ministry in their written replies stated as
under:

“The consultancy period was from September 2011 to March, 2019, for which
consultancy fees was paid as per the terms and conditions of agreement i.e.
%8.54 crores. After assessing the requirement of PMC beyond 54 months, as per
the terms of contract given in the original RFP document, the consultants were
paid fees after obtaining requisite approvals.”

71... Apprising the Committee about the contributory reasons for paying two parallel
payments to the consultant (from 03/2016 till 03/2019) i.e., the original consultancy fee
as well as monthly compensation from the 43% months for the same consultancy
services without providing any additional service, the Ministry in their written replies
stated as under:

“The payments were made following the conditions of the agreement between IIT
Hyderabad and the PMC. No double payment was made. One payment was
made as per the contract for the period from September 2011 to March, 2019
and the remaining being fees paid for the period of retaining the consultants
beyond this period at the agreed rates as per the contract.”

72. The Committee enquired that any punitive action has been taken against the
guilty and the extra payment made to PMC has since been recovered. In response, the
Ministry in their written replies stated as under:

“There has been no willful deficiency on the part of any of the stakeholders that
led to the delay in the completion of the project. Several intangible factors
beyond the institute's control cannot be quantified as it followed the standard
procedures and CPWD Codal Provisions, and the construction work was taken
up_and completed as early as possible, despite the various constraints. For

instance, during the contract period, delays occurred due to many reasons like

All India Truckers Strike, Agitation for Telangana State formation, and
20


implementation of GST etc. Because of these justified reasons, work was
delayed, which were beyond the contro! of any stakeholder and cannot be
accounted for beforehand. All these issues were discussed in detail and
approved by the Project Advisory Committee (PAC), which was appointed by
Competent authority and further put to the notice of the Building Works
Committee (BWC) followed by a detailed discussion at the highest-level body of
IITH i.e., Board of Governors (BoG) and it was approved. The payments made to
the PMC were strictly as per the terms of the contract given in the original RFP
document. No changes were made subsequently and due process was followed
in assessing the requirement of the PMC services and necessary financial
approvals were obtained.”

है Indefinite time frame in contract

73. Audit found that a contract was entered (March 2011) for providing consultancy
services (design) for ‘Architectural, Structural, .Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing
(MEP) and Educational Technologies for the Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
Department’. The consultancy fee was fixed at five per cent of the ‘accepted bid value’
of the proposed building, irrespective of completion cost. Provision for stage-wise
payments in ten installments was made in the agreement, based on the progress of the
work and the final payment was to be made when the consultant submitted the ‘As-Built
drawings’. As such, the contract had no completion date and the consultant was to be
paid as and when the milestones mentioned in the contract were completed. A
consultancy fee amounting to 242.02 lakh was paid (March 2011 to December 2012) for
the work done up to Stage 6.

74. Audit observed that the actual construction work of the CSE department, was
taken up only in July 2019 i.e., after a delay of eight years, at an awarded cost of 247.38
crore. IITH recalculated the six stage-wise payments previously made to the Consultant
as the earlier payments were made based on the estimated cost and not the accepted
bid value. Hence, the payment to the consultant was revised to 70.36 lakh (September
2019) based on the ‘accepted bid value’ of the work done till December 2012.
Resultantly, an additional fee amounting to $28.34 lakh (%70.36 lakh - 242.02 lakh) was
paid in September 2019. As such, delay of eight years in awarding the contract for the
construction imposed an additional liability on the IIT, due to a natural escalation in
costs over time.

75. On being enquired as to why no completion date was fixed in the contract and
also time-to-time review of the contract done by the MoE. In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:
““The architects’ agreement are based on the guidelines of the Council of
Architecture which is a Statutory body established by an Act of the Parliament.
21


The architects are retained on percentage basis. The services of the architect are
required till the completion of the project.The award of contract and subsequent
agreement with the PMC is entered into by the Institute at its own level and
Ministry is not a party to the agreement. However, Ministry coveys the financial
sanctions and the time limits within which the project is to be completed, as per
the Cabinet approval. For extension of time and for cost overrun, the proposals
are received from the institute which is examined in consultation with the Finance
Division of the Ministry, and on proper justification, is recommended for approval
by the competent authority.” .

76. The Committee desired to know that any guidelines/directions have been issued
on the matter as a remedial action taken. In response, the Ministry stated as under:

“The observations are noted for compliance in all future projects.”

(v) Non-accessibility of facilities to persons of disabilities

77. Audit noticed that Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment launched
‘Accessible India Campaign’ to ensure persons with disabilities have access on equal
basis with others, to physical environment, to transportation, to information and
communications technologies and system and to other facilities and services opened or
provided to the public.

78. Audit observed that the toilet block for male and female users of the workshop
building in Heavy Labs-3 was planned and built (2019) without provision of access for
physically challenged students and other users.

79. The Committee sought to know as to whether any further policy direction was
issued to IITs to comply with facilities to be provided to persons with disabilities to have
access on equal basis with others. In response, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“All buildings in IITH have been designed with the provisions required for the
differently abled, such as grab bars, ramps etc., and are made user friendly.
Additionally, the pavements along roads have been designed as per the
provisions in MoRTH for the differently abled persons. The provision of braille is
made in all elevators.”

(vi) Construction of Foot-over-Bridge (FoB)

80. Audit scrutiny revealed that the permanent campus is located along National
Highway 65 (NH65) connecting Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and
Maharashtra. The main entry to the IITH Campus abuts the NH65 carrying the traffic of
Hyderabad;-proceeding to other districts of Telangana and Maharashtra 810 vice versa.
Audit observed that the BWC accorded (September 2017) approval for construction of

22


FoB in a convenient location near the main entry of IITH to ensure safety of students,
faculty, staff and other users of IIT campus. However, till October 2020, the FoB was
not constructed, thus endangering the safety of IITH students, faculty and other
stakeholders.

81. When enquired whether any policy direction through the MoRTH/ NHAI was
devised to create infrastructure such as FoB/Underpass to ensure safe crossing of
National Highways by Students and other stakeholders, the Ministry stated as under:

“The National Highway 65 is proposed to be expanded to 6 lane from the existing
4 lane. NHAI is preparing the DPR and assured to consider a Vehicle/Pedestrian
Underpass (VUP/PUP) in front of the main gate of the campus.”

82. When asked why the MoE could not address the issue of construction of FoB
with NHAI/MoRTH till September 2021 and about the steps taken by MoE to ensure
completion of the FoB at the earliest, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as
under:

“The matter has been taken up by IIT and, as informed above, NHAI is already
preparing the DPR.”

॥1 INDORE

83. Audit scrutiny revealed that IITl commenced its activities from a temporary
campus at Institute of Engineering and Technology of Devi Ahilyabai University from
academic year 2009-10 under mentorship of IIT Bombay. Later, the Government of
Madhya Pradesh allotted a total land of 501.42 acres during 2012 at Indore, Madhya
Pradesh. It started functioning from new campus from February 2016.

(i) Execution of works

84. Audit found that out of 20 sampled works, four works pertain to Phase-] which
were examined in Audit. All the four works were executed by IIT] and were scheduled to
be completed between January 2015 and September 2016. Out of the four works, three
works (workshop building, hub building and campus infrastructure works) were
completed between June 2015 and August 2017 with delays ranging between five and
nineteen months. One work (construction of permanent campus at Simrol) costing
307.95 crore, which was scheduled to be completed by February 2016, was yet to be
completed, running into delay of 37 months as of March 2019.

85. Audit observed that out of 16 Phase-|l works, seven works were scheduled to be
completed prior to 31 March 2019 while the other nine works were due for completion

only after March 2019. Out of these works, two works (faculty housing and football -_

ground) remained in progress as of March 2019 with delays ranging between four and

23


seven months, while two works (footpath and ancillary works) were completed with
delay of one to 14 months. है

86. The Committee desired to know the present status of completion of Phase-I &॥
works in IIT Indore and the specific reasons for delay in Phase-Il works. In response,
the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“The mandate given to IIT Indore to construct the area of 2,21,000 Sqm for All
21 (phase |) +11 (phase II) buildings & structures are complete and occupied. To
ensure the better functionality and user satisfaction in long run some changes
due to design, drawing, specifications, site conditions and unavoidable
circumstances that arose due to global pandemic Covid-19 in Phase-ll works,
had caused some delay.”

87. As regards the present status of the decision to impose Liquidated Damages of
%30.61 crore for contractor's responsibility towards delay along with the liquidated
damages since been recovered from the contractor, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“Liquidated Damages have already been recovered from the contractor by
encashment of Bank guarantee, recovery of security deposit and pending bills.”

88. Audit observed that the Phase — | works which were scheduled to be completed
between January 2015 and September 2016 were allotted to a new contractor in August
2021 with a timeline of six months to complete the work.

89.  Elaborating status of completion of these works, the Ministry stated as under:

“Mandate of 2, 21,000 Square Meter of construction area is completed. Financial
progress of 97.3% is achieved as on Oct. 2022 and balance and rectification
works of worth हैं 10 Crore are in progress. Delay in completion of the Work was
due to difficulties in procuring matching parts for obsolete control panels,
electrical devises and the worldwide shortage of semiconductors for firefighting
devices. Balance work involving electrical installation, commissioning & testing of
HVAC and finishing civil work spread over 21 structures is a major reason of
delay in completion due to complex nature of work being executed in the
occupied buildings. Covid phase-II has reduced the pace of work. However, the
balance and rectification work is expected to be completed by December 31,
2022.” हु

(ii) | Non completion of Indoor Sports Centre

90. Indoor Sports Centre (ISC) was to be constructed under the work ‘Construction
of Permanent Campus -Phase-lA(a) ‘Part-A’-which was awarded (June 2014) to M/s

24


Simplex Infrastructure Limited (SIL). It was scheduled to be completed by February
2016; however, this was not completed even till March 2019.

91. Audit observed that against the tendered amount of %12.63 crore, financial
progress of only 27.20 crore (56 per cent) was achieved till March 2019 i.e., even after a
delay of more than 57 months against the scheduled period of 20 months for
completion.

92. The Committee sought to know the present status of the construction of Indoor
Sports Centre in IIT Indore along with the status of the contract awarded in August
2021. In response, the Ministry stated as under:

“Indoor Sports Complex is completed. Although rectification work involving
testing and commissioning of pumps, air washers, paneling of the Squash courts
and repairing of the wooden floor are in progress, which also will be completed
by November 15, 2022.”"

93. When enquired whether any penal action has been initiated by the MoE against
the previous contractor for the delay/non-performance, the Ministry in their written
replies stated as under:

“Liquidated Damages of हैं 30.61 crores has been recovered from the contractor
by encashment of Bank guarantee, recovery of security deposit and adjustment
from pending bills.”

(iii) Assets created and not put to use

94.(i) Audit scrutiny revealed that Heating, Ventilation and Air-conditioning (HVAC)
facilities were to be established under the work ‘Construction of Permanent Campus
Phase-lA (a) Part A’. The work was allotted to M/s Simplex Infrastructure Limited (SIL)
(June 2014) at a cost of 15.18 crore.

95. Audit observed that even after a delay of more than four years from the
scheduled date of completion (February 2016), the HVAC work was not completed by
the contractor. This was due to inadequate deployment of resources and procurement
of materials which resulted in idling of HVAC equipment worth 27.63 crore and depriving
the IIT of its intended benefits.

96. The Committee desired to know as to whether Ministry had given any policy

direction(s) to IITs for effective management of such high value contracts. In response,
the Ministry submitted as under:

“The award of contract and subsequent agreement with the PMC is entered into
-by. the.tInstitute at its.own_level.and Ministry.is_not 8 party..to. the agreement.
However, Ministry coveys the financial sanctions and the time limits within which

25


the project is to be completed, as per the Cabinet approval. For extension of
time and for cost overrun, the proposals are received from the institute which is
examined in consultation with the Finance Division of the Ministry, and on proper
justification, is recommended for approval by the competent authority.”

97. The Committee desired to know the present status of completion of HVAC work
and use of equipment lying idle even after a lapse of more than three years. In
response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Heating, Ventilation & Air-Conditioning (HVAC) facilities were made functional in
all 5 buildings of POD (academic building), hence all the equipment are now in
use. Minor works will be completed by November 30, 2022.”

98. When asked about the responsibility fixed against the contractors, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

“Liquidated Damages of = 30.61 crores has been recovered from the contractor
by encashment of Bank guarantee, recovery of security deposit and adjustment
from pending bills.”

99. Audit scrutiny revealed that a football ground was to be constructed (July 2018)
on the south side of the sports complex in 111 campus. The site of football ground was
changed (January 2019) to the north side of sports complex despite the fact that the
north side of the campus was full of black cotton soil and located in a low-lying area. IITI
ignored the possibility of water logging and work was awarded to contractors in July
2018 and May 2019. Further, the contract was closed in September 2018 and July
2019. An amount of $92.15 lakh was paid to the contractors.

100. Audit observed that after closure of the contracts, the football field was uneven
and there were bushes all over the football ground. Thus, the football ground was not in
a ready condition even after incurring expenditure of %92.15 lakh.

101. The Committee desired to know the reasons for closing the contracts within two
months despite paying हैं 92.15 lakh to the contractors and also the reasons for closing
the contract only after two months of awarding the same. In response, the Ministry
submitted as under:

“The performance of the contractor was not satisfactory and hence the contract
was closed.”

102. Audit further observed that balance of work of development of football ground
has been awarded to CPWD in February 2021.

_ 103. When enquired about the status of construction of football ground in IIT Indore

campus, the Ministry submitted as under:

26


“Earthwork of north side of Indoor sports complex has been completed. However,
as per the master plan of the institute, it was decided that complete sports arena
including Synthetic athletic track, Football ground, Warm up area, sitting
arrangement, Hockey Ground, Lawn Tennis, Volleyball ground and work is
entrusted to CPWD. This work is being undertaken by the CPWD.”

11 JODHPUR

104. IITJ commenced it’s activities with the mentorship of IIT Kanpur from a temporary
campus at Muganiram Bangar Memorial (MBM) Engineering College, Jodhpur from
2009-10 onwards. The Government of Rajasthan allotted a total land of 872 acres at
Karwad, in Jodhpur in 2011 for development of permanent campus. IITJ completely
shifted its academic and research operations to its permanent campus by March 2018.

(i) Assets created not put to intended use

105. According to Audit, a joint physical verification revealed that a swimming pool
constructed up to plinth level under Phase-Il was abandoned after incurring expenditure
of %1.85 crore. Construction work taken up in October 2017 was stopped in September
2018 in compliance with the guidelines issued (July 2018) by MoE stating that the
grants were not to be used for development of certain infrastructure such as swimming
pools.

106. The Committee enquired whether the Ministry was aware that the work of Jal
building was ongoing work in IIT Jodhpur and its guidelines (July 2018) effectively
stopped the work mid-way and there was any direction(s) to the IIT Jodhpur regarding
half-completed work. In response, the Ministry in their written replies stated as under:

“As per the Ministry of Education guidelines issued vide letter F.No.32-28/2018-
TS.1 dated 16th July, 2018 (July 2018), the Building and Works Committee
(B&WC) in its 19th meeting held on 21.09.2018 recommended to stop the
ongoing construction work of Jal Building and the same was approved by the
BoG in its 9th Special meeting held on 09.11.2018. Regarding half completed
work, the MoE vide letter of even no dated 16.07.2018, it was stated that
Institution can mobilize funds from other sources for its completion.”

107. The Committee also enquired about the current status of the Jal building and
asked whether the expenditure of = 1.85 crore already incurred on the work abandoned
was ratified by the Ministry. In response, the Ministry in their written replies stated as
under:

27


“The Building is constructed till plinth level at safe stage. Institute is advised to
undertake construction strictly as per approved DPR, and within the approved
capital cost.”

iT MANDI

108. IIT Mandi commenced its activities from temporary campus in IIT Roorkee in
2009-10 and later shifted to another transit campus in Government College at Mandi
from 2010-11. IIT Mandi shifted to its permanent campus at Kamand, Mandi in October
2012 and shifting process was completed by April 2015.

(i) Availability of land

109. Audit observed that Government of Himachal Pradesh allotted 501 acres of land
to IIT Mandi. Out of this, 308 acres was forest land for which approval was pending from
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Gol. Out of the remaining 193
acres, 19 acres was disputed and sub judice. Thus, the IIT had only 173 acres (35 per
cent of the allotted land) for infrastructure development. Further, the IIT had to incur an
expenditure of % 3.02 crore towards shifting of power stations and lines and diversion of
roads passing through the campus.

110. The Committee desired to know the present status of possession of land by the
IT Mandi. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“IIT Mandi was allotted 501 acres of land out of which 193 acres was animal
husbandry department land. Out of this, 19 acre is disputed; case is pending in
Hon'ble High court of Shimla. Remaining 308 acre land was transferred to IIT
Mandi on September, 2021, documentation formalities for mutation process of
possession is still under progress by the revenue department.”

111. The Committee observed that it is expected that State Government has to
transfer land encumbrance free and free of cost to IIT, the IIT incurred € 3.02 crore
towards shifting of power station and lines and diversion of roads passing through the
campus. On being desired to know Ministry's stance in this regard. In response, the
Ministry submitted as under:

“Taking into consideration the work in progress and the safety of the buildings /
workers, the power line was shifted, which resulted in creation of more land for
expansion. As regards diversion of road passing through the campus is
concerned, the matter has been taken up with the State Government. In another
case, as against the estimated cost of ~ 1.55 cores for diversion of Mandi
Kamand Kataula Road which was passing through allotted land for IIT Mandi,
only %-81.67 lakhs was released and the work has been completed.”

28


(ii) | Execution of works

112. Major construction works under Phase-l were entrusted to CPWD and NBCC.
Audit examined 14 construction works taken up by IIT Mandi during 2014-19 under
Phase-l. Of these, 11 works were scheduled to be completed by March 2019. However,
six out of these 11 works (like academic buildings, laboratory building, recreation centre
etc.) which were scheduled to be completed between October 2012 and August 2017
were completed between October 2013 and February 2018 with a delay ranging
between two months and 26 months. Two major construction works, (i) ‘construction of
Phase-I North’ viz., academic buildings, guest house, gymnasium, hospital and
auditorium buildings and (ii) ‘different buildings’ viz., 22 hostel blocks, 28 faculty housing
buildings, dining and club house, were entrusted to NBCC/ CPWD. The construction of
these buildings was scheduled to be completed by May 2018 and October 2015
respectively. However, the construction of these buildings was yet to be completed
(March 2019) and delays of 10 months and 41 months respectively were observed.

113. In one specific case, it was observed that the construction of academic and
residential complex (52 buildings) was entrusted to CPWD which in turn awarded the
work to a contractor for a tender value of = 179.48 crore with a stipulation to complete
the work by October 2015. Audit observed that the project was delayed by five years
with nine out of 52 buildings remaining incomplete as of November 2020.

114. The Committee sought to know as to whether any policy intervention has been
made in this regard by- the Ministry. In response, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“IITs are autonomous bodies and Ministry of Education does not interfere in the
routine administrative / review process. However it monitors the progress through
FC and BOG when the status of construction is placed before the FC and BOG.
IITs have Building & Works Committee, which regularly monitors the construction
progress of the IIT. IIT Mandi has been reviewing progress of work on monthly
basis with PMC by conducting Construction Review Meetings. Due to delay in
completion of work and non-performance of firms/ contractor, CPWD forfeited
Performance Guarantee (PG)& Security Deposit (SD) amounting to
%12,35,72,748/- and credited to work. Similarly, NBCC due to delay in completion
of work and non-performance of firm forfeited PG amounting to = 13,41,44,625/-
-COVID-19 pandemic also contributed to delay in completion of work as most of
the migrant laborers had left and it took considerable time to re-start the work.”

(iii) Non accessibility of facilities to persons with disabilities

115. Ministry of Social. Justice and Empowerment launched ‘Accessible India

Campaign’ to ensure persons with disabilities have access on equal basis with others,

to physical environment, to transportation, to information and communications
29


technologies and system and to other facilities and services opened or provided to the
public.

116. Audit observed that out of the 80 completed buildings, facilities of ramps and
toilets for wheelchairs was constructed only in 32 buildings and Braille symbols and
auditory signals in elevators or lifts was provided only in eight buildings.

117. The Committee desired to know the present status of the buildings with regard to
providing facilities to the persons with disabilities along with any such facilities have
been provided in all the buildings. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Buildings have been provided with ramps/toilets to make it disabled friendly.”
| PATNA

118. IITP commenced its activities, under the mentorship of IIT Guwahati, from a
temporary campus at Navin Government Polytechnic in Patna in the year 2008-09.
Later, the Government of Bihar allotted a total land of 500.45 acres during 2011 at
Bihta, Patna. IITP shifted to its new campus in July 2015.

(i) Execution of works

119. Audit examined all three Phase-I works (entrusted to CPWD, NBCC and EIL)
executed during 2014-19. These three works included academic buildings, hostels,
faculty housing, hospital, school and workshops. The works were scheduled to be
completed between June 2014 and December 2017. Delays were observed in
completion of two works, namely academic building and residential complex, ranging
between 18 months and 22 months (as of March 2019). The third work which included
hostels, staff quarters etc. and scheduled for completion by December 2017 was still in
progress with the delay of 15 months (as of March 2019).

120. The Committee desired to know the present status of the completion of third work
which included Hostels and Staff Quarters. In response, the Ministry in their written
replies submitted as under:

“Third work includes Hostel and Staff quarters which was started on 27/10/2016
has been completed on 31/12/2019. Girl's Hostel, Boys Hostel and C type
quarters with Gymkhana were completed on 04/07/18, 24/05/19 and 31/12/19
respectively, as per priority.”

121. MoE in their replies stated that (September 2021) the works awarded to NBCC.
were delayed due to agitation by local people for land compensation and change in the
layout of internal brick work partition in all buildings.

._122, The Committee also desired to know about the initiatives taken by IIT/State
Government to resolve the same. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:

30


“State Government took suitable remedies and the matter was resolved. Phase |
Work was completed and inaugurated by Hon'ble Prime Minister on 25/07/2015.”

123. When enquired about the action if any initiated by IIT against the contractor for
failing to complete the works as per schedule, the Ministry in their. written replies
submitted as under:

“EIL(PMC) has recommended for time extension without any LD on agency and
submitted reasons for delay. It will be placed in next BWC meeting.”

IIT ROPAR

124. IIT Ropar commenced its activities, under the mentorship of IIT Delhi, from the
premises of former Government Women Polytechnic, Rupnagar. Later, the Government
of Punjab allotted (2009) 501 acres of land for development of the permanent campus.
The IIT started shifting it’s activities to the permanent campus from July 2018. Complete
shifting to the permanent campus was not achieved as of March 2019.

(i) Availability of land

125. 501 acres of land was allotted to IIT out of which 20 acres of land was under
dispute/litigation. In August 2019, the campus got flooded. A portion of the boundary
wall and some equipment/furniture were damaged and IIT Ropar suffered a loss of
%3.46 crore due to the damage caused by the floods. Further, expenditure would have
to be borne by IIT Ropar for replacement of the damaged items.

126. The Committee desired to know the present status of the availability of land of 20
acres which was under dispute/litigation. In response, the Ministry stated as under:

“IIT Ropar has taken up the land related issues with the State Government to get
it resolved.”

127. The Committee also desired to know that any efforts have been taken by the
Ministry/IT to prevent further damage to the IIT campus in case of recurrence of floods.

“Regarding flood related issues, the Institute has brought the matter to the notice
of Govt. of Punjab, Deputy Commissioner, Ropar and the Chief Secretary Govt.
of Punjab. The damaged boundary wall has been designed with suitable
openings to allow flow of runoff, Institute has requested for river draining works
on rivulet Budhki that passes through the campus. Proposal forthe same has
been sent by Water Resources Department to their higher authority for approval.”

(ii) Execution of works

128. .Out.of.the 12 works examined, 11 works pertained to Phase-| construction. All
the 11 works were entrusted to CPWD. Nine out of these 11 works, consisting of

31


administrative, academic, residential and hostel blocks etc., scheduled to be completed
between April 2017 to April 2019 were completed with a delay ranging between 4
months and 39 months.

129. The Committee desired to know as to whether Ministry has issued any guidelines
to IITs for timely formulation of project designs which require subsequent
changes/revisions in scope etc. In response, the Ministry in their written submitted as
under:

“Initially after the Cabinet Approval for setting up. of the IITs, a common DPR was
prepared for adoption by all the IITs. However, later on while considering the
revised cost estimates, as per the requirement, site specific changes /
modifications were permitted to adapt to the requirements.”

130. The Committee also desired to know the impact of such revisions caused
halting/slowing the pace of the progress of the campus development along with the
action taken by the Ministry to overcome such situations. In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

“It is accepted that there has been delay in execution/completion of the project.
Ministry has been impressing upon all IITs to strictly follow the Contracts, monitor
the progress of projects and implement the penalty clauses, wherever necessary.

(iii) | Tendering and Awarding of works

131. For Phase-IA, the contract for architectural consultancy was awarded to M/s
Sikka Associates (SA) and an agreement was entered into with this firm. Accordingly, it
was Report No. 20 of 2021 24 Performance Audit on Setting up of new Indian Institutes
of Technology agreed to pay 1.80 per cent of the project cost of the buildings and
services, as per the tendered cost or actual cost, whichever would be less, for the works
designed by the consultant. IIT also awarded (November 2015) the consultancy contract
to SA for Phase-IB on same terms and conditions, on a nomination basis, without
calling for fresh tenders. This was in violation of the selection process as envisaged in
Rules 163 to 176 of GFR 2005.

132. The Committee desired to know as to whether any guidelines / guidance have
been formulated by MoE for selection of consultants to avoid stated violation of GFR. In
response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“In this regard, it is reiterated that both the works were sub divisions of the one
original project. The. work was distributed in three phases only to facilitate the

execution of work properly because a lot of changes had to be made in the

~ ‘designs of the project at every stage

32


(f) Procurement of Equipment

133. Audit observed that each IIT has its own procurement policy/manual detailing
therein the purchase procedures, guidelines and proper delegation of powers. An
examination of the process of procurement of equipment and services by IITs over the
period 2014-19 was conducted for selected sampled cases.

134. The impact of delays in procurement, installation and idling of equipment on the
intended objectives (administrative, academic and/or research projects) was studied
and analysed. Similarly, the process exercised by these IITs in procuring services and
adherence to the terms and conditions as stipulated in the agreements were also
examined.

(i) Supply of Equipment

135. Time schedules are important part of any contract and the suppliers must deliver
the goods within the scheduled date mentioned in the Purchase Order (PO). During
analysis of the data and connected records pertaining to procurement of equipment
(selected sample), Audit observed that in 106 out of the 340 sampled cases, there were
delays in supply of equipment (including high value equipment) ranging between 31-536
days. These substantial delays in supply of the equipment delayed subsequent stages
of installation and utilization. As a result, the faculty and students could not get the
facility of these resources which defeated the intended purpose of their procurement.

136. The Committee sought to know as to whether there was a review by IITs for
delays in supply of the equipment. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“All the procurements are being made as per GFR 2017, S&P norms of IITs and
Gol stipulated procedures.In most cases, and therewere undue delays. Cases
where delay was unjustified, penalties were imposed.”

137. The Committee also sought to know that any measures been taken by IITs to
avoid recurrence of such delays in future. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

a) “IIT Bhubaneswar: Procurement procedure developed by IIT Bhubaneshwar
makes it mandatory for procurement of equipment after due assessment of
requirement and their timely installation within 30 days of delivery. This is being
ensured.

b) IIT Hyderabad: Yes. IITH has reviewed the delays in supply of the equipment
and accordingly instructions were issued to all concerned Intenders to go in for
procurement of equipment only when the requisite infrastructure is ready for
installation of the equipment.

c) IIT Indore: The detailed review of delay in delivery has been done and delay of

~ delivery is in few cases. The delay-in delivery is-mainly of two types

1. Beyond control of supplier such as transport strike, COVID, flood etc.
- 33


2. Delay attributable to the supplier. In such cases the liquidated damage is imposed
as per purchase order terms and conditions.”

“As a practice, IIT Indore has initiated below mentioned process to streamline the
delivery process as per order.

¢ Inclusion of delivery schedule, timeline and scope of supply in NIT.

e Detailed briefing to all prospective supplier in pre-bid meeting and detailed pre-bid
report is uploaded on website, GeM/CPPP.

¢ Delivery date in clearly mentioned in purchase order along with installation
timeline.

¢ In case of approval of drawing/layout the same is done before placement of order.

¢ Follow-up by user department and MMS towards timely delivery of the equipment.

e In case of any delay by the supplier, liquidated damages is imposed as per
purchase order.”

138. The Committee further desired to know whether the status of the installation of
equipment in the laboratories of aforesaid IIT was reviewed by the Ministry along with
the specific reasons for delay in commissioning of equipments in their laboratories. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“Once the Government approves cost for setting up of the IIT, it is communicated
to the respective IITs and is reviewed at the level of Ministry only when the
concerned IIT brings the matter to the notice of Ministry.”

139. The Committee sought to know that Ministry would like to revisit the procurement
policies particularly with regard to the procurement of equipment of high value when the
site readiness was delayed/non-availability of space. In response, the Ministry stated
as under:

“Ministry is not having any direct role over the procurement of the equipment.
However, some of the IITs have informed that they go in for procurement of
equipment only when the requisite infrastructure is ready for installation of the
equipment.”

140. The Committee also sought to know as to whether the IITs have evolved any
policy to provide proper investigation/assessment of the equipment/availability of
accessories for timely installation of equipment. In response, the Ministry submitted as
under:

“IITs go in for procurement of equipment only when the requisite infrastructure is
ready for installation of the equipment.”

(ii) “~ Shortfall in Laboratory facilities

34


141. Laboratories are a crucial part of an engineering institute as they provide means
for testing theories and gain hands-on knowledge of various concepts. Ministry in its
DPR envisaged that the IITs would need laboratory equipment as well as computer
equipment and that the list of such equipment will be based on the academic curriculum
of the IIT as well as research programme to be developed by the faculty of the IIT. It
was expected that all laboratories and buildings would be fully developed over a period
of eight years.

142. Audit observed shortfalls in the availability of laboratory facilities in respect of four
IITs. Thus, laboratory infrastructure created in the IITs was not sufficiently equipped to
cater to the needs of the students even after lapse of 10 years from their setting up.

143. The Committee desired to know the present status of the laboratories regard to
availability of equipment. In response, the Ministry replied as under:

“All the IITs are having enough number of lab equipment, components and
accessories to meet the requirement. At present, full-fledged laboratory facilities
are available and are working satisfactorily.”

144. The Committee also desired to know as to whether any review of laboratories
facilities was made to ensure that full-fledged laboratories were available in the IITs. In
response, the Ministry replied as under:

“The laboratories facilities have been reviewed from time to time to ensure full-
fledged functioning and availability. Thus, at present there is no shortfall of
equipment.”

145. The Committee further desired to know that the Ministry has initiated any action
to review the infrastructure facilities created for the laboratories in all the IITs and timely
availability of adequate equipment therein. In response, the Ministry submitted as
under:

“IITs are autonomous bodies and the Ministry is not involved in the day to day
matters / academic matters / administrative matters. As and when any
requirement for procurement of equipment which are not readily available in the
Indian market / GEM, based on the information furnished by the Institutes in the
prescribed format, administrative approval of the Ministry is given for floating
Global Tender Enquiry (GTE).”

c. Financial Management

146. IITs are autonomous institutions under MoE which receive Grants (both Capital
and Recurring), Loans (both from internal and external agencies) from Gol. They also
generate’ internal’ revenues ‘through fee, publications, interests, consultancy works

among other things.
35


147. Audit examined the financial management across these eight IITs under four
broad areas viz., fund availability, its application, resource mobilization and investment
of funds.

(a) Revision in the Capital Outlay

148. Audit observed that MoE approved (July 2008) project cost of = 6,080 crore
(%760 crore per IIT) for establishment of eight new IITs over a period of six years (2008-
14). This was further revised twice. The revision was necessitated by time and cost
overrun due to delays in handing over of sites by State Governments which further
resulted in cost escalation, delay due to procedures involved in getting statutory
approvals, cost enhancement in various other factors like rise in equipment costs,
salaries, taxes etc. and site-specific infrastructure provisions like underpass, foot over
bridge etc. Thus, the non-completion of infrastructure development within project period
resulted in spill-over of the infrastructure development beyond six years, necessitating
the revision of the capital outlay from हैं 6,080 crore to हैं 14,332 crore for a period of 13
years.

149. The Committee desired to know the present status of overall infrastructure
development in the IITs. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as
under:

“Out of the 8 IITs, IIT Jodhpur completed its campus establishment project by
- 31.07.2021. The progress of remaining IITs as on 31.10.2022 is as under:-

; Name of the| Number of | Number of | Number of | % Estimated
N | ॥5 Buildings Buildings building Comple- | date of
0. proposed to | completed incomplete | tion Completion
be
constructed
as per DPR
1 | IIT Gandhinagar ; 66 62 4 94% 31.12.2022
2 | IT 58 47 11 87.00% 31.03.2023
Bhubaneswar
3 | IIT Hyderabad 41 41 [ = | 100%
4 | MIT Jodhpur 59 | 58 | [| - | 100% [| = |
[ 5 | IIT Ropar हा 56 1 | 90.5 | 31.03.2023
[ 6 | liT Patna 61 [| 52 | | 9 | 96.50% 28.02.2023
7 | UT Indore 36 | 36 | | = | 98%# 31/12/2022
[8 | {NT Mandi 107 107 | “४ | 100% [ = |

# mandated 2, 21,000 SQM area is constructed and occupied by the Institute. Minor
commissioning and rectification work is in progress which will be completed by 31.12.2022”

36


150. The Committee also desired to know the action taken by the MoE for ensuring
timely completion of projects. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted
as under:

“Ministry from time to time reviews the projects with the IITs to keep track of the
progress being made and resolve issues hindering the projects. The slow
progress of the work is taken up with the concerned PMC / CPWD at appropriate
level and punitive measures are also taken, wherever necessary.”

(b) —_ Utilisation of funds

151. Ministry allocates and releases head-wise funds to IITs based on Budget
Estimates submitted by IITs. Audit observed that the initial grants were to be utilised by
2014, but that could not be achieved by IITs due to delay in execution. Despite delayed
execution, almost all the funds received by the IITs for infrastructure development had
been utilised by 2019-20. At the end of 2020, the amount unutilised was 224.26 crore.
Audit also observed that expenditure incurred was within the available funds in respect
of all the eight IITs except IIT Ropar where it was marginally in excess by 4 per cent
(58.56 crore excess) to the end of 2019-20.

(i) Utilization of Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Loan

152. Gol entered (2014) into an MoU with Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA) in respect of IITH for infrastructure development (Phase-ll) for the period 2013-
14 to 2016-17. The total cost approved for the project was % 1,776.50 crore. The scope
of the work included construction works, procurement of goods and services and
consulting services over a period of four years for Phase-ll in IITH. The project period
was extended by the Ministry (June 2017) upto 2022-23 without cost overrun.

153. Audit observed that before the time extension was granted to the project in 2019,
against the available funds of ¥ 107.64 crore (upto 2013-17 which was initial project
period), IITH had spent only हैं 8.64 crore (8.03 per cent) on the project. Subsequently,
from 2017-18 the utilization of funds picked up and unspent JICA funds was हैं 38.11
crore at the end of March 2020.

154. The Committee sought to know as to why MoE has released the funds to IIT
Hyderabad without utilizing the funds released previously. In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

“The procurement process for the equipment was initiated; however, the
requirement of International Competitive bidding for JICA and their elaborate
procedures and checks involving multiple stake holders such as CAAA, Bank of
Japan, Tokyo, Bank of India Tokyo and JICA Tokyo resulted in delay in the
utilization of funds. The Ministry of Education has been-releasing funds, based

37


on the demands raised by the IIT Hyderabad and after obtaining requisite
approvals.”

155. The Committee also sought to know that any responsibility was fixed on the part
of IIT Hyderabad for the delay in pre-construction activity/execution of project. In
response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“There was no willful deficiency on part of MOE or IIT Hyderabad since
appointment of the contractors and consultants requires approval of JICA in
every stage such as approval of prequalification documents, evaluation of tender
documents and its scrutiny etc. This process could only be accomplished by
March 2019 for construction of buildings.

Documents and other relevant information pertaining to the delay in
implementation have been evaluated and the delay has been found to be due to
the Institutional practices of JICA, which were not suited for the construction of
buildings with detailed architectural work. The framework for loan agreements
with JICA was suited for large infrastructure projects, which are decided after a
techno-economic analysis. The framework for the loan agreement did not have
provisions for the construction of buildings and procuring high-end equipment.
Therefore, considerable time was spent in determining the process of
implementation after the loan agreements were to be signed. The tendering
process was started in 2018 after the approval of the revised EFC in 2018 and
the construction was started in 2019. There was no lack of commitment from the
Ministry or IITH.”

(c) Generation of Internal Receipts

156. Rule 230 (6) of GFR 2017 stipulates that the grant sanctioning authorities should
take into account the internally generated resources while awarding the grants. They
should also consider laying down targets for internal resources generation by the
grantee Institutions or Organisations every financial year, particularly where grants are
given on recurring basis every year.

157. Audit observed that the proportion of the internal receipts against the recurring
expenditure was very low in IITs. ranging between 12 per cent (in IITBBS) and 61 per
cent (in IITJ) even after having been established over a decade. Low proportion of
internal receipts forces the IITs to be heavily dependent on grants for meeting recurring
expenditure. Audit also observed that no targets were set for the generation of internal
receipts by the MoE for any of the eight IITs.

. .158.... The Committee. desired.to. know.the reasons for not fixing any.targets for the IITs...

for generation of internal receipts. In response, the Ministry stated as under:

38


“ITs are continuously working upon increasing their Internal Revenue
Generation. Ministry has also issued draft guidelines to IITs regarding
Endowment funds.”

159. The Committee also desired to know as to whether IITs have identified any other
sources for increase in generation of internal revenues. ॥ reply, the Ministry stated as
under:

“Efforts are being made to raise IRG by

. Introduction of new Self sponsored Certificate Courses / short-term
courses.

. Raising endowment funds from Alumni and Philanthropists, Industry etc.

. Increasing the number of Sponsored Research Projects and Consultancy

Projects etc.”

D. Academic Programmes and Research Activities

160. The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the Ministry for setting up of new IITs noted
that only 5,000 seats were available in the existing IITs as against three lakh aspirants
appearing in the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) during 2006. It was felt that an equal
number of talented and deserving students got left out due to lack of opportunity and the
situation could be corrected to some extent by establishing additional IITs.

161. Further, regarding research activities, the DPR stated that the spirit of education
in the IITs is ‘research-based learning’ by exposing students to laboratory work in
intensive manner. It was also stated that the new IITs are intended to have strong
sponsored research activity and develop a research and technology development
atmosphere with sizable infrastructure.

162. The Committee sought to know the reasons for the delay in introduction of the 10
courses in IIT Bhubaneswar. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted
as under:

“The required infrastructure could not be completed on time. Faculty strength
could not be increased as per the requirement of prospective plan. Shortage of
technical staff was also one of the reasons.”

163. The Committee also sought to know the progress if any has been made by the
IIT Bhubaneswar and Jodhpur in introducing the academic courses. In response, the
Ministry submitted as under:

“IIT Bhubaneshwar offers 34 courses as of now.IIT Jodhpur offers 78
programmes as of now.

39


164. The Committee further sought to know as to why the post-doctoral fellowship
program in IIT Jodhpur which was supposed to commence from the academic session
2011-12 was not started as of March 2019. In response, the Ministry submitted as
under:

“The strength of the experienced faculty members was less in the initial years
and infrastructure was inadequate for offering post-doctoral fellowships.”

(a) Creation of Student Intake

165. MoE’s DPR on setting up of new IITs during Eleventh five-year plan period
stipulated the year-wise intake of students during the first six years.

166. Audit observed that none of the eight IITs attained the stipulated cumulative
intake of 2,360 students at the end of the sixth year (2013-14). The percentage of non-
achievement of targeted intake was highest in IIT Ropar (77 per cent) and lowest in IITH
(42 per cent). As against the overall targeted intake of 18,880 students, only 6,224
students (33 per cent) were admitted in all the eight IITs during the first six years,
thereby not fully achieving its objectives of maximizing educational opportunity to
students. Further, it was observed that till 2018-19, only IITH was able to achieve the
targeted student intake.

167. The Committee desired to know as to what initiative have been taken up by the
MoE for addressing the issue in order to achieve the envisaged student intake and the
current status of student intake in all the eight IIT, course wise, PG wise, Doctoral and
postdoctoral fellowship program wise. In response, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“While conveying the approval of the Government for setting up of a new IIT, the
targets fixed for the intake of students are also conveyed to each IIT which has to
be met progressively over a period of time, in proportion with the infrastructure
facilities which could be developed by these IITs. However, as there has been
some delay in construction of buildings and other infrastructure like lab etc., the
intake of students has been lesser. However, these IITs are having the following
student strength.

iT ओर Total
IIT BBS 1858 499 346 2701
{IT Gandhinagar 876 377 539 1792
॥1 Hyderabad 1520 1184 1055 3759
IT Indore 1259 423 560 2242
IIT Jodhpur 1507 1182/40 | 3329
॥1 Mandi... -1060 . 536 [..... 419 won O14
IIT Patna 1238 305 663 2206

40


IT Ropar 1336 404 731 2471
Total 10654 4909| 4953] «20514 |

(b) Enrollment in PG Programmes

168. IITs offer Postgraduate programmes (M.Tech., M.Sc., M.A. and MBA apart from
M.Phil) in various branches ‘of Engineering and Technology and other branches. There
are two modes of intake for PG i.e.,

a. MoE funded PG courses (entrance through GATE for M.Tech and through
JAM for M.Sc.)

b. Project funded/industry sponsored/externally agencies funded/self-
sponsored.

169. Audit noticed from the information provided by IITs on intake, enrolment and
vacant seats in PG programmes, that there was shortfall in enrolment into PG
programmes against the available intake in all of the eight IITs during 2014-19 which
ranged from 12 per cent (IITH) to 48 per cent (IITGN). The overall average shortfall was
28 per cent across eight IITs (2,193 students against 7,713 seats).

170. The Committee sought to know as to whether the IITs have conducted any
feasibility study prior to introduction of these PG courses. In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

“The respective Senate of the IITs keep on restructuring courses, as per the
requirement of Industries, to provide skilled manpower for the growth of the
nation.”

171. The Committee also sought to know that MoE has devised any policy guidance
to IITs for reviewing these courses with respect to introduction, withdrawal of some
areas to be covered in order to align these PG courses with the actual requirements of
industry scientific advancements. |In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Senates of the IITs are empowered to take decisions regarding academic

matters. Ministry offers its comments/views when such matters are placed before
FC and BOG.”

(c) Enrollment in PhD Programme

172. ITs offer various Ph.D programmes in Engineering and Science disciplines and
interdisciplinary areas. The information of |IT-wise intake, enrolment and vacancies
during the period 2014-19 was examined. Audit noticed that out of the eight IITs
reviewed, five IITs (IITI, IITJ, IIT Mandi, IIT Patna and IIT Ropar) offered their Ph.D

41


programmes without fixing the intake in these courses. The remaining three IITs
(1885, IITGN and IITH) fixed the year-wise intake themselves at the beginning of
each academic year. The percentage of shortfalls were significant in the case of IITBBS
and IITGN indicating, among other things, a lack of interest by the students in the Ph.D
programmes offered by these IITs. Audit observed that IITs might like to reassess the
utility of these courses and take the initiative to restructure these courses to make them
more attractive to students. Further, the failure to fix intake targets by IITI, IITJ, IIT
Mandi, IITP and IIT Ropar deprived these IITs of a holistic approach in ascertaining the
present status and future requirements of resources for effective and efficient operation
of these Ph.D programmes. This would also affect the availability of skilled manpower
from these IITs in the long run.

173. The Committee desired to know about assessing the utility of these courses by
॥ and the steps. taken to restructure these courses to make the more attractive to
students. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“The respective Senate of the IITs keeps restructuring courses, as per the
requirement of Industries to provide skilled manpower for the growth of the
nation.”

174. The Committee also desired to know as to whether the IITs student intake has
not been fixed and any action has initiated to fix the intake targets in PhD programs. In
response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Some of the IITs have taken steps to fix the intake of PhD students. However,
depending upon the available faculty strength and other infrastructure, other IITs
are also admitting PhD students.”

(d) Faculty Positions

175. MoE sanctioned (August 2008/February 2009) 30 posts per year for initial three
years at the time of setting up of IITs. Further, the Ministry permitted the increase in
sanction of the faculty positions linked with the increase in the intake of students i.e.,
sanction of faculty posts is increased by one for every increase in intake of students by
10 (1:10 ratio). Subsequently, the Kakodkar Committee also recommended inter alia the
faculty student ratio (FSR) as 1:10. IIT Council, while accepting (November 2011) the
recommendations of Kakodkar Committee considered the increase in faculty strength
across all IITs in the country from around 4000 (2011) to 16000 by 2020, enabling
creation of a large pool of high-quality faculty and researchers.

176. Audit observed that the IITs have been recruiting faculty consistently. However,
the pace of recruitment of faculty did not correspond to the student intake/enrolment,
resulting in vacancies in-faculty positions. This shortage was observed even.to the end
of March 2019 in all IITs except in IIT Ropar. .

42


177.

The Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry considered the

availability of enough suitable faculty candidates before the setting up of new IITs. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

178.

“Initially these 8 IITs were proposed to start with student strength of 120, for
student strength of 120, faculty strength of 30 was proposed that may increase in
proportion to the student strength of these IITs. Directors of mentor IITs were
confident of recruiting faculty for new IITs as about 1000 students were going to
complete PhD in Older IITs, a sizeable portion of which can be attracted to work
as faculty in these New IITs. Efforts were also made to attract bright Indian
students studying abroad to work as a faculty in IITs.”

The Committee also desired to know as to how the ministry/IITs is going to

address the issue of huge vacancies in faculty positions in order to ensure the delivery
of quality education. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

179.

“IITs have been directed to fill up the vacant posts in mission mode.”

The Committee further desired to know the present position of filling the

vacancies in faculty positions. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

(e)

180.

“With a view to not affect the academic work of the IITs, services of adjunct and
visiting faculties are utilized as a stop gap arrangement. The status of vacancies
in these 8 IITs are as follows:

a No. a Sanctioned | Posts | Vacancy Positions (vacant

Strength filled |. posts have been calculated

including visiting and

adjunct faculties

1 IT Bhubaneswar | 240 128 112
2 IIT Gandhinagar 160 148 12
3 IIT Hyderabad 388 275 113
4 IIT Indore 250 179 71
5 UT Jodhpur 332 226 106
[| 6 | tT Mandi 201 145 56
7 IIT Patna 223 126 97
[| 8 | IIT Ropar 230 165 ॥िििएििशिमओ
Total [2024 | 1392 ॥: आिएिििम

IITs have been directed to fill the vacancies in their Institutes in mission mode
within a period of 1 year.”

Faculty workload and appraisal system

Kakodkar Committee suggested (April-2011) that as a part of appraisal system,

faculty could decide what percentage of his/her time and focus in the next year, would

43



be spent on each of the following five parameters namely (i) Teaching (and project
guidance), (ii) Research/MS/Ph.D guidance/Research-oriented projects, (iii) Technology
development & Industry interaction, (iv) Development of policy/standards and (v)
Service. Besides, the goals could also be specified qualitatively in each of these areas,
depending upon what the faculty wishes to do. Kakodkar Committee also gave a broad
outline for self-appraisal, departmental review and periodical external review of these
appraisals.Also viewed against the criteria given by the Kakodkar Committee, the IITs
have not fully implemented the Committee’s recommendation with regard to faculty
workload and appraisal system. MoE may consider developing broad outlines for self-
appraisal and departmental review which may then be taken up by all IITs for optimal
performance.

181. The Committee sought to know that the Ministry has considered developing
broad outline for self-appraisal and department review of faculties which may then be
taken by ail IIT for assessment of optimal work load for the faculty. In response, the
Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“No. As it is an internal administrative matter of IITs, and IITs enjoy full autonomy
in this regard, Ministry is not interfering.”

(f) Inadequate_representation of research result categories _in_ student

enrollment.

182. As per the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in admission) Act, 2006,
out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, 15 per cent,
seven and half per cent and 27 per cent seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes (SC), the Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Classes (OBC)
respectively.

183. Audit observed that the representation of the reserved category was not as
prescribed, particularly, in respect of PG and Ph.D admissions.

(i) The percentage of shortfall in enrolment of SC students in post-graduate
courses was significantly higher in IITGN (30 per cent), IITH (25 per cent)
and IIT Mandi (23 per cent). The shortfall in ST students was high in all
the eight IITs ranging between 7 per cent (IIT Ropar) and 69 per cent
(IITGN).

(ii) | The percentage of shortfall in enrolment of Ph.D courses was very high in

respect of ST category ranging from 73 per cent (IITH) to 100 per cent

(IITJ). In respect of SC students also, the shortfall was significantly higher

(more than 50 per cent) in all IITs except IITH and IITBBS where it was 25

per cent and 28 per cent respectively. Under the OBC category, the

~--shortfall was -high inITGN (37 -per-cent);IIT Ropar (36 percent) and IIT
Mandi (32 per cent).

44


184. The-Committee sought to know as to what steps have been taken by the ministry
is to ensure this efficient representation of reserved categories in student enrollment
especially in PG and PhD programs.

“The admissions in IIT programs are provided following the reservation norms of
Government of India. It has been observed that in PG program that they received
very few applications from SC and ST category students and hence those seats
cannot be filled. With regard to shortfall of students in reserved category in IITs, it
is submitted that this shortfall is only in respect of SC and ST category in PG and
PhD programs due to inadequate/ poor response by the students belonging to
these categories.”

“To encourage students of reserved category to take admission in IITs, several
steps have been taken such as:

e FEE waiver

° Relaxation in minimum qualifying cut off marks

e Allowances

e Besides SC/ST students are also eligible for scholarship from the Central
Sector Scheme administered by Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and Ministry of Tribal Affairs.”

(g) Peer Group Assisted Learning (PAL)

185. IIT council approved (October 2015) Peer-Group Assisted Learning (PAL)
strategy wherein educationally and socially backward students were to be tagged to
bright student volunteers from senior classes. It was intended to be a fully funded
initiative of MoE and was to be operationalised by the IITs to enable fresh students to
cope with the academic pressures of IITs.

186. Audit observed that the initiative was not operationalised in IITBBS, IITJ, IITP
and IIT Mandi thereby, denying the intended benefits of the PAL strategy as envisaged
by IIT Council.

187. The Committee sought to know as to why the ministry not issue specific

instructions guidelines in this regard. In response, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“Ministry has not issued any specific instructions in this regard. However, IT
have made arrangements for mentoring the newly admitted IIT students by the
faculty and senior students.”

(h) Sponsored Research Projects

45


188. The DPR envisaged that the new IITs would have a strong sponsored research
activity. IITs receive funds from both government and non-government/industry sources
for Sponsored Research Projects and faculty members of the IITs are actively engaged
in these. Research projects are sponsored by different funding agencies like
Department of Science and Technology (DST), CSIR, DRDO etc. During 2014-19, the
eight IITs had executed 1,712 Research projects with an outlay of 857.71 crore. Some
of the areas of research included 5G Research and Building Next Gen Solutions, Mobile
sensor network technologies, metal additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence, bio-
inspired engineering, catalysts, energy and health care.

189. Audit observed that all the eight IITs attracted sizeable funding from Government
sources like DST etc. However, the number and cost of non-government sponsored
projects in all IITs was low. It was noticed that IIT Mandi, IITP, IIT Ropar and IITH were
able to attract between 3.5 to 14.31 per cent of total non-government funding among the
eight IITs while the others attracted very low levels of funding.

190. The Committee desired to know as to whether the IIT is prepared any action plan
to attractive funding from my industry non-government sources. In response, the
Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“IITs invite experts and management personnel from the Industry time to time to
show case research facilities and strike consultation project deals.A lot of
faculties are engaged with industry for consultancy and testing based projects.
Development offices of IITs are engaged with industry to attract the CSR funding
from the industries for research directly applicable to social needs. IITs are also
making its R&D infrastructure accessible to Industries and Non-Government
sources on a payment basis to attract the funding.”

(i) Patents filed and obtained

191. As per the Patents Act, 1970, patent is granted for an "invention" which means a
new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application.
As per Para 7.1 of Kakodkar Committee Report, one of the key roles of IITs should be
of driving innovation and entrepreneurship, which result in patents and publications —
the traditional measures of performance of faculty and research institutions.

192. Audit observed that IITH filed 94 patents, followed by IITI, IIT Mandi, ITP and IIT
Ropar. However, there was a large variance between the patents filed and obtained by
the eight IITs which needs to be reviewed at highest level. In five IITs viz. IITBBS,
IITGN, IITI, IIT Mandi and IITP, no patents were obtained during the five-year period
indicating that the research activities could not bring out fruitful results.

193. The Committee sought to know as to whether IITs have developed any action
~ plan for improving théir performance in “obtaining patents: In response, the Ministry in
their written replies submitted as under:

46


“Most of the IITs have their own IPR policy or are in the process of formulating
one in order to expedite the process of patent filing.”

194. Regarding the number of Publications brought about since 2020 by IITs, the
Ministry of Education during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished the following.

Number of Publications (Web of Science)

202

1732 2080 2501 44.40%
994 1276 1593 60.26%
921 1069 1282 39.20%
962 1080 1327 37.94%
1630 : 2027 2329 42.88%
1135 1366 1548 36.39%
809 1013 1208 49.32%
376 472 639 69.95%

Number of Publications (Scopus)

48.31%

1437 1761 59.95%
1167 1408 41.37%
416204434 98 gH

47


॥1 Bhubaneswar co 1208 1392 1562 29.30%
861 1102 1366 58.65%
451 574 799 77.16%

195. Regarding the number of Patents granted and published during the period 2016-
21) by IITs, the Ministry of Education during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished
the following.

Patents Granted / Published

| Published
(2016-21)

58

24

13

30
29
12
23
23

0) PhD students graduating per faculty

48


196. In order to produce more number of Ph.D students graduating from the IITs every
year, Kakodkar Committee recommended that the IITs quickly get 0.6 Ph.D student to
graduate for each faculty member every year and then strive to get to one Ph.D student
to graduate per faculty each year in the years to come.

197. Audit, observed that most of the IITs have not achieved the desired average of
0.6 Ph.D graduates per faculty despite being established over a decade. Only IIT] was
able to achieve the prescribed 0.6 Ph.D graduations per faculty during Academic year
2018-19. IIT Ropar (0.15) and IITJ (0.04) remained far behind the desired ratio.

198. The Committee sought to know that any corrective measures have been initiated
by the IITs to achieve the desired average if so whether any specific timelines was set
to achieve the targets. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as
under:

“Ministry in consultation with the Ministry of Finance has approved the ideal
student faculty ration of 10:1. However, no specific student faculty ratio has been
defined for course / stream wise in the IITs.”

199, Regarding the number of PhDs awarded during the period 2016-2021 by IITs, the
Ministry of Education during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished the following.

24 27 63 86 258.33%
24 13 38 49 38 58.33%

13 23 26 54 85. 553.85%
24 28 30 49 52 116.67%
32 51 80 77 71. -121.88%
14 10 32 35 35 150.00%

18-202 283278

49


IT Jodhpur 75 16 26 29... 25. 400.00%

200. Regarding the Students and Faculty Strength in IITs, the Ministry of Education
during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished the following.

Students and Faculty Strength

(k) Non establishment and_functioning of research and __ technology “establishment _and functioning of research and__ technolo:
development council

201. MoE’s DPR envisaged establishment of a Research and Technology
Development Council in the governing structure of each IIT, to provide policy guidance
for research and development activities. Audit observed that no such Council was
established by the IITBBS, IITH, lITI and IITP during the period 2014-19. As a result, the
policy guidance from a specialised body for research and development activities was
lacking.

202. The Committee desired to know that the setting up of research councils by the IIT
was monitored by the ministry and the present status of research and technology
“development ‘councils in the IITs. In response, the Ministry in their written replies ~

submitted as under:
50


“IITs have established advisory committees at their Institute level to oversee
research activities; and IITs have established Research Advisory committee
(RAC) or Research & Development Committee for advising on R&D matters
including IPR and Technology transfer etc.”

(I) Adherence to timelines in progress of research projects

203. Audit test-checked 208 sampled cases of research projects in eight IITs for
assessing the cost and time over runs. Out of 189 projects for which information was
provided to Audit, 96 projects were scheduled to be completed by March 2019. Out of
these, Audit observed delays in 17 research projects (18 per cent ) in six IITs (IITBBS,
IITH, IITJ, IIT Mandi, IITP and IIT Ropar) with delay ranging from 22 days to 644 days
as of March 2019.

204. The Committee sought to know that any effective monitoring mechanism was put
in place by it to ensure the completion of research projects in timely manner and if so
please state. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“The research projects are directly being monitored by the concerned IITs and
the Ministry does not interfere in the routine work of the IIT.”

205. Detailing the research outputs carried out during COVID-19 period by IITs, the
Ministry of Education during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished the following:

“Major Research Outputs during COVID-19 period

1. IIT Gandhinagar

+ Developed an interactive COVID-19 Dashboard called “MIR AHD Covid19
Dashboard” to provide real-time information at various levels.

: Artificial Intelligence-based deep learning tool for detection of COVID-19 from
Chest X-ray images.

+ DNA programmed microfluidic devices as cost effective, high throughput point
of care diagnostic platforms for Covid 19 detection.

2. IIT Bhubaneshwar

+ Development of a Patient Responsive Active Assist coNtrol (PRAAN)
Ventilator. oe co हु ४ 7

$1


Development of a UVC Disinfection Cabinet.

Development of effective disinfectants and washing materials. Hand Sanitizer
prepared by researchers as per WHO parameters.

. IIT Hyderabad
Supermodel for the prediction of Covid-19 progress in India.

Aerobiosys, a startup of CfHE at IITH, developed a low-cost portable ventilator,
Jeevan Lite.

Dept. of Design developed a UV air sterilizer “Swatchh Air” supported by IITH via
a BUILD (Bold Unique Ideas Leading to Development) project.

Developed and deployed an App for tracking the distribution of rice and money to
more than 3,00,000 migrant workers.

- वी Jodhpur

Low-Cost Reusable Marble Dust Appended Composite Ceramic Porous Mask for
Air Purification and Water Issues During & After COVID-19 Pandemic.

SMART HEALTH solutions for Rapid Mass Diagnosis for COVID - 19 which
includes Al driven diagnostics using X-ray and CT images of lungs.

. वी Patna

BigOHealth App, incubated at IIT Patna, started a social initiative where any
covid symptomatic patient can consult the doctor 24/7 through their platform.

Telemedicine Platform, Bikedoc, an Online consultation company incubated at
IIT Patna, built a telemedicine platform in two versions- one Kiosk model and one
Bike model- which can be used for monitoring of patients and remote
consultation.

Sanitization Devices: The Kingshahi Pvt. Ltd, incubated at IIT Patna, found a
WHO guideline complied, lower cost, highly effective full body sanitization
solution for limiting contamination in sterile areas.

. HT Indore

Development of UV disinfection Box and Arms: Development of sterilization
chamber using 254 nm ultra-violet. (UV) rays to sterilize personal objects i.e.
mobile phone; wallet, etc. of duty-bound police; doctors etc.

52


Development of Virucidal Cationic Polymeric Nanoparticles for Face Masks
and PPEs.

7. IT Ropar

Sampark-o-Meter: A mobile-based app which can indicate areas on maps with
maximum corona virus infection possibility.

Low-Cost Ventilator: IIT Ropar team comes up with low cost ambubag-based
ventilator for shorter duration like during ambulance transport.

Negative Pressure Room (NPR): NPR. has been designed to prevent
transmission of COVID-19 through air at isolation wards and testing labs, thus
protecting the medical staff from infection.

8. IIT Mandi

Reusable MoS2 - Modified Antibacterial Fabrics with Photothermal Disinfection
Properties for Repurposing of Personal Protective Masks.

Nanofiber membrane decorated face mask with an efficacy of 94-99% at a
pressure drop much lower than N95 has been developed.

Low cost auto tuned mechanical ventilator.

A low-cost ultraviolet light triggered viral disinfection panel, which has the
direct application on courier box, PPE gear, travel bags, currency, wallet etc.

206 Regarding the number of programmes offered and placements made in the new
IITs, the Ministry of Education during the evidence held on 11.10.2022 furnished the

following.

Programmes offered by. liTs ©

53


| IIT Gandhinagar

54

6 17 21
5 25 16
6 20 7
10 11 4
15 43 15
Placements
= ae : के 0:
85.96% 81.77% 88.49%
80.85% 86.63% 94.52%
91.00% 83.00% 97.70%
88.00% 93.00% 95.00%
71.32% 73.28% 91.85%
80.85% 86.63% 94.52%
80.00% 69.55% 86.52%
pa 94.40% 90.47% -—-—-- 950%



207. During the evidence held on 11.10.2022, the Ministry of Education also furnished
the details of NIRF Rankings and QRS Rankings of 2G IITs as under:

NIRF Rankings of 2G IITs

26

8 8 9
53 ; 43 30
24 22 23
22 28 36
10 13 16
31 41 20
QS Rankings

601-650 591-600 581-590

55


iT-Gandhinagar : Le oo oo S
iIT-Bhub neswar | - 701-750 801-1000

. - 396

208. When queried what QS ranking is, the Secretary, Ministry of Education during the
deposition before the Committee stated as under

“Internationally, it is a very well recognized ranking system.

209. When asked whether the national rankings and the international rankings are
comparable, the representative of the Ministry stated as under

“Sir, actually the criteria for both the national rankings and the international
rankings are separate. So, it is not a comparable thing.”

210. On being further enquired about the specific reason thereof, the representative of
the Ministry explained as under:

“the critical difference is that 50 per cent weightage in international rankings is
based on perception, that is on academic perception and employer's perception.
Academic perception is for 40 per cent and for the employer's perception it is 10
per cent. This 50 per cent of perception points in Indian national rankings is only
10 per cent. So, that is the biggest diversion between the two.”

211. In this regard, the representative of the Ministry further added as under:

“As it also requires a kind of background and as it is optional for the IITs to
participate in these international rankings. Typically, it takes about 10 to 20 years
in terms of establishing the international image with the voting, because 40 per
cent is from the international participants who give their perception.

E. Functioning of Oversight Mechanism

212. Oversight mechanism is a system or process used by organisations to monitor
and ensure that their work is effective, of envisioned quality and that all applicable rules
and regulations are followed. A well-structured oversight mechanism with governing
bodies ‘at ‘appropriate levels institutionalises smooth functioning of the organisation and

56


ensures that the intended outcomes are achieved economically, efficiently and
effectively.

(a) Shortfall in meetings of Government Bodies

213. The Act and Statutes stipulate for a minimum number of meetings to be held
every year by each governing body. Conducting the meetings as prescribed facilitates
regular monitoring of the activities and taking timely remedial measures.

214. Audit noticed that there were shortfalls in number of meetings held by the BoG,
Senate, Finance Committee and BWC in all IITs during the five-year period 2014-19.

215. The Committee sought to know that the IITs are adhering to the minimum
number of meetings as prescribed by the act statutes and any specific instructions for
issued by Ministry to ensure the same along with the action taken by governing bodies
of each IITs with regard to delay in execution of infrastructure works in all 8 IITs lead to
cost escalation. In response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“Governing bodies of the Institute have been meeting normally with more
frequency than mandated in Act/Statutes and this has facilitated extra and
effective supervision the activities of the Institute. Action taken on the approved
projects by the BoG are also reviewed and discussed in detail through Building
and Works committee (BWC).Reviewing construction on fortnightly basis with
PMC were undertaken wherein PMC submits working programme, activity-wise,
indicating material and manpower required to complete the construction activities
within stipulated time.”

IIT BHUBANESHWAR

216. As per Statute 7(2) of IITBBS, the Finance Committee is responsible for
providing its views and making recommendations to the Board on any financial matter
relating to the IIT.IITBBS entered (October 2014) into a tripartite agreement for supply
of 5 MLD water to its campus. The agreement was executed by the Director without
approval of BoG/FC which was against the said stipulation of their Statutes. Further, the
requirement of water was not properly estimated as on November 2018 the actual
requirement was only for 0.5 MLD against the 5 MLD agreed. As per records furnished
to audit, the agreed volume of water (5 MLD) would be required in the year 2030 i.e.,
after complete development of the campus.The water supply project was functional
since June 2018 and the agency claimed water supply charges of 3.32 crore (March
2019) though no water was drawn by the IIT till date through this project.

217. Audit observed that improper/unplanned assessment of water requirement at
initial stage and signing of agreement, without prior approval of governing bodies and
incorporating bulk supply ~condition’ instead’ of~ actual- consumption-~resulted ‘in

57


involvement of financial liability of = 3.32 crore on the IIT without any commensurate
outcome.

218. The Committee desired to know that any responsibility has been fixed by IIT
Bhubaneswar for entering the agreement without the approval of statutory bodies. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“MoE called for an explanation from the charged officer and suitable reply was
given where he admitted his action. IIT Bhubaneshwar is examining the issue
further.”

219. The Committee also desired to know the present status of the payment of water
supply charges of rupees 3.32 crore and any specific assurance was received from the
state government public health engineering organization Bhubaneswar in this regard. In
response, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

“No amount of water charges as claimed by the agency (MEIL) has been paid so
far, as water has not been drawn by IIT Bhubaneshwar. The matter is now sub-
judice under Arbitration Tribunal.”

IIT HYDERABAD

220. As per the Statute 8(2) of IITH, the BWC is, inter alia, responsible, under the
direction of the Board, for construction of all major capital works after securing from the
Board the necessary administrative approval and expenditure sanction. BWC is also
responsible to give the necessary administrative approval and expenditure sanction for
minor works including maintenance and repairs.

221. Audit observed that as against two meetings in a year, BWC met only once
during 2014-15, 2016-17 and 2017-18 and no meetings were conducted in 2015-16 and
2018-19. It was also observed that the BWC in its ninth meeting (September 2014)
ratified, in one sitting, 175 construction works taken up between 2012-15 (175 works
costing € 9.33 crore).

222. The Committee sought to know as to whether BWC meetings are being held
regularly by IIT Hyderabad in order to avoid such a certification of works. In response,
the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:

"ITH is conducting two BWC meetings in a year in accordance with the
Statutes.”

58


IT INDORE

223. As per the delegation of powers of IITI, the Director was delegated financial
powers to award the works upto हैं 50 lakh and the works beyond ₹ 50 lakh should be
referred to BWC.

224. Audit observed that the Chief Engineer and Project-in-Charge of CPWD awarded

(December 2015) a work to a contractor for construction of RCC road amounting to
%92.97 lakh without calling for tender and without the prior approval of BWC.

225. The Committee desired to know as to whether any action to fix responsibility was
initiated by the IIT Indore authorities. In response, the Ministry in their written replies
submitted as under:

“The observation is noted as the work was entrusted due to pressing need of the
Institute in view of upcoming Convocation 2015 and access to the Workshop
building, for which road was necessary. However, it has been ensured that no
reoccurrence of similar decisions happened at the Institute level.”

226. Outlining a brief overview of the action being or proposed to be taken by the
Ministry, the Committee were informed as under:

>
>

All 8 IITs, as of now, have land in the range of 400-900 acres.

These IITs faced several technical, logistical and administrative issues
during the process of establishment causing delays.

For completion of work, all IITs are taking active steps such as discussion
with PMC and regular follow up.

Today, IIT Jodhpur is 100% complete and other IITs are also at advanced
stages of completion. .

All ITs have been asked to fill up vacancies in a mission mode.

On academic front, all these IITs feature in top 50 engineering colleges as
per NIRF rankings.

3 of them already figure in international ranking.

There have been substantial increase in the PhD degrees awarded over
the last 5 years.

There has been substantial increase in the research publications in
indexed journals.

Senates of IITs have been actively introducing new courses and
programmes from time to time.

59


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Introduction

Five IITs were established during the year 1950 to 1961. liT Guwahati was
established in 1994. IIT Roorkee became the seventh IIT in 2001. Eight new IITs
were announced by the then Prime Minister in his Independence Day speech on
15" August 2007. These eight IITs, known as 2GIITs, were set up at Ropar, Patna,
Hyderabad, Jodhpur, Gandhinagar, Bhubaneswar, Indore and Mandi. All the eight
new IITs commenced their academic activities initially from temporary campus
and subsequently initiated construction of permanent campuses in the land
allotted to them by the respective State Governments. IITs, Indore and Mandi
started their operations in 2009, while the other IITs started their operations from
2008. As of now, all the IITs are operating from their permanent campuses.

Detailed Project Report (DPR) of MoE (erstwhile MHRD) provided that the
new IITs would be residential institutes of an area about 500 to 600 acres each.
The campus of each of these IITs would house the academic area and residential
area for students, faculty and staff. The campus of the IITs would also contain
facilities like guest house, health care (at the level of primary health clinic), small
shopping centre along with banks, sports facilities, postal facilities, elementary
and secondary schools for the children of faculty, staff and married students. The
IITs were also to be fully equipped with laboratory equipment and computing
equipment for the students to facilitate the learning process in line with the
courses offered. Accordingly, the Government of India (Gol) requested (in 2006)
the respective State Governments to identify and allot 500-600 acres of land
(preferably land in possession of the Government) free of cost, to each of the
eight 15, with necessary social and physical infrastructure like electricity, water,
rail and road connectivity.

Creation of Infrastructure

41. The Committee note that in IIT Hyderabad, IIT Indore, IIT Jodhpur and IIT
Patna, sufficient land as envisaged (500-600 acres) by the Ministry of Education
(MoE) was available while in IIT Bhubaneswar, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT Mandi and IIT
Ropar, issues in allotment and transfer of land persisted even after a decade of
their establishment. The Committee, while wondering how MoE went for large
scale expansion of the IIT System without ensuring availability of requisite ©
suitable land from the State Governments, observed that for construction of
permanent campuses and providing planned facilities to the students, transfer of
suitable land by the States was the primary requirement. In this regard, the
Ministry submitted that when_an IIT is to be established in a State, MoE requests.
the State Governments to allocate 500-600 acres of land free of all encumbrances

which then identify two or three sites as per availability for placing before a Site
60


Selection Committee comprising of senior officials from the Ministry,
representative from the concerned IIT/ Mentor IIT and CPWD that visit and inspect
the sites and submits their recommendations for final selection. Ministry added
that taking into account the issues in allotment and transfer of land in some of
the IITs, in future, efforts would be made to impress upon the State Governments
for identification of suitable land for transfer for setting up of the IIT. In view of
unsuitable land offered by some of the State Governments subsequently for
creation of infrastructure of IITs, the Committee are constrained to observe that
proper due diligence was not conducted by the Site Selection Committee. The
Committee trust that while embarking upon expansion project for the third
generation IITs, the MoE would take appropriate measures to obviate recurrence
of lapses noticed during implementation of the second generation IITs.

2. The Committee note that though the infrastructure work like ‘construction
of academic buildings, hostels, laboratories etc., were undertaken in a phased
manner in ail IITs from 2012, the pace of their creation was not commensurate
with the pace of envisaged increase of student/faculty. The delays were
significantly high in respect of five IITs (IITH up to 56 months, IIT Mandi up to 41
months, IIT Ropar up to 39 months, IIT Gandhinagar and IITI up to 37 months).The
Committee also note that in case of IIT Gandhinagar and IIT Mandi, the land
availability is far less than the envisaged 500-600 in DPR. Further, in lITGN,
although 399 acres of land had been allotted to the Institute, 150 acres of land
was in unsuitable condition. Hence, 165 acres of land compensating the unusable
land was sought from the State Government. In this regard, the Ministry
submitted that IIT Gandhinagar is currently in possession of 399 acres of land,
which is sufficient to support a student intake of 10,000, as per the decision of the
Committee for determination of land requirement of Central higher education
institutions. The matter relating to requirement of additional land was taken up
with the State Government at the level of Secretary, D/o Higher Education on
28.10.2020. Further, IIT Mandi is already in possession of 501 acres of land. The
Central Government also vigorously follows up with the concerned State
Governments for remaining land. The Committee, taking note of the slow pace of
student intake since commencement of operations in IITs, recommend that while
undertaking initiatives for conversion of forests and riverine land for
residential/institutional purposes, Ministry should also review the requirement of
land for IITs. The Committee also recommend that alternate plan to create
infrastructure to meet the targeted intake of student strength in view of non-
availability of suitable land should also be explored. Observing that State
Governments offered disputed land as against the requirements of
encumbrances-free land for setting up IITs, the Committee further recommend
that Ministry/ITs should not accept unsuitable land in future.

3. The Committee note that each IIT developed their own Master Plan for ~~ ~

undertaking construction work in a phased manner for various academic and
61


non-academic purposes. Audit observed that while construction activities under
Phase-! were initiated in all the IITs during 2012, buildings under Phase-I were
complete only in two IITs (IITBBS and IITJ), out of eight IITs as of March 2019.
Further, Phase-ll work was initiated during the period 2014-19 in five IITs (IITBBS,
HTH, IITI, IITJ and IITP). Audit also noticed delays in execution of Phase-II building
work in two IITs, namely IITBBS and IITI. Phase-Il work was yet to be initiated in
rest of the three IiTs (IITGN, IIT Mandi and IIT Ropar) during above period. Some
of the facilities that were delayed in these IITs were academic buildings including
research facilities, hostels, health centres and sports facilities. As such,
envisaged campus development remained incomplete in IITs, despite a lapse of
seven years since initiation of construction activities. The Committee note that as
on 31.10.2022, IIT Jodhpur, IIT Hyderabad and IIT Mandi are 100% complete out of
the 8 IITs. Further, while construction work of IIT Gandhinagar and IIT Indore
(being 94% and 98% respectively) was estimated to be complete by 31.12.2022,
construction work of IIT Bhubaneswar (87.00%) and IIT Ropar (90.5%) and IIT
Patna (96.5%) are estimated to be completed by 31.03.2023. The Ministry stated
that most of the reasons attributed to delay are those for which clearances need
to be obtained at the Institute level. These clearances are required as per norms
of the State Government. The Committee desire that IITs need to do regular follow
up with the State Government to obviate any delay in future. Further the
liquidated damages should be imposed on delinquent contractors and
encashment and forfeiture of Performance guarantees should also be explored
along with blacklisting of the firm, too. Observing delays in creation of even
facilities like academic buildings including research facilities, hostels, health
centres and sports facilities in some IITs, the Committee further desire that IITs
should take up the infrastructure work for academic purposes on priority basis
and in tune with the envisaged increase in student strength and faculty. They
should also have provision of rain water harvesting and installation of Solar
Panels for fulfilling in-house water & electricity needs.

4, The Committee note that 35 attributed the delay in the construction of the
buildings to time taken for finalization of designs, obtaining regulatory
clearances, statutory approval, shortage of labour, remoteness of area, etc. The
Ministry explained that constraints in water and electricity supply coupled with
execution of work based on conceptual design finalized by the architectural
consultants further contributed to the delays as individual details were finalized
in the construction process. From this, the Committee note that the Ministry
failed to anticipate the above problems while creating infrastructure for premier
institutions. The Committee feel that in order to expedite the construction
~ process, it is incumbent upon the Ministry to address the issues in consultation
with the State Government concerned. While noting that the Board of Governors
62


of individual !ITs were reviewing the progress of work of construction, the
Committee feel that the Ministry should have also played a pro-active role in
settling the contentious issues so that IITs would have obtained all necessary
statutory clearances from concerned Ministries/ Departments like forest.
Railways and National Highway authorities etc. in time which would have made
available the sites for procurement and installation of scientific equipment as per
schedule. The Committee, therefore, desire that henceforth the work should be
initiated after finalizing individual details of the project and not on conceptual
planning and clearances must be obtained in time.

Faulty execution of fire safety works

5. The Committee note that National Building Code, 2005 (NBC) provides that
while taking up construction of building projects, the design should include
statutory fire-fighting strategies. For 885, a consultant (Consulting
Engineering Service (CES) India Pvt. Ltd.) was engaged (in May 2010) to provide
Project Development and Project Management Services for various buildings like
hostels, staff quarters, guest houses etc., under Phase-l.. Audit observed that
designs which were non- compliant with the fire safety norms of NBC 2005 were
adopted for construction and buildings were built, thereby exposing the
occupants to fire hazards. As a result, certain portions of six buildings, already
constructed, had to be dismantled (in June 2015) at a cost of €32 lakh. Later,
IITBBS estimated that an additional %2.18 crore would have to be incurred for
installing firefighting systems to meet the requirements of NBC 2005. The
Ministry submitted that out of an estimate of ¢ 2.18 cr, fire safety work valued at
99.25 lakh has been executed. The Committee note that notwithstanding that the
actual expenditure incurred was lesser for installing firefighting systems, the fact
remains that a serious lapse has occurred in observing fire safety norms. This
would have put the lives of the students and faculties etc. in jeopardy. The
Committee while noting that stringent action should be taken on the consultant,
CES India Pvt. Ltd. for dereliction of duty in not including statutory fire-fighting
provision in the design, recommend that the Ministry should also sensitise the
oversight committees to be more careful in future.

Tendering and awarding of works by IITGN

6. Audit scrutiny revealed that architectural consultancy services for five
works which included the construction of academic buildings, sports complex
etc., in Phase-| was awarded on nomination basis at a consultancy fee of 7.64
crore, without following the provisions of GFR for process of identification,
shortlisting, selection of consultants and outsourcing of services. Audit further
..pointed. out. that..the..Owner’s . Architect. and. later_a company owned. by. the
Owner’s Architect was appointed on a nomination basis too. Further, a civil

63


engineer from the company owned by the Owner’s Architect was also appointed
on a nomination basis too. The Ministry submitted that the consultant in question
i.e. M/s. Mitimitra was initially selected for comprehensive architectural services
for non-residential buildings comprising of Academic Buildings under Phase-1A
as per relevant provisions contained in GFR-2005 for procurement of Goods and
Services. Having considered the performance(s) of all three architectural
consultants engaged by IITGN namely (i) M/s. HCP Design, Planning &
Management Pvt. Ltd. for Student Hostels (ii) M/s. VastuShilpa Consultants for
Residential Buildings (iii) M/s. Mitimitra Consultants for Academic Buildings only
Ms. Mitimitra Consultants was found suitable for other works as scope of the
work in original RFP was already defined with a rider that further work under
Phase-1 (i.e., Phase-1B) shall be awarded based on performance under Phase-1A.
Accordingly, the work for Phase-IB was awarded to M/s. Mitimitra Consultants.
Further, regarding owner’s architect, the Ministry stated that the initial
appointment of this consultant was on the basis of formal search for a
professional consultant willing to initiate the process of selection of various
architectural consultants i.e. for Master Plan, detailed architectural planning of
buildings and infrastructural development including bulk services. The
Committee are not satisfied with the reasoning of the Ministry nor in agreement
with the policy of selecting the consultants through nomination compromising
quality and transparency. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to
strengthen their compliance mechanism and direct IITs to adhere to the
provisions of GFR in procurement of Goods and Services for each phase of work.

Inordinate delay in taking up Phase-Il work

7. The Committee note that Phase-ll work among others, included
construction of Laboratory complexes under Technology Incubation Park (TIP)
and Technology Research Park (TRP) which were estimated to cost 21,776.50
crore and out of this, Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) sanctioned
a loan of %1,501.72 crore to Gol during January 2014. The remaining 274.77 crore
was to be funded by Gol for which the release of fund started from 2013-14. The
project period was four years from 2013-14 to 2016-17. Audit observed that the
work pertaining to Phase-Il was, however, awarded during March 2019, i.e., after
five years from the date of loan agreement and was scheduled to be completed by
March 2022 (36 months from March 2019). In this regard, the Ministry attributed
delays in award of work to the appointment of the contractors and consultants
which required approval of JICA in every stage such as approval of
prequalification documents, evaluation, tender documents and its scrutiny etc.
According to the Ministry,;-this process could only be accomplished -by March
2019 for construction of buildings. The Ministry also submitted that in addition to

64


the requirements of JICA, a Project Advisory Committee has been set up at IITH
to monitor the progress of construction. Besides, monitoring by BWC and BoG is
also ensured. The Committee do not find the reply of the Ministry tenable as more
than five years of delay in awarding work has occurred for which the reasons
cannot be attributed to only the stringent terms and conditions of the loan
agreements signed with JICA. There has been inordinate delay on the part of
IT/Ministry, which is being covered in the name of JICA. The Committee note
that the Ministry has been evasive in furnishing the reasons on their part. As a
result thereof, the intended objective of advancement of academic and research
activities in the Campus could not be achieved in time. The Committee, therefore,
while emphasizing a need for enquiring into the causes of the delay, desire that
the Ministry must take policy initiatives for timely utilization of the loan fund
raised from international funding agency. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of financial implications of delay in release of funds in terms of interest
payments/ penalty or otherwise.

Indefinite time frame in contract

8. The Committee note that a contract was entered (in March 2011) for
providing consultancy services (design) for ‘Architectural, Structural, Mechanical,
Electrical and Plumbing (MEP) and Educational Technologies for the Computer
Science and Engineering (CSE) Department’. The consultancy fee was fixed at
five per cent of the ‘accepted bid value’ of the proposed building, irrespective of
completion cost. Provision for stage-wise payments in ten installments was made
in the agreement, based on the progress of the work and the final payment was to
be made when the consultant submitted the ‘As-Built drawings’. A consultancy
fee amounting to $42.02 lakh was paid (from March 2011 to December 2012) for
the work done up to Stage 6. Audit observed that the actual construction work of
the CSE department, was taken up only in July 2019 i.e., after a delay of eight
years, at an awarded cost of %47.38 crore. IITH recalculated the six stage-wise
payments previously made to the Consultant as the earlier payments were made
based on the estimated cost and not the accepted bid value. Hence, the payment
to the consultant was revised to %70.36 lakh (September 2019) based on the
‘accepted bid value’ of the work done till December 2012. Resultantly, an
additional fee amounting to %28.34 lakh (%70.36 lakh - 42.02 lakh) was paid in
September 2019. As such, delay of eight years in awarding the contract for the
construction imposed an additional liability on the IIT, due to escalation in costs
over time. The Ministry submitted that the architects’ agreement are based on the
guidelines of the Council of Architecture which is a Statutory body established by

an-Act.of.the Parliament...The architects are.retained.on percentage basis. The .._.

services of the architect are required till the completion of the project. The award

65


of contract and subsequent agreement with the PMC is entered into by the
Institute at its own level and Ministry is not a party to the agreement. However,
Ministry coveys the financial sanctions and the time limit within which the project
is to be completed, as per the Cabinet approval. For extension of time and for
cost overrun, the proposals are received from the institute which is examined in
consultation with the Finance Division of the Ministry, and on proper justification,
is recommended for approval by the competent authority. In the opinion of the
Committee, IITH had to pay an additional fee amounting to €28.34 lakh (270.36
lakh - 42.02 lakh) due to the fact that the contract had no completion date and
the consultant was to be paid as and when the milestones mentioned in the
contract were completed. The Committee desire that henceforth before awarding
the contract, terms and conditions including expected date of completion of the
projects should be clearly mentioned and invariably reviewed from time to time
by Ministry, too so that the progress of the project within the scheduled
timeframe may be ensured without any extra financial liability.

Construction of Foot-over-Bridge (FoB)

9. The Committee note that the permanent campus of IITH is located along
National Highway 65 (NH65) connecting Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka
and Maharashtra. The main entry to the Institute abuts the NH65 carrying the
traffic of Hyderabad, proceeding to other districts of Telangana and Maharashtra
and vice versa. The Committee also observe that the BWC accorded
(in September 2017) approval for construction of Foot-over-Bridge in a
convenient location near the main entry of IITH to ensure safety of students,
faculty, staff and other users of IIT campus. However, till October 2020, the FoB
was not constructed, thus endangering the safety of IITH students, faculty and
other stakeholders. The Ministry stated that the National Highway 65 is proposed
to be expanded to 6 lanes from the existing 4 lanes. NHAI is preparing the DPR
and assured to consider building a Vehicle/Pedestrian Underpass (VUP/PUP) in
front of the main gate of the campus. IITH has also taken up the matter with them.
In light of the fact that NHAI is already seized of the matter of building
infrastructure such as FoB/Underpass to ensure safe crossing of National
Highways by Students and other stakeholders, the Committee desire that IITH
should take up the case more vigorously with the highest authority of NHAI. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of the action taken in
this regard.

10. The Committee are concerned to note that the Phase-I works of IIT Indore

__Which were scheduled to be completed between January 2015 and September |

2016 were allotted to a new contractor in August 2021 with a timeline of six

months to complete the work. In this regard, the Ministry has informed that
66


2,21,000 Square Meter of construction area is completed and financial progress of
97.3% is achieved as on Oct. 2022. The balance work and rectification work worth
¥10 Crore are in progress. The Ministry also stated that delay in completion of the
Work was due to difficulties in procuring matching parts for obsolete control
panels, electrical devices and worldwide shortage of semiconductors for
firefighting devices. Further, the balance work involving electrical installation,
commissioning & testing of HVAC and finishing civil work spread over 21
structures is complex in nature. However, the balance and rectification work was
expected to be completed by December 31, 2022. In view of the fact that the new
contractor also failed to meet the timeline to complete the work, the Committee
would like to know the action taken against these contractors. Further, there was
a delay of about 5 years in all in awarding work to new contractors. The
Committee would also like to know the reasons for this delay in awarding work
and action taken against inefficient officials. Further, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the current status of the project.

Non- completion of Indoor Sports Centre

11. | The Committee note that a football ground was to be constructed (in July
2018) on the south side of the sports complex in 111 campus. The site of football
ground was changed (in January 2019) to the north side of sports complex
despite the fact that the north side of the campus was full of black cotton soil and
located in a low-lying area. IITI ignored the possibility of water logging and work
was awarded to contractors in July 2018 and May 2019. Further, the contract was
closed in September 2018 and July 2019. An amount of $92.15 lakh was also paid
to the contractors. Audit observed that after closure of the contracts, the football
field was uneven and there were bushes all over the football ground. Thus, the
football ground was not in a ready condition even after incurring an expenditure
of 92.15 lakh. As regards reasons for closing the contracts within two months
and paying हैं 92.15 lakh, the Ministry submitted that the performance of the
contractor was not satisfactory and hence the contract was closed. Audit further
observed that balance of work of development of football ground has been
awarded to CPWD in February 2021.Giving the status of construction of football
ground in IIT Indore campus, the Ministry submitted that Earthwork of north side
of Indoor sports complex has been completed. However, as per the master plan
of the institute, it was decided that complete sports arena including Synthetic
athletic track, Football ground, Warm up area, seating arrangement, Hockey
Ground, Lawn Tennis, Volleyball-ground and related work is entrusted to CPWD.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the rationale of changing the site of
Indoor sports complex to the north side and initially awarding the work to the
contractors while it was to be entrusted to CPWD, as per the master plan of the
institute. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the resultant extra
expenditure borne by the institute due to closure of the contract and awarding

67


midway the balance work to CPWD along with the sequence of decisions taken at
each level and reasons therefor.

Assets created not put to intended use

12. The Committee note that in IIT Jodhpur, a swimming pool (Jal Building)
constructed up to plinth level under Phase-ll was abandoned after incurring
expenditure of %1.85 crore. Construction work taken up in October 2017 was
stopped in September 2018 in compliance with the guidelines issued (in July
2018) by MoE stating that the grants were not to be used for development of
certain infrastructure such as swimming pools. Regarding half completed work,
the MoE informed the Committee that it was stated that Institute can mobilize
funds from other sources for its completion. To a question over ratification of the
expenditure of € 1.85 crore already incurred on the work abandoned, the Ministry
stated that the Building constructed till plinth level at safe stage. Further, Institute
has been advised to undertake construction strictly as per approved DPR, and
within the approved capital cost. While expressing displeasure over the manner
in which public money was squandered by IIT, the Committee would like to know
the action taken by Ministry for this expenditure of ¢ 1.85 Cr which was not as per
DPR and desire that the Ministry ensures scrupulous compliance of
DPR/Guidelines by IITs.

Execution of works

13. The Committee note that Major construction works under Phase-I were
entrusted to CPWD and NBCC. Audit examined 14 construction works taken up
by IIT Mandi during 2014-19 under Phase-l. Of these, 11 works was scheduled to
be completed by March 2019. However, six out of these 11 works (like academic
buildings, laboratory building, recreation centre etc.) which were scheduled to be
completed between October 2012 and August 2017 were completed between
October 2013 and February 2018 with a delay ranging between two months to 26
months. Two major construction works, (i) ‘construction of Phase-I North’ viz.,
academic buildings, guest house, gymnasium, hospital and auditorium building
and (ii) ‘different buildings’ viz., 22 hostel blocks, 28 faculty housing building,
dining and club house, were entrusted to NBCC/ CPWD. The construction of
these buildings was scheduled to be completed by May 2018 and October 2015
respectively. However, the construction of these buildings was yet to be
completed as of March 2019 and delay of 10 months and 41 months respectively
were observed. Audit pointed out that in one specific case, it was observed that
the construction of academic and residential complex (52 buildings) was
entrusted to. CPWD which in turn awarded.the work [0-3 contractor for a tender...
value of € 179.48 crore with a stipulation to complete the work by October 2015.

68


Audit observed that the project was delayed by five years with nine out of 52
buildings remaining incomplete as of November 2020. Regarding policy
intervention, the Ministry submitted that IITs are autonomous bodies and Ministry
of Education does not interfere in the routine administrative / review process.
However, it monitors the progress through Finance Committee (FC) and Board of
Governors (BOG) when the status of construction is placed before the FC and
BOG. IITs have Building & Works Committee, which regularly monitors the
construction progress. IIT Mandi has been reviewing progress of work on
monthly basis with PMC by conducting Construction Review Meetings. Due to
delay in completion of work and non-performance of firms/ contractor, CPWD
forfeited Performance Guarantee (PG) & Security Deposit (SD) amounting to
%12,35,72,748/- and credited to work. Similarly, NBCC, too, due to delay in
completion of work and non-performance of firm, forfeited PG amounting to
%13,41,44,625/--COVID-19 pandemic also contributed to delay in completion of
work as most of the migrant laborers had left and it took considerable time to re-
start the work. While expressing dismay over the delay, the Committee desire that
the Ministry should have played a proactive role beyond FC and BOG ratification
in case of delayed projects. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
current status of aforesaid construction work with the details of time overruns
and cost overruns.

Supply of Equipment

14. The Committee note that each IIT has its own procurement policy/manual
detailing therein the purchase procedures, guidelines and proper delegation of
powers. During analysis of the data and connected records pertaining to
procurement of equipment (selected sample), Audit observed that in 106, out of
the 340 sampled cases, there were delays in supply of equipment (including high
value equipment) ranging between 31-536 days. Regarding delays in supply of the
equipment, the Ministry submitted that all the procurements are being made as
per GFR 2017, S&P norms of IITs and Gol stipulated procedures and cases where
delay was unjustified, penalties were imposed. Further, IITs have initiated action
to streamline the delivery process as per order which inter alia cover inclusion of
delivery schedule, timeline and scope of supply in IIT; detailed briefing to all
prospective suppliers in pre-bid meeting and uploading of detailed pre-bid report
on website, GeM/CPPP; seeking approval of drawing/layout before placement of
order; follow-up by user department and MMS towards timely delivery of the
equipment etc. The Committee are of the view that ensuring timely procurement
of equipment would enable its utilization by the faculty and students in time. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that besides measures taken by liTs, the
Ministry should.review.the procedure for. procurement.of equipment and issue

69


directions, if any, required for timely delivery. Further, IITs must ensure
installation of equipment within 30 days of delivery.

Financial Management

Revision in the Capital Outlay

15. Audit observed that MoE approved (in July 2008) project cost of = 6,080
crore (% 760 crore per IIT) for establishment of eight new IITs over a period of six
years (2008-14). However, due to delay in handing over of sites by State
Governments and procedures involved in getting statutory approvals, there was
cost enhancement in equipment, salaries, taxes etc. Therefore, site-specific
infrastructure development like underpass, foot over bridge etc. could not be
completed within project period resulting in spill-over of the infrastructure
development beyond six years, necessitating the revision of the capital outlay
from % 6,080 crore to हैं 14,332 crore for a period of 13 years. The Ministry
submitted that out of the 8 IITs, 3 IITs completed its campus establishment
project by 31.07.2021 and for ensuring timely completion of projects of remaining
Ts, Ministry from time to time reviews the projects with the IITs to keep track of
the progress being made and resolve issues hindering the projects. Further, the
slow progress of the work is taken up with the concerned PMC / CPWD at
appropriate level and punitive measures are also taken, wherever necessary.
Taking the pace of completion of eight IITs, the Committee desire that the
reasons for inordinate delay in completion of six IITs may be analyzed with
corrective course of action in terms of SOP and be informed. Further the learning
out of this exercise should be utilized to ensure. completion and
operationalisation of future IITs in time with no cost escalation with required
facilities.

Generation of Internal Receipts

16. Audit observed that the proportion of the internal receipts against the
recurring expenditure was very low in IITs ranging between 12 per cent (in
IITBBS) and 61 per cent (in IITJ) even after having been established over a
decade. Audit also observed that no target has been set for the generation of
internal receipts by the MoE for any of the eight IITs. In this context, the Ministry
stated that efforts are being made to raise Internal Revenue Generation (IRG) by
introduction of new Self sponsored Certificate Courses / short-term courses;
raising endowment funds from Alumni and Philanthropists, Industry; increasing
the number of Sponsored Research Projects and Consultancy Projects etc. While
appreciating the initiatives taken by IITs for internal resources generation, the
Committee desire they should fix a target for internal resource generation. The

Ministry should also ensure laying down targets by IITs to improve the
70


mechanism of generating revenues with a view to reduce the dependency on
government grants and strengthen the financial position of all IITs.

Faculty Positions

17. The Committee note that MoE sanctioned (in August 2008/February 2009)
30 posts each year for initial three years at the time of setting up of IITs. Further,
the Ministry permitted the increase in sanction of the faculty positions linked with
the increase in intake of students i.e., sanction of faculty posts to be increased by
one for every increase in intake of students by 10 (1:10 ratio). Subsequently, the
Kakodkar Committee also recommended inter alia the faculty student ratio (FSR)
as 1:10. IIT Council, while accepting (in November 2011) the recommendations of
Kakodkar Committee considered the increase in faculty strength across all IITs in
the country from around 4000 in 2011 to 16000 by 2020, enabling creation of a
large pool of high-quality faculty and researchers. Audit observed that the IITs
have been recruiting faculty consistently. However, the pace of recruitment of
faculty did not correspond to the student intake/enrolment, resulting in vacancies
in faculty positions. This shortage was observed even to the end of March 2019 in
all IITs except in IIT Ropar. Faculty to student ratio was ranging between 1 to 16 in
IIT Bhubaneswar and 1 to 11 in IITs, Jodhpur and Mandi indicating the shortfall in
the faculty positions in IITs except in IIT, Ropar. The Committee note that faculty
vacancies were ranging between five per cent to 36 per cent. Regarding
consideration of the availability of enough suitable faculty candidates before the
setting up of new IITs, the Ministry submitted that initially these 8 IITs were
proposed to start with student strength of 120, for which faculty strength of 30
was proposed that may increase in proportion to the student strength of these
ITs. Directors of mentor IITs were confident of recruiting faculty for new IITs as
about 1000 students were going to complete PhD in Older IITs, a sizeable portion
of which could be attracted to work as faculty in these New IITs along with
attracting bright Indian students studying abroad to work as a faculty in IITs. The
Ministry submitted that services of adjunct and visiting faculties are utilized as a
stop gap arrangement with a view to not affect the academic work of the IITs.
Considering the above the Committee recommend for taking initiatives for filling
up the vacant faculty positions in a time bound manner to maintain adequate
FSR.

Faculty workload and appraisal system

18. The Committee note that Kakodkar Committee suggested (in April 2011)
that as a part of appraisal system, faculty could decide what percentage of his/her
time ‘and focus’ in“the next year, would be’spent on each of the following five~~
parameters namely (i) Teaching (and project guidance), (ii) Research/MS/Ph.D

71


guidance/Research-oriented projects, (iii) Technology development & Industry
interaction, (iv) Development of policy/standards and (v) Service. Besides, the
goals could also be specified qualitatively in each of these areas, depending
upon what the faculty wishes to do. Kakodkar Committee also gave a broad
outline for self-appraisal, departmental review and periodical external review of
these appraisals. The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status
of implementation of Kakodkar Committee recommendations by IITs for evolving
a better appraisal system by analyzing the faculty workload and other services.

Peer Group Assisted Learning (PAL)

19. The Committee note that IIT council approved (in October 2015) Peer-Group
Assisted Learning (PAL) strategy wherein educationally and socially backward
students were to be tagged to bright student volunteers from senior classes. It
was intended to be a fully funded initiative of MoE and was to be operationalised
by the IITs to enable fresh students to cope with the academic pressures of IITs.
Audit observed that the initiative was not operationalised in IITBBS, IITJ, IITP and
IIT Mandi thereby, denying the intended benefits of PAL strategy as envisaged by
IIT Council. The Committee note that the Ministry did not issue any specific
instruction in this regard to these IITs. However, IITs have made arrangements
for mentoring the newly admitted IIT students by the faculty and senior students.
The Committee appreciate the initiative of the IIT council and desire that PAL
must be implemented by all {ITs in letter and spirit. The Ministry of Education
should issue suitable instructions for this purpose.

Sponsored Research Projects

20. The Committee note that the DPR envisaged that the new IITs would have a
strong sponsored research activity. IITs receive funds from both government and
non-government/industry sources for Sponsored Research Projects and faculty
members of the IITs are actively engaged in these research projects which are
mainly sponsored by different funding agencies like DST, CSIR, DRDO etc. During
2014-19, the eight IITs had executed 1,712 Research projects with an outlay of
%857.71 crore. Some of the areas of research included 5G Research and Building
Next Gen Solutions, Mobile sensor network technologies, metal additive
manufacturing, artificial intelligence, bio-inspired engineering, catalysts, energy
and health care. Audit observed that all the eight IITs attracted sizeable funding
from Government sources like DST, CSIR, DRDO etc. However, the number and
cost of non-government sponsored projects in all IITs were low. It was noticed
that IIT Mandi, IITP, IIT Ropar and IITH were able to attract between 3.5 to 14.31
per cent of total non-government funding among the eight IITs while the others
~~ attracted very low levels of funding. As regards preparation of any action plan by
llTs to attract funding from industry and non-government sources, the Ministry
72


submitted that IITs invite experts and management personnel from the Industry
from time to time to show case research facilities and strike consultation project
deals. A lot of faculties are engaged with industry for consultancy and testing
based projects. Development offices of IITs are engaged with industry to attract
the CSR funding from the industries for research directly applicable to social
needs. IITs are also making its R&D infrastructure accessible to Industries and
Non-Government sources on a payment basis to attract the funding. While
appreciating the initiatives by IITs for attracting non-government funding, the
Committee desire an enhanced share of funding from the non-government
agencies too, particularly by all IITs that are attracting very low levels of funding.
The Committee would further like to be apprised of the extent of funding attracted
by the IITs during the last five years.

Patents filed and obtained

21. The Committee note that as per the Patents Act, 1970, patent is granted for
an "invention" which means a new product or process involving an inventive step
and capable of industrial application. As per Para 7.1 of Kakodkar Committee
Report, one of the key roles of ilTs should be of driving innovation and
entrepreneurship, which result in patents and publications — the traditional
measures of performance of faculty and research institutions. Audit observed
that IITH filed 94 patents, followed by IITI, IIT Mandi, IITP and IIT Ropar. However,
there was a large variance between the patents filed and obtained by the eight
llTs which need to be reviewed at highest level. In five IITs viz. in lIITBBS, IITGN,
ITI, IT Mandi and IITP, no patent was obtained during the five-year period.
Regarding devising of action plan by IITs for improving their performance in
obtaining patents, the Ministry submitted that most of the IITs have their own IPR
policy or are in the process of formulating one in order to expedite the process of
patent filing. The Committee are concerned to note that despite patents filing
policy in all IITs, the percentage of obtaining patents is very low. The Committee,
therefore, desire that IPR policy in IITs should be relooked into and made in tune
with the requirements of the industry and future needs which may increase the
number of research projects resulting in obtaining more patents.

Adherence to timelines in progress of research projects timelines in progress of research projects

22, The Committee note that Audit test-checked 208 sampled cases of research
projects in eight IITs for assessing the cost and time overruns. Out of 189
projects for which information was provided to Audit, 96 projects were scheduled
to be completed by March 2019. Out of these, Audit observed delays in 17

reséarch projects (18 per cent) in six IITs (IITBBS, ITH, 173, IIT Mandi, ITP and ~~"

॥ Ropar) with delay ranging from 22 days to 644 days as of March 2019. The
73


Ministry submitted that the research projects are directly being monitored by the
concerned IITs and the Ministry does not interfere in the routine work of IITs. In
this regard, the Committee desire devising of an effective mechanism to ensure
the completion of research projects in timely manner by IITs to obviate any cost
overrun and time overruns and providing all facilities for the purpose.

Functioning of Oversight Mechanism

Monitoring mechanism

23. The Committee note that the Act and Statutes stipulate for a minimum
number of meetings to be held every year by each Governing Body. Audit noticed
that there were shortfalls in number of meetings held by the BoG, Senate,
Finance Committee and BWC in all the IITs during the five-year period (2014-19).
In this regard, the Ministry submitted that Governing Bodies of the Institute have
been meeting normally with more frequency than mandated in Act/Statutes and
this has facilitated extra and effective supervision activities by the Institute.
Action taken on the approved projects by the BoG are also reviewed and
discussed in detail through Building and Works committee (BWC). Reviewing
construction on fortnightly basis with PMC was also undertaken wherein PMC
submits working programme (activity-wise) indicating material and manpower
requirement to complete the construction activities within stipulated time.
However, the Committee note that governing bodies of each IITs failed in timely
execution of infrastructure work in all 8 IITs which also resulted in cost escalation
which indicate that the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry and IITs is poor.
The Committee, therefore, desire that appropriate action should be taken to
strengthen the oversight mechanism with a view to avoid cost overruns and time
overruns and maintaining the standard.

NT HYDERABAD

24. The Committee note that as per the Statute 8(2) of IITH, the BWC is, inter
alia, responsible, under the direction of the Board, for construction of all major
capital works after securing the necessary administrative approval and
expenditure sanction from the Board. BWC is also responsible to give the
necessary administrative approval and expenditure sanction for minor work
including maintenance and repairs. Audit observed that as against two meetings
in a year, BWC met only once during 2014-15, 2016-17 and 2017-18 and no
meetings were conducted in 2015-16 and 2018-19. It was also observed that the
“BWC का its ‘ninth’ meeting (September 2014) ‘ratified, in one’ ‘sitting, 175 ~
construction works taken up between 2012-15 (175 works costing हैं 9.33 crore).

74


As regards periodicity of BWC meetings by IIT Hyderabad in order to avoid such
certification of works, the Ministry submitted that IITH is conducting two BWC
meetings in a year in accordance with the Statutes. The Committee would like to
know the reasons of non-ratification of these 175 works in earlier meetings and
compelling circumstances deferring their ratification/certification. Further, the
Committee desire that Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) may be framed for
timely ratification/certification of work by BWC.

NT INDORE

25. The Committee note that as per the delegation of powers of IITI, the
Director was delegated financial powers to award the works upto % 50 lakh and
the works costing in excess of = 50 lakh was to be referred to BWC. Audit
observed that the Chief Engineer and Project-in-Charge of CPWD awarded (in
December 2015) a work to the contractor for construction of RCC road amounting
to % 92.97 lakh without calling tender and without the prior approval of BWC. The
Ministry submitted that the work was entrusted due to pressing need of the
Institute in view of upcoming Convocation in 2015 and access to the Workshop
building, for which road was necessary. The Ministry further added that, however,
it has been ensured that there is no recurrence at the Institute level. The
Committee feel that the matter would have been referred to BWC with a request
for urgent sanction and find that mere admission of lapse on the part of Chief
Engineer and Project-in-Charge of CPWD is not tenable and, therefore, desire that
action be taken against the erring officials responsible for awarding the work
without calling for tender and without prior approval of BWC.

26. The Committee note that the envisaged student intake during the initial six
years period from 2008 to 2014 was 2360 per IIT. Thus, total intake expected was
18880 in the initial six years. However, it reached up to only 6224 students. Only
वा Hyderabad could reach to this figure of 2360 after a delay of five years, in
2019. The Committee also note that there was a shortfall of 28 per cent across all
IITs in enrolment of PG programmes. In the case of PhD programmes, five IITs did
not fix up their targets and three IITs fixed the targets, however, fell short of
achieving the same. The Committee, therefore, recommend that IITs fix targets for
enrolment in UG, PG and PhD programmes and make efforts to ensure that these
targets are met. The Committee also recommend that MoE must take steps to
galvanize the Council of IITs as well as Senate of each IIT so that new teaching
methodologies, introduction of topical courses setting high academic standards
are attained for meeting the emerging manpower needs of the country.

27. The Committee note that Performance Audit Report No. 20 of C&AG was
tabled in December, 2021. However, Ministry in their reply stated that reply to the
Report was furnished on May, 2022, September, 2022 and October, 2022. The

Committee find that reply/ clarification to the queries raised during the course of
75


examination by the Audit before tabling the Audit Report was forwarded by the
Ministry quite late. The Committee, therefore, desire that replies to the
observations of the C&AG Audit Team must be furnished promptly. For this,
necessary directions may be issued from the highest level in Ministry.

28. The Committee note that in terms of performance, research work, IIT
Hyderabad amongst other IITs is making strides. The Committee have been
informed that IIT Hyderabad has about 100 start-ups which have come out of its
incubation in the last five years and generated 1000 jobs besides revenue of % 800
crore. As regards achievements of other IITs, the Committee note that a number
of start - ups / companies are running in their respective incubation centers and
are working on development of products. The Committee while appreciating the
performance of the IIT Hyderabad desire that other IITS should emulate the
performance.

29. The Committee note from the status report of National Institutional Ranking
Framework (NIRF) rankings held by 2G IITs that some of the IITs have improved
their ranking from 2020 while others have failed to maintain the same. According
to NIRF ranking report, IIT Ropar, IT Jodhpur, IIT Gandhinagar and IIT Mandi have
notched up their rankings respectively to 22, 30, 23 and 20 in 2022 as compared
to 25, 53, 24 and 34 in 2020. The rankings of IIT Patna, IIT Hyderabad, IIT
Bhubaneswar and IIT Indore have respectively declined from 26, 8, 22 and 10 in
2020 to 33, 9, 36 and 16 in 2022. The Committee further note that some of the IITs
have also opted for internationally recognized World University Ranking System
namely Quacquarelli Symonds (QS). For IIT Hyderabad, it has been observed that
QS ranking has raised from 601-650 in 2021 to 581-590 in 2023, however, in
respect of IIT Bhubaneswar, it is pegged at 801-1000 in 2023 compared to 701-750
in 2022. Further, it has been observed that QS ranking of IIT Indore stood at 396 in
2023. In this regard, the Ministry stated that 50 per cent weightage in international
rankings is based on perception, that is on academic perception and employer’s
perception. Academic perception is for 40 per cent and for the employer's
perception it is 10 per cent. This 50 per cent of perception points in Indian
national rankings to only 10 per cent. Further, it is optional for the [ITs to
participate in these international rankings. The Committee observe that second
generation IITs are not catching up with the international standard. Big variance
is also observed in.respect of NIRF ranking. In light of the variance in perception
points as highlighted by the Ministry above, the Committee note that despite
showing improvement in their ranking from 2020 as per Indian national rankings
system i.e. NIRF Report, some of the IITs have been put much below the ladder in
terms of-World-University-Ranking System namely Quacquarelli Symonds (QS).
In view of these factors, the Committee desire that Indian national ranking system

76


i.e. NIRF should be made more broad based and internationally acceptable. For
this the parameters taken into account for appraisal of the performance of the IITs
in the country should be reviewed and made comprehensive as per the
international practices.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
14 December, 2023 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

77