130

PRADHAN MANTRI UJJWALA
YOJANA

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2360

ONE HUNDRED AND
THIRTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PRADHAN MANTRI UJJWALA YOJANA

es
'सत्यमेव जचते

Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on: 24.02.2024
Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA

SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

H

February, 2024 /Phalguna, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-I (CIVIL) OF PUBLIC (ii)
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iti)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iv)
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
PART |
[1 | Introductory 1
|॥ | Chapter-3: _ Distribution of LPG Connections under PMUY 4
|_॥. | Chapter- 4: Compliance to Safety Standards 19
IV. Chapter- 5: Infrastructure Preparedness 21
V. Chapter- 6: Transition of BPL households to LPG 31
Vi. Chapter- 7: Financial Management 40

PART Il
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 48-80
APPENDICES
| | Minutes of the 47 sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)
held on 20" July, 2022.
|" | Minutes of the 10" sitting of the 59-0017॥88- (Civil) of Public
Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 43h April, 2022.
|" | Minutes of the 5" sitting of the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) of Public
Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 08"" November, 2021.
IV. Minutes of the 2™ sitting of the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) of Public
Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on 13" September, 2021.
Vv. Minutes of the 17 sitting of the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) of Public

Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on 0117 September, 2021.

(i)



COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-I (CIVIL) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2021-22)

1. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor
3. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu - Member

4. Shri Sudheer Gupta - Member

5. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi - Member

6. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale - Member

(ii)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

(iii


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

© MPN OA A ७

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O’ Brien*
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

* — Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committée (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirtieth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana” based
on C&AG Report No. 14 of 2019, relating to the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas.

2. The C&AG Report No. 14 of 2019 was laid on the Table of the House
on 11.12.2019.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the subject matter and allotted
the same to one of their Sub Committees i.e, Sub Committee-l. Based on
the oral evidence and written replies, the Sub-Committee examined the
subject in detail.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 06.02.2024.
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part- Il of the Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for tendering evidence before
them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection
with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(v)


1
REPORT
Part-I
INTRODUCTORY

In May 2016, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), introduced the
‘Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana’ (PMUY) scheme with an objective to make clean cooking
fuel such as LPG available to the rural and deprived households which were otherwise
using traditional cooking fuels such as firewood, coal, cow-dung cakes etc. Usage of
traditional cooking fuels had detrimental impacts on the health of rural women as well as on
the environment - cutting down of trees and jungles. As the connections would be released
in the name of the women in the household, this scheme would also help to empower the
women both socially and economically besides improving their health and liberating them
from the ill-effects of household air pollutions (HAP), smoky kitchens and the drudgery of
collecting firewood.

2. Under PMUY, target was set to provide LPG connections to 5 crore women members
of BPL households with financial assistance of = 8,000 crore by Government of India.
Implementation time schedule for the scheme was by March 2019. The eligible beneficiaries
were identified from the Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) data 2011 (based on
Government Census 2011). In SECC-2011 census survey, Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD) enumerated 24.5 crore households in the country. Out of these, 10.31 crore
households suffered at least one deprivation, which were later earmarked by the Gol for
release of 5 crore LPG connections under PMUY. The SECC data was shared by MoRD to
MoPNG who in turn shared it with the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) through National
Informatics Centre (NIC) to approach these customers and initiate the process of releasing
LPG connections.

3. The C&AG Report No. 14 of 2019 contains significant findings of the performance
Audit of “Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala. Yojana”. Following are the audit objectives for this
Performance Audit:

« Whether PMUY connections have been released and installed by the OMCs to the
eligible and intended households of SECC list after due diligence?

« Whether sufficient measures for enhancement of LPG distribution network have been
undertaken to cater to the PMUY beneficiaries?

e Whether the OMCs have taken steps to ensure the usage of LPG by PMUY
beneficiaries as per the prescribed safety standards and for creating awareness of
the scheme?

« Whether the scheme has led to sustained usage of LPG by PMUY beneficiaries?

4 Performance Audit covered the implementation of PMUY (excluding e-PMUY) during
the period from May 2016 to December 2018


2

5. Major shortcomings as pointed out by the Audit in implementation of PMUY are as
under:

(i) Out of 3.78 crore LPG connections, 1.60 crore (42 percent) connections
were issued only on the basis of beneficiary Aadhaar which remained a
deterrent in de-duplication.

(ii) Laxity in identification of beneficiaries was noticed as 9897 LPG connections
were issued against Abridged Household List Temporary Identification
Numbers (AHL TINs) where names of all family members and the beneficiary
were blank in SECC-2011 list. Similarly, 4.10 lakh connections were issued
against AHL TINs where entire detail of family except that of one member was
blank in SECC-2011 list.

(iii) Due to lack of input validation check in Indian Oil Corporation Limited
(1061) software, 1.88 lakh connections were released against AHL TIN of
males.

(iv) Lack of input validation check in IOCL software allowed issue of 0.80 lakh
connections to beneficiaries aged below 18 years.

(v) 8.59 lakh connections were released to beneficiaries who were minor as
per SECC-2011 data.

(vi) Data analysis revealed mismatch in name of 12.46 lakh beneficiaries
between PMUY database and SECC-2011 data. Further, test check in field
audit revealed that AHL TINsof 784 (18 percent of 4348 KYCs verified)
intended beneficiaries were used by LPG distributors to extend benefits to un-
intended persons.

(vii) Deficiencies in de-duplication to restrict issuance of duplicate connections
were noticed in 12465 cases. Further, lack of input validation check allowed
telease of 42187 connections against invalid AHL TINs which did not exist in
SECC-2011 data.

(viii) Delay of more than 365 days was noticed in installation of 4.35 lakh
connections against stipulated time period of seven days.

(ix) Pre-installation inspection report was not available in 2531 cases (13.64
percent). Similarly, installation certificates were not available in 2367 cases
(12.75 percent).

(x) Inadequate efforts in commissioning targeted 10000 new LPG
distributorships by OMCs led to a compelling situation for existing LPG
distributors to supply cylinders either at long distance or from
godown/designated points instead of door delivery


3

(xi) Delay of more than 10 days (ranging up to 664 days) was noticed in
delivery of 36.62 lakh LPG refills against the stipulated delivery period of seven
days. Further, the poor performance of LPG distributors in adherence to
Targeted Delivery Time (TDT) norms of Marketing Disciplinary Guidelines
(MDG) was not monitored by the OMCs.

(xii) The annual average refill consumption of 1.93 crore PMUY consumers
(who have completed more than one year as on 31 March 2018) was only 3.66
refills as worked out by audit. Similar analysis for 3.18 crore PMUY
beneficiaries as on 31 December 2018 revealed that refill consumption declined
to 3.21 refills per annum.

(xiii) Risk of diversion of domestic cylinders for commercial use was noticed as
1.98 lakh PMUY beneficiaries had an average annual consumption of more
than 12 cylinders which seems improbable in view of their BPL status. Similarly,
13.96 lakh beneficiaries consumed 3 to 41 refills in a month. Further, IOCL and
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) in 3.44 lakh instances issued
2 to 20 refills in a day to a PMUY beneficiary having single bottle cylinder
connection.

(xiv) Low consumption of refills (up to three) by 0.92 crore loanee consumers
(who had completed one year or more as on 31 December 2018) had hindered
recovery of outstanding loan of %1234.71 crore.

(xv) Though year-wise target for release of PMUY connections was revised
(September 2017) to two crore connections each for the years 2016-17 to
2019-20, neither the Revised Estimates for 2017-18 nor the Budget Estimates
for 2018-19 was allocated in line with the revision of targets or for meeting the
shortfall for the previous years.

(xvi) There was excess parking of funds under Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) pool which was contributed on the directives of Ministry of Petroleum &
Natural Gas (MoPNG) without any realistic assessment thereof. As such, an
amount of $261.85 crore is lying idle which could have been utilized elsewhere
in other deserving projects.

6. In the process of examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) of PAC,
which was allocated the subject for in-depth examination, obtained Background Note and
detailed written replies from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/Oil Marketing
Companies. The Sub-Committee also took oral evidence of the aforesaid Ministry/OMCs.
Based on written and oral depositions of the Ministry/OMCs, the sub-committee examined
the aforesaid shortcomings as pointed out by Audit and enumerated the same in detail in
the succeeding paragraphs.


4

Chapter-3:_ Distribution of LPG Connections under PMUY

7. Targeted beneficiaries of PMUY are underprivileged BPL households deprived of
LPG access in the country. The objective of the scheme is to bring these BPL households
under LPG coverage through one-time Government financial assistance to support their
transition from unclean to clean cooking fuel. MoPNGinter alia formulated the following
implementation modalities of PMUY:

1. A woman of the BPL household, who does not have access to LPG connection,
may apply for LPG connection in the prescribed format along with details like
address, Jandhan/Bank account and Aadhaar numbers of all the adult family
members to the LPG distributor;

2. OMCs are to match the applications against SECC-2011 database and after
ascertaining their BPL status, enter the details into a dedicated OMC Web Portal.
Primary identification of a PMUY beneficiary is to be done on the basis of AHL TIN
which is the identifyingnumber of each beneficiary;

3. OMCs undertake electronically the de-duplication exercise and KYC checks to
ensure that the new connections are issued only to the eligible beneficiaries.

(A) Non-obtaining of Aadhaar Numbers of all audit family members from PMUY
beneficiaries

8. PMUY implementation modalities inter alia state that a woman beneficiary is required
to furnish Aadhaar number of all family members and OMCs are to undertake electronically
the de-duplication exercise for obviating the possibility of issue of multiple connections to
the samehousehold. In order to enforce implementation modalities of PMUY, MoPNG
notified (23 June, 2016) the approved format of Ujjwala KYC wherein obtaining the following
information was made mandatory for undertaking KYC checks:

+ Details of household members aged above 18 years (consisting of people living
together in a dwelling unit having common kitchen);

+ Aadhaar number of all adult family members along with copies of Aadhaar card;

+ Ration card details viz. State of issue, Ration card number along with copy of
ration card. The PMUY Handbook (July 2016), had clarified that “it is mandatory
to have Aadhaar as well as a Bank account in the name of recipient beneficiary.
For other members of the household, it is mandatory to furnish Aadhaar number’.
On analysis of the PMUY consumer database, audit noticed that out of 3.78 crore
active PMUY LPG connections, OMCs released 1.60 crore (42 percent)
connections only on the basis of beneficiary's Aadhaar.

9 During test check of records at selected LPG Distributors, audit noticed that out of
1206 KYCs, though 361 PMUY beneficiaries had furnished Aadhaar numbers of their adult


5

family members along with KYC, the LPG distributors had not entered the same in the LPG
web portal. On verification of Aadhaar numbers of family members from OMCs web portal,
audit noticed that out of these 361 available Aadhaar numbers of adult family members of
PMUY beneficiaries, 72 (20 percent) were found to be linked with some
other LPG connection with the same / another OMC which substantiates the existence of
additional LPG connections in the beneficiary households.

10. Further, as per the scheme if the Aadhaar number of all family members was not
available, OMCs were to facilitate in obtaining Aadhaar of family members. However, LPG
software of OMCs had no provision to seed Aadhaar after release of LPG connections.

11. | The scheme guidelines of PMUY dated 311 March 2016 does not mention that the
collection of Aadhaar of all adult members was compulsory. Moreover, FAQ of PMUY
mentioned that OMCs will endeavour to collect the Aadhaar of all adult family members. As
the scheme progressed, OMCs felt the need for further strengthening the de-duplication
process and since September 2017, capturing another Aadhaar of family member was
enabled and made compulsory in the system design. Hence, seeding of Aadhaar number of
adult family members was possible at KYC seeding stage from September 2017 onwards.
Once KYC is cleared after de-duplication exercise at OMC & NIC, the same is processed for
SV. After KYC is cleared, no Aadhaar details of family members further can be updated, to
ensure financial integrity.

Later during CAG Audit, it was observed that there are 1.6 crore connections without
Aadhaar of adult family members. Following the observation, MoPNG advised OMCs to
ensure addition of Aadhaar of adult family members to the identified connections.

Moreover, in all the connections of PMUY, de-duplication on the basis of Aadhaar,
bank A/c, AHL TIN, RC number, name and address is being carried out by NIC and OMCs
which has to a greater extent ensured the uniqueness of the PMUY connection and has
also ensured the prevention of generation of multiple connection in the system which was
the purpose of taking Aadhaar of family members.

12. Distributors had arranged for Aadhaar enrolment camps for prospective applicants
under PMUY and their family members.

13. On being asked as to whether OMCs have done any exercise to collect seed and
carry-out de-duplication of Aadhaar number of beneficiary's husband or other adult family
members after release of LPG connections, the MoPNG in their written replies submitted as
under:

“OMCs had advised distributors to contact the beneficiaries whose connection
was detected to have been released with only the applicant's Aadhaar. The
distributors carried out customer contact to obtain Aadhaar. It was observed
that some of the beneficiaries were the only adult members in the family. In
such cases, an undertaking to this effect was taken.”


6

14. | While observing that as on 30 November, 2020, 1.73 crore LPG connections were
still pending for seeking additional Aadhaar, the Committee sought to know the reasons
thereof and present position of seeding of additional Aadhaar. The MoPNG in their written
replies submitted as under:-

“As on 01.09.2021, adult family Aadhar/ lone member declaration has been
taken from 15.23 lakh beneficiaries out of 1.6 crore connections identified in
the CAG Audit. Soon after the activity started in the field in full swing, the pan-
India lockdown due to the pandemic started. This severely impacted the pace
of collection of family Aadhaar.”

15. On being asked about the steps taken to validate the entry of Aadhaar of
all other adult family members of the beneficiaries, the MoPNG in their written
reply stated as under:-

“Software check to ensure entry of Aadhaar numbers of adult family
members of beneficiary has been incorporated.”

16. In response to the aforesaid reply of the Ministry, Audit made the
following comments:-

“Information in this regard has been sought from OMCs, which is
awaited.”

17. Further when asked about the steps taken to avoid wrong connections
or duplicate connections being given under PMUY, the Ministry stated that
several system validation checks have been incorporated to avoid release of
LPG connections to ineligible beneficiaries.

18. In response thereto, the vetting comments of Audit are as under:

“OMCs have been carrying out de-duplication process of Aadhaar. De-
duplication becomes effective if Aadhaar of all family members are
seeded in LPG database. Status of Aadhaar seeding of family members
will be checked during audit of e-PMUY.”

(B) Release of PMUY connections against AHL TIN with complete blank records in
SECC-2011

19.  Auditfound that laxity in identification of beneficiaries was noticed as 9897 LPG
connections were issued against Abridged Household List Temporary Identification
Numbers (AHL TINs) where names of all family members and the beneficiary were blank
in SECC-2011 list. Similarly, 4.10 lakh connections were issued against AHL TINs where
entire detail of family except that of one member was blank in SECC-2011 list.


7

In this connection MoPNGreplied to Audit (December, 2020) that all connections

were blocked. However, Audit found that the 8,407 connections out of 9,897 connections
were still appearing as active in the LPG database as on 30 November, 2020.

20.

Apprising the Committee of the steps taken to block the connections of ineligible

persons, the MoPNG in their written replies stated as under:-

(c)
21.

“The SECC data was shared by MoRD to MoPNG who in turn shared it with
OMC through NIC. The SECC data was based on a survey done by MoRD in
2011 but it was being used 5 years later. The time gap gave rise to some
inconsistencies in field like name, DOB, gender, blank AHL TIN field, wrong
names/ family composition etc in some of the cases. At the beginning of the
scheme, the data was made available in excel sheets. In this data, it was seen
that some connections were released on Null AHL TIN data where the AHL
TIN data of the family was not available. At later date, with assistance from
NIC, OMCs have uploaded all the data in the respective OMCs systems where
the required checks and balances were made available.

These connections were later detected in the CAG Audit and were blocked
and thus subsequent refills were stopped. Distributors were advised to
terminate these connections. However, the beneficiaries were reluctant to
terminate their connections citing that they hailed from poor families.

Considering the condition of these families, a facility was made such that
these identified connections with Null AHL TIN connections can be regularized
in EPMUY/EPMUY-2 schemes provided they meet the eligibility criteria of the
new scheme.

A total of 9177 connections were identified with Null AHL TIN and all have

been blocked. As on 01.99.2021, 1103 have been terminated, 8072 have
been regularized and made active and balance 2 connections are still
suspended.”

Issue of PMUY connections to male consumers

It was imperative upon the OMCs to design sufficient validation in the LPG software for
issuance of LPG connections only to females. On matching of AHL TIN in the PMUY
consumer data base with those in the SECC-2011 database, audit observed that 1.88 lakh

LPG connections were issued by 1001 against AHL TINs of males.

22.

In this regard MoPNG replied (May/July 2019) that the OMCs were advised to verify
and take corrective action. Accordingly, 0.41 lakh connections were terminated by 1001 being

ineligible out of 1.78 lakh cases verified. Remaining cases were under verification.


8

23. On being asked about the current status w.r.t. ineligible connections, reasons for
issuing such connections by IOC and responsibility fixed in this regard, the Ministry replied as
under:-

“In the CAG Audit, 1.78 lakh connections were identified to have been
released using AHL TIN of male members. All the identified connections
were verified and as on 01.09.2021, 363 connections are in suspended
status, 11,253 have been surrendered and the balance 1.67 lakh
connections have been verified and made active.

The SECC data was shared by MoRD to MoPNG and then with OMCs.
Some inconsistencies were noticed in the SECC data pertaining to the
‘Gender’ field of the applicant. It was observed that in a large number of
cases, the connections were released to female beneficiaries but were
wrongly tagged as ‘Male’ in the SECC list. All other details in the SECC
data were found to be correct. These connections were regularized and
made active.

As the scheme was implemented in mission mode, a check that only AHL
TIN of ‘female’ members can be used could not be put in place at the OMC
and NIC level. Also, as the data was received through MoRD, the necessity
of putting such a check was not felt initially. However, as soon as this
inadequacy was identified, necessary checks were put in place and further
release of such connections was stopped.

The absence of a check so as to allow enrolment using AHL TIN belonging
to females was unintentional and therefore no responsibility has been fixed.
The check was put in place as soon as the gap was identified and
necessary corrective action is also being taken.”

24.  Apprising the Committee about the present position w.r.t. to the connections issued
in the name of Male members, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Of the identified 1.785 lakh connections, all were verified. Upon verification,
it was found that 1.36 lakh connections were found to be correct and made
active. The balance 0.42 lakh connections were blocked as some
regularization were required. Once regularization process was made
available, necessary changes were made and as on 20.11.2021, 0.31 lakh
connections have been regularized and made active, 11,253 have been
surrendered and the balance 362 connections are in suspended status
where action is yet to be taken by field. OMCs will complete the exercise by
March 2022.”


9

25. When asked as to whether validation check in this software of IOC has been
rectified and why such a validation check was not ensured in gender category, the MoPNG
submitted as follows:

“Yes, the validation was put in the OMC software as soon that the
inadequacy was noticed.

As the scheme was implemented in mission mode, a check that only AHL
TIN of ‘female’ members can be used could not be put in place at the OMC
and NIC level. Also, as the data was received through MoRD, the
necessity of putting such a check was not felt initially.

However, not all connections detected to have been released with AHL TIN
of ‘Male’ members were found to be ineligible. It was observed that in a
large number of cases, the connections were released to female
beneficiaries who were wrongly indicated as ‘Male’ in the SECC. All other
details in the SECC data were found to be correct. Due to the
inconsistency in the SECC data, the beneficiary was identified as a Male
member although as per the KYC form the PMUY connection was issued
to female beneficiaries only in these wrongly tagged cases as well.”

26. While apprising the Committee about the action taken to correct the issue of
PMUY connections to male consumers as appeared in Audit Observation on PMUY-
1.0 and current status in this regard, the MoPNG in their replies submitted as under:-

Software validation check for confirming that the beneficiary is female has
been incorporatedin system. This will eliminate the possibility of issue of PMUY
connection to malemembers.PMUY connections were given to poor households.
Instead of terminating the connections given ontechnical grounds customers were
given an option to regularize the connection, in case if there is anyeligible person in
the same household and there is no other LPG connection in the same household.In
all such identified cases, OMCs carried out re-verification of documents and
appropriate correctiveaction was taken as detailed in the table below.

CAG Total Total Active Terminated | Blocked

Finding Cases verified (Verified as
and found ok/ on
Regularized) 01.07.2022

3.2.3 | Issue of | 178, 520 | 178, 520 167,058 11,386 76

PMUY

connections

against AHL

TIN of male

consumers



10
Action could not be taken on these 76 blocked cases due to pending court cases.

27. In response to aforesaid replies of the Ministry, Audit in their vetting comments
submitted as under:-

“Sample KYC have been requisitioned from OMCs in order to verify the
entitlement of beneficiary/regularisation process. However, information is
awaited from all three OMCs.”

28. Further, when asked about the improvement made as a result of putting
validation check in the OMC software, the Ministry stated as follows:-

“Salutation and Gender validation checks are added in the system. With above
checks, erroneous entries have been eliminated. Wrong connections or
duplicate connections are avoided by adopting de-duplication of Aadhaar of all
family members submitted by the consumer. Also, several system validation
checks have been incorporated to avoid release of LPG connections to
ineligible beneficiaries.”

29. However, during the course of vetting of these replies, the Audit stated that
“OMCs have provided screenshots for validation checks regarding gender in their
software in support of their reply. However, efficacy of the validation check will be
verified in the e-PMUY audit.”

(D) Issue of LPG connections to minors under PMUY

30. PMUY as well as LPG control Order, 2000 stipulates that LPG connection can only
be provided to a consumer who is at least 18 years of age. However, audit noticed
instances of LPG connections issued to minor beneficiaries.

31... Lack of input validation check in IOCL software allowed issue of 0.80 lakh
connections to beneficiaries aged below 18 years. Similarly, data analysis revealed that 8.59
lakh connections were released to beneficiaries who were minor as per SECC- 2011 data
which was in violation of PMUY guidelines and LPG Control Order, 2000.

32. As regards the action taken by the Ministry on the abovesaid Audit observation, the
MoPNG submitted as follows:

“During the course of implementation of the scheme, the absence of the
validation on date of birth was noticed and the same was introduced in the
software immediately to avoid recurrence of release of connections to
minors. The Scheme was started on war-footing and the absence of the
check was unintentional. Hence, no responsibility has been fixed.
Corrective action has been taken on the identified connections and as on
01.09.2021, out of 0.78 lakh identified connections, 0.71 lakh connections
have been regularized and made active, 7531 connections have been


11

terminated and the balance 70 connections are suspended and action is to
be taken on them.

Also, 8.11 lakh connections were identified across Industry where the
beneficiary was a minor as per the SECC database. All the connections
were verified, and it was seen that in most cases, the DOB in the SECC
data was incorrect i.e. the DOB in the SECC database was incorrectly
captured. During the course of implementation, it was observed that the
DOB as per Aadhaar and SECC was different. Hence, distributors were
advised to use the DOB as per the Aadhaar card.

All the 8.11 lakh identified connections were verified and as on 01.09.2021,
7.49 lakh connections were regularized and made active, 0.38 lakh
connections were terminated, and the balance 0.24 lakh connections are
suspended and action is yet to be taken on them.”

33. As regards the current status of regularisation of 70 suspended connections, the
MoPNG in their written replies stated as under:

“As of 20.11.2021, out of the 0.79 lakh connections identified, 70 are in
suspended status, 7533 have been terminated and the balance 0.71 lakhs
connections have been regularized and made active. The balance 70
connections will be regularised by OMCs by 31.03.2022.”

34. On being asked as the OMCs claim to have achieved 90 percent of the target of
providing 8 crore connections and if the inelligible connections are deducted, what is the
real time coverage, the Ministry replied as under:-

“The target of the scheme was achieved on 7" September, 2019 when the
8" crore connection was released. Verification of the identified connections
had already been started before the target of 8 crore was reached. As and
when connection is terminated, the number is reduced from the total
number of released connections. However, suspended connections are still
accounted for in the total number of connections. As on 17 September,
2021, the number of connections as against the target of 8 crore is 7.99
crore including 1.64 lakh suspended connections on which regularization
or termination is yet to be carried out.”

35. While providing the present data in this regard, the Ministry submitted as
follows:

The main reason for release of connections to minor was incorrect entry in data
maintained in SECC list provided by MoRD. The other reason was absence of system check
in the software of OMCs.However, software validation check for ensuring that age of
beneficiary is more than 18 years was later incorporated in system. This ensures that no
connection is given to a minor inadvertently. The data in this regard is as below: -


12

CAG Finding Total Total Active Terminated | Blocked
Cases | verified | (Verified as
and found on
ok/ 01.07.20
Regularized) 22
3.2.5 | Issue of LPG! 142 142 125 17 a
connections to
minors under
PMUY (Field
Verification,
3.2.5.2 | Issue of | 78,999 78,999 71,310 7,685 7
connections to
minors due to
absence of
validation checks
in the LPG
database
3.2.5.3 | Issuance of LPG 811,419 | 811,419 | 7,66,076 44,268 1075

connections to
consumers being
minors as per
SECC 2011

Corrective actions for the blocked cases is complete except for Court Cases.

36.

(E)

37.

of monitoring at the field level.

38.

In their vetting comments, the Audit submitted as follows:

“OMCs have provided validation regarding age restriction to avoid connection
to minors. Further, Sample KYC have been requisitioned from OMCs in order to
verify the entitlement of beneficiary / regularisation process. The information is
still awaited from all three OMCs.”

Mismatch in the names of beneficiaries between SECC-2011 database and
PMUY consumer database of OMCs

Audit compared the PMUY consumer database with the SECC-2011 list and
observed that the names of 12.46 lakh PMUY beneficiaries in the LPG database were
different from those entered in the SECC-2011 list (IOCL: 7.24 lakh, BPCL: 3.96 lakh and
HPCL: 1.26 lakh). Further, during field audit of 38 LPG distributors, test check revealed that
out of 4348 beneficiaries, the names and family details of 784 PMUY beneficiaries (18 per
cent) as per their KYC records viz. ration card, Aadhaar card did not match with SECC
detail which shows that LPG connections were issued to unintended beneficiaries by
manipulating and using AHL TIN of eligible beneficiaries which was mainly due to absence

Apprising the Committee about the reasons for such a high cases of mis-match in the
name of beneficiaries, the Ministry stated as follows:-



13

“The SECC data was shared by MoRD to MoPNG and then to OMC through
NIC. The SECC data used was 5 years old and it was found that it had some
inconsistencies like blank or missing name, mismatch in names, wrong
names, use of nick names, short names etc.

During scheme implementation process, it was observed that the names
captured in the SECC list were found to be nick names/ other names/ short
names of same beneficiaries while distributors captured names in the LPG
data base as per Aadhaar. Due to the aforementioned mis-match between
SECC data and KYC data (filled as per Aadhaar), the CAG Audit identified
12.46 lakh suspect cases with name mismatch between SECC and LPG
data base.”

39. When the Committee desired to know the action taken by the OMCs in respect of
reported cases of name mismatch, the Ministry replied as under:-

“Field has verified all the suspect cases to ascertain whether the correct
beneficiary has been given the connection by scrutinizing, family details in
ration card/ voter card, name in bank, address in POA, Aadhaar etc.
Wherever the beneficiary as per the SECC details and Aadhaar/RC/Voter
Card details have been found to be the same person, the connection was
made active. In the balance cases, the connection was suspended for
termination. Additionally, provision has been given to regularize these
connections to EPMUY/EPMUY-2, subject to meeting eligibility criteria of
the new schemes.

Out of 12.42 lakh connections, 11.36 lakh connections were regularized and
made active, 0.46 lakh connections were terminated and the balance 0.6
lakh connections are still in blocked state and action is yet to be taken on
them.”

40. On being asked about the time by which the action will be completed, the MoPNG
submitted as under:

“As on 20.11.2021, out of the total identified 12.42 lakh connections, 0.22
lakh connections are in blocked status, 0.46 lakh connections have been
terminated and the balance 11.73 lakh connections have been regularized
and made active. The balance 0.22 lakh connections will be regularized by
OMCs.”

41. The present position as on 01.07.2022 as submitted by Ministry is given as
under:-

“Out of 12.42 lakh cases identified under this, only 2413 cases are under
blocked status as detailedin the table below:


14

CAG Finding Total Total Active Terminated | Blocked
Cases verified (Verified as
and found ok/ on
Regularized) 01.07.2022
3.2.7. | Mismatch in the | 1,241,835 | 1,241,835 | 1,188,023 51,399 2,413

names of

beneficiaries

between SECC-

2011 database and

PMUY consumer

database of OMCs.

(F) Issue of multiple connections under PMUY to the same individual or within the
same family

42. Audit carried out de-duplication exercise on AHL TIN used for issue of connections
and observed that in 822 cases, the OMCs had released duplicate connections on the same
AHL TIN i.e. to the same person (on the basis of 29 digit AHL TIN) while in 11643 cases,
duplicate connections were issued to the same family (on the basis of 26 digit of AHL TIN)

43. As per the methodology of de-duplication, KYC is to be rejected in case AHL TIN of
the applicant is not found in SECC-2011 list. A comparison of PMUY consumer database
with SECC-2011 database revealed that in 42187 cases (IOCL: 42145 and BPCL: 42), the
AHL TIN entered in LPG database was not available in the SECC-2011 database.

44. Audit observed that the concerned distributors had entered incorrect AHL TIN of the
beneficiary, which was accepted by the LPG software due to lack of input validation check.
This also remained undetected in the de-duplication process at the NIC Level.

45. On being asked about the action taken by OMCs to improve the system check, the
MoPNG in their written replies submitted as follows:-

“The SECC data was shared by MoRD to MoPNG and then to OMC
through NIC. AT the beginning of the scheme, the data was received
through excel sheet and was shared with distributors for contacting the
prospective beneficiaries. The AHL TIN used for application is a 29-digit
long number. Since the data was provided in excel sheets, the distributors
had to type the AHL TIN number in the application process. This gave rise
to typographical errors in entering the AHL TIN. When this issue was
noticed during self-audit of the system, the details received from MoRD was
hosted in the OMC software and auto-population of the AHL TIN number
was enabled. In this way, wrong entry of AHL TIN number was prevented in
the system.”



15

46. When asked as to whether the connections in all such cases have been blocked, the
Ministry stated as under:-

“All the identified connections were verified. Wherever, the AHL TIN could
be rectified (family AHL TIN remaining unchanged) or the family could be
regularized to EPMUY/EPMUY-2, regularization was done. Wherever
connections were found to be ineligible, the connections have been
terminated. As on 01.09.2021, out of 42,145 identified connections, 35,513
could be regularized and made active, 6491 connections were terminated
and the balance 141 connections are in suspended state and corrective
action is yet to be taken.”

47. Apprising the Committee about the present status of regularization of multiple
connections issued under PMUY-1.0, the MoPNG in their written replies stated as
under:

The connections were regularized by identification of families which had spilt
but not captured in Ration Card or family composition documents. Multiple
connections among OMCs were addressed by retaining one connection in the
family and terminating the other connections based on retention criteria.
Details are as under:-

CAG Finding Total Total Active (Verified | Terminated | Blocked as

Cases verified and found ok/ on
Regularized) 01.07.2022

Issue of multiple | 9,583 9,583 7,121 2,402 -

connections

under PMUY to

the same

individual or

within the same

famil

48. In their vetting comments to the aforesaid replies of the Ministry, Audit
observed as follows:-

“Sample KYCs have been requisitioned from OMCs in order to verify the
entitlement of beneficiary / regularisation process. The information is still
awaited from all three OMCs.”

(G) Delay in installation of PMUY connections

49. The OMCs’ Citizen Charter on Marketing of Petroleum Products stipulated that the
registration for new domestic LPG connection is to be done immediately and new
connection is to be installed within seven working days. In order to make the scheme
effective, it is pertinent thatthe installation of PMUY connections is done in a timely manner.


16

Audit analyzed the PMUY consumers’ data to examine the time taken for installation of
PMUY connections since the date of feeding of KYC details in the system. It was observed

that installations were done with a considerable delay as detailed below:

Time analysis of installation as on December 2018 (in lakh)
Time taken from No. of connections Total
KYC to
installation (No.
of day) 1OCL BPCL HPCL
0-7 33.27 27.29 12.10 72.66
8-30 62.79 29.44 35.82 128.05
31-60 30.78 13.25 19.90 63.93
61-90 14.89 7.91 eso | 32.79
91-180 24.38 11.34 14.12 49.84
181-365 12.48 7.19 6.59 26.26
More than 356 | 1.82 1.09 1.44 4.35
days
Total 180.41 97.51 99.96 377.88

Audit observed that only 19.23 per cent of the total PMUY connections were installed within
the stipulated time frame. OMCs cited (April 2019) various reasons for delay in installation
like difficulties in locating customer due to absence of customer contact number, migrating
rural population, beneficiary's request for loan after KYC seeding, non-availability of safe
conditions for LPG installation like cooking platform, time taken for imparting training to
manpower for installation and disruption in transportation of Cylinders/Regulators/Hot Plates
due to transporters’ strikes, flood.

50. Apprising the Committee about the specific reasons for such a long period of delay in
installation of PMUY connections, steps contemplated to avoid these delays and the
monitoring mechanism if any that has been put in place to ensure timely installations of
connections, the MoPNG stated as follows:

“Physical KYCs in large numbers were collected by way of door-to-door
and enrolment camps conducted at village level by the distributors and then
seeded in system by the respective distributors. Once the applications were


17

cleared after de-duplication, these were ready to be released. As per
modalities, the initial connections in an area were to be given away in
presence of the public representative (Hon'ble Ministers/MPs/MLAs etc.) in
a public function (Ujjwala’ Melas). ‘Thereafter, _installations
processstarts. Distributors’ endeavour was to install the connections at the
earliest after clearing of the KYCs.

Considering the afore-mentioned process followed at field level, there was
some time lag between the release of connections and physical installation
of the connections. Moreover, the process of installation is dependent on
the availability of the customer at home. It was seen that many did not have
mobile number with them and were not reachable by the distributor for
installation of the connections. Many customers could be contacted but
delay the installation process due to non-availability of money to pay for the
hot plate and refill (non-loanee customers). Also, natural calamities like
flood or very heavy rain fall disrupted the transportation of
Cylinders/Regulators/Hot Plates and distributor's operations in general.

SOPS have been made and circulated to field for taking action. PMIS portal
was used by the field to ensure timely installations are done against release
of SVs.”

(H) Linked Bank Account not pertaining to PMUY beneficiaries

51. PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme launched (2013) by the Government of India envisaged
curbing pilferage and diversion of domestic LPG through distribution system of OMCs by
effecting cash transfer of subsidy directly into the bank account of the eligible beneficiaries.
The Scheme envisaged payment of market price for the domestic cylinders by LPG
consumers and the transfer of subsidy amount directly to consumer's bank account. However,
during test check of KYC records at sample 164 LPG distributors, 100 instances were noticed
where bank account of others were linked with PMUY beneficiaries which led to transfer of
her subsidy in the bank accounts of others thereby depriving the genuine beneficiaries of their
subsidy.

52. MoPNG added (May/July 2019) that bank account and name of beneficiary were sent
to NPCI for verification with respective banks and de-duplication. OMCs have been advised to
identify joint accounts linked to PMUY beneficiaries and submit report by 30 June 2019.
Further, BPCL and HPCL have verified 64 cases and found 11 connections ineligible.
Verification ofthe remaining cases was pending. Replies are to be viewed against the fact that
as the bank accounts not pertaining to beneficiaries got cleared from NPCI and respective
banks, it indicates inadequacies in existing account verification.

53. As regards the steps taken by OMCs to link the Bank account of PMUY beneficiaries to
ensure transfer of subsidy to the right beneficiaries, the MoPNG in their written submitted
stated as under:-


18

“In the process of DBTL, LPG customers are receiving subsidy either via
ATC (Aadhaar Transfer Compliant mode) or BTC (Bank Transfer Compliant
mode). Out of cash transfer nearly 85% is going through ATC process of
cash transfer. It may be noted that Aadhaar is not mandatory for PMUY for
Assam and Meghalaya).

Moreover, after seeding the bank account details, bank verification is
carried out at Bank’s end. Here the name and account details of the LPG
customer are matched with the name in the bank records. In case of
mismatch in the name (e.g. in cases of joint account, spelling errors etc.),
the information of the mismatch is shared with the distributor through a
portal. Distributor has to verify the correctness of the data once again. Only
after the distributor clears the data, customer becomes compliant for receipt
of subsidy.

Hence, the process of subsidy transfer is having suitable checks and
balances and is designed to ensure that subsidy is transferred to the
intended beneficiary only.”

54. | When asked about the action taken in case of aforesaid 100 cases the Ministry
replied as under:-

“Bank accounts (Husbands bank account or other members) were rectified
under Bank account correction facility and beneficiaries bank account/Joint
account got added.”

55. In this regard, Audit in their vetting comments stated that HPCL has provided
case wise detail of correction of bank account, which will be verified during audit of
e-PMUY HPCL has provided case wise detail of correction of bank account. This will
be verified during audit of e-PMUY.

56. While providing the latest status of 100 cases where linked bank account does
not pertain to PMUY beneficiaries, the Ministry stated that:

“All the identified connections observed in the field visit have been
verified and corrective action has been taken as deemed fit.”

57.  Apprising the Committee about the present status of recovery of subsidy transferred
in the account of ineligible beneficiaries, the MoPNG stated as follows:

“In case it is found that the bank details entered are of ineligible
beneficiaries, the connections have been terminated. As per extant
process, the entire amount of subsidy paid to the consumer has been
recovered from the distributor besides total loan amount, cash assistance
component, State Government advance and other advances, if any.


19

In their reply (December 2020) the Ministry submitted that connections of
ineligible beneficiaries were terminated. However, Audit found that even as
on 30 November, 2020 in 5,391 cases name of beneficiary was different
from name of bank account holder.”

58.  Apprising the Committee about the measures taken to terminate all the connections
and present status thereof, the MoPNG stated as follows:

“There are many instances wherein the PMUY beneficiaries have submitted
joint accounts with primary name being of husband/father/some other family
member. Also, the beneficiary’s name used in the bank account is found to
have the initials of the name of the account holder instead of the complete
name. In case of mismatch, the distributor received the data through a portal
where he/she has to verify the bank account details.

However, in case the customer is an ATC customer, then the subsidy is
transferred to the bank account which has been last linked to the Aadhaar
number. Many a times, consumers have multiple bank accounts and the
bank account seeded in the PMUY application will be different from the one
in which she is received the subsidy.”

(I) Third Party Audit of the Scheme

59. | PMUY guidelines stipulated that the Government may undertake third party audit of
the scheme. However, no such audit has been carried out by the Government till date.
MoPNG initiated process to carry out third party audit of the scheme.

60. The Committee sought to know the reasons for non-conducting of third party audit of
the scheme and present status to carry out the same. In response the MoPNG replied as
follows:

“Work order dated 12.10.2020 has been issued to M/s Research and
Development Initiative Pvt. Ltd. for undertaking study on perception and
adoption level of PMUY. Impact study on PMUY by M/s. Research and
Development Initiative Pvt. Ltd. is underway. Report will be submitted upon
completion of the survey.”

Chapter- 4: Compliance to Safety Standards
(A) Non-Conducting of Pre-installation Inspection

61... Pre-installation inspection is conducted before issuance of LPG connection in order
to ascertain that the beneficiaries’ premises meet the required safety standards for LPG
installation viz. ventilated kitchen, elevated platform for stove etc. Pre-installation inspection
also serves as atool to check whether the household already has a LPG connection in
which case, the beneficiary becomes ineligible for getting a LPG connection under PMUY.


20

During field audit, a test check of the KYC records at LPG Distributors revealed that in 2531
cases (13.64 percent), the pre-installation inspection report regarding suitability, or
otherwise, of the kitchen of household on the basis of pre-installation inspection was not
available on record. In addition to this, audit observed that at three sample distributors, pre-
installationinspection report was not found attached with the SVs in any of the PMUY
connections (29078). Thus, the possibility of non-compliance to safety standards during
LPG installation in these households cannot be ruled out.

62. While enquiring about the steps taken to improve the system of compliance to safety
standards during PMUY LPG installations, the MoPNG replied as under:-

“OMCs have placed the SOP for installation of cylinders at customer
premises along with the format of pre inspection report. The physical copies
of inspection report are retained with the distributors and made available on
request. Distributors were advised that all PMUY installations are to be
necessarily inspected. This is done by Distributor and his staff.”

(B) Unsafe LPG usage by the PMUY beneficiaries
63. | The Handbook of PMUY provides for the following safety standards to be observed:

i) The hot plate should always be placed on a platform (made of non-
flammable material) above the cylinder level;

ii) All parts of the installation are to be in good condition;
iii) | Only ISI marked hot plates are to be used;

iv) Rubber tube must be regularly checked and changed immediately in
case any visible cracks / damage are noticed. Use of “SURAKSHA” LPG
hose sold by LPG distributors is recommended for its enhanced safety
features and longer life. Rubber Tube, if used, must be ISI approved.

64. Test check of KYC records at sample distributors and beneficiaries survey (1662)
conducted by audit revealed adoption of unsafe LPG practices in 277 cases (16.67 percent)
viz. installation of hot plate below the height of LPG cylinder (82 cases), hot plates kept on
wooden platform(9 cases), poor quality/rusted/damaged stove burners/non-ISI stove (21
cases), sub-standard quality of hose-pipe (10 cases), installation of LPG connection in
unsafe places i.e. kutcha houses, bamboo/hay roof (155 cases).

65. Providing status of LPG Fire accidents that have taken place at households of PMUY
beneficiaries since launch of the scheme, MoPNG submitted as under:


21

Year-wise number of LPG accidents have taken place in PMUY households.

ver | OmMc

2016-17 44

2017-18 194 — |
2018-19 474

2019-20 173

2020-21 311

Total 1896

66. On being asked as to whether OMCs have conducted awareness campaigns to
educate the PMUY beneficiaries on safe use of LPG, MoPNG replied as under:

“OMCs have been conducting safety-clinics which is an integral part of
consumer awareness programs done by the distributors/ field officers. For
PMUY consumer, a module of PMLP (Pradhan Mantri LPG Panchayat) was
implemented from 2018-19 onwards. During 2018-19, a total of 1.04 lakh
PMLPs were conducted. During 2019-20, 0.42 lakh PMLPs were
conducted at the ground level involving Village Pradhans, Teachers,
NGOs, Anganwadi workers, LPG users etc to spread awareness about
LPG safety. It may be noted that during such safety clinics/ PMLPs a demo
installation along with training on usage is vividly shown to all the
participants. Besides, PMLP, demonstration on safe usage of LPG are
provided to PMUY consumers while releasing connections by the mechanic
doing installation.”

Chapter- 5: Infrastructure Preparedness

(A) Non-achievement of target to appoint distributors

67. Audit observed that the OMCs have commissioned only 4738 new LPG
distributorships in the last 33 months (April 2016 to December 2018). Out of these, 2262
distributorships were related to the advertisements released prior to June 2016. After June
2016, OMCs advertised for 6373locations out of which 2476 distributorships (39 per cent)


22

were commissioned. It was further observed that in 12 states less than 25 percent LPG
distributorships were commissioned against the advertisement. OMCs replied (April 2019)
that after receipt of the revised Unified Guidelines for Selection of LPG distributorships,
OMCs conducted Feasibility studies/Surveys for identification of locations for setting up the
LPG distributorships and 6382 locations were identified (till April 2019) and published on
pan India basis. Completion of the stipulated procedures for selection for such a high
number of locations took considerable time. MoPNG added (May 2019) that 7807 new
distributorships have been commissioned in the last four years and commissioning of more
than 2000 new distributorships is at various stages. Further, during Exit Conference it stated
that difficulties are being faced in obtaining the NOC/Retail Sales License in some Stes.

68. MoPNG informed the Audit that from April 2015 to January 2020, 8690 new
distributorship have been appointed on Industry basis and presently 2029 locations are in
pipeline in various stages of commissioning.

69.  Apprising the Committee about the present status of commissioning of new LPG
distributors at 2029 locations, which were in pipeline in various stages of commissioning, the
MoPNG submitted as follows:

The status of the 2029 locations is mentioned below:

Particulars | | index | OmMc
All Locations pending as on 01.02.2020 A 2029
Total Commissioned between 01.02.2020 till pS | 743
01.09.2021

Locations pending for Commissioning as on C=AB 1286
01.09.2021 (from 01.02.2020)

Net Locations dropped between 01.02.2020 till PP | 2
01.09.2021

Total Locations in pipeline as on 01.09.2021 E=c-D 1284

70. On the question of steps taken for enhancement of LPG Distribution Network in
PMUY-2.0 the MOPNG in their written replies submitted as under:-

“Apart from increasing number of LPG Distributors, OMCs have tied up with
CSC/VLEs for providing refill bookings, deliveries and other services which enables
easy access of refill to Ujjwala customers in far flung areas.”

(B) Long distances catered to by the Distributors


23

71. As per Unified Guidelines for selection of LPG distributorship issued (June 2016) by
MoPNG Rural Urban Vitrak and Gramin Vitraks serve the LPG customers in specified rural
areas covering all villages falling within 15 Km from the municipal limit/boundary limit of the
LPG distributorship location respectively and/or the area specified by the respective OMCs.
Audit analyzed the data relating to the distance covered by 164 distributors and observed
that LPG distributors are covering the various villages/areas/tehsils as specified by the

OMCs which come in the range of 0 Km to 92 Km as detailed below:
“No. of LPG distributors with distance covered for refill delivery
Particulars poe km Beyond 15 km upto
92 km
IOCL 47 35 :
HPCL 7 | 34
BPCL 15 26
Total | 8 Pe

Thus, it can be seen that out of 164 LPG distributors, 95 LPG distributors
(57.93 per cent) served the PMUY beneficiaries’ located up to a distance of 92
Km. Covering such long distances to cater to the consumers led to delay in
refill supply and non-delivery of refills at customer's door-steps.”

72. MoPNG replied (May/July 2019) that the OMCs have been directed to expedite the
commissioning of new distributorships and also effect intra as well as inter OMC customer
transfer by re-distributing connections to the nearest distributorship and complete this
exercise by 31 July 2019.

73. — In their Action Taken Notes MoPNG stated that OMCs have now facilitated booking of
refills from all the CSC/VLEs.

74. While specifying the extent to which the time for refill delivery has been reduced due
to refilling from all the CSC VLEs, the Ministry stated as under:

“CSC VLEs are appointed by distributors who are supplying beyond 15 Km
trading area/far flung areas. Enrolment of consumers beyond 15 km radius
arose mostly as PMUY consumers were in areas beyond the supply area of
the nearest distributors. PMUY consumers being first time users were not
conversant with booking through IVRS if at all they had mobile phones with
them. They used to book refill when the delivery personnel of the distributor
used to visit their villages for delivery. Consequently, the delivery was also
delayed. However, after booking facility was extended through CSC-VLEs, this


24

hassle reduced to quite some extent. Once the booking is done, distributor is
able to gauge at what intervals the delivery in the villages can be done. This
resulted in faster delivery of cylinders. Thus, with the aid of cylinder availability
at CSC VLEs, the customer is at his/her convenient for taking refill from
CSC/VLE rather than expecting refill delivery from the distributor who will be
covering the village once/twice in a week.”

75. The steps as taken by the Ministry to ensure timely refill delivery are given as under:

“As per MoU for FY 2019-20, OMCs have been given the target to maintain
80% of distributors with 4 and 5 stars rating. As of now more than 90% of the
Distributors are having 4 & 5 Star ratings. To monitor the backlog position,
complete refill data is available at all levels in OMCs in field to monitor the
distributor performance, viz. average delivery time, pending call, calls with age
analysis, based on which suitable actions are taken at field level. Necessary
corrective action is taken from time to time to counter any increase in the
backlog position.”

(C) Non-Delivery of LPG cylinders at customers’ address

76. During beneficiary survey of PMUY consumers, audit observed that LPG distributors
were not making home delivery to all consumers. Instead, consumers had to pick up the LPG
cylinders either from the distributor's godown or from a common point in the service area as
identifiedby the distributor. 247 (14.86 per cent) out of 1662 surveyed PMUY beneficiaries
reported that they are getting refills either on point delivery basis or self pick-up from the
distributors’ godown. Audit also observed that since the OMCs are not maintaining any data
in their system about the ex-godown / point delivery taken by the consumers, it could not be
verified as towhat portion of the population are still not getting refills delivered at their
doorsteps which is mandatory as per the MDG.

77. OMCs replied (February 2019) that PMUY consumers are mostly from the rural
segment with meager buying capacity. They prefer to take refills from the distributor premises
as per their convenience and ease to buy. BPCL further stated (April 2019) that in view of
rapid expansion of customer base in rural areas after PMUY, district/state administration
have suggested and advised distributors to identify Points of delivery as an interim
arrangement of refill delivery till the commissioning of new distributors. The replies disregard
the fact that non-home delivery of refill can only be made under exceptional circumstances
and with prior written authorization of the OMC. Non-compliance of this condition falls under
major irregularities defined under MDG. Further, it confirms the fact that there is an urgent
requirement for the OMCs to appoint new LPG distributors in the rural areas. MoPNG replied
(May/July 2019) that the OMCs have been advised to ensure door step delivery by capturing
coordinates of the refill delivery place or to allow ‘Cash and Carry’ rebate to customers. It
also directed the OMCs to capture the mobile number of all the registered consumers in the
system.


25

78. On being asked about the steps taken to record data in the LPG system about the ex-
godown/point delivery taken by the PMUY consumers, the MoPNG replied as under:

“The rural customers due to their poor socio-economic conditions prefer to
book refill at the distributorship itself as per their funds and their availability at
home. Most being casual labor/daily wage earners are not very educated to do
IVRS booking and make walk-in booking at the distributorships. Distributors
have been advised to ensure home-delivery to all LPG consumers and in most
cases Home-delivery of LPG cylinders is undertaken. Wherever the same is
not possible, Cash & Carry Rebate is given to the consumers. Further, OMCs
have done pilot for delivery verification through Delivery Authentication code
(DAC)/OTP. However due to the issues being faced in field in receiving OTPs
due to non-availability of internet/mobile connectivity and the user not being at
home, the same has not been implemented on all-India basis.”

79. While providing present status of capturing of all mobile numbers of PMUY
consumers in LPG data base, the MoPNG stated that 82% of the PMUY customers in IOC,
80% of HPCL PMUY customers and 88% of BPC PMUY customers are having Mobile
Numbers updated in LPG data base.

80. As regards the steps initiated to strengthen the delivery mechanism to provide
benefit to intended beneficiaries, MoPNG submitted as follows:-

“The delivery mechanism has been strengthened through Commissioning of
new

distributorships in under-served areas and engagement of CSC/VLEs for LPG
distribution, steps which have immensely improved the delivery infrastructure
thus benefiting the PMUY beneficiaries in getting the refills at doorstep. All the
OMCs distributors, except DurgamKshetriyaVitrak are understanding
instructions to provide door to door refill delivery to all households.”

81. In response thereto, Audit in their vetting comments stated that this will be
verified during audit of e-PMUY.

(D) Delay in delivering refills to PMUY consumers

82. During the period from May 2016 to December 2018, 19.41 crore LPG refills have
been delivered by 17782 LPG distributors to 3.78 crore active PMUY beneficiaries. On
analysis of data, audit observed that in case of 36.62 lakh LPG refills delivered to 24.83 lakh
consumers (6.57 per cent of total active consumers) by 14290 LPG distributors (80.36 per
cent of totalLPG distributors), there was a delay of more than 10 days in delivery of refills by
the LPG distributors which is in deviation to the OMCs’ Citizen Charter which specifies
maximum delivery time of seven days. On further analysis, it was observed that out of 36.62
lakh refills, 5.94 lakh refills were delivered with a delay of more than 30 days as detailed
below:


26

Delay in delivery of LPG refills

Delay in} 1001. HPCL BPCL Total
refill
delivery
(in days)
No. of | No. of| No. off No. off No. off No. off a off No. of
refills consumer | refills consumers; refills consumers | refills consumers
s affected affected affected affected
11-30 1263645 | 1007872 749289 | 692349 1055057 | 783261 3067991 | 2483482
31-180 | 221849 173055 195375 590279
181-664 | 71 1701 2238 4010
Total 1485565 924045 1252670 3662280
It was further observed that 1209 LPG distributors supplied more than 100 refills (ranging
from 100 to 9154 refills) with a delay of more than 30 days to 5 lakh beneficiaries. As majority
of PMUY beneficiaries are having Single Bottle Cylinder (SBC), delayed delivery of refill is a

deterrent to the main objective of the scheme of transferring the BPL households from
uncleanto clean fuel and may force PMUY beneficiaries to return to unclean fuel being used
earlier.

83.  Apprising the Committee about the action initiated by the OMCs to appoint new LPG
distributors in the rural areas, MOPNG stated as under:

“Unified Guidelines for selecting LPG distributorships was communicated to
OMCS by MOP8NG vide letter P-20019/2/2016-LPG dated 23.06.2016. The
formats of LPG distributorships catering to the villages under the unified
guidelines are as under:

a. Rurbanvitarak caters to ‘urban area’ and also provides service to the
LPG customers in specified ‘rural area”, generally covering all villages
falling within 15 km from the municipal limits of the LPG distributorship
location and or the area specified by the respective OMCs.

b. Graminvitrak located in ‘rural area’ caters to specified villages or cluster
of villages falling within 15 km from the location.

c. DurgamKshetriyavitrak (DKV) are set up in difficult and special areas
where setting up of Gramin and Rurbanvitrak are not feasible.


84.

In this regard Audit observed that refill data furnished by 1001 was incomplete therefore the
could not be verified in case of 1001. As on 30 November, 2020, 37.03 lakh refills
were delivered with delay of more than 10 days out of which 7.33 lakh refills were delivered

same

27

PMUY consumers mostly hail from the rural areas and new distributors were
advertised in the rural areas in view of providing better service to the growing
number on consumers in the rural areas.

9433 distributorships have been appointed between April 2015 to August
2021 and as on 01.09.2021, around 1284 are in various stages of
commissioning.”

MoPNG replied (December, 2020) that the pendency of booking at any distributorship
is monitored through the system generated report on daily basis which includes all booking
status vis-a-vis supply. It has also got age analysis of pending refills for sensitizing the field.

with delay of more than 30 days in HPCL and BPCL.

85.

(६)
MDG

86.

Justification of the MoPNG/OMCs in this regard is as under:-

“The pendency of booking at any distributorship is monitored through the
system generated report on daily basis which includes all bookings’ status
vis-a-vis supply. It has also got age analysis of pending refills for sensitizing
the field. Only after multiple attempts (three)of delivery has been made,
distributors are allowed to cancel and booking after recording proper reason.
Till then the booking are kept open for delivery.

At times, however, delay in delivery of refills is beyond control of
OMCs/distributor due to natural calamities, strikes/bandhs, law & order
situation, Government directives, product shortage/ supply constraints with
OMCs etc. In such situations, all out efforts are made to normalize the
situation. OMCs on daily basis are monitoring the backlog in field which is
also shared with MoPNG.

To gauge the backlog scenario, OMCs have been given a target to maintain
80% distributors with star rating of 4 and 5. OMCs ensure the compliance of
the same is done by monitoring the backlog situation. As of now more than
90 % of the Distributors are having 4 & 5 Star ratings.”

Non-adherence to “Targeted Delivery Time” norms contained in the

LPG distributorships are appointed by the OMCs and are governed by the terms &
conditions of agreement/MDG.As per the MDG, the LPG distributors have to deliver the gas
cylinders within the “Targeted Delivery Time” (TDT) where delivery time is the time between
the booking dateand the actual delivery date. The TDT performance envisages rating of

distributors based on its quarterly performance as follows:


28

No. of Star Delivery period Category
5 Star 85% delivery in <=2 days Excellent —
4 Star 85% delivery in <=4 days Good
3 Star 85% delivery in <=6 days Average
2 Star 85% delivery in <=8 days Below Average
1 Star 15% delivery in >8 days Poor

The distributor is to ensure that its distributorship is not rated with ‘1’ Star, i.e. ‘Poor’ rating
and ‘2’ Star, i.e. ‘Below Average’ rating in a quarter, failing which the OMCs have to take the
action, as specified in the MDG, against the erring distributorship.

MDG states that in case of ‘1’ Star rating in 1st or 2nd quarter, OMCs have to issue a
warning- cum guidance letter to the distributor. In all cases of ‘Poor’ rating during any quarter
subsequent to above period, a fine equivalent to 25 per cent of one month’s distributor
commission shallbe imposed on the erring distributor. In every instance of ‘Poor’
performance rating subsequent to the above, 50 per cent of one month's distributor
commission shall be imposed. Further, it states that if LPG distributorship is rated ‘Poor’ in
any four completed quarters during thepreceding 2 years (i.e. 8 quarters), it would lead to
termination of the LPG distributorship.

On analysis of the OMCs star rating data w.r.t. its LPG distributors, audit observed that there
were 504 (IOCL: 373, BPCL: 87 and HPCL: 44) LPG distributors who were given one star
rating in all eight quarters in the preceding two years on the basis of their performance and
were therefore liable for termination.

Further, it was observed that there were 461 (IOCL: 371, BPCL: 40 and HPCL: 50) LPG
distributors whose performance was observed at two-star rating, either on consistent basis or
in last three quarters in the last two years. As per MDG, these distributorships were also
liable for a penalty i.e. a fine equivalent to 10 per cent to 25 per cent of one month's
distributor commission due to continuous ‘Below Average’ performance.

87. On being asked about the steps taken to monitor the performance of LPG
distributors, the MoPNG replied as under:

“To gauge the backlog scenario, MoPNG has given OMCs a target to maintain
80% distributors with star rating of 4 and 5.

The backlog of the distributors is monitored by OMCs regularly. OMCs have
developed system wherein distributor-wise / day-wise pendency of refills is auto
triggered to field every day. This enables stringent monitoring of the backlog.


29

This also helped in improvement of TDT rating of the distributors. The details
of the distributors with 4 and 5 Star TDT rating for the year 2019-20 to 2020-21

is as under:
OMCs 10C HPC BPC
2019-20 80.4% 84.7% 82.57
2020-21 88.7% 91.2% 89.02
2021-21 (Apr-Jun) 93.1% 90.9% 91.20
88. Further, when asked about the action taken against the erring LPG distributors for

non-adhering to targeted delivery time, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Whenever it is observed that star ratings of the LPG distributor either one star
(poor) or two star (below average) action in line with MDG is initiated in the
form of the Show Cause Notice to the LPG distributorship. The reply to the
Show Cause notice is analyzed by the competent authority at Territory
/Divisional Offices of respective OMCs and in all established cases, action is
taken against the distributors under the provision of MDG. However, in case
the reasons are not attributable to the LPG Distributor, action is not taken.

However, in the past 18 months, in view of prevailing pandemic situation,
monitoring of Distributor Performance w.r.t. Targeted Delivery Time was not
tenable.”

(F) Insufficient steps to encourage consumption of 5 kg cylinders

89. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 7 March
2016, highlighted that unless and until the distribution policy of LPG was reformed to
bring availability of small cylinders to the poor households, PMUY would not be that
successful. In line with this, MoPNG recommended two sizes of cylinders i.e. 14.2 Kg
and 5 Kg for PMUY beneficiaries depending upon the field situation. Further,
encouragement of the option of using smaller sized cylinder was important as PPAC-
CRISIL survey (June 2016) had highlighted that high refilling cost was a serious barrier
to LPG usage with 83 per cent of the respondents of the survey considering it as a
barrier. However, it was observed that the OMCs, till December 2018, have been able
to release only 16032 connections with 5 Kg cylinders as shown below:


30

Number of § kg LPG connections released

OMC 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total
(December 2018)

1001. 325 322 13848 14495

BPCL P| 253 172 425

HPCL io 896 216 1112

Total 325 14717 14236 16032

It is evident from the above that the number of 5 Kg cylinder connections released till
December 2018 constituted only a miniscule portion (0.04 per cent) of the total PMUY
connections. Further, during the course of beneficiary survey, audit observed that 567
beneficiaries out of 1662 PMUY consumers (34 per cent) were not aware of the option of 5
Kg cylinders which raises a concern about the effectiveness of awareness building
measures taken by the OMCs. Though a pilot project for swapping 14.2 Kg cylinder with 5
Kg cylinder was launched (July 2017), the response was not very encouraging. In May
2018, eight focus states were identified to improve 5 Kg cylinder by certain ways viz.
maintaining adequate stock at distributorship / plant level, close monitoring of LPG
distributor performance on 5 Kg cylinder and undertaking wide publicity. Further, MoPNG
issued instructions in June 2018 to OMCs to encourage use of 5 Kg cylinders by providing
the option to switching from 14.2 Kg to 5 Kg cylinder or opt for Double Bottle Cylinder (DBC)
of 5 Kg cylinder instead of a 14.2 Kg connection. However, these steps should have been
taken initially itself in view of caution expressed by EFC.

90. The current position of consumption of 5 kg cylinders from 2018-19 to 2021-22, as
provided by the MoPNG is given as under:

“The current status of consumption of 5 Kg cylinders for the year 2020-
21 and 2021-22 (till August 2021) is as appended below.

FY Sales (in lakhs)
2018-19 3.72

2019-20 38.23

2020-21 50.42

2021-22

(till August 2021)
13.49



31

It is observed that the growth of 5kg refill sale in FY 20-21 was 32%
while the overall growth for LPG in FY 20-21 was 8% for Industry.
Therefore, it can be said that sufficient steps have been taken by the
OMCs to promote sale of 5 kg cylinders.”

91. Further, in regard to the steps taken for encouraging the beneficiaries to use the 5
kg cylinders or opt for double bottle cylinder of 5 kg cylinder instead of 14.2 kg connections,
the MoPNG submitted as under:

“In order to promote 5 Kg sales, following have been done by OMCs
i. Option to swap 14.2 Kg cylinders with 5 Kg and back

ii. Default option of 5 Kg in new connection enrolled (PMUY
enrollments were stopped wef 05.09.2019 on achieving 8 crore
target and Ujjwala 2.0 has started w.e.f. 10.08.2021)

iii. Promotion of 5 kg through campaigns and banners

iv. Use of Pradhan Mantri LPG Panchayats and Safety Clinics to
enhance 5 kg sales.”

Chapter- 6: Transition of BPL households to LPG
Adoption of clean fuel by the PMUY beneficiaries

Audit analysis of consumption of refills by PMUY consumers are given in the following
paras:

(A) Low consumption of refills

92. At the time of implementation of the scheme, OMCs have worked out the annual
consumption of existing BPL families having LPG connections as 3-4 refills per annum.
This consumption pattern was expected to continue after launch of PMUY and the
assessment of demand of refills was based on this assumption. First year of LPG usage is
crucial in assessing the BPL household's willingness to adopt clean fuel and, therefore,
keeping this in view, audit calculated the average refill consumption of 1.93 crore PMUY
consumers who had completed one year or more as on 31 March, 2018 and observed that
they had consumed 3.66 refills per annum. The same analysis was done for 3.18 crore
PMUY consumers who had completed one year or more as on 31 December 2018 and it
revealed that the average refill consumption came down to 3.21 refills per annum. Thus,
the overall average refill consumption of PMUY beneficiaries is on a declining trend.
A further analysis of these 3.18 crore PMUY consumers, who had completed one year or
more as on 31 December, 2018, revealed that 0.56 crore (17.61 percent) beneficiaries
never came back for second refill and 1.05 crore (33.02 percent) beneficiaries consumed 1
to 3 refills only.


32

(B) State-wise consumption pattern

93.  State-wise consumption shows that Chattisgarh had the lowest per annum average
refill consumption of 1.61 refills, followed by Madhya Pradesh (2.38 refills), Jharkhand (2.57
refills), Odisha (2.88 refills), Assam (2.95 refills), West Bengal (3.08 refills) and
Maharashtra (3.18 refills). In the remaining States/UTs, Audit observed that in two
States/UTs the average annual consumption was less than three refills ie. below the
envisaged consumption of 3-4 refill per annum.

(C) Higher Annual LPG refill consumptions

94. OMC-wise details of consumers with higher annual consumption of refills are as
detailed below:

OMC wise number of beneficiaries with higher consumption

Average annual | Number of PMUY consumers Total

consumption of LPG

refills

1001. BPCL HPCL

13-20 96326 60160 37384 193870

21-30 1376 1342 1335 4053

31 to 40 108 104 141 353

41-50 33 17 107 157

51-85 11 4 16 31

Total 97854 61627 38983 198464
As seen from the above, 1.98 lakh consumers had an average annual consumption of more
than 12 cylinders.
(D) Higher monthly LPG refill consumptions
95. Audit further analyzed the consumption pattern of PMUY beneficiaries on monthly
basis and observed that 13.96 lakh consumers in 20.12 lakh instances consumed 3 to 41

refills in a month since installation. Out of 13.96 lakh consumers, 10.09 lakh consumers have
taken refills in the above range only once and the remaining 3.87 lakh consumers have taken
refills 2 to 23 timeswhich suggests that these consumers are habitual in taking more than two
refills in a month. OMC wise detail of instances of higher monthly consumption by the
beneficiaries is as detailed below:


33

ONC wise instances of higher monthly consumption

Monthly 1001. BPCL HPCL Total

consumption|

of LPG refills} No. off No. off No. off No. off No. off No. off No. off No. 0
consumers} instances | consumers) instances | consumers] instances | consumers] instances

3to5 553516 | 689769 | 449031 | 612752 | 393898 | 543521 | 1396445 | 1846042

6109 51626 48400 35638 135664

1010 14 16092 7996 6185 30273

15 to 41 67 65 84 216

Total 757554 669213 585428 2012195

96. Attributing the reasons for the two different trends in the use of LPG cylinders-decline
as well as high consumption, the MoPNG stated as under:-

“The PMUY consumers are mostly first time
that the average consumption of LPG refills would rise steadily over the years.

LPG users. Hence, it was expected

The average consumption of PMUY consumers has been improving year on
year. The year-on-year per capita consumption of LPG refills by PMUY

consumers is given below:

FY PCC for PMUY Consumers

2016-17 3.96

2017-18 3.39

2018-19 3.00

2019-20 13.01

2020-21 (4.39 (effect of Free Refill under PMGKY scheme)
2021-22 3.72 (data till August 2021, prorated for FY)

97. On being asked as to whether the OMCs get the matter investigated by their
investigating teams, Ministry replied as under:

“Yes, the OMCs have got the matter investigated by their teams and action
on case to case basis has been taken. OMCs have already taken action
based on the findings/verification for the cases as per MDG.


34

Show cause notices were issued to Distributors having cases of high
consumption detected by CAG providing the details and reason for
justification The Distributors have submitted their replies where customers
have stated that high consumption was due to function / religious event in
the family. The details for consumption have been verified based on the
DGCC entries.

Wherever misuse of refills was obtained, action has been taken on the
Distributor. Wherever the consumption has been confirmed by the
consumers, the same has been confirmed and taken into account. Based
on the verification, MDG have been levied upon the 1665 Distributors
wherever the consumption was found not genuine.”

98. As regards the steps taken to improve the low consumption of LPG refills, the
Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:-

PMUY beneficiaries are households with poor socio-economic background and are
habituated to use their traditional cooking methods. Hence, OMCs are continuously
monitoring the refill pattern of PMUY Beneficiaries and taking necessary initiatives to
improve LPG Adoption by PMUY Beneficiaries. As seen from the table below, the per capita
consumption of PMUY beneficiaries has been progressively increasing and has reached 3.68
Refills during FY 2021 -22. The year-on-year improvement in PCC for PMUY consumers is
given below:

FY PCC for PMUY Consumers
2018-19 3.00
2019-20 3.01
2020-21 4.39
2021-22 3.68

OMCs have also tried to facilitate LPG Consumption by taking following measures:
1. Deferment of Loan Recovery

2. Swapping provision from 14.2 Kg to 5 Kg refill and vice versa and 5 Kg DBC provision
under PMUY Scheme.

3. To create awareness about LPG usage and benefits, PMLP (Pradhan Mantri LPG
Panchayats) are being regularly conducted by OMCs.

4. During Covid-19 pandemic, a Scheme for providing upto 3 (three) free of cost LPG refills to
PMUY beneficiaries was started under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package (PMGKP).

Apart from above, the Government has started subsidy of Rs. 200/- per refill(14.2 kg cylinder)
upto 12 refills/Annum during FY 2022-23. This subsidy will be over and above market subsidy
being credited to customer’s bank account.

99. However, Audit in their vetting comments submitted that annual average refill
consumption is still less than 4 refills.


100.

35

The Ministry stated (in December 2020) that OMCs have further strengthened the
system by imposing additional restrictions w.e.f. June 2019 which limits the maximum refills

to 2 per month and 15 in a year of PMUY consumers.

In this regard, Audit observed that 20,307 instances of monthly consumption of more
than 2 refills from June 2019 were noticed in database of BPCL and HPCL. IOCL has

furnished incomplete data of refill of LPG cylinders and same could not be verified.

101.

102.

While providing justification in this regard, the Ministry stated that:

“There is an option available for a PMUY consumer to book more than 2
refills in a month, if the same is needed on the basis of family size and
requirement. The request for such cases are approved by OMC field
Officials.

For all such cases, where consumption is more than 2 post June, 2019, the
requests for refills shall have been approved by OMC field official based on
request made.”

Further, on being asked about the action taken to limit the high

consumption of refills, the MoPNG stated as under:-

103.

(E)

104.

OMCs have introduced validation check in June, 2019 in their
respective software that restricts refills to 2 numbers of 14.2 Kg refill
per month and maximum 15 in a year to PMUY Customers. OMCs have
taken necessary Disciplinary action against the established diversion
casesas per the provision of MDG. Action has been taken against 697
distributors and imposed penalty of 14.5 crore.

In this regard Audit remarks are given as under:

“OMCs have provided screenshots regarding validation put in place by
them in their software in support of their reply. However, the same
would be verified during the e-PMUY to check the efficacy of the
validation put in place.Information regarding imposition of penalty has
not been shared by OMCs.”

Outcome of PMUY beneficiary survey
Audit observed that out of 1662 PMUY beneficiaries, 672 beneficiaries

exclusively shifted to LPG, while 589 beneficiaries again reverted back to the use of
unclean fuels (firewood, cow-dung cake and etc.) and 401 beneficiaries were using
both LPG and unclean fuels mainly due to higher price of LPG refills or easy/free of
cost availability of traditional unclean fuel. In view of high cost of LPG refill, which
emerged as the main cause for reverting back to traditional unclean fuel by the BPL
households from beneficiary survey, audit analyzed the price of LPG refills (14.2 Kg


cylinder) and found that market

36

price of LPG refills had varied between the range of

500 per refill to 837 per refill during the period from April 2016 to December 2018.

Since the cost of refill has to

be paid upfront by the BPL consumers, this has

become a constraint in ensuring sustained usage of LPG.

Some initiatives as taken
consumers are given below:

by the MoPNG to improve the affordability for PMUY

i) 5 Kg DBC connection made attractive giving additional amount of = 350/-
through CSR over है 1600/- cash assistance to PMUY

ii) Swapping option from14.2 Kg to 5Kg and vice a versa was implemented

iii) Deferment of loan recovery from Subsidy amount to reduce the net cash
out go of a PMUY consumer to encourage refill consumption for six refills
of 14.2kg/17nos. 5kg cylinder or a period of one year, whichever is
earlier w.e.f. 01.08.2019.”

105. On being asked about the action taken by the MoPNG/OMCs to ensure sustained
usage of LPG by PMUY beneficiaries and current status in this regard, the MoPNG replied

as under:

“PMUY has been successful in enhancing the refill consumption of the consumer.
The year-wise per capita consumption of PMUY customers for last years, is as
under and it clearly indicates that the refill consumption is improving.

FY PCC for PMUY Consumers

2016-17 3.96

2017-18 3.39

2018-19 3.00

2019-20 3.01

2020-21 4.39 (effect of Free Refill under PMGKY scheme)
Auguet 2021) 3.72 (data till August 2021, prorated for FY)

OMCs have taken various steps to improve the LPG consumption of PMUY

customers and are as fol

lows:

1. Deferment of loan recovery from subsidy amount to reduce the net cash outgo of
a PMUY consumer to encourage refill consumption for six refills or period of one


(F)
106.

37

year whichever is earlier during FY 2018-19 and also during August 2019 — July
2020.

Swap option from 14.2 kg connections to 5 kg connections which will reduce the
upfront cash outgo for a PMUY consumer and thus encourage refill consumption.

PMUY beneficiaries were given option of 5kg DBC package. To avail the 5kg
refills, the upfront cash outgo for a customer will be low.

During pan India lockdown on account of Covid-19, Government of india
supported the PMUY beneficiaries with the free refills Scheme under “Pradhan
Mantri Garib Kalyan Package”. Under this scheme, 14.17 crore free refills were
delivered to PMUY Beneficiaries during April-December, 2020.

Conducting Pradhan Mantri LPG Panchayat (PMLP), a community-based
program to create awareness about the scheme and also to address any issue
pertaining to LPG usage. After achieving 8 Crore LPG connections, PMLP were
targeted among nil or low refill consumers, to convince them about sustained
usage of LPG. OMCs had conducted total 1.46 Lakh LPG Panchayat during FY
2018-19 & FY 2019-20.”

Interest free loan extended by the OMCs

MoPNG guidelines on the PMUY states that OMCs will provide EMI facility to

those BPL beneficiaries who want to avail the same towards the cost of gas stove and
fist refill under the scheme. In this regard, audit observed that OMCs have extended
unsecured interest-free EMlfacility to 68 per cent of beneficiaries subject to recovery of

loan

amount from the subsidy payable to respective PMUY beneficiary against initial

refill/subsequent refills. Details of interest-free loan extended by the OMCs to PMUY
beneficiaries vis-a-vis recovery thereof as on 31 March and 31 December 2018 was as
follows:

Details of loanee PMUY consumers and outstanding loan there against

PARTICULAR’ 31.03.2018 31.12.2018
No. of active PMUY consumers 3.52 3.78

(in crore)

No.of PMUY consumer who 2.38 2.58

have taken loan(in crore)

Amount of Interest-free Loan 3852.77 4192.79
extended (Zin crore)



38

Amount of Interest-free Loan 1519.36 1575.72
recovered(%in crore)

Outstanding Interest-free Loan 2333.41 2617.07
(Zin crore)

As seen from the above, only 37.58 percentof the amount of interest-free loan extended
has been recovered by the OMCs as on 31 December 2018.

107.

Apprising the Committee about the steps taken by MoPNG to safeguard financial

interest of the OMCs in view of non-recovery of interest free loans from the PMUY
beneficiaries, the MoPNG stated as under:-

108.

“As on 317 December, 2019, OMCs have extended a total loan of = 10,575 crore to
PMUY beneficiaries. Of this around = 3,500 crore has been recovered. The balance =
7,075 crore is outstanding. The interest free loan was given by the OMCs to the
PMUY consumers to ease their entry into the LPG ecosystem and to ensure better
adoption of LPG for its sustained usage. As of 01.09.2021, while about = 4,121 crore
worth of loan was recovered, = 6,454 crore remained unpaid. Due to Covid related
restrictions and continuous financial difficulties faced by the PMUY consumers, it was
felt that enforcing recovery of loans from poor PMUY consumers would not be a
justifiable option, especially when complete recovery of loan through LPG subsidy
was not feasible. Therefore, MoPNG has advised the OMCs to consider the effects of
prevailing situation on the consumers and take suitable decision about
absorbing/writing off the pending loans.”

The Committee then sought to know about the recovery of balance amount of %7,075

crore. In this regard the reply of the Ministry is as follows:-

“As on 01.09.2021, the outstanding loan for PMUY beneficiaries is = 6454
crores. OMCs had undertaken deferment of loan recovery of the PMUY
consumers during FY 2018-19 and during Aug '19- July '20. As a result,
instead of recovery of loan through subsidy, the subsidy was paid to the
consumers. Also, the recovery of PMUY loan has been low as compared to
the previous years as the value of subsidy in any particular market has
reduced drastically since May 2020. Moreover, around 17% markets are
not having any subsidy. Consequently, the recovery of PMUY loan has also
reduced. Now, OMCs have been conveyed by MoPNG that OMCs may
take a decision regarding absorption/writing off the outstanding PMUY
loans. OMCs are presently working on this matter.”


39

109. Apprising the Committee about the recovery of outstanding loan, the
Ministry stated as under:-

“Loan amount is recovered through adjustment of subsidies against the
refills taken by the beneficiaries and is underway. Under Ujjwala 2.0, all
beneficiaries are being given free refill and stove and hence there is no
loan option required in Ujjwala 2.0.”

(G) Absence of Performance indicators to assess the benefits of the scheme.

110. Expenditure Finance Committee, during approval of the Scheme, enquired (March
2016) about the measurable benefits / outcomes of PMUY to which MoPNG replied that
PMUY being a social development scheme, the measurable benefits / outcomes were:

a) the reduction in dependence on firewood;
b) improved health status of women

Audit, however, observed that there were no parameters set to monitor sustained usage of
clean fuel. No performance indicators were set by the Ministry for assessing the health
benefits achieved by the beneficiaries from the scheme. To an audit query that whether any
criteria / benchmark has been set to assess the extent of achievement of the scheme,
MoPNG replied (January 2019) that the scheme relied upon the existing studies
enumerating impact of conventional fuels on the health of women and children. Hence, the
overall benefit achieved from the scheme cannot be measured in absence of any
performance indicator.

MoPNG noted (May/July 2019) the audit observation and also replied that to assess the
impact of PMUY, it has requested the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to set up an
inter-ministerial panel of experts chaired by Health Sector expert consisting of
representatives from relevant sectors including Environment, Petroleum & Natural Gas.

111. The reasons as stated by the MoPNG for not specifying performance indicators to
assess the overall implementation of PMUY, are given as under:

“The increase in PCC of PMUY beneficiary from 3.39 to 4.39 cylinders indicates
that users are switching over from partial use of primitive fuel like wood, coal, cow
dung etc. to full utilization of LPG. The LPG coverage across the country has
increased from 56 % as on 01.04.2014 to 100.5 % as on 01.09.2021. Number of
domestic LPG customers has increased from 14.51 crore in 2014 to 29.31 crore
as on 01.09.2021. Total LPG consumption in the country has increased from 17.6
MMT for the year 2014-15 to 27.7 MMT for the year 2020-21.

The Scheme was designed with an overall objective of enhanced LPG coverage in
the country and hence National/State level LPG coverage is its most important


40

performance index, alongwith number of domestic connections and per family LPG
consumption. All these parameters are regularly monitored by MoPNG.”

112. On being asked as to whether inter-ministerial panel of experts chaired by Health
Sector experts consisting of representatives from relevant sectors including Environment,
Petroleum and Natural Gas has been set up to assess in the impact of PMUY, the MoPNG
stated as under:-

“MoPNG has commissioned a third party evaluation for measuring impact of the
scheme on various socio-economic aspects of women life. The study is being
conducted by RDI. Also, a study has been commissioned by Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare on measuring health effects of improved LPG coverage.
According to interim results shared from this study for 6 States, 45 % of the total
surveyed primary cooking persons have reported improved health after
consistently using LPG.”

Chapter- 7: Financial Management
(A) Budget for settlement of PMUY claims

113. OMCs’ claims against release of LPG connections under PMUY are required to be
lodged with PPAC on a quarterly basis which was revised to monthly basis from September
2016. PPAC scrutinizes and forwards the same to MoPNG which in turn reimburses the
claims to OMCs.Year-wise release of PMUY connections and settlement thereof was as
given below:

Details of funds allocated and utilization

Year PMUY Budget Revised Budget OMCs’ claim =
connections Estimate Estimate utilized processed
released
(सा crore) | (सा crore) | (Zin crore) | (in crore)
(in crore)
2016-17 | 2.00 2000.00 2500.00 2500.00 Up to January | Balance claims of
2017 498.77 crore
for 2016-17 were
settled in
2017-18.
2017-18 1.56 2500.00 2251.81 2251.81 Up to | Balance claims of
September 672.84 crore
2017 for 2017-18 were
settled in
2018-19.
2018-19 | 2.39 3200.00 NA. 3200.00 Up to August | + Balance claims
(including 2018 amounting to
(part payment) | %1232.00 crore
2.09 crore



41

under EPMUY)

for the

Nov-18
settled in
20.

crore
December
was

from Aug-18 to

Payment of
claim of 2177.11

under process at

period

were
2019-

for
2018

MoPNG

114.

In this regard, Audit observed that while scaling up the scheme target to eight
crore, the year wise target for release of PMUY connections was also revised
(September 2017) to two crore connections each for the years 2016-17 to 2019-
20. However, neither the RE for 2017-18 nor the BE for 2018-19 was allocated in
line with the revision of targets or for meeting the shortfall for the previous years.
This has resulted in partial settlement of the claims in these years due to shortfall
in the budget. This situation is likely to persist in view of further release of
PMUY/E-PMUY connections unless MoPNG gets sufficient budget to settle the
pending claims of the OMCs including the shortfall arising due to partial
settlement of claims.

The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have informed that the OMCs have
achieved the target of releasing 8 crore connections under PMUY. The total cash
assistance from Govt. of India that has been sanctioned for these connections is
% 12,800 crore.”

Providing details of the amount disbursed to each OMC out of हें 12,800 crore and

details of the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Budget utilized during the years
2019-20, 2020-21 and OMCs claims settled, the Ministry submitted as follows:-

“The amounts disbursed to OMCs under PMUY are as under:

(रे in crore)

Total

Net claim submitted to

PPAC 5,978.73) | aes 3,358.94)

Less: Claim Utilized out of

>| ICSR pool Fund 117.24 67.29 65.95) 250.48}

12,780.09



Final claim net of ineligible

claim and utilized out of

42

IC(A-B) ICSR 5,861.49} 3,375.13) 3,292.99] 12,529.61

~~ |less:Claimamountreceved| | #&3| / |

० | from PPAC 5,850.23 3,366.37 3,282.95} 12,499.55)
Net PMUY Cash assistance

E(C-D) |claim receivable 11.26 8.76] 10.0: 30.06)

(B) CSR_funds collected from NOCs_ without_assessing the realistic

requirement

115. CCEA, while approving the scheme, had stipulated that MoPNG may, from within the
available savings from the total scheme funds and CSR fund of OMCs, spend no more than
two per cent towards administration and IEC related activities. MoPNG, while issuing
modalities for implementation of PMUY, directed (June 2016) the OMCs that 20 per cent of
CSR funds of National Oil Companies (NOCs) would be used for release of LPG
connections under PMUY to the extent of two percentadministrative / IEC expenses. IOCL
was nominated as the nodal agency. Accordingly, the NOCs had contributed 20 per cent of
their CSR funds as given below:

Details of CSR funds contributed by NOCs (₹ in crore)

Company CSR Contribution Total
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
ONGC 107.13 P| ro 107.13
GAIL 16.30 | | | _| 16.30
OIL 15.80 12.35 11.23 39.38
1001. 41.60 76.43 85.38 203.41
8701. 31.82 36.67 40.54 109.03
HPCL 16.58 25.27 31.44 73.29
Total 229.23 150.72 168.59 548.54

Utilization of CSR fund by the OMCs for release of LPG Connections under PMUY as

on March 2019 was as be!

0५४:


43

Details of utilization of CSR funds by OMCs (2 in crore)

OMG 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total
1OCL 41.60 10.79 54.20 री
BPCL 16.44 12.94 29.58 58.96
HPCL 15.99 14.09 31.06 61.14
Total 74.03 37.82 114.84 [7669]

Audit observed that MoPNG, instead of working out the realistic requirement of
CSR funds for utilization in PMUY, directed the NOCs to pool in 20 per cent of their CSR
fund as per past practice. Since only an amount of %286.69 crore had been utilized till
March 2019, an amountof = 261.85 crore is lying idle with 10561 which is the pool
operator.”

116. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated that CSR contribution to the CSR
Fund of the OMCs is governed by the PMUY modalities document. As per extant modalities,
CSR funds (i.e. 20% of 2% CSR of IOC, BPC, HPC, ONGC, GAIL and OIL)will be used to
provide LPG connections under PMUY to the extent of 2% IEC/ PME which would be
booked under PMUY. The estimated release of connections under PMUY for a financial
year out of this CSR fund was not projectable for any future period. The un-utilised fund
from a particular financial year gets carried forward to next year without causing any loss to
Govt. /OMC. In order to utilise CSR fund, following expenditure was approved for inclusion
in CSR by appropriate authority.

o 5kg DBC connections under PMUY

o Connections to those BPL families dwelling in the proximity of Taj Trapezium
Agra who were not part of the SECC data

117. While attributing the reasons for not realistically accessing the requirement of CSR
fund and the present position of unutilized CSR fund, MoPNG submitted as follows:-

“As per the PMUY scheme, fund received under CSR 9001 account are to
be used for issuing PMUY connections to the extent of 2% of IEC and
PME admissible under the scheme.

As the fund received by nodal agency are to be given back to OMC upon
their claim against PMUY connections issued by them to claim IEC/PM
expenses, there is no certainty when the claim from OMC would be
received by nodal agency (i.e. IOCL) and also nodal agency cannot
foresee the amount of claim that each OMC would lodge with IOCL.


44

Hence it is not possible to foresee the amount and when the requirement
would arise. However, contribution to CSR pool fund is as per the scheme
ie. 20% of CSR pool fund.

There is no unutilized CSR fund as on date. The entire amount has been
disbursed or consumed amongst OMCs.”

(C) Non-transfer of subsidy to PMUY consumers

118. The non-loanee PMUY beneficiaries are entitled for refill subsidy right from the fist
refill. However, for loanee beneficiaries, the subsidy is to be transferred only after recovery
of loan in full. In order to enable transfer of refil subsidy to consumers’ bank account, Bank
accountdetails and Aadhaar number of consumer has to be mapped with LPG connection
by the LPG distributor. Analysis of PMUY transaction data (as on 31 December 2018) using
data analysis tool revealed that:

a) Subsidy of %78.85 crore (IOCL: 244.38 crore, BPCL: %13.04 crore and HPCL:
%21.43 crore) for 10.5 lakh non-loanee PMUY consumers (IOCL: 5.97 lakh, BPCL:
1.48 lakh and HPCL: 23.05 lakh) had not been transferred to their bank account
despite these consumers being active and taking refills;

b) Similarly, subsidy amounting to %108.66 crore (IOCL: %66.02 crore, BPCL:
215.55 crore and HPCL: %27.09 crore) for 15.43 lakh loanee PMUY consumers
(IOCL: 9.53 lakh, BPCL: 2.06 lakh and HPCL: 3.84 lakh) on subsequent refills had
not been transferred to bank accounts of these consumers. Out of 15.43 lakh
consumers, loan of 3.23 lakh consumers (061: 2.24 lakh, BPCL: 0.26 lakh and
HPCL: 0.73 lakh) had been recovered fully. Subsidy of remaining consumers was
due as their consumption was less than six refills as on 31 December 2018.”

119. In this regard, the Ministry replied (December, 2020) that the issue of subsidy failure
is due to Aadhaar not linked by customer's Bank account or Aadhaar delinking/other
reasons of account not active with the Banks or in National Payments Corporation of India
(NPCI) Mapper.

OMC have recently initiated drive for contacting consumers with an intention to correct
their bank a/clinked to Aadhaar. Distributors are given visibility of subsidy failure cases and
they are proactively contacting consumers and guiding them to take suitable action mostly
with their banks. OMCs are regularly taking up with NPCI for corrective action on the failures
cases. Action initiated at the distributor end is being regularly monitored through an MIS.

On the aforesaid reply of the Ministry, Audit observed that as on 30 November 2020,
an amount of % 114.96 crore (% 99.78 crore: loanee PMUY consumers; = 15.18 crore: non-
loanee PMUY consumers) of subsidy was not transferred to consumers. There were still
cases of non-transfer of subsidy. As the beneficiaries belong to BPL families so non-transfer
of subsidy to eligible beneficiary may defeat the objective of the PMUY scheme.


45

120. Apprising about the present status of linking of bank account of PMUY beneficiaries
and transfer of subsidy to their accounts, MoPNG stated as follows:

“The bank account of PMUY beneficiaries have been linked to their account
and on OMC basis, 85% Cash Transfer Compliant customers and Aadhaar
Transfer Compliant. The balance are Bank Transfer Compliant.

It may be noted that currently subsidy component has reduced drastically.
Therefore, there is very little incentive to the customer to change the bank
account for availing subsidy. Moreover, we would like to mention that major
reason for failure in cash transfer which are received from Bank/ NPCI are
given as under:

1. Aadhaar number inactive

2. Account closed/ transferred/ blocked/ frozen

3. Aadhaar number not mapped to Account number.

4. Change of IFSC code on account of merger of banks.
5. Beneficiary account becoming dead or dormant.

For all these failures, action has to be taken at bank end by the consumers.
The major failure reasons were also highlighted by OMCs to NPCI over
mails/Letter/meeting for further correction actions at bank’s end.

In addition to above following actions are taken / being taken by OMCs for
subsidy transfer in (PratyakshHanstantritLabh) PAHAL.

1. For the failed cases OMCs are retriggering the subsidy every 15 days
(twice). Further attempts are also made after successful cash transfer of
subsequent refill.

2. The failed transactions are eligible for subsidy transfer for subsequent 2
financial year excluding current year.

3. For the cases having difficulty in linking Aadhaar with bank (inactive
Aadhaar), OMCs are collecting bank details and transferring the funds via BTC
mode.

4. SMS is being sent to customers on success & failed transactions giving
the reasons of failures with an advice to take corrective actions.

5. Information of subsidy transfer including the failure reasons are made
available OMC call center 1800 2333 555, grievances can be attended on
phone as well.


46

6. Several rounds of trainings/communications were given to distributors
for assisting customers for getting their grievances resolved from bank.

7. IFSC codes of merged banks and RRBs are being collected through
PFMS/NPCI for mass upload.”

121. As regards the measures taken by the OMCs for process improvement in handling
the issue MoPNG stated that as a process improvement, OMCs have made the following
changes in system:

i. CTC Status confirmation of PMUY beneficiary before release of SV.
ii. | Option to update bank account details for PMUY beneficiaries.

iii, | Sending communication to consumers for getting correct details
updated.

iv. Tie-up with Payments Banks as India Post Payments Bank to organize
camps to enroll for bank accounts for seeding.

122. Audit observed that % 79.55 crore subsidy was pending to be transferred to =
37.57 lakh consumers, when asked about the measures taken by the OMCs for
process improvement, the MoPNG stated as under:-

PMUY subsidy is being credited to all beneficiaries who have been onboarded on
PFMS. Out of the above amount of हैं 79.55 crore, ¥ 52.51 crore could not be
disbursed to the beneficiary and amount has got lapsed due to time-barring of two
years. OMCs are constantly upgrading the process for subsidy transfer based on
IFSC update, bank details update and issue with PFMS. Subsidy is transferred as per
PAHAL scheme guidelines. As per this, three attempts are made to send subsidy to
customer at intervals of 15 days. If all three attempts fail, then subsidy amount is
parked and is re-triggered to the customer when any subsequent customer transfer
is successful. Thus customer gets an opportunity to correct problems in Bank end in
case of subsidy failure. In most cases subsidy fails in case Bank account is either
closed or blocked. Subsidy amount parked can be transferred to the customer till 2
financial years after the date of transaction excluding the financial year on which
transaction was made. For example, if transaction was made in June,2018, then
customer will get this subsidy till March, 2021.


47

Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana -2

123. PMUY-2 was launched on 10.08.2021 on Pan-India basis to provide additional
one crore LPG connections alongwith free first refill and stove. The reasons that
necessitated launch of PMUY-2 are as below:

(i) To accommodate poor households who could not be covered in earlier
schemes;

(ii) To address the issue of eligible migrants who are facing difficulties in
providing POA through a self-certification process;

(iii) | To improve LPG coverage and sustenance to clean energy.

124. According to Ministry the target of one crore connections was achieved in the
month of January 2022. Government of India had announced an extension to the
scheme by additional 60 lakh connections out of which 45 lakh connections have
already been released by OMCs as on 01.08.2022. The scheme is progressing at
satisfactory pace.

125. Upon noticing that several inadequacies have been pointed out by Audit in
release/installation of LPG connections under PMUY, the Committee desire to know
the extent to which those inadequacies have resolved in PMUY-2. In response
thereto, the Ministry P&NG submitted as under:

“To ensure release of connections under Ujjwala 2.0 is error free, OMCs have
upgraded their software systems. These include:

° Softwarevalidation check for ensuring the beneficiary is female is
incorporated in system. This will avoid inadvertent issue of LPG connection to
male members.

न Software validation check for ensuring that age of beneficiary is female
is more than 18 is incorporated in system. This will ensure that no connection
is given to a minor inadvertently.

. Aadhaar authentication by UIDAI is made mandatory.

. Installation check list introduced to ensure safety and proper installation
of connection at customer’s premises.
. Software check for entry of Aadhaar numbers for adult family members

entered in the system is made mandatory.”

और औ जे कै जज #।


48

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) was launched on 1* May, 2016 with the
primary objective of providing access to clean cooking fuel (LPG) to poor households
thereby protecting their health by reducing the serious health hazards associated
with use of conventional cooking fuel such as firewood, coal, cow dung etc., which
causes severe indoor household air pollution. The scheme aimed to provide five
crore deposit free LPG connections to women belonging to the Below Poverty Line
(BPL) families over a period of three years starting from Financial Year 2016-17. The
beneficiaries were to be identified from Socio Economic and Caste Census (SECC)-
2011 list. Subsequently, the target for PMUY beneficiaries was increased from 5 crore
to 8 crore to be achieved by FY 2019-20. The Government has, at a later stage,
extended the benefit of PMUY to such poor families who have been left out on
account of their names not appearing in either SECC list or belonged to the identified
categories of poor families of the country and were made entitled for being covered
under the Scheme, Extended PMUY (E-PMUY).

2. The Committee’s examination of the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana’ is
based on the performance Audit of this Scheme carried out by the office of C&AG of
India for assessing the implementation of the Scheme as per the guidelines laid down
by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. Performance Audit covered the
implementation of PMUY (excluding E-PMUY) during the period from May, 2016 to
December, 2018. The objective of carrying out the performance Audit was to
ascertain whether PMUY connections have been: (a) released and installed by the

OMCs to the eligible and intended households of SECC list after due diligence; (b)


49
sufficient measures for enhancement of LPG distribution network have been
undertaken to cater to the PMUY beneficiaries; (c) the OMCs have taken steps to
ensure the usage of LPG by PMUY beneficiaries; and (d) the scheme has led to
sustained usage of LPG by PMUY beneficiaries. Audit scrutiny revealed certain
deficiencies in implementation of PMUY which inter alia include, not obtaining the
Aadhaar numbers of all adult family members from PMUY beneficiaries; releasing
PMUY connections against AHLTIN with blank records in SECC-2011 list; issue of
LPG connections to minors under PMUY; issue of multiple connections under PMUY
to the same individual or within the same family; delay in installation of PMUY
connections; not conducting pre-installation inspection; non-availability of
installation certificates; unsafe usage of LPG by the PMUY beneficiaries; non-
delivery/delay in delivery of LPG cylinders at customer’s address; non-adherence to
targeted delivery time norms; low consumption of refills; collection of CSR Fund from
OMCs without assessing requirement realistically; non-transfer of subsidy to PMUY
consumers etc. The Committee have dealt with these issues in the subsequent

paragraphs of the report.

3. The Committee note that PMUY implementation modalities inter-alia state that a
woman beneficiary is required to furnish Aadhaar number of all family members and
ONCs are to undertake electronically the exercise of de-duplication for obviating the
possibility of issue of multiple connections to the same household. The Committee
are concerned to note that out of 3.78 crore LPG connections, 1.60 crore (42 percent)
connections were issued only on the basis of beneficiary’s Aadhaar which later on
proved to be a deterrent in enabling de-duplication of multiple connections. In case of

361 PMUY beneficiaries who had furnished Aadhaar number of their adult family


50

members alongwith KYC, the LPG distributors failed to enter the details in the LPG
software. The reasons for not entering the Aadhaar numbers in the LPG data need to
be enquired into and informed to the Committee. Moreover, out of these 361 available
Aadhaar numbers of adult family members of PMUY beneficiaries, 72 (20 percent)
were, as per Audit observation, found to be linked with some other LPG connection
as well with either the same or another OMC. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the Action taken in regard to 72 PMUY beneficiaries having additional
LPG connections as per data informed about. Also, in cases where the Aadhaar
number of all family members was not available, OMCs were required to facilitate the
concerned in obtaining the Aadhaar of the family members. However, LPG software
of OMCs had no provision for seeding Aadhaar after release of LPG connections. It
was only since September, 2017 that capturing Aadhaar numbers of other family
members of beneficiaries was enabled and made mandatory in the System design.
The Committee are constrained to observe that while the PMUY Scheme was
introduced in May, 2016, capturing Aadhaar numbers of other family members was
made possible only since September, 2017. The Committee desire to know the
reasons for such delay of more than one year following the initiation of the scheme in
facilitating capture of Aadhar data of all family members of the beneficiaries’. The
Committee are of the view that had this process been initiated earlier, the prevalence
of additional connections in the beneficiary households which has been brought out
in the Audit observation could have been avoided.

As regards the observation made during CAG Audit of the Scheme, that there
were 1.60 crore connections where details of Aadhaar of adult family members was
not available, subsequently, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas advised OMCs to

ensure addition of Aadhaar of adult family members to the identified connections.


51
The Committee note that in case of all the connections of PMUY, de-duplication on
the basis of Aadhaar, bank account, AHLTIN, RC number, name and address is being
carried out by NIC and OMCs have, to a substantial extent, ensured the uniqueness
or correctness of the PMUY connections. The Committee are compelled to note in
this regard that it was only after being pointed out by Audit that the Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas has initiated action towards resolving the issue. The
Committee are of the view that this move by the Ministry should have been initiated
much earlier and not after the matter was brought to notice by Audit. The Committee
have been informed that Distributors had arranged for Aadhaar enrolment camps for
prospective applicants under PMUY and their family Members. Yet, the information
furnished is silent on the number of applicants who have enrolled their Aadhaars and
the extent to which these camps have been beneficial for enrolling Aadhaar of
prospective applicants. The Committee would like to have the desired information in

this regard within one month of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.

The Committee note that pursuant to the advice of OMCs, the distributors
carried out an exercise of contacting the beneficiaries where only the applicant's
Aadhaar formed the basis for granting connections, with a view to obtaining the
Aadhaar numbers of all the adult family members. The Committee, however, do not
find the related information furnished by the Ministry to be satisfactory as it lacks
details about the number of beneficiaries contacted, the number of Aadhaars
received from them and extent and nature of de-duplication of connections carried
out. The Committee desire to be apprised of the related details. Further, the
Committee observe that as on 30 November, 2020, out of 2.18 crore LPG connections,

a very substantial number of connections were still pending in regard to obtaining


52
details of Aadhaar numbers of all family members of beneficiaries. Apprising the
Committee about the present position of seeding of Aadhaar numbersof all family
members, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas submitted that as on 01.09.2021
adult family Aadhaar/lone member declaration has been taken from 15.23 lakh
beneficiaries out of 1.60 crore connections identified in the CAG Audit, but the

Pandemic severely impacted the pace of collection of Aadhaar numbers of family

members. Audit have stated that information has beensought in this regard from the
OMCs. Audit has alsostated that status of Aadhaar seeding of family Members will be

assessed in the course of Audit of e-PMUY. The Committee hope that adult family

Aadhaar from all the 1.6 crore beneficiaries would have been securedby now. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the present position of rectifying the problem.

The Committee would also await the findings of Audit of e-PMUY.

Release of PMUY connections against AHLTIN with blank records in SECC-2011

4. There has been laxity in identification of beneficiaries, as noticed from the fact
that 9897 LPG connections were reportedly issued against Abridged Household List
Temporary Identification Numbers (AHLTIN) in cases where names of all family
members as well as the beneficiary were blank in SECC-2011 list. More strikingly,
4.10 lakh connections were issued against AHLTINs where entire details of family,
leaving apart that of one member was blank in SECC-2011 list. Further, from the
information furnished, the Committee find that 8,407 out of 9,897 connections
continued to be shown as active in the LPG database as on 30 November, 2020.
Apprising the Committee about the status in this regard, i.e., as on 01.11.2021, the
Ministry have stated that out of the total 9201 connections, 2 connections are

suspended, 988 have been terminated and the balance 8211 connections have been


53
regularized and are now active. According to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, the
identified connections with Null AHLTIN connections can be regularized under
EPMUY/EPMUY-2 Schemes provided the beneficiaries meet the eligibility criteria of
the new schemes. The Committee would like to be furnished with data in regard to
number of cases that were ineligible at the time of commencement of PMUY, who
subsequently became eligible under the E-PMUY and E-PMUY-2. The Committee
would also like to be informed of the present status of regularization of such

connections under EPMUY/EPMUY-2.

Issue of PMUY connections to male consumers

5. The Committee note that PMUY envisaged release of LPG connections
towomen. However, Audit observed that due to lack of input validation check in
software of Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), as many as 1.88 lakh connections
were released against AHLTIN of male members. According to Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas, in May/July, 2019, OMCs were advised to verify and take corrective
action. Accordingly, 0.41 lakh connections were terminated by IOCL as being
ineligible out of 1.78 lakh cases verified. Remaining cases were under verification. On
the reasons for such a lapse having occurred, the MoPNG indicated that the
inconsistencies in the SECC data pertaining to the ‘Gender’ field of the applicant was
the cause forthe lapses. The Ministry further admitted that a validation check for
ensuring usage of AHLTIN of female members only could not be put in place at the
level of OMC and NIC. Also, as the data was received through MoRD, the need for
putting such a check in place was initially not felt. However, once the inadequacy
came to notice, necessary checks were put in place and further release of such

connections stopped. The Committee wish to point out in this regard that the Ministry


54
became active with the intent of resolving this issue only after it was pointed out by
Audit. The Committee feel that since the main aim of launching the PMUY was to
provide women with Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) connections with the intent of
safeguarding the health of women and children, it was imperative upon the OMCs to
design sufficient validation in the LPG software for issuance of LPG connections only
to women. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas/OMCS should have taken timely
action to ensure release of the connections to women beneficiaries only, so that the
benefit of this scheme could reach the intended beneficiaries. As regards the current
status of action taken in this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
submitted that as on 01.07.2022, of the identified 1.79 lakh connections, 1.67 lakh

have been regularized and made active, 0.11 lakh have been terminated and 76 cases

have been blocked. Action could not be taken in these 76 cases due to pending court

cases. Audit observed that OMCs have provided screenshots for validation checks

regarding gender in their software. However, the efficacy of the validation check

devised will be verified in the e-PMUY Audit. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the present status of rectification measures being taken so as to avoid recurrence

of such lapses.
Issue of LPG connections to minors under PMUY

6. The Committee find that on review of Aadhaar Cards attached with 18558 KYC
records of PMUY beneficiaries at 164 LPG distributors by Audit, 255 LPG connections
(1.37 percent) were observed to have been released to individuals who were minors
as per DoB (Date of Birth) mentioned in their Aadhaar cards. These LPG connections
were issued by projecting a minor applicant as an adult by entering a wrong DoB

under the relevant field of the LPG database, in-contravention of the LPG control


55
order 2000. The Committee are also perturbed to note that lack of input validation
check in 1061 software allowed issue of 0.80 lakh connections to beneficiaries aged
below 18 years. Similarly, data analysis revealed that 8.59 lakh connections were
released to beneficiaries who were minors as per SECC-2011 data, which was in
violation of PMUY guidelines and LPG Control Order, 2000. The Committee have been
informed that during the course of implementation of the scheme, the absence of
validation of date of birth was noticed and consequently the same was introduced in
the software to avoid recurrence of release of connections to minors. The Committee
feel that had the Ministry/OMCs taken timely actionfor developing such a software
before-hand, that is, prior to initiation of the scheme, the problem could have been
avoided. As regards the present status of action taken in this regard, the Committee
have been informed that as on 01.07.2022, out of 0.79 lakh identified connections,
which were issued in the name of minors due to absence of validation check in the
LPG data base, 0.71 lakh connections have been regularized and made active, 7685
connections have been terminated and the balance 4 connections have been blocked.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of action taken in
regard to blocked cases. Further, in regard to 8.11 lakh connections that were
identified, where the beneficiary was a minor as per the SECC, 2011 database it was
observed that the DoB as per Aadhaar and SECC was different. Hence, distributors
were advised to use the DoB as per Aadhaar card. The Committee feel that the
MoPNG/ONCs should have, instead of blaming the SECC database by terming it as
faulty, and therefore, the reason for all the errors, taken timely steps for obtaining
authentic records of beneficiaries i.e. Aadhaar number, birth certificate, bank details,
Ration Card etc. Further, according to the Ministry, out of 8.11 lakh identified

connections, as on 01.07.2022, 7.66 lakh have been regularized and made active and



56

the balance 0.44 lakh connections are terminated and 1075 cases have been blocked.

In this regard, Audit observed that sample KYC have been requisitioned from OMCs

in_order to verify the entitlement of beneficiary/enablereqularization process. The

information is expected from all the three OMCs. The Committee would like to be

apprised of the information sought by Audit and corrective action taken in regard to

the blocked cases.

Mismatch in the names of beneficiaries between SECC-2011 database and PMUY
consumer database of OMCs

7. The Committee note that data analysis revealed mismatch in names of 12.46
lakh beneficiaries between PMUY database and SECC-2011 data. Further, test check
in field audit revealed that AHLTINs of 784 (18 percent of 4348 KYCs verified)
intended beneficiaries were used by LPG distributors to extend benefits to un-
intended persons by manipulating and using AHLTIN of eligible beneficiaries. This
happened mainly due to absence of monitoring at the field level. According to
MoPNG, wherever the beneficiary as per the SECC details and Aadhaar/RC/Voter
Card details has been found to be of the same person, the connection was made
active. In the balance cases, the connection was suspended for termination.
Additionally, provision has been made to regularize these connections under
EPMUY/EPMUY-2, subject to the beneficiary meeting eligibility criteria of the new
schemes. The Committee are perturbed to note that instead of appropriately
addressing the matter during PMUY phase itself, the Ministry have, in a way, carried
forward and kept pending, the issue of addressing the matter to EPMUY/EPMUY-
2.Now, the MoPNG submitted that as on 01.07.2022, out of 12.42 lakh connections,

11.88 lakh connections were regularized and made active, 0.51 lakh connections were


57
terminated and the balance 0.02 lakh connections continue to be in blocked state and
action is yet to be taken on them. The Committee desire that the action in regard to
the balance 0.02 lakh connections be taken at the earliest and the Committee
informed ofthe present status of such cases.

Issue of multiple connections under PMUY to the same individual or within the same
family

8. The Committee observe that deficiencies in de-duplication to restrict issuance
of duplicate connections were noticed in 12465 cases. Further, lack of input
validation check allowed release of 42,187 connections against invalid AHLTINs
which did not exist in SECC-2011 data. The Committee note that the distributors
concerned had entered incorrect AHLTIN of the beneficiary, which was accepted by
the LPG software due to the lacuna of not having the facility of input validation check.
This also remained undetected in the de-duplication process at the NIC level.
Obviously, the MoPNG did not make efforts to restrict issuance of duplicate
connections in a large number of cases. Further, no reason or explanation was given
for entering incorrect AHLTIN of the beneficiary by the distributor concerned. The
Committee desire to know about the responsibility, if any, fixed against those
distributors who had entered incorrect AHLTIN of the beneficiary. As regards the
steps taken to avoid such situations, MoPNG submitted that when this issue was
noticed during self-audit of the system, the details received from MoRD were hosted
in the OMC software and auto population of the AHLTIN numbers was enabled. In this
way, wrong entry of AHLTIN numbers was prevented in the system. The Committee
note that the Ministry have taken this step only after the issue was taken up for
examination by the PAC. Had such a step been taken initially itself, the position

would have been different. However, as on 01.07.2022, out of total of 9583



58

connections identified, 2402 connections have been terminated and the balance 7121

connections have been regularized and made active and 60 connections have been

blocked. The Committee would like to know the present position of the 60 cases that

are in blocked state. The Committee are also constrained to note that sample KYC

that has been requisitioned from OMCs has not been secured. The Committee desire

to be apprised of the requisite information at the earliest.

Delay in installation of PMUY connections

9. Another instance of improper execution of the scheme by MoPNG/OWNCs is the
delay in installation of PMUY connections. OMC’s citizen charter on marketing of
Petroleum Products clearly stipulates that a new connection is to be installed within
seven working days. Yet, delay to the extent of more than 365 days in installation of
4.35 lakh connections against stipulated time period of seven days has been noticed.
The reasons as attributed by the MoPNG for this delay include, difficulties in locating
customers due to absence of customer contact number, migrating rural population,
beneficiaries request for loan after KYC seeding, non-availability of safe conditions
for LPG installation like cooking platform, time taken for imparting training to
manpower for installation, and disruption in transportation
ofcylinders/Regulators/Hot plates due to transporter’s strikes, flood etc. The
Committee feel that the reasons as cited are not the kind that could not have been
detected timely and addressed in order to avoid the huge delays witnessed in
installation of PMUY connections. The Committee, therefore, desire that henceforth
these reasons should be identified/resolved timely so that such long delays are
avoided in future. Now, the MoPNG have informed the Committee that SOPs have

been made and circulated at the field level for taking action. Programme Management


59
Information System (PMIS) portal was used at the field level to ensure timely
installation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of SOPs and their

effectiveness in reducing the delays in installation on account of the steps taken.

Linked Bank Account not pertaining to PMUY beneficiaries

10. The Committee note that during test check of KYC records of a sample of 164
LPG distributors, 100 instances were noticed where accounts of other persons were
linked with PMUY beneficiaries thereby leading to transfer of subsidy intended for the
beneficiary into the bank accounts of others, and depriving the genuine beneficiaries
of the subsidy amount. However, as per the submission of MoPNG the process of
subsidy transfer has suitable checks and balances built in and is designed to ensure
that subsidy is transferred to the intended beneficiary only. Further, as regards the
latest status of 100 cases where linked bank account does not pertain to PMUY
beneficiaries, the Committee have been apprised that all the identified connections
observed in the field visit have been verified and corrective action has been taken as
deemed appropriate. However, the information furnished is silent on the nature of
action that has been taken. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of
the action taken in this regard and the actual outcome thereof. The Committee,
however, are appreciative of the fact that as part of the rectification measures, the
entire amount of subsidy paid to the ineligible beneficiaries including the total loan
amount, cash assistance component, State Government advance, and other
advances, as may have been given has been recovered from the distributor

concerned.


60
The Committee also note from the information furnished that as on December,
2020, all connections of ineligible beneficiaries have reportedly been terminated.
However, as per Audit observation, as on 30 November, 2020, in 5,391 cases there
was a mismatch in the name of beneficiary from that of the bank account holder. The
Committee are surprised to note as to how these many cases could be analysed and
ineligible ones terminated in such a short span of time. The Committee would like to

be informed of the process followed in this connection.

The Committee have also been informed that many a time, consumers have
multiple bank accounts and the bank account seeded in the PMUY application may be
different from the one into which the subsidy is transferred to the beneficiary. As
mismatch in the bank account number creates several problems in transferring
subsidy to the actual beneficiary, the Committee would desire that concrete
measures be contemplated by the MoPNG for transferring subsidy to the bank
account of the beneficiary which has last been linked to the Aadhaar number only.
This would obviate the chances of transferring the subsidy to ineligible beneficiaries.
As regards the measures taken in this direction, the Committee have been apprised

that Bank Accounts were rectified under bank account correction facility and
beneficiaries bank account/joint Account got added. In their Audit comments, Audit

found that HPCL has provided case wise details of correction of bank account

details. This will be verified during audit of e-PMUY. In this regard, the Committee feel

the need for checking the bank account of the actual beneficiaries at regular intervals
and in case any irregularity in transferring the subsidy is noticed, stringent action be

taken against the errant distributor.


61

Third Party Audit of the Scheme

11. The Committee note that although PMUY guidelines clearly stipulate that the
Government may undertake third party audit of the Scheme, no such audit has been
carried out till the audit of the scheme by the office of C&AG of India. It was only
pursuant to the audit observation that the MoPNG initiated the process of carrying
out third party audit of the scheme. In this regard, work order dated 01.10.2020 has
been issued to M/s Research and Development Initiative Pvt. Ltd. for undertaking a
study on perception and adoption level of PMUY. The ‘impact study’ is presently
underway and the Report will be submitted upon completion of the survey. The
Committee also note in this regard that the work order to M/s Research and
Development Initiative Pvt. Ltd. has been issued only after four years of the initiation
of PMUY i.e. on 12.10.2020 and the ‘impact study’ is still underway. In view of the
large number of shortcomings as pointed out by the Office of C&AG of India in
operation of PMUY, the Committee recommend that the study may be completed at
the earliest. They also wish to be apprised of the outcome of this study and Action

Taken thereon by MoPNG/OMCs.

Pre-installation Inspection

12. The Committee note that a test check of the KYC records at LPG Distributors
revealed that in 2531 cases (13.64 %), the pre installation inspection report regarding
suitability or otherwise, of the kitchen of the household on the basis of pre-
installation inspection was not available on record. Besides, in case of three
distributors taken as sample, pre-installation inspection report was not found

attached with the SVs in any of the PMUY connections (29078). The Committee thus


62

feel that the possibility of non-compliance to safety standards during LPG installation
in these households cannot be ruled out. As regards the steps taken to improve the
system of compliance to safety standards during PMUY, the Committee have been
informed that OMCs have placed the SOPs for installation of cylinders at customer
premises along with the format of pre-inspection report. Distributers were advised
that all PMUY installations are to be necessarily inspected. While expressing
agreement with the steps taken by OMCs in this regard, the Committee feel that a
strong monitoring mechanism also needs to be made available at all the OMCs for
keeping constant vigil over the distributors for inspecting the premises of
beneficiaries before the PMUY installations, failing which action could be taken
against the distributor concerned. This is necessary as pre-installation inspection is
a vital component before issuance of LPG connection in order to ascertain that the
premises of the beneficiary meet the required safety standards.

Unsafe usage by the PMUY beneficiaries

13. The Committee note that test check of KYC records at sample distributors and
beneficiaries survey (1662) conducted by Audit revealed that unsafe LPG practices
were adopted in 277 cases (16.67 %) viz. installation of hot plate below the height of
LPG cylinder (82 cases), hot plates kept on wooden platform (9 cases), poor
quality/rusted/damaged stove burners/non-ISI stove (21 cases) sub-standard quality
of hose-pipe (10 cases), installation of LPG connection in unsafe places i.e. kutcha
houses, bamboo/hay roof (155 cases). It is also a matter of concern to note that since
the launch of the scheme (2016-17 to 2020-21) a total of 896 LPG accidents have
taken place in PMUY households. Most of accidents i.e. 311 had occurred during the

year 2020-21. The Committee feel that this could be mainly due to not conducting pre-


63

installation inspection and also not annexing the installation certificates with SVs.
Evidently, proper awareness programmes are not being conducted to educate the
PMUY beneficiaries on safe use of LPG. However, according to the Ministry, several
awareness programmes have been conducted for the PMUY beneficiaries about LPG
safety. Nearly one lakh LPG Panchayats are stated to have been conducted in 2018-
19 to educate the customers about how safely the connection is to be used. The
Ministry also reportedly conducted 42,000 LPG Panchayats in 2019-20. Besides,
demonstration events on safe usage are also to be provided to PMUY consumers
while releasing connections by the mechanic responsible for installation. The
Committee, while appreciating the aforesaid steps taken by the MoPNG/OMCs yet feel
that concrete and specific measures need to be initiated by the MoPNG/OMCs to
spread awareness about LPG safety. Training too needs to be provided in this regard
to distributors.

Non-achievement of target of appointing distributors

14. The Committee note that in furtherance of its commitment to provide clean fuel
to all households in the country with key focus on rural and difficult areas, the
MoPNG directed (February 2016) the OMCs to commission 10,000 new LPG
distributorships in that year (2016-17) to cater to the increased demand and to
provide better services to rural poor. The Committee further note that inadequate
efforts in commissioning the targeted 10000 new LPG distributorships by OMCs led
to a compelling situation for existing LPG distributors to supply cylinders either at
long distance or from godowns/designated points instead of door-step delivery which
has had the effect of considerable delays in supply of cylinders. Apprising the

Committee about the present status of commissioning of new LPG distributors, the


64
Ministry submitted that from April, 2015 to January, 2020, 8690 new distributorships
have been granted on Industry basis and presently 2029 locations are in various
stages for commissioning. The Committee have further been apprised that as on
01.09.2021, out of 2029 locations 1284 locations continue to be in pipeline and are yet
to be commissioned. The Committee are constrained to observein this regard that
between 01.02.2020 and 01.09.2021, distributorships have been commissioned only at
743 locations. The Committee wish to be apprised of the reasons for the undue delay
in commissioning of distributors. The reasons for non-commissioning need to be
enquired into and responsibility for the same fixed, as may be necessary. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the current position in this regard and
recommend that appointment of distributors at all the 1284 locations be completed at
the earliest as this would reduce the average distance covered by the existing

distributors and most of the villages would be catered by an LPG distributorship.

Long distances catered to by the Distributors

15. The Committee note that the Audit analysed the data relating to the distance
covered by 164 distributors and observed that LPG distributors are covering the
various villages/areas/tehsils as specified by the OMCs which come in the range of 0
Km to 92 Km. From the figures of number of LPG distributors with distance covered
for refill delivery, it can be seen that out of 164 LPG distributors, 95 LPG distributors
(57.93 percent) served the PMUY beneficiaries’ located upto a distance of 92 Km.
Covering such long distances to cater to the consumers led to delay in refill supply
and non-delivery of refills at customer's door-steps. The Committee have now been
apprised that the time for refill delivery has been reduced due to refilling from all the

CSC VLEs. Thus, with the aid of cylinder availability at CSC VLEs, the customer is at


65

his/her convenience for taking refill from CSC/VLE rather than expecting refill
delivery from the distributor who will be covering the village once/twice in a week.
They have further been informed that as of now more than 90% of the distributors are
having 4 and 5 star ratings. Besides, necessary corrective action is taken from time
to time to counter any increase in the backlog position. While appreciating the steps
taken in this regard, the Committee suggest that steps may also be taken to increase
the service capability of distributors in ensuring timely refill delivery. Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas and OMCs should also consider allowing Fair Price Shop
dealers to keep PMUY cylinders so as to reduce the time of beneficiaries/distributors.
In this regard, Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas deposed before the
Committee that for selling cylinders at Fair Price Shops permission of ‘PESO’ has to
be taken and more than seven cylinders cannot be kept at one place only. However,
the Ministry is making efforts to revise this norm so as to enable keeping some more
number of PMUY cylinders in the shops, as a temporary storage, in Fair Price Shops.
Besides, some persons in the remote villages could be deputed to aggregate the
demand of PMUY beneficiaries in order to send the collective demand to the
company and cylinders may be brought in bulk. Secretary, MoPNG also agreed that
there is an urgent need to streamline the system of keeping cylinders at fair price
shops and the Ministry would surely take necessary measures in this direction. The
Committee would desire that appropriate steps be taken at the earliest. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard and outcome
thereof in enabling timely delivery of cylinders.

Non-Delivery of LPG cylinders at Customer’s address

16. The Committee are constrained to observe that LPG distributors were not

providing the facility of home delivery to all consumers. 247 (14.86 percent) of the


66
1662 surveyed PMUY beneficiaries reported that they were getting refills either on
point of delivery basis or by way of self pick-up from the distributor’s godown. The
Committee are concerned to note in this regard that OMCs are not maintaining any
data in their system about the ex-godown/delivery point availed by the consumers. It
is not clear as to how, in the absence of the relevant data in their system, the OMCs
could verify the portion of population that was either securingor not securing refills
at their doorstep. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas stated that
OMCs have been advised to ensure door step delivery by capturing coordinates of
the refill delivery places or to allow ‘cash and carry’ rebate to customers. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the measures taken in this direction and outcome
thereof. The Ministry has also directed the OMCs to capture the mobile number of all
the registered consumers in the system. Further, on the present status of capturing
of all mobile numbers of PMUY consumers in LPG data base, the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas apprised the Committee that 82% of the PMUY customers
in IOCL, 80% of HPCL PMUY customers and 88% of BPCL PMUY customers are
having mobile numbers updated in the LPG database. The Committee appreciate the
steps taken in this direction. Since most of PMUY consumers are from the rural
segment with meager buying capacity they prefer to buy refills from the distributors
premises as per their convenience. The Committee recommend that necessary
arrangements be made for having more distribution points at the earliest for refill of

PMUY cylinders besides commissioning of new distributorships.
Delay in delivering refills to PMUY consumers

17. The Committee note that delay of more than 10 days (ranging upto 664 days)

was noticed in delivery of 36.62 lakh LPG refills against the stipulated period of seven


67
days. It was also observed that out of 36.62 lakh refills, 5.94 lakh refills were delivered
with a delay of more than 30 days. Further, 1209 LPG distributors supplied more than
100 refills (ranging from100 to 9145 refills) with a delay of more than 30 days to 5 lakh
beneficiaries. As regards the action initiated by the OMCs to appoint new LPG
distributors in rural areas, MoPNG, as indicated, apprised that 9433 distributorships
have been appointed between April 2015 to August 2021 and as on 01 September,
2021, around 1284 are in various stages of commissioning. However, the Committee
note that as on 30 November, 2020, 37.03 lakh refills were delivered with delay of
more than 10 days out of which 7.33 lakh refills were delivered with delay of more
than 30 days. The reasons attributed by the MoPNG for delay in delivery of refills
include, natural calamities, strikes/bandhs, law and order situation, Government
directives, product shortage/ supply constraints with OMC, etc. The Committee desire
that all out efforts be made by the OMCs/ distributors to resolve the aforesaid issues
at the earliest in coordination with the Ministry/OMCs/distributors and provide refills
of PMUY cylinders to beneficiaries in time. For this, the Committee suggest that
monitoring of bookings vis-a-vis supply may be done at regular intervals, distributors
keep some refill cylinders in their storage godowns etc. to deal with such situations
and storage capacity of refill cylinders may be adequately enhanced so as to avoid
delay in delivery of refills. The Committee further feel that urgent measures should
also be taken to commission the 1284 additional distributorships at the earliest.
Besides, pendency of bookings may be monitored at the higher level in the Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas/OMCs and responsibility of the officers/distributors

may be fixed to avoid the delay in delivery of refill cylinders to the beneficiaries.


68

Non-adherence to ‘Targeted Delivery Time’ norms contained _in_the Marketing
Disciplinary Guidelines (MDG) -

18. The Committee note that the poor performance of LPG distributors in adhering
to Targeted Delivery Time (TDT) norms of Marketing Disciplinary Guidelines (MDG)
was not monitored by the OMCs. Apprising the Committee about the action taken
against the erring distributors, the Ministry of P&2NG submitted that in case of ‘1’ star
rating in 1% or 2"? quarter, OMCs have to issue a warning letter to the distributor. In all
cases of ‘Poor’ rating during any quarter subsequent to above period, a fine
equivalent to 25% of one month’s distributor Commission is to be imposed on the
erring distributor. In every instance of ‘Poor’ performance rating subsequent to the
above, 50 percent of one month's distributor commission is tobe imposed. Further, if
LPG distributorship is rated ‘Poor’ in any four completed quarters during the
preceding 2 years (.6., 8 quarters), it would lead to termination of the LPG
distributorship. The Committee observe that there were 504 (IOCL: 373, BPCL: 87 and
HPCL: 44) LPG distributors who were given ‘1’ star rating in all eight quarters in the
preceding two years and were liable for termination of distributorship. Further, there
were 461 (IOCL: 371, BPCL: 40 and HPCL: 50), who were also liable for a penalty i.e.,
a fine equivalent to 10 percent to 25 percent of one month's distributor commission
due to continuous ‘Below Average’ performance. The Committee would like to be
informed of the number of distributors to whom warning—cum-guidance letter has
been issued, fine imposed amounting to 25% of one month’s distributor Commission
or Penalty of 50% of one month’s distributor Commission levied; and number of LPG
distributorships terminated since the inception of PMUY. The Committee express the
view that penalties need to be imposed stringently for reasons of non—adherence to

targeted delivery time schedules.


69

Consumption of 5 Kg LPG cylinders

19. Considering the high refill cost which was a barrier to LPG usage
theExpenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell
(PPAC) - Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited (CRISIL) had highlighted
the importance of smail 5 kg cylinders to make PMUY successful. However, efforts
towards promoting usage and supply of 5 kg. cylinders have been slow and tardy,
which is evident from the fact that till December, 2018, only 16032 (0.04 percent of
total PMUY connections) beneficiaries were provided 5 kg cylinder connections. As
per information made available, 34 percent of total PMUY Consumers were not aware
of the option of 5 kg cylinders, which is indicative of the fact that awareness
measures undertaken by the MoPNG/OMCs to encourage use of 5 kg cylinders or
enable the consumer to opt for Double Bottle Cylinders (DBC) of 5 kg instead of a
14.2 kg cylinders have been insufficient. The Committee are of the view that steps
towards promoting supply and usage of 5 kg. cylinders should have been taken at the
stage of initiation of the Scheme itself. Nevertheless, subsequently, as per
information furnished, in the year 2020-21, and during 2021-22 (till August, 2021) the
growth in sale of 5 kg refills has reportedly been to the extent of 32% (in FY 2020-21)
while the overall growth of LPG consumption during the year was to the extent of 8%.
The Committee would desire to know the current status of extent of consumption of 5
kgcylinders and further action being taken to bring about an improvement in

promoting usage of these small cylinders.

Transition of BPL households to usage of LPG

20. The Committee note that sustaining usage of LPG remains a challenge as the

annual average refill consumption of 1.93 crore consumers (who have completed


70
more than one year as on 31 March, 2018) was 3.66 refills only as worked out by
Audit. Similar analysis for 3.18 crore PMUY beneficiaries as on 31 December, 2018
revealed that refill consumption was only to the extent of 3.21 refills per annum. A
further study of the3.18 crore PMUY consumers who had completed one year or more
of LPG usage as on 31 December, 2018, revealed that 0.56 crore (17.61 percent)
beneficiaries never came back for second refill and 1.05 crore (33.02 percent)
beneficiaries consumed 1 to 3 refills only. Further, data regarding state-wise
consumption indicates that Chhattisgarh had the lowest per annum average refill
consumption of 1.61 refills, followed by Madhya Pradesh (2.38 refills), Jharkhand
(2.57 refills), Odisha (2.88 refills), Assam (2.95 refills), West Bengal (3.08 refills) and
Maharashtra (3.18 refills). Of the remaining States/UTs, Audit observed that in two
States/UTs the average annual consumption was less than three refills. From the
data, the Committee are inclined to conclude that the awareness programmes
launched by the MoPNG/ONCs are not as impactful as required. The Committee,
therefore, emphasize that effective measures be taken to encourage the PMUY
beneficiaries towards sustaining usage of LPG so as to effectively secure benefits of

improving the health of women and reducing Household Air Pollution.

Improper usage of Domestic Cylinders

21. |The Committee are also concerned to note from the data on “OMC-wise details
of consumers with higher annual consumption of refills” that 1.98 lakh consumers
had monthly consumption of more than 12 cylinders. This is indicative of possible
diversion of domestic cylinders for commercial use as consumption of a large
number of LPG refills, particularly by BPL households seems to be improbable. The

Committee, therefore, recommend that the purported consumption of a large number


71
of cylinder refills by BPL families as brought out by Audit should be enquired into
and those guilty of any wrong doing suitably punished. A strong monitoring
mechanism also needs to be established with a view to avoiding commercial usage of

cylinders meant for consumption by PMUY beneficiaries.

Yet another surprising fact to note is that there have been 20.12 lakh instances
where individuals concerned purportedly consumed 3 to 41 refills in a month
following the installation of the connection. Out of 13.96 lakh consumers, 10.09 lakh
consumers have taken refills in the above range only once and the remaining 3.87
lakh consumers have taken refills 2 to 23 times. On the other hand, as for the decline
in consumption of LPG cylinders by PMUY beneficiaries, the Ministry has informed
that as most of the PMUY consumers are first time LPG users, the average
consumption would rise steadily over the years. The scrutiny of LPG consumption
figures during the years 2018-19 to 2021-22 reveals that the per capita consumption
of PMUY consumers has been improving year on year. Besides, several steps have

been taken by the OMCs to facilitate LPG consumption. However, Audit, in their

comments on the information furnished by the Ministry, have stated that annual

average consumption continues to be less than 4 refills.

Further, with regard to figures pertaining to high consumption levels, the
Committee have been informed that the OMCs have got the matter investigated by
their teams, show-cause notices have been issued to Distributors having cases of
high consumption, and wherever misuse of refills was ascertained, action has been
taken on the distributor concerned. Further, based on the verification, MDG has been
levied upon the 1665 distributors wherever the consumption was found to be not

genuine. The Committee would like to be informed of the details of the number of


72
show cause notices issued to distributors, reply given, position of acceptance or
non-acceptance of the explanation, action taken thereon and the amount of MDG
levied upon the 1665 distributors. The Committee note that the MoPNG stated (in
December 2020) that OMCs have further strengthened the system by imposing
additional restrictions with effect from June 2019 which limits the maximum refills to
2 per month and 15 in a year for PMUY consumers. Yet, it is learnt that 20,307
instances of monthly consumption of more than 2 refills from June 2019 were noticed
in the database of BPCL and HPCL. While providing justification in this regard, the
Ministry submitted that for all such cases, the requests for refills have been approved
by OMC field officials based on requests made. The Committee would like to know
the basis on which such requests were approved by OMC field officials, whether all
such cases were genuine or there were other issues and considerations. The
Committee desire that all the cases of approval by field officials be investigated by
the MoPNG and wherever the field officials are found guilty, in any way, stringent
action be taken so as to avoid misuse of PMUY cylinders. Further, it needs to be
ensured that restrictions imposed by OMCs in this regard are strictly followed by the
consumers lest they be faced with stricter penalties for circumventing such

restrictions.

Outcome of PMUY beneficiary survey

22. The Committee note that out of a sample of 1662 PMUY beneficiaries, 672
shifted to exclusive usage of LPG, while 589 beneficiaries reverted back to using
unclean fuels and 401 beneficiaries were using both LPG and unclean fuels which
was mainly owing to the higher price of LPG refills. Since the cost of LPG refill has to

be paid upfront by the BPL consumers, this has become a constraint in ensuring


73
sustained usage of LPG. However, for enabling affordability, certain initiatives like
giving additional amount of = 350/- through CSR over % 1600/- cash assistance to
PMUY, swapping option from 14.2 Kg to 5 Kg cylinders and deferment of loan
recovery from subsidy amount for reducing the net cash outgo of a PMUY consumer
have reportedly been taken by the MoPNG/OMCs. Further, OMCs have also
conducted Pradhan Mantri LPG Panchayat (PMLP), a community-based programme
for creating awareness about the scheme and to address any other issue or problem
pertaining to LPG usage. The Panchayats have been targeted towards nil or low refill
consumers with a view to convincing them about sustained usage of LPG. A total of
1.46 lakh LPG Panchayats have reportedly been conducted by OMCs during FY 2018-
19 & FY 2019-20. However, from the figures provided by MoPNG, it is seen that there
was not much increase in refills during these two years. As a matter of fact, during
the year 2018-19 the number of refills consumed came down from 3.39 refills per
capita in 2017-18 to 3.00 in 2018-19. However, thereafter, during the year 2020-21 it
has increased to 4.39, which appears to be mainly owing to the effect of ‘free refill’
under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY). The Committee are concerned
to note that various steps that have been taken by the Ministry/OMCs to improve LPG
consumption including holding LPG Panchayats have had little impact. The
Committee, therefore, express the need for taking strong and effective measures in
this direction. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this

regard and outcome thereof.

Interest free loan extended by the OMCs

23. MoPNG guidelines stipulate that OMCs would provide EMI facility to such BPL

beneficiaries who want to avail the facility for meeting the cost of gas stove and first


74
refill under the scheme. However, OMCs have extended unsecured interest-free EMI
facility to 68 percent of beneficiaries subject to recovery of loan amount from the
subsidy payable to PMUY beneficiary concerned against initial refill/subsequent
refills. The Committee have been informed that as on 01 September, 2021, about =
4,121 crore worth of loan amount was recovered and ₹ 6,454 crore remained unpaid.
Owing to Covid related issues and financial difficulties faced by the poor PMUY
beneficiaries, the MoPNG has advised the OMCs to take into consideration, the effect
of prevailing situation on the consumers and take a suitable decision on
absorbing/writing off the pending loans. OMCs are reportedly working on this matter.
The Committee, while expressing agreement with the advice of MoPNG, desire to be
apprised of the present status of absorbing/writing off the pending loans and
recommend that measures be taken towards OMCs completing this process at the
earliest.

Absence of Performance Indicators to assess the benefits of the scheme

24. The Committee feel disappointed to note that there were no parameters set to
monitor whether there was sustained usage of the clean fuel. No performance
indicators were set by the Ministry for assessing the health benefits for the
beneficiaries from the scheme. The Committee cannot therefore, help concluding that
the overall benefit achieved from the scheme is not measurable in the absence of any
performance indicator. The MoPNG have stated that the number of domestic LPG
customers has increased from 14.51 crore in 2014 to 29.31 crore as on 01 September,
2021 and total LPG consumption in the country has increased from 17.6 MMT for the
year 2014-15 to 27.7 MMT for the year 2020-21. Yet, the Ministry’s reply is silentin

regard to the details of PMUY consumers who have benefitted from this scheme,


75
financially as well as in terms of health. The Committee wonder as to how, in the
absence of well-defined performance indicators which is a primary requirement, the
Ministry could make an assessment of the implementation of PMUY. As of now, as
per information furnished, MoPNG has commissioned a third-party evaluation by RDI
for measuring the impact of the scheme on various socio-economic aspects of
women’s life. The study is under way. The Committee desire to know the date of
commissioning of such study and the time frame for its completion. The Committee
would also recommend the MoPNG to ensure that the study be completed at the
earliest and appropriate action taken on the observations as soon as possible.
Besides, as informed, another study has been conducted by IIT, Kanpur which is
sponsored by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on measuring health effects
of improved LPG coverage. According to interim results shared from this study which
was carved out in 6 States, 45% of the total surveyed primary cooking persons have
reported improved health after consistently using LPG. The Committee would also
recommend that the study be completed in all the States/UTs at the earliest, a time

line prescribed for this purpose, and they be apprised of the same.

Budget for settlement of PMUY claims

25. The Committee note that though year-wise target for release of PMUY
connections was revised (September 2017) to two crore connections each for the
years 2016-17 to 2019-20, neither the Revised Estimates for 2017-18 nor the Budget
Estimates for 2018-19 were made in line with the revised targets or for meeting the
shortfall of the previous years. This had the effect of settling OMC’s claims only
partially in these years due to the shortfall in the budget. The Committee take a

serious view of the fact that PMUY suffered from want of adequate funds due to lack


76
of seriousness and urgency on the part of Ministry of Finance/NITI Aayog, i.e. budget
allocating agencies. Obviously, the MoPNG also failed to impress upon the Ministry
of Finance/NITI Aayog about the need for timely release of funds for such a vital
Scheme. The Committee cannot but emphasise the need for enhancing further the
budgetary allocations for such a vital Scheme in view of the fact that rural/poor
population of the country are the main beneficiaries of this Scheme. The Ministry of
Finance/NIT| Aayog ought to keep this fact in view while allocating funds for this

Scheme.

CSR funds collected from OMCs without assessing the requirements realistically

26. The Committee observe that there was excess parking of funds under
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Pool which was done on the directive of
MoPNG. Evidently, there was no realistic assessment made of the requirement, and
an amount of € 261.85 crore has been lying idle with IOCL (nodal agency and Pool
operator) which could have been utilized elsewhere for other deserving projects. On
the reasons for the inability in assessing the requirement of CSR funds, the MoPNG
inter-alia informed the Committee that the funds received by the nodal agency i.e.
IOCL are to be given back to OMCs upon receipt of their claims against PMUY
connections issued by them and there is no certainty about when claims would be
received. The Committee are of the view in this regard that in this age of
technological advancement, it is not impossible to keep an eye on the funds
released/expended. The Committee would thus suggest that an appropriate
mechanism be developed by MoPNG in co-ordination with IOCL so as to avoid the
concentration of CSR funds with IOCL only, and the funds are distributed timely

among the other OMCs.


77

The Committee have further been informed that presently there is no unutilized
CSR amount. The entire amount has been disbursed or consumed amongst OMCs.
While this is a step in the right direction, the Committee nevertheless, wish to point
out that these initiatives have been taken only after the issue was pointed out by
Audit and the subject matter examined by the PAC. Had these steps been taken on
time, idling of funds could have been avoided and utilized on some other projects, for
which funds were in short supply. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that, in
future, proactive steps need to be taken to ensure that CSR funds are fully utilized

during the on-going year itself.
Non-transfer of subsidy to PMUY Consumers

27. Non-loanee PMUY beneficiaries are entitled for refill subsidy right from the first
refill. However, for loanee beneficiaries, the subsidy is to be transferred only after
recovery of loan in full. For this, Bank Account details and Aadhaar number of
consumerhas to be mapped with LPG connection by the LPG distributor. The
Committee are concerned to note that as on 31 December, 2018, subsidy of = 78.85
crore (IOCL: ₹ 44.38 crore, BPCL: ₹ 13.04 crore and HPCL: ₹ 21.43 crore) for 10.5 lakh
non-loanee PMUY consumers (IOCL: 5.97 lakh, BPCL: 1.48 lakh and HPCL: 3.05 lakh)
had not been transferred to their bank account despite the consumers being active in
consuming refills. Similarly, booking and availing subsidy amounting to = 108.66
crore (IOCL: ₹ 66.02 crore, BPCL: ₹ 15.55 crore and HPCL: ₹ 27.09 crore) for 15.43
lakh loanee PMUY consumers (IOCL: 9.53 lakh, BPCL: 2.06 lakh and HPCL: 3.84 lakh)
on subsequent refills had not been transferred to bank accounts of the consumers.
Aiso, out of 15.43 lakh consumers, loan amounts of 3.23 lakh consumers (IOCL: 2.24

lakh, BPCL: 0.26 lakh and HPCL: 0.73 lakh) had been recovered fully and subsidy


78
amounts of remaining consumers was due as their consumption was less than six
refills as on 31 December, 2018. According to the Ministry (December, 2020), this
issue of subsidy failure was due to Aadhaar not being linked with Consumer’s Bank

Account.

The Committee fail to understand how, despite inadequacies relating to
Aadhaar numbers, LPG connections were issued to the consumers. Prior to giving
the connections, the OMCs should have ensured that Aadhaar number was linked to
the Bank account and all documents were in proper order. Also, although, several
steps are stated to have been taken by OMCs for ensuring linkage of Aadhaar with
the Bank Accounts, the Committee find that as on 30 November, 2020, an amount of =
114.96 crore (₹ 99.78 crore: loanee PMUY consumers; हैं 15.18 crore: non-loanee
PMUY consumers) of subsidy was not transferred to consumers.

The Committee have now been apprised that several steps such as re-
triggering of subsidy every 15 days by OMCs in failed cases; making eligible failed
transactions for subsidy transfer for subsequent two financial years excluding the
current year; collection of bank details and transferring the funds via BTC mode;
making available reasons for failure of transfer; attending to grievances on phone as
well and giving several rounds of training to distributors for assisting customers
have been taken/are being taken by OMCs for subsidy transfers. Besides, for
improving the process of handling this issue, OMCs have made some changes in the
system like, confirmation of CTC status of PMUY beneficiary before release of SV,
option to update bank account details for PMUY beneficiaries, sending
communication to consumers for getting correct updates of details and tie-up with

‘Payments Banks’ such as India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) to organize camps to


enroll for bank accounts for seeding. While appreciating the measures initiated by the
MoPNG/ONCs for smooth transfer of subsidy to PMUY consumers, the Committee
expect that henceforth subsidy would be transferred to PMUY consumer’s bank
accounts regularly. Since PMUY consumers are mainly poor and daily-wage
labourers, they cannot run from pillar to post to get the subsidy at the cost of losing
their daily wages. The Committee note that in reply to the related queries, the
representative of Ministry/OMCs apprised the Committee during evidence that in 99
percent cases, subsidy is transferred successfully to the bank accounts of the PMUY
consumers. The Committee are of the view that the issue seems to have been
neglected by the Ministry/OMCs until Audit conducted a review on the PMUY and
PAC took up the subject for detailed examination. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details regarding number of consumers to whom subsidy was to be
transferred, number of consumers getting the subsidy regularly from the first refill,
number of consumers who remain to be transferred with the subsidy amount and the

period of delay in transferring the subsidy to their accounts etc.

28. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry'(OMCs have taken various
steps to ensure that inadequacies which include, not obtaining Aadhaar numbers of
all adult family Members, issue of connections to male members of house-holds and
minors; issue of multiple connections to the beneficiaries, delay in installation of
PMUY connections, inadequate consumer awareness programmes, failure to grant
required number of distriburships, delay in delivery of LPG cylinders at customer’s
address, as well as abnormally Low/high consumption of refills, non-transfer of
subsidy amounts to consumers, as highlighted by Audit are not repeated while

operationalising PMUY-2. While noting the steps being taken in this direction by the


MinistryiOMCs,the Committee would desire that based on experience from
implementation of PMUY initially, measures need to be taken to improve the
infrastructure as well the monitoring mechanism by way of sharpening modalities
and software checks so as to ensure that Ujjwala 2.0 is bereft of problems. The
Committee would also like to be informed of the present position of releasing the
remaining connections that are due. The Committee trust that these connections

would be released to the customers without undue delay.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,

17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee