94

Construction and Utilization of Limited Height
Subway (LHS)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their 52nd Report based on Audit Para 3.1 of C&AG’s
Report No.19 of 2019 (17" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24) ~

NINETY FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
>> NEW DELHI... .


PAC NO, 2324 |

NINETY FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

CONSTRUCTION AND UTILIZATION OF

LIMITED HEIGHT SUBWAY (LHS)

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their 52nd Report based on Audit Para 3.1 of C&AG's
Report No.19 of 2019 (17" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Pausha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (v)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
PART-1
REPORT
PART ~ Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes sof the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
००००००० 0!

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on

Page 3 of 16



PN Aw AWD

०

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

2.
3.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury = Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

Page 4 of 16


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this 94" Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on _ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained
in their 52"¢ Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “CONSTRUCTION AND
UTILIZATION OF LIMITED HEIGHT SUBWAY (LHS)” relating to Ministry of
Railways.

2. The Fifty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 20" July, 2022. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their
Sitting held on 17" January, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix
1.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of
the Report.

4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-second Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
February, 2024 Chairperson,
Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Page 5 of 16


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by

the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-second Report (177 Lok Sabha) on "Construction and
Utilization of Limited Height Subway (LHS)".

2.

The Fifty-second was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on -

20.07.2022. It contained Twenty Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the

Ministry of Railways and are categorized as under:

10]

(ii)

(ii

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2,3,4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20

Total: 20
Chapter - Il

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. NIL
Total: 0

Chapter - Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. NIL
Total: 0

Chapter - IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:

Para No. ह
NIL

Total: 0
Chapter - V

Page 6 of 16


will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on Some of their
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.

be fixed on account of occurrence of post construction water logging, problem of
drainage etc. that was witnessed at several sites,

5. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:-

“Noted As already mentioned in Para 10 above, all remedial measures
like construction of pump & sump arrangements, provision of Cover sheds
on both approaches, arresting source of ingress of water, etc. are being

(LHS)s.” /
6... Audit vide their ७.0, No.5-RIy/ILR/SECR/12-28/2017dated 04.01.2023
have not offered any further comments..-- ~ :

Page 7 of 16


7. The Committee expressed disappointment that despite incurring
additional expenditure, water logging continues in Limited Height
Subways (LHSs). The Committee had recommended that Railways take
necessary action to make all LHSs fully usable, ensuring the safe
movement of the public through subway passages. In the interest of
effective management of drainage systems, the Committee recommended
the clear demarcation of responsibility.

In response to the Committee's recommendation, the Ministry of
Railways has noted the concerns and mentioned about the implementation
of remedial measures to avoid water logging. The Committee further
recommend the implementation of geo-tagging for all LHSs, with the
names and contact details of the nodal officers responsible for their
maintenance. The Committee emphasized that this information should not
only be displayed at the LHS sites but also be made available on the
official website of the Railways for public awareness and easy
accessibility.

Recommendation (Para No. 16)

8. The Committee noted that as per guidelines issued in 2010 by Railways
LHS were not to be constructed if adequate embankment height was not
available, with the exception being made only in cases where water proofing
arrangements were available. While the guidelines are in tune with the ground
reality, what the Committee found to be disappointing to note is that guidelines
pertaining to maintenance were unclear and do not clearly designate and
bestow responsibility. The Committee noted that as per the guidelines, the cost
of provisioning drainage facility in areas that fall outside the Railway boundary is
to be borne by the respective State Governments, but the Governments
concerned have not owned up any responsibility. As provision of drainage
facility was not considered to be any one’s responsibility, and not stipulated in
clear terms, maintenance work was not being undertaken.

Page 8 of 16


9. 116 Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:-

“As mentioned in Para 4 above (Railway Boards letter dated 03.05.2010 &
21.06.2011), in order to eliminate all UMLC in time bound manner, LHS
were constructed, even at those locations also where adequate bank height
was not available. Railways over a period of time have taken several
remedial measures to mitigate problem of water logging. All remedial
measures like construction of pump & sump arrangements, provision of
cover sheds on both approaches, arresting source of ingress of water, etc.
are being provided to avoid water logging.

Even though guidelines are issued by Railway Board that the responsibility
of maintenance of road passing through subways, lighting, drainage system
and other allied works lies with State Government, but State Governments
has not taken any initiative. As such, in view of safety and convenience of
road users, Railway had no option but to take the responsibility for
maintenance of above said assets.”

10. Audit vide their 0७.0. No.5-Rly/LR/SECR/12-28/2017 dated
04.01.2023 have not offered any further comments.

11. The Committee acknowledge the Railway's efforts in addressing the
problem of water logging in Limited Height Subways (LHS) and notes the
guidelines issued in 2010, emphasizing the importance of embankment
height and water proofing arrangements. However, the Committee
expressed disappointment in the lack of clarity and designated
responsibility for LHS maintenance in the guidelines.

The Committee emphasized the historical challenges with State
Government authorities not taking responsibility for the maintenance of
drainage facilities outside the Railway boundary, as outlined in the

guidelines. They, therefore, recommend collaboration between Railway _

-and State Government authorities to address this issue effectively. The

Page 9 of 16


Committee accentuate that a collaborative approach will not only
delineate responsibilities but also facilitate the timely and efficient
maintenance of LHS, ensuring the safety and convenience of road users.

Recommendation (Para 17)

12. The Committee also recommended that Railways should form a
Committee of Senior Engineers to come out with solutions for mitigating
recurrent and perpetual cost of dewatering in the sub-ways and find a
permanent and low cost method of ensuring maintenance of drainage in all LHS.
Steps took in this regard may be intimated to the Committee.

13. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:-

“Research Design and Standards Organization (RDSO) under Ministry of
Railways had already studied the issue in detail to minimize problem of
water logging in Road Under Bridges (RUBs)/Limited Height Subways
(LHS) and suggested remedial measures. Accordingly, comprehensive
guidelines have been issued in April 2020 by Railway Board, which
includes following actions: - Adequate drainage arrangement had been
made as integral part of planning of new Road Under Bridge
(RUB)/Subways. In existing RUB/subways, feasible remedial measures like
water flow diversion to nearest bridge and nallahs, provision of cover shed
on approach roads, provision of hump at entry to Road under Bridge
(RUB), provision of cross drains, sealing of joints etc. had been made as
per site suitability and requirements. In addition, pumping arrangement had
also been made for identified RUBs, to drain out expeditiously in case of

emergency.”

14. Audit vide their U.O. No.5-Rly/LR/SECR/12-28/2017 dated
04.01.2023 have not offered any further comments.

Page 10 of 16


15. The Committee appreciate the comprehensive guidelines issued by
the Railway Board in April 2020 to address the issue of water logging in
Road Under Bridges (RUBs)/Limited Height Subways (LHS). However, the -
Committee had recommended a more sustainable and permanent solution
.to mitigate the recurrent and perpetual cost of dewatering in sub-ways.
Specifically, the Committee had suggested that Railways should form a
Committee of Senior Engineers to explore structural measures that can
effectively stop water flow in LHS, minimizing the reliance on pumping
arrangements.

The Committee emphasized the need for a low-cost method to
ensure the maintenance of drainage in all LHS. The focus should be on
finding structural solutions that prevent water accumulation and facilitate
efficient drainage without the need for continuous dewatering efforts. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the proposed Committee of
Senior Engineers should conduct a thorough study and propose practical,
cost-effective measures to address the root cause of water logging in sub-
ways.

At this stage the Committee can only emphasize for a thorough
review of the implemented actions to identify potential areas for
improvement or modification. Additionally, the Committee recommend that
structural measures be undertaken to prevent water flow in the first place,
in order to minimize the reliance on pumping arrangements. This approach
aligns with the Committee's recommendation to form a Committee of
Senior Engineers to explore permanent and low-cost solutions for
drainage maintenance in all LHS.

Regular monitoring and evaluation of the implemented measures will
ensure the continued effectiveness of the drainage arrangements and
_contribute to the overall safety and functionality of RUBs and LHS.

Page 11 of 16


Recommendation (Para 18 )

16. The Committee did note that as per report of RPF an accident
took place on 6 December 2016 at the LC no 286, due to non-barricading of
the LC although the LC was closed. The Committee noted that the subsequent
joint inspection of Railways with Audit revealed that the LHS was filled with
water up to the brink. The Committee had found that the explanation of the
Ministry given in this regard is evasive. While the Audit clearly stated that the
RPF reported the accident at the LC No. 286, the Ministry in their written reply
stated on the contrary that there was barricading, LC was closed, and the
motorbike driver involved in the accident was trespassing the railway track at a
location far from the LC. The Committee found the reply of the Ministry
contradicting the Report of RPF, as cited by Audit. The Committee emphasized
the importance of human life and deplore the casual manner in which the
railway has chosen to respond on the matter. The Committee desire that an
explanation on the points highlighted in the RPF report may be given to the
Committee and recommend that responsibility, as warranted be fixed on the
official(s) responsible for getting the barricading done in this case, and the
Committee intimated of the outcome at the earliest.

17. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:

“Railway has highest regard for human life and several measures are taken
by the railways to prevent trespassing of railway track. Apart from
barricading/trenching of the trespassing locations, Counseling of people
living nearby area of track is done regularly by a team of Railway Protection
Force (RPF) staff, P-way staff along with Safety personnel. Moreover, to
create awareness among the people nukkad natak and advertisements
through print and electronic media is also given.

Page 12 of 16


Though the accident occurred near the LHS site, but it occurred due to
the negligence/carelessness of the trespasser crossing the track without
taking proper care about the incoming trains.”

18. Audit vide their U.O.1 No.5-Rly/LR/SECR/12-28/2017 dated 04.01.2023
have not offered any further comments.

19. The Committee find the response of the Ministry contradictory to the
RPF report, as noted by the Audit. The Committee emphasize the
significance of human life and express concern about the casual manner
in which the railway has chosen to respond to the matter. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the Ministry provide a detailed explanation
on the points highlighted in the RPF report.

Furthermore, the Committee recommended fixing responsibility on
the official(s) responsible for ensuring barricading in the specific case of
LC no 286. The Committee stressed the importance of holding accountable
those responsible for lapses in safety measures, and request to be
intimated of the outcome at the earliest.

In light of the actions taken by the Railway, including measures to
prevent trespassing, the Committee acknowledges the importance of such
initiatives. However, the Committee emphasize that a proactive approach
is required, ensuring that safety measures are effectively implemented and
that responsibility is not shirked in the event of accidents.

Page 13 of 16


Recommendation (Para No. 19)

20. The Committee in their original Report had noted from findings of Audit
that in yet another case of accident, as per RPF report at LC no BK-12 an
accident took place on 22 May 2014. The Committee also noted the Audit
observation that at the time of accident, construction of LHS was not completed
though the scheduled date of completion of the LHS was 11.09.2013. In this
regard, the Committee also took note of the reply from the Ministry of Railways
that since the Railway Officials executing the works at these LCs had taken
action as per the contractual provisions such as imposition of penalty and
termination of Contracts therefore, no action has been taken against Railway
Officials executing the LHS works. The Committee felt that the ultimate
responsibility lies with the Railway Officials, and therefore recommended that
simply penalizing the contractor and absolving the railway officers is not the
solution and will not solve the issue. The Committee wondered as to why no
action was taken against erring officers when there was a delay of more than
eight months in construction of LHS and no warning/security was put in place for
the general public. The Committee expressed the need for identifying the senior
railway officers who did not report the delay nor act on the delay reported in this
case.

21. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:-

“It is true that the scheduled date of completion for the LHS work at LC No.
BK-12 was 11.09.13. But, due to the failure of the contractor and due to slow
progress of work, the construction of LHS could not be completed in time.
Accordingly, the contractor was penalized as per contract provisions.

The accident occurred due to negligence/carelessness on the part of
tractor driver. On the fateful day, the tractor driver did not observe the
various road sign boards on the approach of UMLC and failed to stop on
the speed breaker at LC approach and collided with the loco of the

Page 14 of 16


incoming train. There was barricading available for the road users.
Railway administrations took all efforts to complete the work within TDC
and for non-completion of work in time the agency also penalized
accordingly.”

22. Audit vide their U.O.1 No.5-Rly/LR/SECR/12-28/2017 (8686
04.01.2023 have not offered any further comments.

23. The Committee find that an accident occurred at LC no BK-12 on 22
May 2014, and the Audit report highlights that the construction of the
Level Crossing (LHS) was not completed by the scheduled date of
11.09.2013. The Committee note the Ministry of Railways’ response,
indicating that penalties and termination of contracts were imposed on the
contractor, absolving the railway officers from any action. However, the
Committee express concern that penalizing the contractor alone is
insufficient and will not address the underlying issue.

The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railway Authorities
should take ultimate responsibility for the delayed construction of the
LHS, especially when there was a delay of more than eight months. The
Committee are not able to understand as to why no action has been taken
hitherto against the erring officers who failed to report and address the
delay, leading to a lack of warning/security measures for the general
public. The Committee emphasize the need for identifying and holding
senior railway officers accountable for their failure to act on the reported
delay in this case.

In conclusion, the Committee recommend a structured and thorough
and impartial investigation into incidents like the one at LC no 286, with a
focus on holding Railway Authorities accountable for any negligence or
failure to enforce safety protocols. The Committee, therefore, in no

Page 15 of 16


e

uncertain words accentuate the need for a transparent and responsible
approach to address safety concerns and protect human life.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
February, 2024 Chairperson,
Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Page 16 of 16