6

Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2015-16)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 887 Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

SIXTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2187

SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2015-16)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 887 Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2020/Magha, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION ............................- ०७७ ०७७७) ७-७५." ७७.
CHAPTER | २७7०० .......................................................
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

accepted by the Government ..........................

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
शॉशिगांणा .........................५५-५----०-०००००५-- ७-०

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
18|2168 ........................ ७६ ७०5५-५० een ५५०

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 11" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2019-20) held on 28" January, 2020.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty-
eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS LOMFOSTTTON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
hri Sudheer Gupta
mt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Ss

S

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Cee ND YF WN

-
NES

| Shri Jayant Sinha

1 ‘14, Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

6. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

9. Vacant’

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

हू SECRETARIAT

| 1. Shri 1. 0. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

| Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his resignation from Rajya
i Sabha on 05 August, 2019


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eighty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Excesses
Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2015-16)".

2. The Eighty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
gt" February, 2018. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Sixth Report at their Sitting held on
28" January, 2020. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-I/.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
30 January, 2020 Chairperson,

10 Magha,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART -।

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Eighty-eighth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over Voted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2015-16)".

2. The Eighty-eighth Report (16 Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok
Sabha/iaid in Rajya Sabha . on 9 February, 2018, ‘contained 10
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministries/Departments
concerned and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the

Government:

Para Nos. 1-10
Total: 10
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not désire to
Pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos, NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration:

Para Nos, NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter -V


I. Excess expenditure incurred during the fiscal 2015-16 incurred during the fiscal 2015-16
(Recommendation Para No. 1)

3. The Committee in their 88" Report (167 Lok Sabha) had noted that a total
expenditure of % 286.24 crore (before misclassification) was incurred in eight cases of
eight excess registering Grants/Appropriations. The Committee had also noted that bulk
of the excess expenditure was on the Civil side viz. ₹ 210.37 crore which is 73.49
percent of total excess expenditure incurred during the year 2015-16. The Committee
had further found that in the Civil side almost the entire excess expenditure was
incurred by the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) viz.
excess expenditure of %,210.22 crore under Revenue - Voted section of Grant No. 15 -
Department of Telecommunications which was 73.44 percent of the total excess
expenditure incurred during the year 2015-16. In case of Grants/Appropriations
operated by the Ministry of Railways, an excess expenditure of = 75.87 crore which was
26.51 percent of the total excess expenditure was incurred under six
Grants/Appropriations. The Committee had observed that the authorities concerned in
various Ministries/Departments continue to display their negligence and callous attitude
towards rules prescribed for containing the expenditure within the sanctioned
provisions. The Committee had viewed this situation with concern and emphasized that
the Ministry of Finance should devise suitable mechanism for tightening the exchequer
control. Emphasizing the need for exercising: effective control over expenditure, the
Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to their 36" Report (167 Lok Sabha)
wherein they had recommended to constitute an Expert Group की each
Ministry/Department representing all the budget controlling authorities to undertake a
thorough study of the instances where expenditure had exceeded the budgetary

allocations during the last five years. Upon noticing that no steps in this tegard had
been taken by the Government, the Committee in their 68" Report (16" Lok Sabha) had
once again impressed upon the Government to constitute Expert Groups in each and
every Ministry and furnish Report thereof indicating the reasons for such a high excess
expenditure and suggestions to obviate the same in future. But no action taken note in
this regard had been furnished by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee were

constrained to express their dissatisfaction over the delay of over two years in taking


i any concrete action in this direction and desired the Ministry of Finance to fix

responsibility on the matter and inform the Committee of the action taken in this regard.

4. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) have stated as under:

"In pursuance of the recommendation made by Public Accounts Committee in
36" Report (16" Lok Sabha) and reiterated in their 687 Report on Excess over
voted Grants and Charged Appropriations for 2014-15, Department of
Expenditure had issued instructions, vide its O.M. No. 12(7)/E.Coord/2017 dated
28.9.2017 (copy enclosed), to all Ministries/Departments to constitute an Expert
Group in each’ Ministry/Departments, whose Grants/Appropriations registered
excess expenditure, to examine the reasons leading to persistent excess
i expenditure and to submit a report to the Committee. Ministries/Departments are
i expected to submit its finding to the Committee."

5. On this reply, Audit have made the following observation:

"The Ministry is required to incorporate in the Action Taken Note, the action taken
on the Committee's remark that the Ministry of Finance should devise suitable
mechanism for tightening the exchequer control. The Ministry is also required to
incorporate. in the Action Taken Note, the action taken on the issue of fixing
responsibility for not constituting Expert Groups in each Ministry/Department. The
Ministry may incorporate in the Action Taken Note, the compliance reported on
the instructions to constitute an Expert Group in each Ministry/Department, for
better appreciation of the Public Accounts Committee."

|

6. In response thereto, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
replied as under: .

"A High-Level _inter-Ministerial Group has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 20.6.2018 to review the excess
expenditure and to recommend measures and mechanism for eliminating
Occurrence of such excess expenditure. This Group will initially be apprised of
the study being conducted from National Institute of Financial Management."

7. Further, in their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the

Ministry of Defence have inter-alia stated as under:

estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare. their budget exercising
utmost caution and accuracy while estimating and projecting the requirement of
funds. Further, as recommended by the Committee in its 68" Report, a high level
committee has been constituted Consisting of the budget controlling authorities of
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as well
as the officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure) to identify loopholes in

। "As a méasure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the budget



ion

the budgeting procedures and to obviate the same in order to avoid the recurring
phenomenon of excess expenditure under the Grants. Following are the terms of
reference for the Committee: .
i) The Committee has to suggest methods for improving planning for budget
at various stages during the year to ensure that over and under spending is
minimized. For this the Committee could consider rationalization of accounting
procedure including budget allocation and re-appropriation, and rationalization of
Grants for the MoD to provide flexibility t6 MoD ih incurring expenditure and
ensuring that over and under expenditure is minimized in r/o MoD.

ii) The Committee has to study Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic
Affairs (Budget Division) OM dated 21/08/2017 on Cash Management System
with reference to its implementation in MoD, including its impact of budget
management. )
iii) Committee has to study the trend of expenditure with reference to
projections by the Services as MoD has a cash outgo based budget which is also
dependent on timelines of projects, to ensure that fund projections of MoF are
more realistic, especially in view of the fact that the funds received from MoF at
BE, RE and Supplementary stages are much lesser than the projections.

Till now three meetings of the high level Committee have been held since 2017
wherein reasons for excess expenditure in Defence Service Estimates and
recurring excess expenditure under Defence Pensions have been discussed
along with ways to minimize the same. After the Second meeting, Defence
Secretary wrote a letter to the Vice Chiefs of the Services in which all the budget
holders of the Service HQrs were directed to maintain the expenditure within the
approved ceilings."
8. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation in an earlier
Report the Ministry of Finance have constituted a high level Inter-Ministerial
Group under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 20.06.2018 to review the
excess expenditure and to recommend measures and mechanism of eliminating
occurrence of such excess expenditure. While appreciating the steps taken by
the Ministry of Finance to overcome the problem of excess expenditure, the
Committee expect that the high-level Inter Ministerial Group will hasten up their
review and submit their report within a defined time-limit by recommending
prudent measures to avoid recurrence of excess expenditure in. future. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the study being
conducted in this regard by National Institute of Financial Management and the
approximate time for completion of the study. The Committee would also like the

Ministry of Defence to monitor and ensure scrupulous adherence to the


instructions issued to the Vice Chiefs of the Services so as to contain the
expenditure within the approved ceilings. Instructions in this regard issued to all
field formations may be furnished to the Committee.

I. Recurring Excess Expenditure Expenditure
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

: 9. The scrutiny of the excess expenditure! incurred had revealed that Civil
. Ministries/Departments and the Ministry of Railways had been incurring large amount of

. excess expenditure continuously during the last ten fiscals. However, it had been

observed that there was ‘considerable decline in excess expenditure incurred by. the

_ Civil Ministries/Departments as well as Ministry of Railways during the year. 2015-16 vis-
‘ a-vis 2014-15. It had also been observed that excess expenditure incurred by the
Ministry of Railways during 2015-16 was the lowest during the last seven years i.e. from
, 2008-09 to 2014-15, The Committee had expressed their satisfaction over the decrease

in excess expenditure during the financial year 2015-16 as compared to that of 2014-15.

~ Still the Committee had expressed their concern over the persistent cases of excess

expenditure by various Ministries/Departments. The Committee had, therefore, desired
that the Government should remain more vigilant in their budgeting exercise and
monitor the expenditure pattern with utmost care and alacrity so that instances and
quantum of excess expenditure are pruned down to the barest minimum in the coming

years, if not eliminated a together.

10. The Committee had further observed that the Ministry of Defence under

Revenue-charged portion of Grant No. 22-Defence Pensions, had incurred excess

expenditure recurringly from the years 2011-12 to 2015-16. Despite the oft-repeated
concern expressed by the Committee on the recurring phenomenon of excess

expenditure under the aforesaid Grants/Appropriations operated by Ministry of Defence

, and Railways, the situation had not apparently improved. Expressing their concern over
: the state of affairs, the Committee in their 367 Report had desired for constitution of a
! high level inter-Ministerial Group under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary and
ithe C&AG of India. Further, taking note of the recurring excess expenditure under
Grants operated by the Ministry of Defence, the Committee in their 68" Report had


desired the Ministry of Defence to constitute a high-level Committee consisting the
budget controlling authorities of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) and officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure) to identify the
loopholes in the budgeting procedures of the Ministry of Defence and to obviate the
same in order to avoid the recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure under the
Grants operated by them. Appreciating that in pursuance of their recommendation:'a
high level Committee with AS & FA (Acquisition) as Chairperson and representative
from Army, Navy, Air Force, IDS DGAFMS & representative from Department of
Economic Affairs and CGA has been set up to identify the loopholes in the budgetary
process, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the findings/recommendations of
that high-level Committee,to curb the tendency of recurring excess expenditure under
the Grants operated by the Ministry of Defence in future.

11. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) have stated as under:—

"The observations made by Public Accounts Committee have been noted. It may
be submitted that the Expert Group, consisting the budget controlling authorities of
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and
officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure), constituted to identify the
loopholes in the budgeting procedures of the Ministry of Defence and to obviate
the same in order to avoid the recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure under
the Grants operated by them is in pursuance of instructions issued by Department
of Expenditure in its O.M. No. 12(7)/E.Coord/2017 dated 28.9.2017."

12. In their vetting comments, Audit have submitted as follows:

"The Ministry may incorporate in the Action Taken Note, the
indings/recommendations of the high-level Committee to curb the tendency of
tecurring excess expenditure under Grants operated by Ministry of Defence, as
desired by the Public Accounts Committee."

13. n response to the vetting comments of Audit, the Ministry of Finance

(Department of Economic Affairs) submitted as under:

"A High-Level inter-Ministerial Group has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 20.06.2018 to review the excess
expenditure and to recommend measures and mechanism for eliminating
occurrence of such excess expenditure. This Group will initially be apprised of
he study being conducted from National Institute of Financial Management."



14... In their ATN to abovesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of
Defence inter-alia stated as under:

sess as recommended by the Committee in its 68" Report, a high level
committee has been constituted consis! ing of the budget controlling authorities of
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as well
as the officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure) to identify loopholes in
the budgeting procedures and to obviate the same in order to avoid the recurring
phenomenon of excess expenditure under the Grants. Till now three meeting of
the high level Committee have been held since 2017 wherein reasons for excess
expenditure in Defence Service Estimates and recurring excess expenditure
under Defence Pensions have been discussed along with ways to minimize the
same. After the Second meeting, Defence Secretary wrote a letter to the Vice
Chiefs of the Services in which all the budget holders of the Service HQrs were
directed to maintain the expenditure within the approved ceilings."

15. The Committee are dismayed to note that neither the Ministry of Finance
nor the Ministry of Defence have furnished the findings/recommendations of the
high-level Committee to curb recurrence of excess expenditure under Grants
Operated by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee express their displeasure
over the tepid and apathetic approach of both the Ministries towards such a bad
phenomenon plaguing the Ministries for long. The Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation and impress upon the Ministry of Defence to strive
earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation of their budgetary requirements under
various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriation operated by them so that the
existing lapses/loopholes are identified and effective remedial measures taken to
obviate excess expenditure. The Committee would again like to be apprised of the
findings/recommendations of the high-level Committee to curb the tendency of

recurring excess expenditure under the Grants operated by Ministry of Defence.

NEW DELHI; ह ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
30 January, 2020 Chairperson,

10 Magha,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


APPENDIX-II
i (Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 10
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 10
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 100%

Para Nos. 1 to 12

i (iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 0
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. -Nil

(v) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 0

which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0

Para Nos. -Nil

4