 
 
144 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PHASE – I OF BHARATMALA 
PARIYOJANA 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
PAC NO. 2374 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O R T Y-
F O U R T H R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2023 -24 ) 
 
 
(SEVENT EENT H LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
         MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
 
                                         
 
 
    Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29.04.2024    
                                                               
Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
April 2024/ Chaitra 1946 (Saka) 
  
IMPLEMENTATION OF PHASE – I OF 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)                         (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 PART- I  
    REPORT 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
   
 APPENDICES  
II*. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on  
19.2.2024. 
 
III* Minutes of the adoption of the Public Accounts Committee (20 23-24) 
through digital circulation on 20.4.2024 
 
 
*Not appended in the report  

 
 
                                                             
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 
2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18.    Shri Derek O’Brien 
19.    Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.    Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.    Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.    Vacant2 
 
             SECRETARIAT 
 
        Shri Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
        Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja           -   Director 
        Shri Alok Mani Tripathi      -   Deputy Secretary 
        Smt. Rinku Awasthi            -    Committee Officer 
        Shri Charanjeet Singh          -    Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson,  Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Forty -First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “IMPLEMENTATION OF PHASE – I OF BHARATMALA 
PARIYOJANA” based on Comptroller and Auditor General's Report No. 19 of 2023.  
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of 
the House on 10.8.2023.   
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of  
Ministry of Home Affairs on 19.2.2024. The Committee considered and adopted this 
Report vide digital circulation on 20.4.2024.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold a nd form Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination 
of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
PART-I 
 REPORT  
 The Committee have found that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(MoRTH) formulates policies for road transport, national highways, and transport research 
to improve the efficiency of India's road transport system. In September 2017, MoRTH 
proposed the Bharatmala Pariyojana program to optimize national highway development 
and m ovement across India by improving existing infrastructure, enabling multi -modal 
integration, addressing infrastructure gaps, and integrating corridors.  
 
2. The Committee also found that t he proposed Bharatmala Pariyojana included 
developing 74,942 km of hi ghways, with 34,800 km to be developed in Phase I (BPP -I) by 
September 2022 at an estimated cost of Rs 5.35 lakh crore . Additional funds of Rs 1.57 
lakh crore  were also committed for other ongoing highway projects not included under 
Bharatmala. 
 
3. Further, the Committee have learnt that the Cabinet approved BPP-I in October 2017 
after recommendations from the Public Investment Board on aspects like program scope, 
project approval, corridor selection criteria, and monitoring. BPP -I is to be executed by 
NHAI, NHIDCL, MoRTH, and State PWDs. 
BPP-I had 7 components with a total length of 34,800 km to be developed at an estimated 
cost of Rs 5,35,000 crore: 
 Economic Corridors (9,000 km) - Rs 1,20,000 crore 
 Inter-Corridor & Feeder Roads (6,000 km) - Rs 80,000 crore 
 National Corridors Efficiency Improvements (5,000 km) - Rs 1,00,000 crore 
 Border & International Connectivity Roads (2,000 km) - Rs 25,000 crore 
 Coastal & Port Connectivity Roads (2,000 km) - Rs 20,000 crore 
 Greenfield Expressways (800 km) - Rs 40,000 crore 
 Residual NHDP (10,000 km) - Rs 1,50,000 crore 
4. The Committee have been given to understand that a  National Highway network of 
64,942 km of NH network was initially identified in Bharatmala Pariyojana. Out of this, the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Aff airs (CCEA) had approved the development of 24,800 
km as a part of Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase I (BPP -I) on 24th October 2017. Further, 
CCEA had also approved development of 10,000 km of residual NHDP project. The Public 
Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and Report C&AG Report 
No. 19 of 2023 on the subject “Implementation of Phase-I of Bharatmala Pariyojana”. 
 

 
 
(Ref: Page 1 of Background Note received from Ministry for Sitting on 19.2.24)  
5. The Performance Audit of BPP -I was car ried out by CAG to assess achievement of 
defined objectives and the execution of NH development under the program. This audit 
aimed to examine several key aspects, including project selection and prioritization, 
financial oversight, contract award processe s, project execution and contract 
management, as well as the effectiveness of the monitoring system in place to ensure the 
Pariyojana’s objectives were met. For this purpose, an Entry Conference was held on 27 
October 2020 by CAG with MoRT&H, NHAI and NHID CL, wherein the scope & coverage 
of audit, audit objectives and criteria etc., were explained. After the review by CAG, the 
Draft Performance Audit Report was issued to MoRT&H on 13 January 2022 for the 
confirmation of facts and figures contained therein a nd to seek MoRT&H’s reply. Draft 
Audit Report was followed by issuance of two supplementary Audit observations to 
MoRT&H on 22 February 2022 and 17 May 2022. MoRT&H furnished its replies on 26 
April 2022, 28 April 2022 and 02 May 2022. An Exit Conference w as held on 19 May 2022, 
wherein major Audit findings and recommendations were discussed with MoRT&H and 
NHAI Management. However, reply couldn’t be furnished by MoRT&H on the draft report 
of the CAG. CAG published final report “CAG Report No. 19 of 2023” o n 10 August 2023. 
The report has made observations on the selected sample projects as well as on the 
overall planning and implementation of the Phase -I of the Bharatmala Pariyojana. The key 
topics covered by the CAG in the final report include the followin g:  
 
i. Conceptualization and Planning of Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase – I (Chapter 3) 
ii.  Fund Management (Chapter 4) 
iii. Award of Projects (Chapter 5) 
iv.  Execution of Projects (Chapter 6) 
v. Monitoring and Information Technology (Chapter 7)  
 
(Ref: Page 2 of Background Note received from Ministry for Sitting on 19.2.24)  
The total length under Bharatmala Pariyojana across all 7 components is 64,942 km, out of 
which 24,800 km is to be developed under BPP -I. Different project implementation modes 
were p rescribed for BPP -I with proper balancing of risk and financing between the 

 
 
government and private sector. The data on progress of the various components of 
Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase I (BPP -I) shows that out of the total CCEA approved length 
of 34,800 km , 26,316 km (75.62%) has been awarded as of 31 March 2023. Audit had 
found that the completion rate is slower, with only 13,499 km (38.79%) completed till the 
presentation of the Audit Report. 
6. Up to 31 March 2023, national highways length of 26,316 km h as been awarded 
under BPP -I, which was 75.62 per cent of the CCEA approved length for BPP -I. The 
sanctioned cost of 26,316 km of project length was Rs.8,46,588 crore (Rs. 32.17 crore/km) 
as against CCEA approved length of 34,800 km at cost of Rs. 5,35,000 crore (Rs.15.37 
crore/km). Out of this, 13,499 km of national highways length has been completed till 31 
March 2023 i.e. 38.79 per cent of CCEA approved length, which included the construction 
undertaken during the challenging CoVID pandemic period.  
7. Audit found that the total sanctioned cost of Rs 8,46,588 crore for BPP-I projects is 
already 158.24% of the original CCEA approved estimate of Rs 5,35,000 crore, indicating 
significant cost overruns. Among the different components, Economic Corridors has see n 
the highest award activity at 94.74% but the completion rate is only 42.30% - the lowest 
amongst all categories. In contrast, 302.75% of the approved length has been awarded 
under Greenfield Expressways, but completion is still behind at 119.75%.  
8. Coastal & Port Connectivity roads present cause for concern, with just 20.75% of 
approved length awarded and 5.20% completed. While Border and International 
Connectivity roads has relatively better performance in terms of awards (80%) and 
completion (62.80%). The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the 
implementation of Bharatmala Pariyojana (BPP -I) with the aim of optimizing the efficiency 
of the movement of goods and people in India. 8. Audit noted the objectives of BPP 
which included bridgi ng infrastructure gaps, allocating resources for holistic highways 
development, and adopting a corridor approach over a package -based one. The Logistics 
Performance Index (LPI) was a crucial benchmark tool, and despite improvements in 
India's overall LPI s core from 2007 to 2023, specific challenges remained in infrastructure 
quality. 
9. The audit also revealed that while BPP -I aimed to positively impact the LPI, the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) did not set specific targets for 
improving L PI during the implementation of Bharatmala Pariyojana. The LPI ranking of 
India did improve, but concerns were raised about the lack of measurable outcome 
parameters, such as accident reduction and user satisfaction, being set at the project 
selection stag e. Delays and challenges were observed in the development of certain 
projects under BPP-I, particularly those inherited from the National Highways Development 

 
 
Program (NHDP). Significant delays and issues related to right of way, environmental 
clearances, and forest land disputes were highlighted in specific cases. The audit pointed 
out that these challenges were not adequately addressed before planning projects under 
BPP-I, leading to skewed development and unproductive use of funds.  
10. In response to th e audit observations, MoRTH acknowledged certain bottlenecks but 
did not provide satisfactory responses for all the identified issues. The audit raised 
concerns about the planning and execution of projects under BPP -I, emphasizing the need 
for addressing b ottlenecks to ensure seamless connectivity and effective utilization of 
funds. The Central Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the 
implementation of Bharatmala Pariyojana (BPP -I) with the aim of enhancing the efficiency 
of goods and peopl e movement across India and improving the Logistics Performance 
Index (LPI). The objectives included bridging infrastructure gaps, optimal resource 
allocation for highways development, and adopting a corridor approach. The Logistics 
Performance Index (LPI)  is a World Bank benchmark tool, based on ground surveys, to 
identify trade logistics challenges. The audit observed improvements in India's LPI score 
from 3.07 in 2007 to 3.40 in 2023. However, concerns were raised about the lack of 
specific targets for L PI improvement under Bharatmala Pariyojana. Audit findings 
highlighted delays in projects under BPP -I, especially those merged from the National 
Highways Development Program (NHDP). Some projects faced challenges like right of 
way issues, environmental cle arances, and delays in fixation of appointed dates. 
Optimization exercises were conducted for NHAI projects, leading to a 160.79% increase 
in the targeted length for BPP -I, with varying increases across components. However, 
optimization exercises for NHIDC L and the Road wing of MoRTH were not conducted. 
Concerns were raised about the lack of clarity in the criteria for project substitution, leading 
to the inclusion of additional lengths beyond the approved limits. The estimation of the 
target length for BPP -I included lengths already developed or awarded before the 
approval. The audit observed an overestimation of the target and achievement lengths for 
residual NHDP projects, and there were concerns about the unauthorised use of BPP -I 
funds for ongoing NHDP projects. NHIDCL's achievements under BPP -I were scrutinized, 
revealing that projects awarded under other schemes were included in BPP -I, leading to 
an overstatement of BPP-I achievements.  
 Audit noted that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) did not 
provide responses to the audit observations, raising concerns about the adherence to 
approved guidelines and the effectiveness of project implementation.  
11. The Audit identified several noteworthy observations in its review of the 
implementation of Phase -I of Bharatmala Pariyojana (BPP -I), a major road development 
initiative in India. Notable concerns were raised regarding the optimization exercise 

 
 
conducted by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH). While an 
optimization exercise was carried out for the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), 
no such exercise was conducted for NHIDCL and the Road wing of MoRTH.  
12. One of the key findings as the Committee have learnt was the significant increase in 
the targeted length for BPP-I post -optimization, raising questions about the alignment of 
the project with the approved targets by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA). The Audit observed disparities in the substitution criteria, with instances of fresh 
alignments being introduced during optimization, including those not initially approved by 
the CCEA. 
 
13. Concerns were also raised about the estimation of target lengths, with discrepancies 
noted in the inclusion of already completed or awarded highway lengths in the o verall 
targets. The achievements of NHIDCL were scrutinized, revealing that some projects 
included under BPP -I had administrative approvals and financial sanctions under other 
schemes, potentially leading to an overstatement of accomplishments.  
14. Inconsistencies between the Cabinet Note and the optimization exercise were 
highlighted, specifically regarding inaccuracies in traffic projections and lengths of roads in 
certain economic corridors. Additionally, the prioritization criteria approved by the CCEA 
were not uniformly applied, as no prioritization exercise was conducted for NHIDCL and 
the Road wing of MoRTH. 
15. The Committee have learnt that t he prioritization of NHAI projects was found to lack 
transparency, with no clear method such as ABC analysis or ranking system evident in the 
decision-making process. Moreover, the absence of prescribed timelines for project 
awards or completion raised concerns about the meaningfulness of the priorities assigned. 
Test checks revealed discrepancies in the prioriti zation outcomes, with instances where 
high-priority projects had not been awarded or construction had not commenced, while 
medium and low-priority projects were progressing. The non -prioritization of projects under 
the Border & International Connectivity R oads and Coastal & Port Connectivity Roads 
components for NHAI was flagged as an issue that could impact port -led development and 
freight movement.  

 
 
16. Finally, the Audit noted that NHAI had awarded projects totaling 5,594 km before the 
prioritization exe rcise, indicating a deviation from the established process. Despite these 
observations, MoRTH did not provide responses to the concerns raised by the Audit, 
leaving several critical aspects unaddressed. The prioritization of the Alandi -Mohol section 
within the Pune -Solapur-Vijaywada Economic Corridor was a subject of scrutiny in the 
audit. MoRTH prioritized this section in November 2018, dividing it into five projects for 
construction, with NHAI approving these projects between February 2019 and November 
2021. The civil cost for these projects amounted to ₹4,913.76 crore, and their scheduled 
completion dates ranged from January 2022 to May 2024. As of March 31, 2023, these 
projects had achieved physical progress ranging between 21.02% and 98%.  
17. However, the audit raised concerns about the Alandi -Mohol section, highlighting that 
it was initially planned under the National Highways (Original) scheme and was not part of 
the approved highways length for Bharatmala Pariyojana. Moreover, the annual average 
daily traffic on the existing Pune -Solapur stretch was approximately 29,000 passenger car 
units from November 2017 to February 2020, indicating underutilization. This 
underutilization raised the possibility of a competing road causing financial implications for  
the existing BOT (Toll) section, either through claims for losses or extension of the 
concession period. The audit also pointed out that, at the time of prioritization, there was 
no authentic data available with MoRTH regarding traffic. Additionally, the development of 
the Alandi-Mohol section as a four-lane highway would result in the underutilization of both 
the existing and the proposed stretches, as the Alandi -Mohol section would have a 
combined lane configuration of eight lanes. The traffic projection s indicated that the traffic, 
which was 29,000 passenger car units in 2020, would only rise to 60,000 passenger car 
units by the year 2035. MoRTH's response in April 2022 did not directly address the core 
audit observation but acknowledged that the Alandi -Mohol section was not originally part of 
the Bharatmala Pariyojana alignments proposed to the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA). 
18. Notably the Committee have found that t he audit of the Dwarka Expressway 
construction and prioritization revealed several key observations. The decision to construct 
an elevated eight -lane main carriageway and a six -lane road at grade over a 29.06 km 
stretch in Haryana raised concerns, especial ly considering that the available 90-meter right 
of way could have accommodated a 14 -lane at-grade national highway. The discrepancy 
in the lane configuration prompted questions about the justification for such a design, given 
the projected average daily t raffic and the associated high construction cost of ₹250.77 

 
 
crore per km. The tolling strategy, with a rate of ₹290 per car single trip, was deemed 
disproportionate, and MoRTH's decision to toll Dwarka Expressway and NH -48 as a 
combined loop raised concern s about potential traffic diversion and toll revenue loss. 
Additionally, the audit pointed out that the alignment of the Regional Rapid Transit System 
(RRTS) Shahjahanpur -Neemrana-Behror intersected with Dwarka Expressway, 
emphasizing the need for a compos ite analysis, which was lacking. MoRTH's responses in 
April 2022 did not fully address the audit's suggestions, raising questions about the 
project's planning, execution, and alignment with broader transportation infrastructure 
considerations. 
19. The audi t of the pavement designs for the at -grade road of Dwarka Expressway 
identified critical issues in the planning and execution. The discrepancy in Million Standard 
Axles considered for the at -grade road, equivalent to a less -trafficked route, raised 
concerns about the pavement's sub -optimal thickness, especially given the heavy 
construction traffic expected in the Delhi -NCR region. Additionally, the contractor's 
deviation in pavement design based on a higher California Bearing Ratio value, resulting in 
cost savings, highlighted the importance of accurate site conditions assessment in project 
planning. Despite these observations, MoRTH did not provide a response to the audit 
findings. 
 
20. Further, the absence of a detailed project report for Dwarka Expressway , a major 
infrastructure project, was flagged as a critical oversight. The projects were appraised and 
approved without a comprehensive report, leading to various manifestations of the lack of 
detailed planning. The decision to construct an elevated eight -lane road and a six -lane at-
grade road without sufficient justification and the potential impact on tolling mechanisms 
underscored the significance of detailed project reports in guiding project decisions. 
MoRTH's response, citing the feasibility report wi th good-for-tender drawings as sufficient, 
contradicted its own Standard Operating Procedure and highlighted the need for 
comprehensive guidance documents for detailed project report consultants, which were 
not provided by NHAI. The audit findings emphasiz ed the importance of meticulous project 
planning and the need for adherence to standard procedures to ensure the quality and 
success of major infrastructure projects. 
21.  Merger of incomplete stretches into Bharatmala Pariyojana  

 
 
The Committee have gauged from the Audit findings which have revealed that languishing 
projects of NHDP were taken up in Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I (BPP -I) without 
resolving the existing impediments/ bottlenecks viz., availability of right of way or pending 
disputes regarding fo rest land including wildlife sanctuaries, as a consequence of which 
these projects again got stuck in BPP-I. 
22. When the Committee asked about the details of the urgency to take up the 
languishing projects of NHDP in BPP -I without first resolving their existing 
impediments and the current status of resolution of those languishing projects, the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as under: 
 
“A scientific and data -based Logistics Efficiency Enhancement Program (LEEP)study was 
conducted to identify the arterial National Highway network to be developed in the country 
as part of the Bharatmala Pariyojana,based on an Origin -Destination survey. The study 
mapped the overall freightmovement in the country and the arterial NationalHighway 
network was identified to enable efficientlogistics between the key Origin -Destination pairs. 
The network included the following components: 
a. Already developed stretches requiring nofurther augmentation in BPP -I 
b. Already developed stretches requiringfurther capacity augmentation to cater to 
thetraffic growth (considering existingcapacity and design life). For e.g., 
capacityAugmentation of already develo pedNational Corridors (GQ and NS -EW) 
underNational Corridor Efficiency Improvementcomponent of BPP -I 
c. New stretches that need to be developedunder BPP -I 
Based on the aforementioned LEEP study, a network of 64,942 km was identified under 
the Bharatmala Pariy ojana. It may be noted that a total length of 10,000 km of residual 
NHDP projects were also approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) as a part of the program. All of these NHDP projects formed part of key high -traffic 
density corridors and hence were critical for efficient freight and passenger movement. 
They were included as part of the BPP -Ito enable faster resolution of bottlenecks and 
hence speed up their implementation. Hence, the expectation that all issues on NHDP 
projects should have been resolved before their inclusion in BPP -I, needs to be 
reconsidered. 
Furthermore, through the evidence of the actual on -ground progress of implementation of 
these Residual NHDP projects, it can be ascertained that these projects are not 

 
 
languishing as compared to the other projects taken up under BPP -I. Below tables show 
the status of the length awarded and constructed for the Residual NHDP projects vis -à-vis 
the other BPP-I projects: 
Component Awarded till 
30thNov Total % length Awarded 
Bharatmala 
Pariyojana 19,667 24,800 79% 
Residual NHDP 6,751 10,000 67% 
Total 26,418 34,800 76% 
 
Component Constructed 
till 30thNov 
Awarded 
30th 
November 
Constructed 
length as % of 
Awarded Length 
Bharatmala 
Pariyojana 10,793 19,667 55% 
Residual NHDP 4,251 6,751 63% 
Total 15,045 26,418 57% 
 
We can see from the tables above that the award of projects under NHDP has only been 
slightly slower than the remaining BPP -I projects, while the pace of construction has been 
higher in Residual NHDP as compared to the remaining BPP-I projects. 
 
It should be noted that all the directions issued by CCEA are being enforced during the 
award of projects. Projects are awarded only after ensuring:  
1. Availability of Right of Way:  
• Availability of 80% of required ROW in case of HAM projects and  
• Availability of 90% of required ROW in case of EPC and BOT (Toll) projects  
2. Availability of Clearances: 
• Environment Clearance (wherever applicable) 
• Clearances for ROB, Utility Shifting, etc. 
• Forest Clearance before start of construction 

 
 
Projects are mandated not to be awarded without meeting the aforementioned conditions to 
prevent any delays at the time of execution. The policy for ensuring project readiness before 
award and appointment is summarized in the table below – 
 
Project 
Stage Land Acquisition Environmental 
Clearance 
Forest 
Clearance 
Pre-Appraisal 
− EPC & BOT (T): 
90% 3(A) 
− HAM: 80% 3(A) 
  
Appraisal & 
Approval 
− EPC & BOT (T): 
90% 3(D) 
− HAM: 80% 3(D) 
Approval of 
terms of 
reference by 
MoEF&CC 
 
Award 
− EPC & BOT (T): 
90% 3(G) 
− HAM: 80% 3(G) 
Environmental 
Clearance  
Appointed 
Date 
− EPC & BOT (T): 
90% Possession 
− HAM: 80% 
Possession 
 
Stage I 
clearance 
(working 
permission) 
 
However, in case of some projects, they were awarded considering the greater good in the 
country’s infrastructure and at the behest of public interest”.  
 
23.  Optimization of projects to be implemented by NHAI, Achievement of NHIDCL 
under Phase -I of Bharatmala Pariyojana & Inconsistencies in CCEA Note and 
optimization exercise 
          The Committee found that f or identification of national highways length, under BPP -I, 
based on principles of optimal traffic and freight movement etc., MoRTH carried out an 
optimisation exercise for NHAI. However, no such optimisation ex ercised was carried out 
for NHIDCL and Road wing of MoRTH. While optimising NHAI projects, the targets for 
development of national highways length under BPP -I increased substantially by around 
160 per cent to 64,675 km (excluding Residual NHDP length). The  target length for 

 
 
Residual NHDP component was increased to 12,324 km post optimisation against 10,000 
km approved by CCEA, while the lengths actually planned (4,607 km) to be constructed 
under BPP-I, under this component, were much lower than what was app roved by CCEA 
and optimised later on. 
           Further, the Committee also found Post optimisation exercise, new national 
highways length, beyond the lengths approved by CCEA, were included in lengths to be 
developed by NHAI under BPP -I. Further, already  awarded/constructed length formed a 
major part of the CCEA approved length and the length optimised. In NHIDCL, national 
highways length approved/awarded for other schemes were being merged in 
targeted/constructed lengths of BPP -I i.e., out of total 97 pr ojects (2,244 km) awarded by 
NHIDCL, under BPP-I, upto 31 March 2023 a total of 78 projects (1,752 km) were approved 
in schemes other than BPP -I. The claim of MoRTH that such lengths were arrived at after 
origin-destination study, freight flow projections and verification of identified infrastructure 
gaps through geo-mapping was, therefore, not verifiable in audit. 
24. On being asked whether any detailed study of length of highways, bottlenecks, 
proposed resolution of impediments carried out before proceedi ng on a project of such a 
huge magnitude, if not the reasons therefor e, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
replied as under: 
 
“CCEA had indicated an overall network of 64,942 km with an approval to 
develop 24,800 km in BPP-I without specifying the exact list of 24,800 km to be 
developed under BPP -I. In this context, it is to be understood that projects 
outside the list of 64,942 km could be added to the network through 
substitution, provided the length for development under BPP -I is restricted to 
24,800 km. CCEA had authorized the MoRT&H to substitute/replace up to 15% 
length of 24,800 kms for Phase I of the proposed program by other suitable 
projects, if development of certain identified stretches under the proposed 
program cannot be taken up on ac count of issues pertaining to alignment 
finalization, land availability and other unforeseen factors.  
MoRT&H undertook a scientific Logistics Efficiency Enhancement Program 
(LEEP) study to identify high traffic corridors to be developed to enable efficient  
freight and passenger movement between key Origin - Destination pairs in the 
country. Details of the same have also been provided in the preceding section.  

 
 
However, it is worth noting thatthe following points were beyond the scope of 
LEEP study -  
1. Optimal alignments to be developed for the corridor  
2. Nature of development (greenfield development vs brownfield 
expansion, lane configuration etc.) to be undertaken.  
Hence an optimization exercise was conducted by MoRT&H for these 
stretches, in discussion with s takeholders and inputs from Detailed Project 
Reports (DPR), for efficient infrastructure development. The optimization 
exercise included addressal of challenges in Brownfield augmentation through 
the development of Greenfield corridors, development of spur s from these 
Greenfield alignments for providing connectivity to places of regional 
importance (e.g., spur to Amritsar from the Delhi -Amritsar-Katra Expressway) 
as well as the enhancement of connectivity to ports / airports (e.g., JNPT spur, 
Jewar spur). 
Furthermore, optimization exercise was undertaken in consultation with all 
state governments, factoring in the upgradation projects being undertaken by 
the State Governments, assessment of the latest traffic flow, to enhance 
connectivity to upcoming industr ial / economic nodes and multimodal logistics 
terminals planned under various government initiatives. It also factored 
parameters such as reduction in time of travel and fuel efficiency while 
optimizing the network. These shorter, straighter greenfield ali gnments will lead 
to reduction in distance and hence the travel time between important economic 
centers, thus, resulting in reduction in fuel consumption. The outcome of the 
optimization exercise was factored in the relevant DPRs.  
Through the above optimiz ation exercise, the overall network of 64,942 kms 
length approved by the CCEAwas optimized to 64,675 kms. However, overall 
length to be developed under BPP-I was maintained at 34,800 km. 
It must also be noted that the optimization exercise was carried out for entire 
Bharatmala network including all agencies - NHAI, NHIDCL and Road Wing of 
MoRT&H, contrary to what has been stated in the question. For e.g., the 
corridors Amritsar -Jamnagar (under NHAI) and Bongaigaon – Guwahati – 
Nagaon – Tezpur – Dibrugarh – Margherita (under NHIDCL) etc. were 
optimized during this exercise”. 

 
 
 
Project Prioritization 
25. Audit has noted that prioritization of projects, after identification of length as per 
optimisation, was not done for NHIDCL and Road wing of MoRTH. No rational, systematic 
and codified methodology was adopted in prioritisation of projects for NHAI. Further, 
timelines were not decided for awarding and constructing the projects falling under different 
priorities. There were instances where projects were de veloped based on deficient cost -
benefit study or without getting detailed project reports prepared.  
26. On being asked about the details of the reasons for no rational, systematic and 
codified methodology was adopted in prioritization of projects for NHAI,  along with their 
comment, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in a written reply stated as under:  
 
 “The identified network of 34,800 km to be developed as part of BPP -I, was 
bifurcated among 3 agencies, as per PIB appraisal in 2022,in the following 
manner – 
Agency Length (km) 
NHAI 30,257 (87%) 
Roads Wing 2,356 (7%) 
NHIDCL 2,187 (6%) 
 
As described in the table above only 2,187 km (104 projects) was being 
developed by NHIDCL and 2,356 km length (36 projects) was being developed by 
Roads Wing. The entire network entrusted to NHIDCL and Roads Wing had to be 
developed as these stretches were important f rom perspective of strategic 
importance and connectivity. Hence, the network entrusted to NHIDCL and 
Roads Wing was prioritized. 
It may be noted that a methodical approach was followed for prioritization of 
projects of NHAI. As part of this exercise, proje cts were categorized as High, 
Medium, and Low priority based on the following parameters:  
a. Corridor completion (Missing links of largely completed corridors prioritized 
irrespective of traffic) 

 
 
b. Average expected traffic in the corridor 
o Expected traffic > 15,000 PCUs  High Priority 
o 15,000 PCUs > Expected traffic > 10,000 PCUs  Medium Priority 
o Expected traffic < 10,000 PCUs  Low Priority 
c. New corridors in National Corridors Efficiency Improvement Program 
(NEIP)& Expressways prioritized due to high traffic volume 
d. Standalone Projects of NHDP prioritized based on average traffic”  
 
27. They have further stated as under: 
“As per the extant guidelines of MoRT&H, all projects are to be appraised and 
approved based on Detailed Project Reports (DPR) and no projects have been 
appraised or approved without any detailed DPR till date. Although, there have 
been cases of delay in D PR preparation of some projects due to involvement of 
multiple stakeholders (state govt., environmental clearance departments, 
Railways, etc.),even in those cases, MoRT&H has tried to expedite the matters 
to the highest levels for quick resolution. The sam e will continue to be ensured 
for all projects to be taken up in the future by MoRT&H.  
It may also be noted that MoRT&H follows multiple best practices for ensuring 
quality of DPR, which are detailed below: 
DPRs are being prepared as per site conditions/ technical requirements while 
following the IRC manual for DPR Preparation (IRC SP:19 -2020) and 
supplementary guidelines issued by NHAI for preparation of DPR for BPP -I. 
Standard RFP and TOR of MoRT&H are adopted for the appointment of DPR 
consultants. Subs equently, use of latest technologies including LiDAR, project 
specific requirements and lessons learnt are suitably incorporated in TOR. The 
scope of work of the DPR Consultant has also been modified to include 
Mathematical Modelling of bridges, for all contracts of DPR Consultants. 
It must also be noted that all stakeholders including local people/ Administrative 
Agencies/ concerned Technical Departments are consulted while the finalization 
of DPR. The output of the DPR consultants is also peer reviewed by  
independent technical experts. MoRT&H also takes suitable punitive action 
against DPR consultants, ranging from monetary penalty to debarment, in the 
case of lapses in the services provided. 

 
 
Furthermore, it may be noted that based on the recommendation of  the CAG, 
MoRT&H has set up DPR Cells in NHAI, NHIDCL and Roads Wing to  
a. Ensure usage of latest technologies for conducting DPR studies  
b. Improve bridge and tunnel designs 
c. Monitor the quality of DPR, recommend appropriate action for deficiency of 
DPR and monitor implementation of the penal action” 
 
Planning for Phase-I of Bharatmala Pariyojana 
28. The Committee have learnt that the Development of 35 Multi Modal Logistics 
Parks (MMLPs) was made part of BPP -I to facilitate efficient and seamless freight 
movement in the country. However, no MMLP was developed up to March 2023.  
 
29.  On being asked about the details of  the reasons for the failure to develop any Multi 
Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs) under BPP -I, along with the details this affect the overall 
objective of facilitating efficient and seamless freight movement in the countr y and for 
providing the comprehensive details of the measures did MoRTH take to address this lack 
of development of MMLPs under BPP -I, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
replied as under: 
 
 “There were delays in the finalization of the action plan  for the development of 
MMLPs because of the following reasons:  
 Initial lack of clarityregarding the implementation agency arising due to multiple 
Government Ministries and Departments (NICDIC, CONCOR) planning 
development of Logistics Parks. 
 Attempts to ensure there was no duplication in efforts and deployment of 
Government resources in development of MMLPs. 
 Issues in identification of suitable land parcels for development, in coordination 
with State Government agencies 
Finally, it was decided in a Sector al Group of Secretaries (SGOS) meeting in 
2020, that MoRT&H will be responsible for development of 35 MMLPs, approved 
under BPP -I. In the meanwhile, based on discussions with DPIITand after 
ensuring that no other Government department istaking up developme nt of 

 
 
MMLP in Jogighopa, MoRT&Hdecided to develop the same. Subsequent to the 
decision regarding responsibilityof development of 35 MMLPs by MoRT&H, 
NationalHighways Logistics Management Limited (NHLML) was setup in 
September 2020 as a wholly owned subsidi ary ofNHAI to implement MMLPs 
and other assets to improveefficiency of freight and passenger movement in the 
country. 
Subsequently, 15 MMLPs were prioritized for development under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase I. This was also examined and recommended by the  Public 
Investment Board (PIB) in minutes dated 19th July 2022. The funding required 
for development of external trunk infrastructure for 15 MMLPs was included in 
the revised cost estimate for BPP -I and the same was appraised by PIB. As of 
date, 5 MMLPs at  Jogighopa, Chennai, Indore, Bangalore, and Nagpur have 
been awarded and are in various stages of development. Furthermore, bids 
have been invited for the MMLP at Anantapur”. 
30. The Ministry in their reply further added as under: 
“It is to be noted that MMLPs to be developed by MoRT&H are being taken up 
under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) model. MoRT&H has formed a project 
specific SPV for each MMLP, with relevant stakeholders with clearly defined roles 
and responsibilities. Model Concession Agreem ent for development of MMLP in 
DBFOT mode has been approved with extensive inter -ministerial consultations. 
The State Government through the SPV will provide the land and develop 
external trunk infrastructure connectivity to the MMLP. The private developer  
(concessionaire) will be responsible for developing and operating the MMLP in 
DBFOT mode for a period of 45 years. The equity contribution of the parties is 
determined in line with their investment. Furthermore, active consultations with 
potential developers are organized to ensure identification and timely resolution 
of issues faced by private developers and the State. So far, there has been a 
good response from private developers for the development of MMLPs.  
For instance, in the case of MMLP in Chennai,  a SPV has been formed between 
NHLML, Chennai Port Trust, TIDCO and RVNL, wherein NHLML is responsible 
for overall coordination of the project, procuring relevant approvals, and providing 
the external road connectivity, rail connectivity (part), LA Cost (p art) etc., RVNL 
will be responsible for providing the rail connectivity, Chennai Port Authority for 
providing land and TIDCO for providing upfront capital as its equity contribution”.  

 
 
 
Compliance to approved funding pattern, Achievement of Modal Mix & Cost  
Variations 
 
31. Committee were informed that upto 31 March 2023, when only 75.62 per cent of 
CCEA approved length was awarded, 158.24 per cent of CCEA approved financial outlay 
was sanctioned. Significant changes made in the scope of projects and cost estimates as 
well as richer project specifications adopted have pushed up the sanctioned cost of 
projects awarded under BPP -I. This has resulted in sanctioned civil cost being Rs. 23.89 
crore per km as against the CCEA approved cost of Rs.13.98 crore per k m and sanctioned 
pre-construction cost being Rs. 8.28 crore per km as against the CCEA approved cost of 
Rs. 1.39 crore per km. 
There was variation from the approved modal mix of NHAI, as out of total national 
highways length of 23,268 km awarded, a meagre national highways length of 1.75 per 
cent was being developed under BOT (Toll) mode (as against 10 per cent approved for this 
mode of construction) whereas 48.35 per cent and 49.90 per cent of national highways 
length were being constructed under EPC and H AM mode respectively (as against 30 per 
cent and 60 per cent approved respectively for these mode of construction). Besides 
increase in requirement of BPP -I funds, the funds approved for other schemes (i.e., Rs. 
1,57,324 crore) were being utilised to repor t BPP-I achievement, as observed in NHIDCL 
whereby 78 such projects (1,752 km) approved in other schemes, were being reported as 
achievements of BPP-I as on 31 March 2023. 
NHAI alone projected, in May 2019, financial outlay of Rs. 10,55,268 crore for meeti ng its 
BPP-I targets against CCEA approved financial outlay of Rs. 5,35,000 crore for BPP -I as a 
whole. The total borrowings realised by NHAI for BPP -I, upto 2021 -22, was Rs. 3,00,349 
crore as against the borrowing approved by CCEA of Rs. 2,09,279 crore as  source of 
funding for BPP-I as a whole. The excess borrowing of Rs. 91,070 crore was being utilised 
for meeting the higher fund requirements due to time and cost overrun in development of 
BPP-I projects. Thus, there was disconnect among the financial outl ay approved by CCEA, 
financial plans for BPP -I approved by MoRTH & its implementing agencies and realisation 
of the plans thereof. 

 
 
32. When asked whether the comprehensive measures have been taken to address the 
disconnect between the financial outlay appr oved by CCEA, financial plans for BPP -I 
approved by MoRTH & its implementing agencies and realisation of the plans thereof, the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as under:  
“As highlighted by MoRT&H in the Action Taken Notes on the CAG observa tions it may be 
noted that cost estimation at the time of CCEA approval was done based on normative cost 
prevailing in 2016 and before the preparation of project specific DPRs. However, with higher 
cost of pre -construction activities and civil cost, higher  quantum of high -speed corridors as 
compared to originally planned as well as a change in GST regulations, the overall 
expenditure on development of NH length of 34,800 km will be higher than estimated.As it 
stands today, the cost estimate for BPP-I stands at Rs. 10.95 Lakh Cr. 
It is also worth noting that the network prioritization principles were approved by the CCEA 
and the responsibility of the detailed designof the project lies with the Ministry. Individual 
projects are appraised and approved in line w ith the powers delegated to the Ministry and 
its implementing agencies by the CCEA. 
The issue of increase in cost has been examined in detail and appraised by PIB vide 
minutes dated 19th July 2022 and 17th March 2023. Draft note for revised approval of 
CCEA of BPP-I has been submitted as per the recommendation of the PIB.  
The reasons forthe increasedfinancial outlay by NHAI for the execution of BPP -I are 
mentioned below 
a. Increase in Cost of Raw material 
b. Enhancement in Specifications / IRC codes 
c. Increase in Cost and Quantum of Land Acquisition  
d. Higher quantum of highspeed corridors  
e. Higher Lane Configuration 
f. GST change 
The following table details the reasons for the revised investment numbers of BPP -I along 
with the financial impact due to each: 

 
 
S.No Item 
Civil 
cost 
(Rs. 
Cr.) 
LA cost 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Total 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Remarks 
A CCEA approval 2017 4,90,000 45,000 5,35,000 
 
B Increase in Cost of Raw 
Material 73,711 - - Escalation was 
not factored 
C Enhancement in Specs /  
IRC Codes 38,598 - - 
For road safety 
and rider 
quality 
D 
Increase in Cost & 
Quantum of Land 
Acquisition 
- 2,50,328 - 
RoW was 
assumed to be 
available 
E Impact of GST change 22,945 
  
12% to 18% on 
balance 
expenditure 
F 
Revised Cost : 
Implementation as per 
CCEA Approval 
(A+B+C+D+E) 
6,25,254 2,95,328 9,20,582 
 
G Higher Quantum of High -
speed Corridors 76,862 (21,828) - 
 

 
 
S.No Item 
Civil 
cost 
(Rs. 
Cr.) 
LA cost 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Total 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Remarks 
H Higher Lane 
Configuration 1,13,077 - 
 
I Impact of GST change 8,984 
   
J 
Savings due to 
Commercial & Technical 
Levers 
(2,080) - - 
 
K Revised Cost : Extant 
Proposal (F+G+H+I+J) 8,22,097 2,73,500 10,95,597 
 
 
 
33. When enquired about  the reasons for changes in the scope of projects? Whether 
approval of the competent authority was sought to modify/ alter the scope of works which 
has pushed up the sanctioned cost of the project and whether there was a 
significantvariation in taki ng up developmental work of national highways under BOT (Toll), 
if so, the details thereof, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as under:  
 
“As described in the preceding section, the investment in Bharatmala Pariyojana as 
approved by CCEA i s Rs. 5.35 lakh Cr. (Civil cost - Rs. 4.90 lakh Cr.; Land acquisition cost - 
Rs. 45,000 Cr.). The cost of the Phase I, if implemented as approved by CCEA in 2017, is 
estimated as Rs. 9.20 lakh Cr. (72% higher) on account of the following reasons:  
 Quantum and cost of land to be acquired was underestimated in the original 
approval of CCEA. If the CCEA Approval was implemented as -is (i.e., 34,000 km of 

 
 
brownfield expansion and 800 km of greenfield development), ~85,000 ha land 
would have been required  at a cost of Rs. 2.95 lakh Cr. compared to 18,000 ha of 
land acquisition approved by CCEA in 2017 at a cost of Rs. 45,000 Cr.  
 The civil construction cost of the Phase I, if implemented as approved, would have 
been Rs. 6.25 lakh Cr (against Rs. 4.9 lakh Cr  approved originally) on account of 
increase in raw material (Rs. 73,711 Cr.), annual cost escalation not factored in the 
original approval, enhancement in IRC specifications (to improve road safety and 
rider comfort) during the course of implementation of  Bharatmala Pariyojana (Rs. 
38,598 Cr.) and impact of change in GST from 12% to 18% (Rs. 22,945 Cr.).  
NHAI Board had initially approved the Base Scenario of modal mix for BPP -I projects as 
60%, 30% and 10% for HAM, EPC and BoT (Toll) respectively and initially a target was also 
set for private participation in the cabinet which was later revised basis increase in the 
overall financial outlay. Details are shared in the table below – 
 
 
# Source of Fund CCEA Approval 2017 
(Rs Cr.) 
Proposal Appraised by PIB 
(Rs Cr.) 
A Budgetary Support 1,39,673 (26%) 5,09,383 (47%) 
B Market Borrowings 2,09,279 (39%) 1,38,214 (13%) 
C Subtotal (A+B) 
3,48,952 
(65%) 
6,47,597 
(60%) 
D Resource 
Mobilization 80,048 (15%) 1,61,684 (15%) 
E Total Public 
Investment (C+D) 
4,29,000 
(80%) 
8,09,281 
(75%) 
F Private Investment 1,06,000 (20%) 2,86,317 (25%) 

 
 
G Total (E+F) 
5,35,000 
(100%) 
10,95,598 
(100%) 
 
However, BOT(T) projects witnessed muted investor participation in recent years. 
Furthermore, the issue of muted investor participation was also discussed in detail in the 
PIB meeting for appraisal of revised cost estimate of Bharatmala Pariyojana on 19th April 
and 22nd April 2022. This necessitated revision in contractual framework, which were 
undertaken after wider consultation with stakeholders (including Financial Institutions and 
NITI Aayog) to boost investor interest. Moreover, there have been a numbe r of arbitration 
cases pending with BoT concessionaire for recovery, reducing the popularity ofBoTas a 
mode of execution. In light of the above, challenges with respect to BOT(T) mode, effort has 
been made to focus on awarding projects on HAM mode. Further, projects constructed 
under EPC and HAM modes are also monetized after established tolling history, through 
TOT and InvIT mechanisms, wherein revenue risk is passed on to the investors without 
construction risk. 
Because of the aforementioned reasons, the targeted modal mix of BPP -I has been revised 
as 42% : 57% : 1% for EPC, HAM and BOT respectively.A comparison of this target modal 
mix with the current modal mix of all Awardedand Approved projects of BBP -1 is provided 
below: 
 
Mode 17 - 18 18 - 19 19 - 20 20 - 21 21 - 22 22 - 23 
23-24 
(Till 
Nov) 
Till Nov 
23-24 
Overall 
Target for 
BPP-I 
BOT Toll 3% 0% 0% 3% 1% 0% 0% 1% 1% 
HAM 53% 35% 27% 56% 58% 59% 31% 52% 57% 
EPC 44% 65% 73% 42% 41% 41% 69% 47% 42% 
 

 
 
As can be seen from the above table, the achievement on the modal mix of projects till date 
is quite close to the revised target for BPP -I and MoRT&H has stepped up efforts for the 
achievement of the same. 
35. The Ministry in their reply added as under: 
"It is worth highlighting that there has been no divers ion of funds from other schemes in the 
execution of BPP-I. Some of the BPP-I projects of NHIDCL were earlier planned under other 
schemes of MoRT&H viz., EAP, NH(O), and SARDP scheme. However, subsequently they 
were prioritized under BPP -I. The sanction let ters for the same are being suitably amended 
by MoRT&H”. 
Maintenance of project-based expenditure and revenue 
36. As learnt by the Committee a ccording to Audit, there was no system for project -
based accounting to identify profit centres to gauge the long -term viability of a project 
resulting which it could not be worked out whether a stretch could be put to reduced tolling 
of 40 per cent after recovery of capital expenditure. It also resulted in non -mapping of 
sources of revenue such as diesel/petrol cess, toll plough back from the Ministry, 
borrowings, other government support etc., for project to work out cost of capital to make 
effective investment decisions 
37. On being asked why was there no system for project -based accounting to 
identify profit centers  to gauge the long -term viability of a project and whether  this 
would not affect the ability to make effective investment decisions and reduce tolling 
of 40% after recovery of capital expenditure along with the comprehensive measures 
did MoRTH take to add ress the non-mapping of sources of revenue for the project to 
work out the cost of capital, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as 
under: 
“MoRT&H has different accounting policies depending on the mode of 
implementation of the project. In the case of projects being implemented in the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) route, project -based accounting mechanism is 
implemented. It is ensured that th e funds in the SPV are used specifically for the 
development of that project. On the other hand, in the case of projects of MoRT&H 
which are implemented using budget provided by the Govt. of India, all toll receipts 
are deposited directly in the Consolidat ed Fund of India (CFI). Hence, the 

 
 
implementation of project -based accounting has limitations in case of such 
projects. 
Nevertheless, it must be noted that in order to implementproject -based accounting 
relating to both the revenue and expenditure of projec ts, around 80% of the cost / 
expenditure components of project -based accounting have already been mapped 
under the unique identifiers of the projects i.e., the Unique Project Code (UPC). 
The remaining components are available in the system and are planned to 
beaccounted for under the same UPC, post the issuance of standard policy/ 
guidelines on the same. For capturing of project -wise revenue and indirect costs 
like finance cost and administrative costs, etc. the current accounting system used 
in NHAI will b e modified to that extent.  Policy for allocation of financing cost, 
administrative cost, overheads and mapping of project wise revenue is also being 
worked upon. It is expected that such a system will be in place in the next 3 
months. 
Specifically for the  case of NHIDCL, for maintaining a record of project 
expenditures, a robust ERP system has already been implemented. However, it 
may be noted that toll collection on roads built by NHIDCL is done by NHAI and the 
same is deposited directly in CFI. As such, the establishment of profit centres in 
NHIDCL is not feasible”. 
 
 
Delegation of powers for project appraisal and approval  
38. The Committee have learnt that according to Audit, there were deficiencies in the 
appraisal and approval mechanism proposed to CCEA as many of the high cost EPC 
projects viz., Delhi -Vadodara Expressway and Dwarka Expressway etc., could not be 
assessed by either CCEA or MoRTH to have the advantag e of the scrutiny at that level. 
Further, even the appraisal and approval mechan ism decided by CCEA was also not strictly 
followed. 
39. On being asked about the type of the deficiencies there were in the appraisal 
and approval mechanism proposed to CCEA an d the details of the means by which it 
would  affect the assessment of high -cost EPC projects such as Delhi -Vadodara 

 
 
Expressway and Dwarka Expressway, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
replied as under: 
 
 “The appraisal and approval mechanism for BPP -I was prescribed by CCEA considering 
the Rakesh Mohan committee report and the appraisal and approval mechanism followed 
by MoRT&H in the earlier phases of NHDP viz. NHDP Phase 1(GQ) and NHDP Phase II 
(NS-EW). The CCEA approval for Phase -I of Bharatmala Pariyojana gave detailed 
delegation of powers to NHAI and MoRT&H for approval of projects. These are detailed as 
follows: 
 
Mode Implementing 
Agency Cost Appraisal Stages 
BOT 
(Toll) - 
VGF 
NHAI, 
MoRT&H, 
NHIDCL 
Up to Rs. 1,000 
Cr. EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC & SFC 
chaired by Secy, RT&H  
2. Approval by Minister, RT&H 
Above Rs. 
1,000 Cr. 
EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC followed by 
PPPAC chaired by Secy, DEA  
2. Approval by CCEA 
BOT 
(Toll) - No 
VGF 
NHAI, 
MoRT&H, 
NHIDCL 
Any 1. Approval by NHAI Board 
BOT 
(Annuity)/ 
HAM 
NHAI, 
MoRT&H, 
NHIDCL 
Up to Rs. 2,000 
Cr. EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC & SFC 
chaired by Secy, RT&H  
2. Approval by Minister, RT&H 
Above Rs. 
2,000 Cr. 
EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC followed by 
PPPAC chaired by Secy, DEA  
2. Approval by CCEA 
EPC NHAI Any 
1. Appraisal by PATSC  
2. Approval by NHAI Board/ EC/ 
Chairman 

 
 
Mode Implementing 
Agency Cost Appraisal Stages 
MoRT&H 
Up to Rs. 1,000 
Cr. EPCC 
1. SFC/ EFC by Secy, RT&H  
2. Approval by Minister, RT&H 
Above Rs. 
1,000 Cr. 
EPCC 
1. SFC/ EFC by PIB  
2. Approval by CCEA 
NHIDCL 
Up to Rs. 1,000 
Cr. EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC followed by 
SFC/ EFC by Secy, RT&H  
2. Approval by Minister, RT&H 
Above Rs. 
1,000 Cr. 
EPCC 
1. Appraisal by PATSC followed by 
SFC/ EFC by PIB  
2. Approval by CCEA 
PATSC – Project Appraisal and Technical Scrutiny Committee  
SFC – Standing Finance Committee 
PPPAC – Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee 
EPCC – Estimated Project Civil Cost 
 
Further, to strengthen the appraisal and approval mechanism of projects follo wing steps 
were taken: 
1. The NHAI Board was restructured to include officers from outside the MoRT&H with 
Secretary, D/o Expenditure, Secretary, M/o RT&H, CEO, NITI Aayog and, DG 
(RD&SS) as its members. 
2. The Project Appraisal and Technical Scrutiny Committee (PATSC) and the Internal 
Appraisal Committee (IAC) were re -constituted by NHAI vide policy circular dated 
07.10.2020.  
3. To cover all the projects, 4 PATSCs were constituted under the Chairmanship of 
each Member of NHAI. Besides CGM (Fin), CGM (Tech) and Advisor (Tech) of 
NHAI, one representative of NITI Aayog (Director and Above) are the members of 

 
 
each PATSC. The constitut ion of PATSC with NHAI with representation of NITI 
Aayog has ensured proper appraisal of projects before approval of competent 
authority. 
4. The Internal Appraisal Committee (IAC) for appraisal of EPC projects of up to Rs. 
500 Cr. is headed by the Member conc erned with CGM (Fin), CGM (Tech) and 
Advisor (Tech) of NHAI as its members. 
5. The Duties of Standing Cost Committee (SCC) are performed by the respective 
PATSC. 
 
Therefore, guidelines for the appraisal and approval mechanism of Bharatmala Pariyojana 
including the delegation of powers were suitably discussed with CCEA. The process for 
appraisal and approval of projects is as per the broad principles of the Government of India 
for the approval of projects.  
Further, it is also submitted that due process of appr aisal and approval has been strictly 
followed in all the projects of Bharatmala Pariyojana. All projects including Dwarka 
Expressway and Delhi-Mumbai Expressway have been appraised and approved as per the 
appraisal and approval mechanism laid down by the CCEA”.  
 
40. When asked whether the decisions on mode of construction taken by NHAI 
had sufficient justification and about  furnishing the details in this regard and at what 
level were these decisions taken, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
replied as under: 
 
“EPC, being cash contracts, have clearly defined financial risk/out -go whereas in PPP 
projects, which are long term concessions, higher level of due diligence is prescribed. 
Powers for approval of EPC projects have been delegated to NHAI  Board by CCEA, with 
recommendation of strengthening of NHAI Board and constitution of PATSC by CCEA in 
BPP-I. The same have been adhered to in BPP-I. 
 The NHAI Board was restructured to include officers from outside the MoRT&H with 
Secretary, D/o Expenditu re, Secretary, M/o RT&H, CEO, NITI Aayog and, DG 
(RD&SS) as its members. 

 
 
 4 PATSCs were constituted under the Chairmanship of each Member of NHAI. 
Besides CGM (Fin), CGM (Tech) and Advisor (Tech) of NHAI, one representative of 
NITI Aayog (Director and Above) are the members of each PATSC.  
 
Mode of execution of projects depends upon market conditions in terms of risk appetite, 
interest rates, overall economic growth and availability of equity. Therefore, itis decided 
based on the following factors – cost of capital, corridor status, fund availability, market 
capacity, tolling history and traffic risk.  
NHAI Board delegated the powers of selection of mode to the NHAI Executive Committee 
for the implementation of Phase I of Bharatmala Pariyojana.Further, as per  para 7 (b) (X) of 
CCEA Note for Bharatmala Pariyojana, which is laid down as under,:  
“All decision of change of mode of execution will be taken by Board of NHAI or 
MoRT&H, for their respective rolls, subject to availability of funds and other 
required conditions.” 
Therefore, it can be concluded that NHAI has a robust mechanism in place  for deciding the 
mode of a project, which is in-line with the guidelines prescribed by CCEA”.  
41. When enquired whether the Audit in their report have highlighted that t he 
approval mechanism prescribed by the CCEA was not adhered to by the Ministry 
and whether the Ministry have furnish the details about the extant mechanism in this 
regard and whether the same was adhered to in the case of Bharatmala Pariyojana, 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as under:  
 
“Prior to the CCEA approval of BPP -Ion 21.09.2017,recommendation of the Public 
Investment Board (PIB) vide memo dated June 2017. The recommendation of the PIB was 
for the development of a total of 34,800  km of National Highway corridors under BPP -I, 
which included 10,000 km of projects under Residual NHDP”.  
42. When the Committee desired  to know about  the details of the approvals 
required prior to CCEA approval for BPP -I and whether the details of important 
meetings where decisions were taken without the presence of member from NITI 
Aayog  were furnished, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways rep lied as 
under: 

 
 
“It may be noted, representatives of NITI Aayog are invariably present in the appraisal of all 
PATSC meetings for the appraisal of projects.However, due to unforeseen reasons, the 
representatives could not be present on a few occasions viz.,  appraisal of Delhi -Vadodara 
Expressway (Package 17-25) and Shamli-Muzaffarnagar (Pkg.-II) by NHAI. Nevertheless, it 
is worth mentioning that on both the occasions, the PATSC circulated all the requisite 
documents for appraisal as per standard practice to all members of PATSC, including NITI 
Aayog and NITI Aayog supported the project proposal and provided written observations 
on the proposals. The observation of NITI Aayog regarding the project proposal were 
suitably addressed and discussed in the PATSC meeting”. 
 
Detailed Project Reports 
43. The Committee have learnt that the d etailed project reports prepared by consultants 
were not appraised with due diligence by the Competent Authority before approval of 
projects. Instances of adoption of different specifications by contractors/concessionaires at 
the time of execution of projects than what were prescribed by detailed project report 
consultants, highlighted the fact that specifications of detailed project reports were not 
found suitable as per site co nditions. Further, detailed guidance document for detailed 
project report consultant was not prepared by NHAI in non -compliance to MoRTH 
directions. 
 
44. On being asked whether the detailed project reports prepared by consultants 
were not appraised with due di ligence by the Competent Authority before approval 
of projects along with furnishing of the details and r the reasons for the lack of due 
diligence in the appraisal of detailed project reports by the Competent Authority 
before approval of projects were fur nished, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways replied as under: 
 
 
 “MoRT&H follows multiple best practices in the preparation of Detailed Project Reports:  

 
 
a. DPRs are being prepared as per site conditions/ technical requirements while 
following the IRC manual for DPR Preparation (IRC SP:19 -2020) and 
supplementary guidelines issued by NHAI for preparation of DPR for BPP -I 
b. Standard RFP and TOR of MoRT&H have been followed for the appointment of 
DPR consultants, which includes the detailed scope of work, da ta sources and 
technologies to use in the preparation of DPR, etc. 
c. Use of latest technologies including LiDAR, project specific requirements and 
lessons learnt are suitably incorporated in TOR 
d. Scope of work of the DPR Consultant has also been modified to i nclude 
Mathematical Modelling of bridges, for all contracts of DPR Consultants  
 
There has been no lack of due diligencein the appraisal of Detailed Project Reports by 
the competent authority before approval of projects. Following mechanisms are put in 
place to ensure diligent review of DPR output by NHAI:  
a. All stakeholders including local people/ Administrative Agencies/ concerned 
Technical Departments are consulted during the finalization of DPR, and prior to the 
appraisal of the project. 
b. The output of the DPR consultants ispeer reviewed by independent technical 
experts. 
c. Furthermore, during the PATSC of the highway projects, the Detailed Project 
Reports are scrutinized in detail and any gaps contained therewith are then 
corrected through the DPR Consultants. 
It may also be noted that MoRT&H takes suitable punitive action against DPR consultants , 
ranging from monetary penalty to debarment, in the case of lapses in the services 
provided. 
Apart from the above -mentioned practices MoRT&H has also set up DPR Ce lls in NHAI, 
NHIDCL and Roads Wing to  
a. Ensure usage of latest technologies for conducting DPR studies  
b. Improve bridge and tunnel designs 
c. Monitor the quality of DPR, recommend appropriate action for deficiency of DPR 
and monitor implementation of the penal action” 

 
 
45. Asked whether any responsibility has been fixed regarding non -
compliance of NHAI with MoRTH directions to prepare a detailed guidance document 
for detailed project report consultants and for furnishing the details along with the 
comprehensive m easures did MoRTH take to address the instances of adoption of 
different specifications by contractors/concessionaires at the time of execution of 
projects than what were prescribed by detailed project report consultants, the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways replied as under: 
 “It must be noted that detailed design of the project is in the scope of contractor / 
concessionaire across both EPC and PPP modes of project execution. The designs by the 
DPR consultant are only indicative in nature and the co ntractor / concessionaire has the 
flexibility to optimize the design by adopting latest materials and construction practices in 
line with the relevant IRC codes indicated in the contract. Further, a portion of cost savings 
from design optimization is passe d on to the authority in the form of tender discounts (as 
arrived at during the competitive bidding process)”. 
 
Tendering and selection of contractors/ concessionaires  
Instances of irregularities in award of projects by implementing agencies were observed in 
clear violation of the prescribed processes of tendering, viz., successful bidder notfulfilling 
tender condition or bidder selected on the basis of falsified documents, award of works 
without there being approved detailed project reports or based on fau lty detailed project 
report. 
 
46. A sked whether the comments regarding the above Audit observation were 
furnished along with the details and the reasons for awarding the projects to bidders 
who did not fulfill tender conditions or who submit falsified docu ments and whether 
the Ministry has identified such bidders along with the details about the action taken 
against such bidders, the Ministry of  
Road Transport and Highways replied as under: 
“MoRT&H has robust bid evaluation mechanism. The bids are evaluate d by the bid 
evaluation committee in line with the provisions of the RFP and approved by the Competent 

 
 
Authority. The conditions of the RFP were strictly followed during the evaluation of the 
bidders and no violations have taken place in the award of tende rs”. 
 
47. On being asked whether any enquiry has been conducted to find out the 
officials in NHAI,  NHIDCL and MoRTH who colluded in award of such projects and 
what action is being taken against those officials, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways replied as under: 
 
“As part of the Audit of BPP -I, CAG had made certain observations regarding the fulfillment 
of bid conditions in the award of projects. MoRT&H has already submitted all responses and 
clarifications as part of the detailed ATN submitted t o the CAG. It may be noted that all due 
processes have been adhered to by MoRT&H in the award of contracts for projects. A few 
project-specific examples are provided below for illustration of the same.  
 Audit has noted below case studies  
(a) Case Study: Suryapet Khammam 
 
CAG had made an observation during the Audit of BPP -I that for the project, MoRT&H 
awarded the work despite the winning bidder not fulfilling tender conditions. The factual 
positions on the same have beenprovided below: 
 
 Winning bidder was  a JV of Adani Transport (ATL) & Prakash Asphalting’s & Toll 
Highways (PATH), with ATL having 74% stake as lead partner and PATH having 
26% stake as JV partner. 
 
 RFP required Technical Capacity in the form of revenue of Rs.1217.32 Cr. over the 
past 5 years  and a Financial Capacity in the form of minimum Net Worth of Rs. 
304.33 Cr. at the close of the preceding financial year.  
 As per the RFP, bidders/ consortia were allowed to represent the technical capacity 
of their Associates in the bid. 
 
 In the instant c ase, the technical capacity of the parent company of the lead partner 
(ATL), viz., Adani Enterprises Limited (AEL), which holds 100% share in ATL, had 

 
 
the requisite experience in a core sector (power). As such, their experience was 
eligible for inclusion in the bid and was evaluated as Rs. 1,362.12 Cr. 
 
 Additionally, bidder was required to have minimum experience in highway sector of 
25% of TTC i.e., Rs.304.33 Cr.This criterion was fulfilled by the Consortium partner, 
PATH, which had an eligible experience of Rs.655.04 Cr.   
 
 With regard to the financial evaluation, as per the RFP, bidders/ consortia were 
allowed to represent the financial capacity of their Associates in the bid. The 
consortium claimed the net worth of the Associate, as allowed, which was ev aluated 
as Rs. 2,971.41 Cr. 
 
As such, it may be noted that all due processes were followed in evaluation and award of 
contract for the project Suryapet-Khammam. 
 
(b) Case Study: Dwarka Expressway 
 
CAG had made an observation during the Audit of BPP -I that for Dwarka Expressway Pkg – 
I, MoRT&H did not adhere to the tender conditions while awarding work to the 
winningbidder.The instant case was regarding awarding of the work including the 
construction of shallow tunnel of 3.6 Km length. The factual positions on the same have 
been provided below: 
 
 The RFP for the project hada condition that “the bidder shall have completed 
construction of at - least one (01) deep/ shallow tunnel consisting of single or twin 
tubes (including tunnel for Roads/ Railways/Metro Rail Irrigation, Hydroelectric 
Projects etc.) having at -least a cross sectional area of 126 sqm and 0.9 km length.” 
The condition mentioned in the RFP stated therequirement of cross -sectional area 
as one of the mandatory evaluation parameters for the bidders, w ithout specifying 
whether it referred to the gross or the clear cross -sectional area.  
 

 
 
 It may be noted that the successful bidder had executed tunnel project with cross 
sectional area (gross) of 126 sqm  and cross section area (clear) of 105 sqm . Initially 
the Evaluation Committee disqualified the bidder considering that RFP mandated a 
requirement of cross section area (clear) of 126 sqm. 
 
 Subsequently, the bidder represented against disqualification citing lack of clarity of 
requirement of cross section (gross/clear) in the RFP.  
 
 Subsequently, the decision to review the evaluation parameters was taken, and after 
due consideration, an administrative decision based on technical inputs was taken to 
consider the experience of bidder. 
 
 It must be noted that the  decision was also taken to promote the domestic contractor 
/ concessionaire ecosystem in development of tunnels / specialized bridges, wherein 
the works were predominantly executed by overseas players in the past. Moreover, 
this representation from the bidder was accepted before opening of financial bids.  
 
 It is also worth mentioning that at the time of award of the project, there was limited 
understanding among officers as well as contracting industry on the interpretation of 
the clauses in the RFP which led to the initial disqualification of the bidder.  
 
 In order to have clarity in bidding parameters and to avoid repetition of such 
situations in future, it has been decided to modify RFP clearly mentioning 
qualification criteria as Gross Sectional Area.   
 
(c)  Case Study: Lucknow Ring Road (Pkg IIIB) 
 
In the case ofawarding the project work of Lucknow Ring Road (Pkg. -IIIB), CAG had made 
an observation regardingthe submission of falsified documents by the bidder. The factual 
positions on the same are elaborated below: 
 

 
 
 In this case, bids were invited on 18.10.2016 and received on 15.12.2016. The 
project of Lucknow Ring Road was awarded on 03.01.2017 to L1 bidder and 
agreement was signed on 3.1.2017. 
 
 Post the award of the project, a complaint (dated 18.03.20 17) was received in NHAI 
regarding the credentials of one of the projects of the bidder. In order to ensure 
transparency in bidding process, it was decided that qualification to be re -examined 
for already awarded projects and accordingly, re -evaluation of technical bid of L1 
bidder was carried out.   
 
 During this re-evaluation, the work of1 project previously executed by the bidder viz., 
“Four laning of HisarDabwali” was removed from the experience of the bidder. The 
non-consideration of this project would have reducedthe technical capacity of the 
M/s GCL to Rs.1,030.53 Cr, which would have fallen below theminimum required 
technical capacity of Rs. 1,126.70 Cr. 
 
 However, during the same re -evaluation process, it was also noticed that another 
work previously executed by the bidder viz., “Construction of master road sector 75 
to 89 Faridabad”, which was initially considered in Category 4 was applicable for 
qualification under Category 3. 
 
 Based on the above developments,a clarification was also sought from the bidder 
vide letter 22.09.2017.Clarification from the bidder was received on 26.09.2017, post 
which a decision was taken to consider the experience of the second project in 
Category 3. This resulted in revised Technical Capacity of Rs. 1,151.08 Cr. which 
was higher than requirement of Rs 1126 Cr. 
 
 The Authority also issued a stern warning to the contractor, for the initial 
misrepresentation of the technical capacity. It may be brought out that the entire 
exercise of re -evaluation wasdone to ensure sanctity a nd transparency of bidding 
process. 
 
(d) Case Study: Churachandpur Tuivai (Pkg 2B) 
 
In the case of awarding the project work of Churachandpur Tuivai (Pkg. -2B), CAG had 
made an observation that the project was awarded despite the assessed bid capacity of the 

 
 
bidder being less than the required bid capacity. The factual positions on the sam e are 
elaborated below:  
 
 As per RFP for the project, Bid Capacity is to be calculated as per formula given in 
RFP which is (A*N*2.5 – B +C), where, 
o N = Number of years prescribed for completion of workfor which Bid is invited.  
o A = Maximum value of civil e ngineering worksexcluding the amount of bonus 
received, if any, in respectof EPC Projects executed in any one year during 
the lastfive years (updated to the price level of the year indicatedin table at 
Note-3 below) taking into account thecompleted as well  as works in progress. 
The EPCprojects include turnkey project/ Item rate contract/Construction 
works. 
o B = Value (updated to the price level of the yearindicated in table at Note -3 
below) of existingcommitments, works for which Appointed 
Date/Commencement Date has been declared or on -goingworks to be 
completed during the period of completion ofthe works for which BID is 
invited. For the sake ofclarification, it is mentioned that works for which 
LOAhas been issued but Appointed Date/ CommencementDate not dec lared 
as on Bid Due Date shall not be considered while calculating value of B.  
o C = The amount of bonus received, if any, in EPC Projects during the last 5 
years (updated to the price level of the year indicated in table at Note -3 
below). 
 
 The Bidder submi tted the details of 08 projects. Out of which, bidder relied upon 05 
projects for the purpose of calculation of technical threshold capacity as well as the 
value of A (Rs. 186.75 Crores) in the Bid Capacity and 03 projects for the purpose of 
calculation of value of B (Rs. 416 Crores) in the Bid Capacity.  
 Based on the above, the Bid Capacity has been calculated as Rs.526.03 Crores 
(186.75 x 2 x 2.5 – 416 + 8.28). 
 
Therefore, it may be seen that the bid capacity has been calculated as specified in RFP and 
bidder fulfills qualification criteria laid down in RFP”. 
 
Execution of Projects 

 
 
Acknowledging the fact that projects were stuck due to land not being handed over to 
contractors/concessionaires, MoRTH apprised CCEA that projects would be awarded under 
BPP-I only after ensuring availability of requisite land. However, Audit observed that 
implementing agencies were still awarding projects without ensuring availability of requisite 
land resulting in delayed commencement of projects construction and their complet ion. 
46. Enquired whether the Ministry was aware of awarding projects without ensuring the 
availability of requisite land along the action which has been taken against the implementing 
agencies for such irregularities, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys replied as 
under: 
 “The requirements for Land Acquisition to be completed before award and appointment of 
projects is as per the Model Concession Agreements (MCA) for all the modes of 
implementation. These MCAs are approved by competent authority on recommendation of 
inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) which has representation from key 
Ministries/Department. In the case of HAM projects, the Authority must grant access to 
80% of the RoW to the concessionaire and to 90% of the RoW in case of EPC and BOT 
(Toll) projects. Addition ally, the earlier criteria of ensuring 3(D) for 80%/ 90% of land at the 
time of Award has been made more stringent, and changed to 3(G) for 80%/ 90% of land at 
the time of Award 
A summary of the Land Acquisition and Clearances policies for ensuring project  readiness 
is shown in table below: 
 
Project Stage Land Acquisition Environment 
Clearance Forest Clearance 
Pre Appraisal EPC: 90% 3(A) 
PPP: 80% 3(A)   
Appraisal & 
Approval 
EPC: 90% 3(D) 
PPP: 80% 3(D) 
Approval of Terms 
of Reference by 
MoEFCC  
Award EPC: 90% 3(G) 
PPP: 80% 3(G) 
Environment 
Clearance  
Appointed Date EPC: 90% 
Possession  
Stage I clearance 
(working 

 
 
PPP: 80% 
Possession 
permission) 
 
In view of the above stated policy, MoRT&H ensures all the requirement are met before 
awarding the projects under BPP-I. MoRT&H admits that there were instances where the 
requirements for Land Acquisition could not be met prior to the awarding of the projects 
due to on -ground challenges like disputes and arbitration. As a result in such exceptional 
cases, keepin g a view of expediting the project, award of works was done prior to 
obtainment of the requisite amount of land as per policy. Project specific responses on the 
same have also been furnished by MoRT&H as part of the ATN submitted to the CAG”.  
 
Monitoring mechanism for BPP projects 
47. C & AG in their Audit Report stated that MoRTH should consider setting of outcome 
parameters for the corridors/projects selected under BPP -I and establish a 
monitoring mechanism for the same as directed by CCEA. The Ministry repli ed as 
follows- 
 
“Recommendation has been noted for compliance. It is submitted that 
MoRT&H already sets outcome parameters for the reduction in travel time and savings 
on fuel consumption from the development of National Highways. The same are 
assessed during the DPR of the project. The riding quality and user experience on NH 
are also monitored through NSV surveys which are conducted every 6 months post 
completion of the project. As recommended by the CAG, MoRT&H has already 
commissioned a study at IIM Ban galore in order to study the impact of the BPP -I. Based 
on the outputs and findings of the study, suitable outcome parameters will be considered 
and tracked to verify the impact of BPP -I. Furthermore, in line with the recommendations 
of the CAG, a decision  has been taken up to set -up the monitoring mechanism by 
MoRT&H. The mechanism will become functional within 6 months.”  
 
(Ref: Page 5 of Background Note received from Ministry for Sitting on 19.2.24)  
 
48. Optimal and efficient management of resources  

 
 
 
C & AG in their Audit Report stated that MoRTH may carry out an in -depth analysis, based 
on accurate ground level data, while proposing a scheme of this magnitude in future so as 
to ensure efficient management of resources and optimal project outcomes. The Minist ry 
replied as follows- 
”Recommendation has been noted for compliance in formulation of future programmes. 
The analysis done for the network planning of BPP -I have been detailed in the detailed 
response to CAG observations.  
As a matter fact, the entire net work of Bharatmala Pariyojana was identified by MoRT&H 
through a detailed scientific study.  
 Furthermore, on the CCEA approved network of 64,942 km, MoRT&H 
carried out a detailed optimization exercise which resulted in the decrease of length of 
the network to 64,675 km.  
Thereafter, a methodical exercise was followed for the prioritization of 
NHAI projects where they were prioritized into categories of high, medium and low 
priority. This was done based on the factors of corridor completion as well as avera ge 
expected traffic in the corridor. Furthermore, new corridors under the categories of NEIP 
and Expressways were also prioritized due to their high traffic volumes.  
However, MoRT&H concedes that there have been challenges on the 
ground in the award and e xecution of projects due to factors such as land acquisition, 
clearances as well as arbitrations in LA.  
Currently MoRT&H is drawing up plans for the next phase of highway 
development beyond the BPP -I. The observations of the CAG are duly noted and the 
learning from BPP -I will be incorporated in order to ensure the efficient resource 
utilization as well as on-ground execution for such future programmes.” 
 
(Ref: Page 6 of Background Note received from Ministry for Sitting on 
19.2.24) 
 
49. Acquisition of land in excess of the requirement 
 
While reviewing 66 projects, Audit observed that in the following cases, implementing 
agencies acquired excess land either due to oversight or deficient scrutiny of faulty detailed 
project reports: 6.1.2.1 Dwarka Expressway (Pkg. -I) NHAI acquired excess land of 2.29 

 
 
hectares (5.65 acres) from Airports Authority of India (AAI), at 50 per cent of the market 
value, as against the condition of AAI transferring necessary land meant for project 
construction to NHAI. This parcel of land being adjacent to the other land acquired, was of 
no use to AAI. In fact, NHAI also did not have any plan to use such land for the project or 
otherwise at the time of acquiring it, but still NHAI acquired it and for this land parcel AAI 
has raised claim of  Rs. 105.61 crore. MoRT&H admitted (April 2022) acquisition of excess 
AAI land because the same was not usable for AAI. It further admitted the fact of 
possibilities being explored to make use of said land for development of tunnel command 
centre/amenities etc., for Dwarka Expressway. Thus, land for which AAI was claiming Rs. 
105.61 crore was acquired by NHAI without planning its usage at the time of project 
appraisal and approval and now possible ways to justify such acquisition were being 
explored. 
 
(Ref: Page 42 of Action Taken Notes as provided by the Ministry)  
 
50. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes stated as follows- 
 
”A response to this observation in the draft audit report dated 13.01.2022 
was provided by MoRT&H vide letter dated 26.04.2022 (Para 5 .1.2(i) of the MoRT&H 
response). An updated response to the same is mentioned below. 2. The issue of 
excess land acquirement on certain projects is mainly due to the following reasons:  
Inaccuracy of revenue/ land records and maps available with the State Revenue 
Department, Deficiencies in DPR reports regarding accuracy of the land to be 
acquired along the RoW , Need to improve usability/ viability of land 3. With regard to 
the acquisition of excess land from the Airports Authority of India (AAI) at a 
discounted rate, MoRT&H had already accepted the observation in its response sent 
to the CAG in April 2022. The detailed response is mentioned below: 4. During the 
meeting between the Secretary, MoRT&H & the Secretary, Civil Aviation, in January 
2018, it was decided that the excess land of Airport Authority of India (approx. of 5.65 
acres) was not usable from AAI’s perspective as it was getting landlocked due to the 
development of Dwarka Expressway tunnels, by NHAI. It is worth mentioning that no 
access could h ave been provided to the said land parcel of 5.65 acres without 
compromising road safety for the users. Accordingly, it was decided in the same 
meeting that the excess land of 5.65 acres would be transferred by AAI to NHAI at 
50% of the market value of the  land. MoRT&H is exploring different possibilities to 

 
 
make use of said parcel of land including the development of tunnel command center 
as well as amenities as part of Project Technical requirement.”  
 
(Ref: Page 42 of Action Taken Notes as provided by the  Ministry) 
 
51.  Also the Committee found through C &AG that in the matter of theDwarka 
Expressway, MoRTH has accepted the Audit observation that the land measuring 
5.65 acres was acquired as it was of no use to AAI and MoRTH was still exploring 
the options to use it. 
 
(Ref: Page 42 of Action Taken Notes as provided by the Ministry)  
 
52. Monitoring and Information Technology 
 To achieve the objectives of Bharatmala Pariyojana, it is imperative that proper 
monitoring of the project is undertaken by deploying suitable information technology tools.  
53.  Monitoring of Bharatmala Pariyojana by Public Investment Board and        
CCEA 
  The Audit noticed that CCEA directed the MORTH, in consultation with NHAI and 
NHIDCL, to bring out a consolidated progress report of all the sub -projects of BPP -I for 
review of Public Investment Board in December/June every year with a view to avoid cost 
and time overruns, and the same, along with Public Investment Board review report, was to 
be placed before CCEA and its guidance was to be obtained.  However, no institutionalised 
system of half yearly review of Bharatmala Pariyojana has been observed resul ting in time 
and cost overruns. 
54.  Enquired as to how the Ministry will justify its failure to establish a system of 
half-yearly review of Bharatmala Pariyojana by Public Investment Board and 
CCEA,and the consequences of such irregularities, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under: 
“The progress of Bharatmala Pariyojana is communicated and reviewed frequently through 
multiple channels and presented in every board meeting of NHAI. Furthermore, there have 
been multiple reviews and discussions with t he PIB and CCEA. The process of examination 
of a revised investment for Bharatmala Pariyojana by PIB was initiated in December 2021. 

 
 
This was evaluated in PIB meetings dated 19.04.2022, 22.04.2022 and 31.05.2022 and 
subsequently recommended by PIB in minut es dated 19.05.2022. A CCEA note for revised 
investment was also circulated for consultation on 06.10.2022. Hence, there have been no 
irregularities in timely review of projects of BPP-I with PIB and CCEA.” 
The audit also recommended that MoRTH should ensu re compliance with the framework 
stipulated by CCEA for effective monitoring and audit of physical and technical parameters 
of BPP-I.  Responsibility needs to be fixed for non-compliance of CCEA directions till date.  
55. The Ministry in their status note stated as under: 
 “MoRTH had submitted the progress report for BPP -I, as mandated in CCEA 
approval, on 17 th May 2019.  The process of examination of a revised investment for 
Bharatmala Pariyojana by PIB was initiated in December 2021.This was evaluated in PIB 
meetings in April and May 2022 and subsequently recommended by PIB in minutes dated 
19th July 2022.  A CCEA note for revised investment was also circulated for consultation on 
6th October 2022. 
 The 6-monthly progress report post the PIB recommendation has been submitted for 
March 2023.  The progress report will be submitted subsequently as per the approved 
guideline. 
 Additionally, MoRTH has ensured compliance to the framework stipulated by CCEA 
for the effective monitoring and audit of physical and technic al parameters of BPP-I through 
multiple monitoring mechanisms including, 
- Regular updates to NHAI Board which has representation from multiple   
agencies similar to PIB 
 - Periodic reviews with stakeholders (internal and external)  
 - Internal Audit Committees in line with the specified guidelines and  
 - Appointments of a third-party Audit agency 
4. All observations from the aforementioned reviews/audits are noted and necessary 
action is taken to comply with the same. 
5. Similar action will be taken on the recommendations of the third -party audit of BPP -I 
by MDI, Gurgaon. 

 
 
6. In addition, MoRTH has also commissioned a study at IIM Bangalore to measure the 
achievements and outcome parameters of the BPP -I.  The same will be also be used as a 
framework for evaluating the impact of the programme.”  
 
56.  Audit of Physical and Technical Parameters 
 The audit revealed that the technical and physical parameters of BPP -I appeared to 
have been neither reviewed by an independent agency nor the same was provisioned in the 
internal audit. 
 On being asked why the Ministry did not adopt independent audit of physical and 
technical parameters of BPP -1 and its projects, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“MoRTH has awarded the Third -Party Audit of Bharatmala Pariy ojana to the Management 
Development Institute (MDI), Gurgaon and Indian Institute of Management Bangalore 
(IIMB). Observations from both the audits are highlighted below:  
 The Audit conducted by MDI is in progress and reports will be submitted by MDI to 
MoRTH. 
 Preliminary findings of the study conducted by IIM Bangalore highlighted following 
benefits of Bharatmala Pariyojana 
o Economic Impact: 9% increase in household income, 6% increase in 
household expenditure, 10.4% increase in car sales etc.  
o Logistics Impact: 2.94% and 1.33% decrease in cost of transportation 
between the factory and the supplier and between factory and the customer 
respectively etc. 
o Business Impact: 9% increase in Mandis accessed by farmers, 19% increase 
in accessibility to factories etc. 
o Social Impact: 16.6% decrease in time to access schools, 8.9% decrease in 
time to access health services etc.  
Apart from the independent audits, there are internal audits as well to keep regular check 
and balances on the progress of the projects. The f actual positions and Internal Audit 
mechanism of NHAI is submitted as follows: 

 
 
 All the Internal Audit Reports for the period from 2017 -18 to 2020 -21 had already 
been provided to the Audit team including Critical Analysis Report (CAR) for the 
period 2017-18 to 2019-20 
 CAR comprising significant audit observations of the Internal audit reports are 
furnished by the concerned PIUs which are reviewed and consolidated by the HQ 
auditors to prepare the CAR of the NHAI as a whole.  
This is a continuous process, and all the Audit paras are pursued till settlement. The 
highlights of the CARs are eventually submitted to the Board Level Audit Committee of 
NHAI.” 
57.  On being enquired whether the Ministry has fixed responsibility for non -
compliance of CCEA directions till da te, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“The progress of Bharatmala Pariyojana is communicated and reviewed frequently through 
multiple channels and presented in every board meeting of NHAI. Furthermore, there have 
been multiple reviews and discussions with the PIB and CCEA. The process of examination 
of a revised investment for Bharatmala Pariyojana by PIB was initiated in December 2021. 
This was evaluated in PIB meetings dated 19.04.2022, 22.04.2022 and 31.05.2022 and 
subsequently recommended by PIB in minutes dated 19.05.2022. A CCEA note for revised 
investment was also circulated for consultation on 06.10.2022. Hence, there have been no 
irregularities in timely review of projects of BPP-I with PIB and CCEA.” 
58.  On being asked whether it is  a fact that additional information and facts were 
provided to Audit by MoRTH only after the Report was laid in Parliament, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated as under: 
“The performance audit of Phase I of Bharatmala Pariyojana was initiated by the  CAG in 
October 2020. Based on the Audit, CAG issued the Draft Performance Audit Report to 
MoRTH in January 2022. It may be noted that MoRTH had responded to the draft audit 
report of CAG in April and May 2022.However, MoRTH could not furnish the response to 
the final draft report circulated by CAG in July 2022, before the final report was tabled in the 
Parliament in August 2023.But within 1 month of the report being tabled in the Parliament, 
MoRTH submitted detailed ATNs for all observations and recommenda tions mentioned in 
the Audit report. 
 
59.  Project Monitoring Information System:- 

 
 
 The Audit observed that the Project Monitoring Information System was developed 
for MoRTH, NHAI and NHIDCL to monitor and track the progress of all projects but due to 
usage of two different applications by three organisations (Data Lake by NHAI and PMIS by 
MoRTH and NHIDCL), there was no data integration on a single IT platform resulting in no 
centralised monitoring and analysis of data for better project management.  Besides, there 
was mismatch in data available on PMIS and data being maintained by MoRTH/NHIDCL.  
The audit recommended that the Project Monitoring Information System should be 
integrated with Data Lake and enhanced with requisite functionalities in order to present  a 
holistic position of status of projects of all implementing agencies on a single platform to 
enable adequate monitoring and input/ data validation.  
The Ministry in their status note stated as under: 
“An integrated MoRTH Dashboard is being used for centr alised monitoring of projects 
across all implementing agencies. It is already integrated with PMIS and Data Lake. 
Integrated MoRTH Dashboard is used for analysis of data for better project management 
and this presents a holistic position of status of proje cts of all implementing agencies on a 
single platform. Further, MoRTH is assessing the feasibility of setting up a single platform 
for project monitoring across all its agencies.” 
 
 
60.  Bhoomi Rashi Portal 
   The Audit found that in case of NHAI and NHIDCL, the compensation to the 
beneficiaries was being made in offline mode without using Bhoomi Rashi portal in NHAI/ 
NHIDCL and the details related to surplus land was not available on the portal.  
The audit al so recommended that MoRTH should ensure early integration of Public 
Fund Management System with NHAI and NHIDCL for seamless financial transactions so 
that timely payment to beneficiaries could be ensured. 
The Ministry in their status note stated as under: 

 
 
“Bhoomi Rashi portal is already integrated with the Public Fund Management System 
(PFMS) for processing LA compensation on real time basis so as to avoid parking of funds 
w.e.f. 15.10.2018. 
MoRTH has already mandated that the payments to land owners need to be done in the 
digital domain by leveraging the functionalities of the Bhoomi Rashi portal.  
The online payment of compensation for land acquisition for the projects under NHAI in 
already enabled through Bhoomi Rashi portal. Further, work is under proces s for payment 
through Bhoomi Rashi for projects coming under NHIDCL and the same would be 
operational within next 3 months after detailed testing.”  
61. Comprehensive ERP System (eDISHA) 
 The Audit observed that there was substantial delay in completion of various phases of 
Comprehensive ERP System (eDISHA) and the implementation of the project was not being 
adequately monitored. 
The audit also recommended that MoRTH should ensure timely c ompletion of all pending 
phases of eDISHA so that centralised data and information is available in a single platform 
for all the three implementing agencies. 
The Ministry in their status note stated as under: 
“Implementation of required functionalities has been completed and now the eDISHA project 
is in O&M phase.  All the data of eDISHA is stored in a centralised database.  Adoption of 
key ERP eDISHA applications is gradually increasing and accordingly support requests are 
continuously coming from the various Stakeholders.” 
 
62. The Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) took oral evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Road Transport on the Report no. 19 of 2023 at their Sitting held on 
20th February, 2024. On the basis of oral evidence and the written inf ormation 
obtained on various aspects of the Report under consideration, the Committee made 
in depth examination of the subject, the recommendations of which are brought out 
in the succeeding paragraphs in Part II of the Report.  
  

 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee note that a  National Highway network of 64,942 km of NH 
network was initially identified in Bharatmala Pariyojana. Out of this, the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) had approved the 
development of 24,800 km as a pa rt of Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase I (BPP -I) 
on 24th October 2017. Further, CCEA had also approved development of 
10,000 km of residual NHDP projects. The CCEA approval for the 
implementation of BPP-I was for a period of 5 years (2017 -18 to 2021-22) at an 
outlay of Rs. 5,35,000 Crore. Of the total outlay, Rs. 3,85,000 Cr. was allocated 
for new projects to be awarded under Bharatmala Pariyojana (24,800 km) and 
Rs. 1,50,000 Cr. for residual NHDP projects (10,000 km). Subsequently, a 
process for the PIB apprais al of the revised cost estimate for BPP -I was 
initiated in January 2022. Further, as of 23rd November 2023, out of 34,800 km 
of network under BPP -I, 26,418 km  has been awarded at a cost of Rs. 8.45 
lakh Cr. Furthermore, MoRT&H has also completed the constr uction of 15,959 
km of NH under BPP -I as of 31st January 2024. The Performance Audit of 
BPP-I was carried out by CAG to assess achievement of defined objectives 
and the execution of NH development under the program. Audit pointed out 
shortcomings in  several key areas, including project selection and 
prioritization, financial oversight, contract award processes, project 
execution and contract management, as well as the effectiveness of the 
monitoring system in place to ensure the Pariyojana’s objectives on the basis 
of sample projects as well as on the overall planning and implementation of 
the Phase-I of the Bharatmala Pariyojana.   The Committee arrived at certain 
recommendations and observations on the basis of the written material 

 
 
available before them, the record of evidence tendered by the representatives 
of the Ministry etc.,  which are brought out in the succeeding paragraphs of 
the Report.  
2.          The Committee note that for undertaking the Audit of Bharatmala 
Scheme,an Entry Conference was held o n 27 October 2020 by CAG with 
MoRT&H, NHAI and NHIDCL, wherein the scope & coverage of audit, audit 
objectives and criteria etc., were explained.  Consequent to the review by 
CAG, the Draft Performance Audit Report was issued to MoRT&H on 13 
January 2022 f or the confirmation of facts and figures contained therein and 
to seek MoRT&H’s reply. Draft Audit Report was followed by issuance of two 
supplementary Audit observations to MoRT&H on 22 February 2022 and 17 
May 2022. MoRT&H furnished its replies on 26 Apr il 2022, 28 April 2022 and 
02 May 2022. An Exit Conference was held on 19 May 2022, wherein major 
Audit findings and recommendations were discussed with MoRT&H and NHAI 
Management. The Committee further note that the MoRTH did not furnish 
replies to the re vised Audit Report issued in June 2022, inspite of two 
reminders issued in September 2022 and May 2023.CAG presented the final 
report “CAG Report No. 19 of 2023” on 10 August 2023. The Committee take 
strong exception to the non submission of replies by MoR TH on the audit 
observations and recommend that some kind of responsibility be fixed for 
this sheer ignorance of the importance of constitutional authority and further 
desire that a timeframe be prescribed by the CAG for submission of replies 
by the Ministries concerned and any delay/ non -submission may be escalated 
to the highest level. 
3.      The Committee observe that the CCEA approved the implementation of 
BPP-I with the objective of optimising the efficiency of the movement of 
goods and people across the country and improving Logistics Performance 

 
 
Index of India  inter-alia by bridging critic al infrastructure gaps and optimal 
resource allocation for holistic highways development/improvement initiative. 
However, though the national highways contributed to carrying 40 per cent of 
the total road traffic of India, MoRT&H did not set any target/mil estone/action 
plan, in furtherance to Bharatmala Pariyojana including BPP -I, to improve LPI 
by developing quality infrastructure in the form of national highways network. 
Further, the CCEA directed for laying down of outcome parameters like 
reduction in t ime of travel, fuel efficiency, accident reduction, comfort in 
riding and user satisfaction for every selected corridor and monitoring 
thereof. However, the  MoRT&H did not set any target for achievement of 
measurable outcome parameters such as accident re duction, comfort in 
riding and user satisfaction etc. and no mechanism was established to 
monitor achievement of reduction in time of travel and fuel efficiency that 
were laid at the time of selection of corridors/projects. The Committee 
observe that the L ogistics Performance Index (LPI) is an interactive 
benchmark tool developed by World Bank to help countries identify 
challenges and opportunities faced by them in their trade logistics. It also 
suggests ways t o overcome the challenges. Such benchmark is  based on 
ground surveys, whereby feedback is taken from operators (global freight 
forwarders and express carriers) worldwide. As per the reply of the 
MoRT&H's that LPI is a multifaceted index influenced by various factors and 
improvement in National Highway  infrastructure is only one aspect 
contributing to LPI enhancement and that setting specific targets for LPI 
improvement based on subjective perception surveys pose challenges. The 
Committee while noting that DPIIT is the nodal Ministry for monitoring LPI 
and that the LPI rank of India was 44 in 2018 (3.18/5.00), at the time of 
initiation of BPP -I, which improved to rank 38 in 2023 would like to be 

 
 
apprised of the challenges faced by the operators, in regard to the National 
Highway Infrastructure in India,  as identified in the LPI Report 2023 and the 
measures taken by the DPIIT/ MoRTH to mitigate them. The Committee further 
note that MoRTH has commissioned a study through IIM Bangalore in order 
to assess the impact of the BPP –I and based on the outputs and  findings of 
the final study, suitable outcome parameters will be defined and targets will 
be set to measure the improvement of Logistics Efficiency through the 
infrastructure being developed under BPP -I. The Committee also note that 
MoRT&H will set up mon itoring mechanisms in next 6 months for all the 
outcome parameters adopted to evaluate the achievements of the BPP -I. The 
Committee wishto be apprised of the final findings of the IIMB study and also 
desire that the  monitoring mechanisms be put in place  within the next six 
months, as proposed. The Committee while noting that the ride quality on 
highways is mandated through contractual provisions and monitored through 
Network Survey Vehicle (NSV), surveys done every 6 months post completion 
of the project would like to be apprised of the major findings of such surveys 
conducted on the completed projects and the average time taken vis -à-vis the 
stipulated timelines to initiate corrective action thereon. The Committee also 
desire that a n annual highway user sur vey may be undertaken by the 
MoRT&H to serve as a key performance indicator for overall highway user 
satisfactionthat may include parameters such as journey time, road safety, 
works management, availability of information, facilities and surface qualit y. 
4.  The Committee take note of the fact  that there were significant delays in 
projects of NHDP, that were merged into BPP -I without resolving the 
impediments viz., availability of RoW and requisite clearances and that their 
inclusion vitiated the objective of ensuring seamless connectivity and resulted in 

 
 
the blockage of funds which could have been utilized in development of other 
stretches.The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Audit 
observation on taking up of NHDP projects without reso lving impediments was 
based on only  a sample of projects whereas Residual NHDP projects taken up in 
BPP-I were key high -traffic density corridors and critical for efficient freight and 
passenger movement. The progress of award and c onstruction for these projects 
was comparable to the remaining projects under BPP -I and out of the 10,000 km 
under Residual NHDP, 6,648 km length was awarded, and 4,037 km wa s already 
constructed as of July’23 and maximum efforts we re being made by MoRT&H on 
the ground to ensure  the availability of requisite RoW as well as clearances 
before the award of projects and future projects under BPP -I a s well as other 
programmes, would be taken up by MoRT&H only after ensuring the availability 
of land and requisite clearances as per cont ract provisions. Further , the 
Committee have been apprised that a C ommittee is being set -up in the Ministry 
to further strengthen the mechanism. The Committee while opining that the 
crucial factors such as RoW and mandatory clearances should have been take n 
care of before committing funds towards these languishing projects ,  
recommend that the projects that have been awarded be completed within the 
stipulated timelines and the issues may be resolved on priority for the remaining 
3,352 km.  The Committee desi re that the Ministerial C ommittee proposed to be 
set up for strengthening the mechanism may be constituted urgently with a time 
bound mandate. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard. 
5       The Committee learn that as per CCEA approval, development of MMLPs at 
strategic locations (including connectivity of logistic parks) was made part of 
National Corridors/National Corridors Efficiency Improvement component of BPP -

 
 
I so as to enhance logistics efficiency. The SOP, issued b y MoRT&H, on BPP -I 
further elaborated the role of NHAI in development of MMLPs by stating that NHAI 
would be responsible for development of MMLPs, for improving efficiency of 
corridors, in line with the policy issued by Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 
NHAI was also made responsible for approving concession agreement for MMLPs. 
As on 31 March 2023, based on pre - feasibility studies and feasibility studies, idea 
of three MMLPs and two MMLPS respectively were dropped whereas in 15 MMLPs 
only pre -feasibility study was completed. Work for feasibility study in respect of 
one MMLP was awarded whereas for another, MMLP contractor had been 
appointed and SPV formulation work was in progress. Responsibility of 
development of the MMLP at Guwahati was transferred fr om NHAI to NHIDCL. The 
Committee observe that the development of Multi Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs) 
under Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I (BPP -I) faced significant delays and none 
were accomplished by March 2023. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that subsequent to CCEA approval, there were discussions with DPIIT 
and other stakeholders on the implementation mechanism for these MMLPs. There 
was a lack of initial clarity regarding the responsibility of different Ministries / 
Departments in exec ution of Multimodal Logistics Parks (MMLP), as multiple 
Government Ministries / Departments (NICDIC, CONCOR) were planning 
development of Multimodal Logistics Parks. Further, identification of suitable land 
parcel in coordination with State Government agen cies resulted in delays in 
implementation. Finally, it was decided that MoRT&H will be responsible for 
development of 35 MMLPs, as approved by the CCEA as a part of BPP -I. To 
expedite the process, MoRT&H did set up the National Highways Logistics 
Management Limited (NHLML) as a wholly -owned subsidiary of NHAI in 
September 2020. The Ministry prioritized 15 MMLPs for development under BPP -I, 
and funding for their external trunk infrastructure was included in the revised cost 

 
 
estimate for BPP -I, approved by th e Public Investment Board (PIB). Out of these 
the Committee learn that 4 MMLPs have been awarded and are in various stages 
of development. Furthermore, bids have been invited for 3 more MMLPs and a 
project specific SPV is being formed for each MMLP with th e relevant 
stakeholders with clearly defined roles and responsibilities and with equity 
contribution in line with their investment. The Committee while noting that delays 
in developing MMLPs are inter-alia attributable to initial confusion arising due to 
involvement of multiple ministries and departments without clearly defined roles 
and responsibilities and issues in identification of suitable land parcel in 
coordination with State Government agencies, are of the considered opinion that 
these eventualities were not unforeseeable and, therefore, while visualizing such 
parks appropriate mechanisms should have been provided for to achieve the 
desired objective of facilitation of efficient and seamless freight movement in the 
country. The Committee here can onl y recommend that  the 4 MMLPs where  work 
has been awarded may be completed within specified timelines and for the 8 
MMLPs where bids are yet to be invited, prioritization may be done after reviewing 
their project preparation status and the Committee be ap prised of the status of 3 
MMLPs where bids have been received. 
 
6. The Committee note that to construct the length of 34,877 Km the NHAI Board 
approved (16 November 2017) funding requirement of Rs. 7,15,523 crore to be 
spent up to 2022 -23 under BPP -I on the g round that proposal to CCEA did not 
include debt servicing cost and operation & maintenance cost. The funding 
requirement of BPP -I was further enhanced to Rs. 10,40,526 crore and then to 
Rs. 10,55,268 crore by NHAI on the grounds that proposal made to CCEA  
differed from ground situations. The Committee also note that as against 

 
 
average CCEA approved civil cost of Rs. 13.98 crore per km, the actual 
sanctioned cost was Rs. 23.89 crore per km i.e., 170.89 per cent of the average 
approved cost  and as against a verage CCEA approved pre -construction cost 
of Rs. 1.39 crore per km, the actual sanctioned pre -construction civil cost was 
Rs. 8.28 crore per km i.e., 595.68 per cent of the approved cost. While 
enhancing the funding requirement, NHAI justified the same by stating that 
land acquisition cost was 2.4 times to three times (both in extent and cost), 
and civil construction cost was 1.2 times of what was proposed to CCEA 
besideshigher quantum of high -speed corridors, increased finance cost on 
costly projects an d short receipts from Government of India than approved by 
NHAI Board. The Committee note that NHAI Board also approved BPP -I 
financing plan higher than that was approved by CCEA for Government 
financial support and market borrowings. The Committee note fr om the Audit 
observation that the sources of funds required over and above the approved 
financial outlay of Rs. 5,35,000 crore and for the remaining national highway 
length was not approved by CCEA. The Committee observe from the reply of 
the MoRTH that th e issue of increase in cost has been appraised by PIB and a 
proposal for revised cost estimates  has already been submitted and the CCEA 
has not yet approved the increased cost sanctioned/committed. The 
Committee further note from the submission of the Secr etary that the reasons 
for cost escalation inter-alia were,wrong estimation of land required in terms of 
area required for acquisition resulting in increase of more than Rs. 2,50,000 
crore in the cost estimates, implementation of new Land acquisition Act a nd 
that the earlier estimation was a preliminary estimation done on the basis of 
projects which had been approved earlier.  The Committee while noting that 
after awarding only 75.62 per cent of CCEA approved length, 158.24 per cent of 
CCEA approved financial outlay had been sanctioned by the NHAI Board are of 

 
 
the considered opinion that grossly inadequate physical and financial  planning 
by NHAI/ MoRTH for a significant project resulted in cost and time overruns 
and thereby  resultinginhigher funding requirements. The Committee also 
observe that no new projects will be awarded till the approval is given by the 
CCEA and recommend t hat henceforth comprehensive planning at the 
Schematic level may be done by involving technical and financial experts and 
other stakeholders for better understanding of the existing and 
expected/probable scenarios and for a long term futuristic approach to  enable 
adequate provisioning so as to ensure that implementation of projects under 
the Scheme is not held up for want of approvals. 
7. Audit observed that there was variation from the NHAI Board approved modal 
mix as a meagre national highways length of 1.75  per cent was being 
developed under BOT (Toll) mode as against 10 per cent approved for this 
mode of construction whereas 48.35 per cent and 49.90 per cent of national 
highways length were being constructed under EPC and HAM mode 
respectively as against 30  per cent and 60 per cent approved respectively for 
these modes. The Committee note that projects constructed under EPC and 
HAM modes are also monetized after 2 years of project completion and 
established tolling history, through TOT and InvIT mechanisms, wherein 
revenue risk is passed on to the investors without construction risk. The 
Committee while noting that in spite of governmental push for BOT(T) as a 
mode, there has been muted participation in recent years and in light of the 
challenges with respect  the same, effort has been made to focus on awarding 
projects on HAM mode , recommend that all decisions on mode of execution 
may only be taken after consideringavailability of funds, RoW and statutory 
clearances, risk profile of the investors and prevailin g market conditions so 
that the concessionaires complete the projects within prescribed timelines, for 

 
 
guaranteed price while meeting specified standards. The Committee also 
desire to be apprised of the concrete steps  taken to harmonise maintenance 
clause of HAM projects with EPC/BOT agreements to maintain roads in traffic 
worthy and safe conditions during construction period.  
8. As per Audit, various deficiencies/ discrepancies were observed during review 
of escrow account statements of Public Private Partne rship projects due to 
poor monitoring of escrow account by NHAI in violation of contractual 
clausesresulting in diversion of funds to the tune of Rs. 3,598.52 crore by 
concessionaires and short infusion of concessionaire’s share of equity by Rs. 
32.34 cror e. The Committee note that NHAI had an option to appoint, during 
construction period, concurrent auditors to undertake concurrent audit o f the 
concessionaire’s accounts, however, no such concurrent audit was conducted 
by NHAI. The Committee further note fr om the reply of the Ministry that as per 
the Forensic Audit Report there are no fault findings in terms of TOR except 
the non-payment of premium for which Concessionaire has raised issue of not 
achieving Actual COD. Further , the MoRT&H acknowledged that th ere were no 
definite processes in place for the review of fund movements from escrow 
accounts and evaluations were done on a case -by-case basis. The Committee 
while noting that MoRT&H will set up concurrent audits for all escrow accounts 
over the next 6 months and that concurrent auditors would be appointed within 
3 months of appointed date in all future projects and programmes of MoRT&H 
recommend that timelines may be specified for taking remedial action on the 
observations made by the concurrent auditors and any delay in the 
appointment of the concurrent auditors may be condoned only at the highest 
level. Further, the Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken on the 
observation of the Forensic Audit regarding non -payment of premium by the 
Concessionaire.  

 
 
 
9. The Committee note that MoRT&H had in  the SoPs instructed that given the 
scale of investment and consequent asset base creation, prudence in 
accounting and financial planning/management was essential to meet fund 
requirements of current and futur e projects. However, NHAI did not maintain 
any records in respect of BPP -I specific funds being received/ raised during 
the  period from 2017 -18 to September 2022. The Committee further note from 
the reply of the NHAI that as per NHAI Act, all the receipts  of NHAI are 
accounted for in the NHAI fund to cater to all expenditure. There is no 
Bharatmala Pariyojana specific fund separately maintained by NHAI and 
further, the borrowings made by NHAI are also credited in a common pool and 
spent on projects on ‘as and where required’ basis. Subsequent to series of 
meetings with CAG, Annual Acco unts for the Financial Year 2019 -20 were 
prepared based on project accounting, however, it was advised to carry out the 
reversal of project accounting and prepare a revised fo rmat. A comprehensive 
proposal for revision of format of accounts prescribed by CAG was submitted 
in June 2022 and CAG accepted some of the proposals during April 2023. The 
Committee note from the Audit comments that the proposal for revision of 
format of accounts was examined by the CAG and some of the major changes, 
proposed by MoRTH, were forwarded for reconsideration of MoRTH viz., 
treatment of asset held on behalf of Government of India during capitalization 
of establishment expenditure, non -preparation of project -wise accounting etc. 
Further, suggestions have also been given for consideration of the Ministry so 
as to make the format more consistent with the Accounting Standard and 
General Accepted Accounting Principles. The Committee note that it was also 
requested to forward the proposed accounting policy to be adopted by NHAI 
for concurrence and that response from MoRTH was awaited. The Committee 

 
 
observe that MoRTH has not accepted the Audit recommendation regarding 
mapping of the scheme wise funds released, citin g challenges in its 
implementation and that the same would be submitted in next six -monthly 
compliance report to PIB . In this regard, the Committee opine that the absence 
of project based accounting hampers the identification of profit centers, 
thereby impa cting the evaluation of the long -term v iability of projects and 
hindering accurate calculation of the cost of capital for effective investment 
decision-making. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that the revision of 
the format of the accounts may be pri oritized and completed in a time bound 
manner and implemented urgently to enable physical and financial monitoring 
of the Scheme/ projects. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
decision of the PIB on the mapping of the scheme wise release of fun ds. The 
Committee hope that the project -wise revenue and indirect costs like finance 
cost and administrative costs, etc. will be expeditiously captured in organized 
accounting system used in NHAI and the policy for allocation of financing cost, 
administrative cost, overheads and mapping of project wise revenue will be in 
place in the next 3 months, as envisaged. The Committee while noting the 
challenges in establishing profit centers in the National Highways and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limite d (NHIDCL) due to toll collection 
being done by NHAI, in no uncertain words recommend that appropriate 
accounting method for project expenditures and revenues may be decided in 
coordination with CAG, for roads built by NHIDCL.  
10.         During the course of  examination of the subject, t he Committee, note d 
several deficiencies in the delegation of powers for project appraisal and 
approval in BPP -I including lack of separation of appraising, approving and 
executing authority; negative correlation between comme rcial risk of a project 
and the level of approving authority prescribed by the CCEA;  no financial 

 
 
capping for approval of EPC projects by NHAI;  decisions on mode of 
construction taken by NHAI without any valid justification;  lack of adherence 
to the app roval mechanism prescribed by the CCEA such as non -appraisal by 
PATSC, absence of member from NITI Aayog and project approval prior to 
CCEA approval. The Committee further note that deficiencies in appraisal and 
approval mechanism prescribed by CCEA, accom panied with its inadequate 
implementation, resulted not only in BPP -I projects not getting scrutinized at 
desired level but also in deficiencies in appraisal of projects being approved 
under BPP -I. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the  
guidelines for the appraisal and approval of projects are in line with findings of 
Rakesh Mohan committee and the powers delegated to MoRTH / NHAI in NHDP 
Phase I; powers for approval of EPC projects have been delegated to NHAI 
Board by CCEA, similar to e arlier phases of NHDP, with recommendation of 
strengthening of NHAI Board and constitution of PATSC by CCEA in BPP -I and 
that mode of execution of projects is decided by NHAI considering various 
factors within the overall umbrella prescribed by CCEA and st rengthened by 
NHAI board. The Committee while emphasizing the importance of strict 
adherence to the CCEA -approved mechanism for high -cost projects, ensuring 
transparency and thorough scrutiny recommend that project appraisal and 
approval mechanism be adequ ately strengthened for ensuring in - depth 
scrutiny and approval of project in all modes of construction at competent 
levels. The Committee also recommend establishing a system for regular 
internal audits and simultaneous monitoring to ensure adherence to a pproved 
mechanisms and promptly addressing deviations, if any. MoRTH should also 
ensure effective monitoring and regular audit of physical an d technical 
parameters of BPP -I, and r esponsibility should be fixed for noncompliance of 
CCEA directions till date. 

 
 
11. The Committee note that the targeted lengths of BPP -I as a whole as well as 
the targeted lengths for each component of BPP -I were substantially changed 
during optimisation in spite of the claims of CCEA approved components and 
lengths being proposed afte r due diligence based on origin -destination 
studies, freight flow projections and identification of infrastructure gaps. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the CCEA approved 64,942 
km of NH network to be taken up in Bharatmala Pariyojana in 2017. Out of this, 
24,800 km was approved for Phase I. In addition, 10,000 km of residual NHDP 
projects were approved for development as part of Phase I. Subsequently, 
alignments were optimized in consultation with stakeholders for efficient infra 
development. The optimization included addressing challenges in Brownfield 
development through Greenfield development as well as the enhancement of 
connectivity to ports / airports.The entire network under all implementing 
agencies of MoRT&H includin g NHAI, NHIDCL and Roads Wing of MoRT&H 
was covered in the optimization exercise. Post the optimization exercise, the 
overall network length reduced from 64,942 km to 64,675 km. However, the 
overall length to be developed under Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase I was 
maintained at 34,800 km. The Committee are surprised to note that MoRTH in 
its draft ATN has stated that optimisation for NHIDCL and Road wing of MoRTH 
was carried out, whereas in the exit conference held in May 2022 it had 
admitted that there was no  scope for optimization of projects to be developed 
by NHIDCL and MoRTH as major length, i.e., around31,000 km. was to be 
developed by NHAI and exhort the senior officers in MoRTH to look into the 
reasons for such divergent views given by the officials at different points of 
time and apprise the Committee of the correct status within one month of the 
presentation of this Report. 

 
 
12. The Committee note that NHAI acquired excess land of 2.29 hectares (5.65 
acres) from Airports Authority of India (AAI), at 50 per cent of the market value, 
as against the condition of AAI transferring necessary land meant for project 
construction to NHAI. This parcel of land being adjacent to the other land 
acquired, was of no use to AAI and NHAI also did not have any plan to use 
such land for the project or otherwise at the time of acquiring it, but still NHAI 
acquired it and for this land parcel AAI has raised claim of Rs. 105.61 crore. 
The Committee further note that during the meeting between the Secretary, 
MoRT&H & the Secretary,  Civil Aviation, in January 2018, it was decided that 
the excess land of Airport s Authority of India (approx. of 5.65 acres) was not 
usable from AAI’s perspective as it was getting landlocked due to the 
development of Dwarka Expressway tunnels, by NHAI. It  is worth mentioning  
here that no access could have been provided to the said land parcel of 5.65 
acres without compromising road safety for the users. Accordingly, it was 
decided in the same meeting that the excess land of 5.65 acres would be 
transferred by AAI to NHAI at 50% of the market value of the land and MoRT&H 
is exploring different possibilities to make use of said parcel of land including 
the development of tunnel command centre/amenities etc., for Dwarka 
Expressway. The Committee hope that the M inistry would be able to utilize the 
land parcel and exhort the Ministry to avoid such recurrences in future. The 
Committee while noting from the reply of the Ministry that the issue of excess 
land acquirement on certain projects is mainly due to inaccurac y of revenue/ 
land records and maps available with the State Revenue Department; 
Deficiencies in DPRs regarding accuracy of the land to be acquired along the 
RoW and Need to improve usability/viability of land desire that appropriate 
mechanism may be put i n place to address the above issues to ensure that 
infructuous expenditure on land and other resources is completely avoided.  

 
 
13. The Committee also note that i mplementation of required functionalities in 
eDISHA project has been completed and the project is currently in O&M phase. 
The Committee while noting that a doption of key ERP eDISHA applications is 
gradually increasing and accordingly support requests are continuously 
coming from the various stakeholders,  recommend that MoRTH should ensure 
that all the i mplementing agencies are on boarded in a time bound manner to  
eliminate data duplication and provide data integrity . The Committee note that 
work is under process for payment through Bhoomi Rashi  Portal for projects 
coming under NHIDCL and the same would b e operational within next 3 
months after detailed testing  and desire to be apprised of the progress in this 
regard. In this regard, the Committee desire that in order to present a holistic 
position of status of projects of all implementing agencies a singl e platform 
may be developed to enable adequate monitoring and input/data validation.  
14. The Committee learn  that excess price adjustment in 5 projects was made by 
making computation on the basis of All India CPI (IW) index rather than indices 
published for respective regions. The Committee  also note that recovery of Rs. 
19.52 Crore has been made in 2 projects a nd MoRT&H is examining other two 
projects. The Committee take note of the fact that excess price adjustment of 
Rs. 2.13 Crore in case of Kohima -Jessami (Pkg II and Pkg III), the issue was 
due to a typographical error and the issue is being examined by the Ministry. 
The Committee also note that a few projects of MoRT&H and NHIDCL were 
incorrectly reported under BPP -I due to clerical mistake . The Committee desire 
that corrective action may be undertaken expeditiously and recoveries made 
urgently and robust internal controls and checks may be put in place to check 
and avoid recurrence of such lapses . 
 

 
 
15. The Committee note that the engagement of Independent Road Safety Auditor 
at all stages of project has been made mandatory by NHAI at DPR stage and 
the guideline s for appointment of authority’s engineers/ independent 
engineers and safety experts will be ensured in next 6 months, across all 
implementing agencies. The Committee desire that the safety auditors/ experts 
/ engineers may be timely appointed and their ob servations may also be 
followed up in a time bound manner to have a fool -proof supervision of project 
execution and safety aspects. 
 
16. The Committee note that a  policy guideline has been issued by NHAI on action 
to be taken on DPR consultants for deficiencies in services provided vis -à-vis 
the Terms of Refer ences in the agreement and  in case of willful lapse on part 
of officers, action would also be taken against  them.The Committee desire that 
responsibility may be fixed, after detailed investigation, for preparing and 
approvingfaulty detailed project reports with sub -optimal 
parameters/specificationsfor the projects already approved and they may be 
apprised there of. Further, MoRT&H will standardize the Terms of Reference 
(ToR) of DPR consultants, which can be leveraged as a basis for the 
preparation of DPRs across the country. To standardize the ToR and improve 
adoption of latest technologies in DPR processes, MoR T&H will set -up DPR 
cells in MoRT&H for overall policy formulation and NHAI & NHIDCL for 
monitoring of DPRs , recommending appropriate action for deficiency in 
services of DPR and monitoring the implementation of the penal action.  The 
Committee while opinin g that all projects should only  be appraised and 
approved ba sed on detailed project reports and a cost benefit 
analysis,recommend that the ToR of the DPR consultants may be standardized 
and circulated and DPR cells may be set up for all the projects in a t ime bound 

 
 
manner for reviewing the detailed project reports and road designs against the 
extant standards/guidelines and detailed SoPs for monitoring by NHAI and 
NHIDCL may also be issued by MoRTH simultaneously.  
17.  The Committee learn that MoRT&H has put in place guidelines for the land 
availability to be provided to the concessionaires on the Appointed Date as 
part of the standard Model Concession Agreements (MCA) for the different 
modes of construction depending on the expected time of financial closure. 
However, the process will be re -examined by coordinating with all the relevant 
stakeholders (Inter Ministerial Consultation (IMC), Capacity building of revenue 
officials, NHAI officials, and DPR consultants) and an SOP will be created 
aligned with all the st akeholders.The Committee desire that the SoPs may be 
created within  a period of one year and the learning from BPP -I may be 
incorporated in order to ensure efficient resource utilization as well as on -
ground execution for such programmes.  
18. The Committee note that entire bidding process of MoRT&H and its agencies is 
online and w. r.t. tendering process viz., (i) In case of tunnel projects, Model 
RFP document is being modified to ensure that all future bid documents 
clearly mention that qualification require ment is for gross crosssectional area 
of the tunnel. (ii) The practice of updating cost estimates just before opening of 
bids is being made mandatory for all projects in line with CPWD works manual. 
(iii) It is now mandated that major maintenance estimates  prepared by State 
PWDs/ other agencies would be physically verified by NHAI before sanction of 
estimates. (iv) All projects will be awarded only after finalization of DPR (as per 
extant guidelines).In order to bring more transparency in bidding process, t he 
Committee at this stage recommend that all out efforts should be undertaken 
to ensure evaluation of bids in an online evaluation system by embedding all 
the steps involved so as to have a trail of transactions and fair evaluation and 

 
 
additional investig ation of low value bids/ unbalanc ed bids and front loaded 
bids to ensure technical or commercial competence and quality transactions. 
Further, anomalies in tendering and selection process of 
contractors/concessionaires should be investigated to fix respons ibility on 
erring officials who failed to ensure due adherence to prescribed rules and 
guidelines. 
19. The Committee note that currently MoRT&H is drawing up plans for the next 
phase of highway development beyond the BPP -I and desire that MoRTH may, 
learning from BPP-I, carry out an in -depth analysis, based on accurate ground 
level data, while proposing a scheme of this magnitude in future so as to 
ensure efficient management of resources and optimal project outcomes and 
also ensure that the execution of projec ts is done as per their defined priority  
and within the approved framework. 
*** 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 