22

“Examination of Accounts of ICAR" "Non
Achievement of Stated Objective" and
“Blocking of Funds of Coconut
Development Board"

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Tenth Report (167 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE

(DEPARTMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH &
EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION &
FARMERS WELFARE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT

Le वा नाक 0099 दाना दाता दाद का २७२१२१ाा१२२ााभााा 2 शााताााक न
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2202

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

“Examination of Accounts of ICAR"™ "Non
Achievement of Stated Objective" and

“Blocking of Funds of Coconut Development
Board"

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Tenth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE

(DEPARTMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE,
COOPERATION & FARMERS WELFARE)

सत्यमेव जयते
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 92.:02..,202/

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ...02....02:.. 2021

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2020/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)


CP NAwA ARYL

eR = Ss

ae

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri 1. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambilka Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant

Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Smt. M.L.K. Raja - Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTERI Introductory

CHAPTER Il* Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

CHAPTER Ill* Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government

CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER ५ Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES

1 Minutes of the Eight sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2020-21) held on 01.12.2020

u Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Tenth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not included to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

PAGE


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, present this 22"? Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Examination of Accounts of ICAR, Non Achievement of Stated Objective and
Blocking of Funds of Coconut Development Board’ relating to the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research & Education
and Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare).

2. The One Hundred and Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha on 9 August, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22 May,
2019. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and thereafter
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 1 December, 2020. Minutes of the sitting
form appendix to the Report.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 01. the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Tenth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
_ February, 2021 Chairperson

Magha, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of

he Committee contained in

their One Hundred and Tenth Report (16"" Lok Sabha) on “Examination of Accounts
of ICAR, Non Achievement of Stated Objective and Blocking of Funds of Coconut

Development Board" based on three audit paragraphs on “
the account of Individual Central Autonomous Bodies, N
Objectives and Blocking of Funds”. Out of these, t
Paragraphs/Subjects fall within the purview of Department o

Significant observations on
jon-achievement of Stated
he first and third Audit
Agricultural Research and

Education and the second paragraph falls within the purview of Department of

Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Agri
Accordingly, the Committees examination has proceeded in t

culture & Farmers Welfare.
hat sequence.

2 The One Hundred and Tenth Report (16"" Lok Sab

ha) was presented to Lok

Sabha on 9" August, 2018. It contained 07 Observations/Recommendations. Action

Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommend
from the Ministry of Agriculture and are broadly categorized a

ations have been received
s under:

i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 3,5, 6 and 7

Total: 05

Chapter - Il
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

NIL

Total: NIL

Chapter — Ill
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration:
Para Nos. 2 and 4

iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of
furnished interim replies/no replies:

NIL

Total: 02
Chapter - IV

which Government have

Total: NIL
Chapter -V


3. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations,
were to be submitted by the concerned Ministry i.e. Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’
Welfare within six months of presentation/laying of the One Hundred and Tenth Report
to the Parliament i.e, by February 2019. The ATNs were received on 06.02.2019.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’
Welfare on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
One Hundred and Tenth Report (16" Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with
the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations
which either need reiteration or merit comments

A. Significant observations on the Accounts of Individual Central Autonomous
Bodies
(Recommendation No. 2)

5. On gleaning through the oral evidence tendered before the Committee and the
material/information supplied, they are perturbed to note that the test checked five
units/Institutes of [CAR were not depicting the value of land (free hold and lease hold) in
their schedule of assets in contravention of the Significant Accounting Policies (SAP)
developed as early as in the year 2003-04. The Committee, are, also astonished to note
that the Department of Agricultural Research instructed five units/institutions to depict
the value of land in their schedule of assets only after the audit observation and the
same have been reflected in their annual accounts from 2016-17 only. The Committee
find that the Ministry have assured that all types of lands have now been digitalized and
brought on record, so all concerted efforts would be made for reconciliation/depiction of
such assets 0५116 units in the annual accounts of the year 2017-18. It is evident that
such an assurance is primarily consequent to the audit findings and subsequently the
Committee's intervention. The Committee, therefore, in no uncertain words, at this
stage, can only aver that such concerted efforts should bring fruits and the annual
accounts of not only the year 2017-18 but for the coming years also invariably depict a

true reconciled picture of lands and put in place a system for integrated data of assets.


6.

3

The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare in their Action Taken Note have

submitted as follows:

8.

“It is submitted for the kind perusal of the Committee that all concerted efforts are
continuously made to ensure that the land as well as other assets are depicted by
all of the ICAR units as per the Significant Accounting Policies of the CAR. Fur-
ther, on the basis of observation of the Committee, it has been specifically in-
structed in the notes to accounts to all ICAR units to mandatorily depict the value
of land in the Annual Accounts which would also be an essential requirement for
acceptance of annual accounts of each unit. Every ICAR unit has also been in-
structed to show the value of land at a nominal value of Rs 1/- in case of free-
hold/gifted and details of all such type of land to be specified separately in their
notes to accounts.”

While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-
“Department has not replied on the recommendation of the PAC regarding
putting in place a system for integrated data of assets. The same may be
furnished to PAC.”

In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-

9.

“The Council has already adopted ERP based FMS-MIS system and made
efforts to computerize its accounting records including assets but the process is
not yet complete as it has confronted many challenges in the process of its
implementation. The Council has more than 110 units across India and each unit
has to ascertain/reconcile its assets as the error free data only could be fed in the
system to get accuracy in the reports and that only will pave the way for a robust
system for integrated data of assets to be in place. Being a very voluminous and
uphill task due to number of technical functional and operational requirements of
the software, it has been taking time also with continuous exploration and
evaluation of all aspects in the direction of integration of assets. Thus, steps for a
strong system for integrated data of assets of all ICAR units spread across the
country have already been taken. Accordingly, the information made available to
the PAC about putting in place a sound system for integrated data of assets has
been compiled with by ICAR. With concerted efforts during the financial year
2019-20, a robust system for integrated idea of assets could be expected to be in
place in the next financial year 2020-21."

The Committee note that the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare,

in their action taken reply furnished at first have assured that all types of lands

have been digitized and brought on record. It has also been assured that all


4

concerted efforts would be made for reconciliation/depiction of such assets by
the units in the annual accounts of the year 2017-18. The Committee further note
that as observed by the Audit too, the reply furnished by the Ministry initially is
incomplete as there has been no response on the Committee's recommendation
for putting in place a system for integrated data of assets. They further note that
in the subsequent response, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
have assured that with concerted efforts during the financial year 2019-20, a
robust system for integrated data of assets could be expected to be put in place

in the next financial year 2020-21.

The Committee find the reply of the Ministry to be more in the nature of an
assurance that a robust system for integrated data of assets could be expected to
be put in place in the financial year 2020-21. While seen in the context of the reply
furnished initially informing inter-alia that all types of lands have been digitized,
the instant reply of the Government does not indicate that the matter has been
taken with due seriousness. The Committee also find that no concrete and
specific steps have been detailed in the reply for achieving the objective of
building an integrated data of assets in a time bound manner. The Committee
while taking note of the reply of the Ministry stating that the task of building an
integrated data of assets of all ICAR units spread across the country is a
voluminous, and uphill task due to a number of technical, functional and
operational requirements of software etc. are of the opinion that for any
organization, a comprehensive data base i.e. a clear compilation of its assets
should be readily available. The benefits of such an integrated data far outweigh
the efforts and challenges building the data may pose. They, therefore, desire
that the Ministry make concerted efforts to put the integrated data of assets in

place and apprise the Committee thereof at the earliest.

B. MISSTATMENTS IN THE ACCOUNTS
(Recommendation No. 4)

40. Upon examining the subject, the Committee are further perturbed to note that

there are errors and mis-statements in the estimation of accrued interest on bank


5

deposits, bonds and other investments in the ICAR GPF accounts. The Department
while admitting the above observation submitted that necessary changes have been
made in the ICAR GPF accounts during 2011-12 and the officers concerned have been
advised to be vigilant in calculating accrued interest from the investments/instruments.
However, the Committee are not satisfied with the mere issue of an advisory in this
regard and desire the Department/ICAR to fix responsibility for the lapse/errors in the
estimation of accrued interest of ICAR GPF accounts and also to devise a foolproof

mechanism to avoid recurrences of this nature in future.

11. The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare in their Action Taken Note have

submitted as follows:

“The error in estimation of accrued interest was analyzed and foolproof
mechanism has now been adopted wherein accrued interest were crosschecked
from the institutions issuing securities and tallied with their certificate of accrued
interest. Separate annexure for different types of maturing instruments and
related accrued interest are also being shown and annexed with Annual Accounts
depicting the exact accrued interest value thereof and now there is foolproof
mechanism to cross check the accrued interest by involving the issuing
institutions to provide the figure. It is reiterated that this error in estimation of
accrued of such mechanism which was a systematic shortcoming and not an
individual failure. The Hon'ble Member of Parliament is requested to appreciate
the effort made by the organization and consider to rest the issue as such, in
view of corrective measures adopted by the organization.”

12. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“No observation on errors and mis-statements in the estimation of accrued
interest on bank deposits, bonds and other investment in ICAR has been made in
the SAR on the accounts of ICAR since 2011-12. Hence, no further comments.”

13. The Committee note that the ICAR has admitted to the audit observations
regarding errors and mis-statement in the estimation of accrued interest on
bank deposits, bonds and other investments in the ICAR GPF accounts. The
Committee had desired that ICAR fix responsibility for the lapse/error in the
estimation of accrued interest of ICAR GPF accounts and had recommended
devising a foolproof mechanism to avoid recurrence of lapses of such nature in
the future. The Committee also note the reply of the Government that the error

in estimation of accrued interest occurred due to the absence of a proper


6

mechanism in place, which by ICARs own admission, is a systematic
shortcoming. The Committee, while acknowledging the request of the
Government to consider putting the issue to rest, are surprised to note that the
Ministry has chosen to attribute the cause of errors in the estimation of accrued
interests on bank deposits etc. as a systematic shortcoming without caring to
identify the causes for the same. The Committee would, therefore, like to
reiterate their recommendation that the Government should enquire into and
identify the causes of the lapse and fix responsibility, apart from ensuring that

the shortcoming is effectively addressed, so that such errors do not recur.

tok


— a.

APPENDIX-I
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 3, 5,6 and7
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 2 and 4
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim

replies/no replies:

-Nil-

Total: 5
Percentage: 72%

Total : 0
Percentage: 0%

Total: 2
Percentage: 28%

Total: 0
Percentage: 0%


-&«

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-Nil-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 Chairperson,

Magha,1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


“9

Confidential

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21) HELD ON 17 DECEMBER, 2020.

The Committee sat on Tuesday the 17 December 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1415

hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Jayant Sinha

OM NOAAA WN

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
411... Shri C.M. Ramesh
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director

1|


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

tok toe eee

REPRESENTATIVES OF INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
(ICAl)

doi Yoetock tock

REPRESENTATIVES OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (Cll)

delete tek creed

REPRESENTATIVES OF FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE &
INDUSTRY (FICCI)

toe eet Prrrry
2 kek RR KE trek
3 tek Shore tien
4. tt wake t wee
5 eke tebe sete
6. tek tee ऋऋकरऋ
7. feet ei etki
8 ceed erered tke
9 ned ke ceed
40. kee see tek
14 creed tte eet
12 ceed ithe अफडकऊ
13. hehe toe अखंड इक:
14. अफऔफ# अऋइ फेर अंजू जे

३|


नो

्‌ऋहऋइऋ

15... thee corey
16, 0 tee Prvers tte
47... tee peeees vite
18. eee eee pees
49... were ferees tee
20, ttt preees pees
errees peers een

21. Then, the Committee took up the following reports of the Committee for

consideration:

a) ik pores wets.

b) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their 110" Report (16" Lok Sabha) on “Examination of
Accounts of ICAR" "Non Achievement of Stated Objective" and "Blocking of

Funds of Coconut Development Board"; and

tobe seek took

०)
22... 86 first two Draft reports mentioned at (a) and (0) above, were adopted by the
Committee without any modifications. Minor changes were suggested in the last line of

Para 30 in the third report mentioned at (c).

23. tee sek soe

24. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid reports
on the basis of factual verification, suggestions of the Members and present the same to

the Hon'ble Speaker/ Parliament.

25. The Committee also proposed that three Sub-Committees viz. Sub-Committee 1
to 3 (2020-2021) may be re-constituted after the Reports on the subjects -allocated to

them were finalized.


-\)-

26. The Chairperson thanked the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Committee in

their deliberations.

The Committee, then, adjourned. adjourned.

4|