114

NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 66" Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2344

ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION
TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER MINISTRIES)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 66" Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on: sesecessecsesensers

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government...
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government...................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.......
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no
18|0185..................... ७.० ७०० eee aee eee eeeteeeeeeae eee eeseee

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Public
Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 05-02-2024.
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal

6 Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

11. Shri Brijendra Singh

12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K Laxman
18. Shri Derek O’Brien
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director

3. Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-23) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Fourteenth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Sixty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) "Non-compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in Timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected
Audit Paragraphs (Civil and Other Ministries)" relating to various
Ministries/Departments.

2. The Sixty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 17" March 2017. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Committee considered and adopted the One hundred and fourteenth Report at their
Sitting held on 5" February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are given
at Appendix-

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__February, 2024 Chairperson,

Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - 1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the ActionTaken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Sixty Sixth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on “Non-compliance by the
Ministries/ Departments in Timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-
selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and Other Ministries".

2. The Sixty Sixth Report (16 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 17" March 2017, contained 9 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministries/Departments concerned
and are broadly categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2,3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8 and 9

Total: 9
Chapter - Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. NIL
Total: 0
Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. NIL
Total: 0
Chapter - IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para No. NIL

Total: 0
Chapter - ४


3. During the detailed examination of the subject "Non-Compliance by
Ministries/Departments in Timely Submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-
selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)," it was identified that various
Ministries/Departments experienced significant delays in submitting Action Taken
Notes (ATNs) in a.timely manner. Non-compliance in the prompt submission of ATNs
on Non-selected Audit Paragraphs was observed within the Ministry of Commerce,
Department of Revenue (Customs), Ministry of Defence, and Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment, spanning different periods.

4. Specifically, the Ministry of Commerce reported a pendency of 17 ATNs from
2013 to the year 2023. The Department of Revenue (Customs) exhibited a
concerning backlog with 59 pending ATNs from the year 2014 to 2023. Likewise, the
Ministry of Defence demonstrated a significant pendency, with 53 pending ATNs
dating back to the year 2009 upto 2023. The Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment, too, showcased a prolonged pendency, with unresolved ATNs from
the year 2007 to 2023.

5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-
Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have
dealt with the Action Taken by the Government, as per Audit Para Management
System (APMS) Statement as on 11.01.2024, on some of their
Observations/Recommendations which either need further reiteration or
comments from the Ministry concerned.

Paragraph 3 of PAC Report No. 66 (16Lok Sabha)

6. The Committee take a note of the efforts of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) in persistently monitoring timely submission of
the ATNs within the Stipulated period of 4 months by the Ministries/Departments,
pursuant to the recommendation of PAC which has resulted in considerable
reduction in the pendency of ATNs from 4216 paras as on 30.06.2010 to 805 paras
as on 31.07.2016. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Monitoring
Cell, feel that there are some areas for improvement, especially with regard to the
reconciliation of pendency figures maintained separately by the C&AG, the Ministries
and the Monitoring Cell. One of the anomalies behind the mismatch in figures of
pendency maintained by the three entities relates to the earlier manual settlement
process wherein the C&AG treats a para as settled after it has given its final vetting
comments whereas for the Ministries the matter is settled on receipt of C&AG's final
vetting comments. The Monitoring Cell considers a part as settled on physical receipt
of finally vetted copies for onward transmission to the PAC. The committee in their
42" report (Rec. Para 5) clearly suggested that the entire process of ATN settlement
be completed in the APMS portal and the extant practice of manual submission of
hard copies to the PAC be done away with. The Committee reiterate that henceforth,


3

all the three entities mentioned above should treat a para as settled once the C&AG
uploads its final vetting comments on the portal. The Monitoring Cell may once again
reconcile the pendency figures on the basis of this criterion and apprise the
Committee of the reconciled figure at the early date.

7. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has made necessary updation
on the APMS Portal and once the C&AG uploads its final vetting comments on
the portal, the para is shown as settled.

2. Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) is regularly reconciling the
figures with the list of O/o C&AG and data available on APMS portal. The
discrepancies noticed during reconciliation have already been brought to the
notice of the Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) vide OM no.
2/16/2015/MC-Vol-111/69 dated 47". May, 2017 (copy enclosed). As
recommended by PAC (Sub-Committee IV) in its meeting held on 08.06.2017,
a meeting was held on 05.07.2017 with 0/0 C&AG to reconcile the pendency
figures (copy enclosed). Such reconciliation meetings are to be held
quarterly.”

8. The Committee find that as a result of their persistent oversight in
regard to the timely submission of ATNs, the position of pendency has been
liquidated to a great extent. Nevertheless, the pendency continues to remain
high and it is a matter of concern to the Committee. Though the Committee
appreciate the efforts made by some of the Ministries/Departments in taking
appropriate measures for timely submission of ATNs, pursuant to the
Committee's recommendations, substantial improvement is still imperative to
be undertaken on the part of a few Ministries/Departments viz., Department of
Revenue, Department of Expenditure, Defence and Railways. The Committee
desire that the Ministries strengthen the existing systems to have a target of
zero pendency of ATNs beyond the stipulated time frame.

Paragraph 6 of PAC Report No. 66 (16"Lok Sabha)

9. The Committee feel that the facility of APMS should also be extended to the
PAC Reports and desire that the Monitoring Cell take on the added responsibility of
monitoring the timely submission of ATNs on the reports of the PAC. Towards this,
the Committee desire that separate pages for each Ministry/Department may be
added on the portal where the Lok Sabha Secretariat can upload the Committee's
recommendations requiring ATNs from Ministries concerned, with columns showing
the dates of presentation of Reports, the dates on which ATNs are due, the


4

replies/ATNs by Ministries concerned and vetting remarks of the C&AG. Considering
the benefits of efficiency, economy of paper and time, and the potential for
replication of the practice by all other Parliamentary Committees, the Committee
desire that the Monitoring Cell in consultation with all stakeholders like the NIC,
C&AG, Ministries and the PAC Secretariat should develop this added feature on the
APMS within a period of three months from the presentation of this report to
Parliament. The Committee in their 20th Report, had also recommended that ATNs
on Audit Paras, whether they have been selected by the PAC for examination or not,
should be furnished by the Ministries/Departments within the stipulated period of 4
months. In cases where the PAC have given their report on an Audit report/para,
ATN on the report would be considered to treat the para as settled. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the C&AG may upload paras requiring ATNs onto the portal
irrespective of whether they are selected or not by the PAC for further
scrutiny/examination.

10. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has developed a module
for online submission/vetting of replies to PAC paras on existing APMS
portal in consultation with all stakeholders and after incorporating their
suggestion and this module is live/operational. Information in this regard
have been circulated to all stakeholders.”

11. The Committee had, in their Report on the subject, desired that the
facility of APMS should also be extended to the PAC Reports and accordingly
separate pages for each Ministry/Department were to be added on the portal
for the Lok Sabha Secretariat to upload the Committee's recommendations
requiring ATNs from Ministries concerned, with columns showing the dates of
presentation of Reports, the dates on which ATNs are due, the replies/ATNs by
Ministries concerned and vetting remarks of the C&AG. The Committee note
from the reply of the Ministry, furnished in 2018 that Department of
Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) had developed a module for online submission
Ivetting of replies to PAC paras on existing APMS portal in consultation with
all stakeholders and after incorporating their suggestions and this module was
made live/operational in 2017. The Committee are shocked to note that the
replies/ATNs by Ministries concerned and vetting remarks of the C&AG in
respect of the eight of the nine recommendations/ observations made by the
PAC in their aforesaid Report have not been uploaded on the Portal and desire
that the same may be uploaded at the earliest. The Committee further desire
that, for continuous monitoring, quarterly pendency statement in regard to the
PAC paras may be forwarded to the PAC Secretariat for being placed before
them

Paragraph 7 of PAC Report No. 66 (16""Lok Sabha)



5

12. The Committee note that as on 31.7.2016, the total pendency of Action taken
Notes with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was 336, out of which
ATNs on 41 paras have not been furnished even for the first time. The Department
of Revenue have however, submitted that the total paras pending with the
Department was 472 only i.e.122 in Central Excise and Service Tax, 102 in Customs
and 248 in Central Board of Direct Taxes. The Committee further observed from the
information furnished by the Audit that the number of pending ATNs as on 30.9.2016
was 263. CBEC have stated that the total pendency of paras on which ATNs are to
be submitted to PAC as on 4.10.2016 was 224 out of which ATNs on only 2 paras
pertaining to Customs have not been furnished even for the first time, revised ATNs
are to be submitted for 7 paras, ATNs on 31 paras have been approved by Audit and
the same are pending with the Ministry and the remaining ATNs on 184 paras are
pending with Audit. CBEC have further submitted that out of the total 122 paras with
Central Excise & Service Tax pending on APMS portal, on 112 paras action was to
be taken by C&AG and on 10 paras action was pending on part of the Ministry.
CBDT further stated that as on date, 140 ATNs were under consideration of the
office of the C&AG for giving vetting comments. The C&AG in 32 cases had given
additional comments out of which in 11 cases revised ATNs had been submitted for
vetting comments of the C&AG and other 21 cases were under examination of
CBDT. In 55 cases, vetting comments had been given online and the CBDT was in
the process of sending physical copies of the final ATNs and uploading of the same.
The Committee are concerned with the indifferent approach of the Ministry in regard
to the reconciliation of the pending paras with that of the Audit, despite clear cut
guidelines to furnish the ATNs within 4 months after the Audit Reports are laid in
Parliament and upload the same on the APMS portal. The Committee are
particularly dissatisfied with the delay in submission of remedial on non-selected
Audit Paras for which the pendency of the ATNs have increased over a period of
time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent requisite
measures in consultation with Audit to reconcile the status of the ATNs and adhere
to the prescribed period for bringing down the pendency status at the earliest. The
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard within two months of
the presentation of the Report.

13. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“It is reported that, as mentioned above, the pendency position of Audit
Paras as on 30.9.2017 of Central Excise & Service Tax shown in the
APMS portal was 122. Out of that, 112 were pending with Audit and
balance the 10 Paras were finally settled by Audit and were pending
with the Ministry for Hindi translation of the Action Taken Notes. It is
also reported that as on 30.9.2017, pendency position as received from
Central Excise & Service Tax were “NIL” (for further comments on the
vetting comments of audit and also for submitting 1st Action Taken


6

Note to Audit). Pendency position received from Office of the C&AG,
as on 30.9.2016 is enclosed as Annexure-1.

2. Pendency position shown in APMS portal as on 11.4.2017 is
enclosed as Annexure-2. In this pendency position, APMS is showing 5
Audit Paras where audit has furnished vetting comments to the Ministry
very recently i.e. in March/April, 2017, and Ministry’s further comments
on the vetting comments of audit are being prepared and will be
submitted to audit shortly. Other 26 Audit Para shown pending with the
Ministry have been finally settled by the audit. After doing Hindi
version of the Action Taken Notes, these will also be uploaded in
APMS portal on top priority.”

14. Audit in their Vetting comments have stated as under:-

“Audit has reiterated the comments furnished by the Ministry, as stated
above. As mentioned in Annexure -1, the audit has reiterated that 71
ATNs are pending with Audit as on 30.9.2016. The ATN on Para
No.6.4.1 (DAP 1C/2014-15) of Audit Report No.2 of 2016 pertains to
Ministry of Commerce. Copy of vetting comments furnished to Ministry
vide C&AG letter dt.27.9.2017 is enclosed as Annexure-A.

In respect of pending ATNs, Audit has not furnished any comments,
since reconciliation of pendency is being done regularly between
Ministry and C&AG.”

15. The Department of Revenue had submitted that the total paras pending
with the Department was 472 i.e. 122 in Central Excise and Service Tax, 102 in
Customs and 248 in Central Board of Direct Taxes. The Committee while
expressing dissatisfaction at the delay in submission of remedial Action Taken
Notes on non-selected Audit Paras for which the pendency of the ATNs had
increased over a period of time recommended that the Ministry take urgent
requisite measures to adhere to the prescribed period for bringing down the
pendency status at the earliest. The Committee are, however, shocked to note
that the total pendency with the Department of Revenue has actually increased
to 824 as on 11.1.2024 i.e. 17 in Central Excise, 64 in Customs and 738 in
Central Board of Direct Taxes and 5 in the Department of Revenue. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry
should take urgent requisite measures to adhere to the prescribed period of 4
months for bringing down the pendency and submit quarterly action taken
reports to the Committee for their consideration. Further, the Committee
desire that action may be taken against the officers responsible for delay in
uploading of ATNs on the portal and the Committee be apprised thereof.

Paragraph 9 of PAC Report No. 66 (167 Lok Sabha)


7

16. The Committee note that the total outstanding paras of the Ministry of
Railways were 100, out of which ATNs on 5 paras have not been received from the
Ministry even for the first time, revised ATNs on 53 paras were awaited and ATNs on
6 vetted paras were pending with the Ministry. Though the Ministry have reportedly
made efforts in finalizing the ATNs by issuing instructions to the field officers to take
necessary action on the Reports for expediting the submission of ATNs without
waiting directions from the Zonal Officers and also constituting and holding meetings
of Standing Audit Committees, the Committee are, however, perturbed to note the
increase in the pendency of ATNs by 33.33 percent as on 30.09.2016. It is,
therefore, imperative that the monitoring mechanism be strengthened by the Ministry
to ensure that various measure initiated towards timely submission of ATNs actually
fructify.

17. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“The increase in pendency from 31.07.2016 to 30.09.2016 is due to
tabling of two new Reports of C&AG (13th and 14th Reports of 2016)
containing 41 paras. Various efforts have since been made to clear the
pendency. Since August 2016, 10 SAC meetings have been held in
which the necessity to clear the paras within the stipulated period is
impressed upon the officers concerned. Two ATN Workshops have
also been held with Audit for audit paras where there is a persistent
difference of opinion between Audit and Ministry, for their early
finalisation. Reminders are also issued to officers concerned for
expeditious disposal of audit paras. As a result, the pendency of audit
paras upto the Report year 2016 now stands at 95. Three more paras
have been finalised and will be submitted to Ministry of Finance/PAC
after Hindi translation bringing the pendency to 92.”

18. The Committee while noting that the total outstanding paras of the
Ministry of Railways were 100, had therefore, recommended that the
monitoring mechanism be strengthened by the Ministry to ensure that various
measures initiated towards timely submission of ATNs actually fructify. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that pendency of audit paras up-
to the Report year 2016 stood at 95 and that SAC meetings were held in which
the necessity to clear the paras within the stipulated period was impressed
upon the officers concerned and reminders were also issued to officers
concerned for expeditious disposal of audit paras. The Committee are,
however, disappointed to note that pendency of audit paras was at 63 as on
11.1.2024. The Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry has
failed in realizing the importance of timely clearance of pending ATNs and
reducing the pendency from 95 to 63 is in no way an achievement to reckon
with. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Railways further
improve the process of clearing pending ATNs and inform the Committee of
the action taken in this regard.


coer


9
CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observations Recommendations

Under Article 151 of the Constitution of India, the Reports of C&AG of India
relating to the audit of Union accounts must be submitted to the President of India
who directs them to be laid on the table of the Houses. Thereafter, the Reports of the
C&AG (Civil) stand entrusted to the Public Accounts Committee for comprehensive
examination. However, due to dearth of time the Committee find it difficult to
examine each and every Report and so they have adopted a judicious and selective
approach by examining and reporting on the more important Reports/Paras. The
Audit Reports which are not selected for in-depth examination by the Committee are
being dealt with by a well devised and accepted mechanism. The Committee, in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha, 1995-96), had recommended that the Action Taken
Notes on all the paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG of India should be furnished
to the Committee through the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) within a period of 4 months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports
on the table of the House w.e.f. 31st March, 1996. From the year 2009-10 onwards,
the Public Accounts Committee have been vigorously examining the subject 'Non-
compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraph’ reports on which are also presented to the
Parliament.

[Para | (page 14) of the 66th
Report of the Public Accounts Committee]
(16th Lok Sabha)
Action taken

Introductory. No Comments.

The ATR has been vetted by 0/0 C&AG (PAC) Section vide email dated 14/09/
2017.

Vetting Comments of Audit:

No Further Comments

Counter comments of Ministry:


10

No Comments

Observations / Recommendations

As a result of the Committee's persistent oversight of the timely submission of
ATNs, the position of pendency has been liquidated to a great extent. The pendency
however, still remains high and it is a matter of concern to the Committee. The
Committee (2008-09), (2010-11), (2013-14), (2014-15) and (2015-16) reviewed the
position with respect to timely submission of ATNs on the non-selected Audit
paragraphs by the Ministries/Departments and gave some considered
opinion/suggestions to improve the situation. Though the Committee appreciate the
efforts made by the Ministries/Departments in taking appropriate measures for timely
submission of ATNs, pursuant to the Committee's recommendations, a lot of
improvement is still imperative on the part of some Ministries/Departments viz.,
Finance, Defence and Railways as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

[Para 2 (page 14) of the 66th
Report of the Public Accounts Committee]
(16th Lok Sabha)
Action taken

Introductory. No Comments.

The ATR has been vetted by O/o C&AG (PAC) Section vide email dated 14/
09/2017.

Vetting Comments of Audit:

No Further Comments

Counter comments of Ministry:

No Comments


11

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee take a note of the efforts of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) in persistently monitoring timely submission of
the ATNs within the Stipulated period of 4 months by the Ministries/Departments,
pursuant to the recommendation of PAC which has resulted in considerable
reduction in the pendency of ATNs from 4216 paras as on 30.06.2010 to 805 paras
as on 31.07.2016. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Monitoring
Cell, feel that there are some areas for improvement, especially with regard to the
reconciliation of pendency figures maintained separately by the C&AG, the Ministries
and the Monitoring Cell. One of the anomalies behind the mismatch in figures of
pendency maintained by the three entities relates to the earlier manual settlement
process wherein the C&AG treats a para as settled after it has given its final vetting
comments whereas for the Ministries the matter is settled on receipt of C&AG's final
vetting comments. The Monitoring Cell considers a part as settled on physical receipt
of finally vetted copies for onward transmission to the PAC. The committee in their
42" report (Rec. Para 5) clearly suggested that the entire process of ATN settlement
be completed in the APMS portal and the extant practice of manual submission of
hard copies to the PAC be done away with. The Committee reiterate that henceforth,
all the three entities mentioned above should treat a para as settled once the C&AG
uploads its final vetting comments on the portal. The Monitoring Cell may once again
reconcile the pendency figures on the basis of this criterion and apprise the
Committee of the reconciled figure at the early date.

(Para 3 of the 667" Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(167 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has made necessary updation on
the APMS Portal and once the C&AG uploads its final vetting comments on the
portal, the para is shown as settled.

3. | Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) is regularly reconciling the figures

with the list of 0/o C&AG and data available on APMS portal. The discrepancies
noticed during reconciliation have already been brought to the notice of the Lok
Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) vide OM no. 2/16/2015/MC-Vol-111/69 dated 47
May, 2017 (copy enclosed). As recommended by PAC (Sub-Committee IV) in its
meeting held on 08.06.2017, a meeting was held on 05.07.2017 with 0/o C&AG to
reconcile the pendency figures (copy enclosed). Such reconciliation meetings are to
be held quarteriy.

4. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No.
89/RC/PAC/93/2017-18 dated 22.09.2017.


12

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, F.no. 12(6)/E.Coord/2017 dated 09
October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Another area where figures differ between the data furnished by the C&AG
and the Monitoring Cell is the lack of clarity regarding the audit paras on which
remedial ATNs are to be furnished by various Ministries/Departments. The
committee would like to make it clear once and for all that remedial ATNs were
earlier required to be submitted to them on those Audit Paras/Chapters/Reports
which are not selected by PAC for detailed examination and report because once
PAC presents a Report to the House on the selected para/subject the
Ministries/Departments concerned are bound to furnish Action Taken Notes within
six months of the presentation of the Report whereas on non-selected paras,
remedial ATNs are required to be furnished within four months of the laying of the
Audit Reports. However. the Committee in their 20" Report (16" LS) had clearly
made a recommendation that ATNs on all Audit paras, whether selected or not by
PAC, have to be furnished for further scrutiny. The Committee, thus, believe that
there should absolutely be no confusion in the submission of ATNs. Of course,
there is a need to prioritize the non-selected Audit Paras upon which remedials are
to be furnished within the stipulated time frame. The Committee would therefore
like the C&AG to decide, identify and prioritize the paras of its Reports which
require remedial action by the Ministries and upload them on the portal immediately
after its Reports are laid in the parliament. Further, each para should be uploaded
with the date of the Report being laid, the date on which ATNs are due etc.
Thereafter, the Monitoring Cell should maintain separate data for paras which are
pending beyond the stipulated 4 months, and those which have not crossed the 4
months period.

(Para 4 of the 66" Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(167 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has conveyed the
Observation/Recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) contained
in para 4 of 66" Report (16 Lok Sabha) to 0/o C&AG vide 0.0. No. 1/66/2017-
MC/61 dated 13.04.2017 and D.O. No. 1/66/2017/MC/108 dated 29.06.2017 (copy
enclosed) and requested them to upload (on the APMS portal) the Audit paras for
which remedial ATNs are required to be furnished by the respective
Ministry/Department, immediately after the corresponding Report is laid in the
Parliament. The provisions for uploading Audit paras on the APMS portal have
been made available on the system. The provisions have also been made available


13

on the existing portal for reflection of paras which are pending beyond the
stipulated 4 months and those which are within the 4 months period.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No.
89/RC/PAC/93/2017-18 dated 22.09.2017.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, F.no. 12(6)/E.Coord/2017 dated 09
October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

The treatment of the so-called backlog paras, i.e. paras which have been
manually settled by the Ministries with the C&AG but yet to be uploaded on the
portal is another cause for the mismatch in the pendency data. The Committee,
therefore, desire that since no further manual settlement was to be entertained by
the C&AG pursuant to the Committee's recommendations in their 4277 Report (167
LS), the Monitoring Cell may create a separate link for such backlog paras until
such paras are settled. Thus, only such paras which are being processed for
settlement on the ARMS in tallying the pendency figures on the main page of the
portal be taken into account. The Committees will henceforth refer to only this
APMS figure for assessment of non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of ATNs. The Ministries with backlog paras may accordingly be given a
time-frame of three months to upload all the manually settled paras alongwith
C&AG's final vetting Comments on the APMS portal.

(Para 5 of the 66" Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(167 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has conveyed the
Observation/Recommendation of the Public Accounts committee (PAC) contained
in para 5 of 66" Report (16 Lok Sabha) to the Secretaries of concerned
Ministries/Departments vide D.O. No. 1/66/2017-MC/62 dated 13.04.2017 (copy
enclosed) advising them to upload all the manually settled paras alongwith C&AG's
final vetting comments on the APMS portal. At present the number of such backlog
paras is six, the details thereof are enclosed.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No.
89/RC/PAC/93/2017-18 dated 22.09.2017.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, F.no. 12(6)/E.Coord/2017 dated 09
October, 2017


14

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee feel that the facility of APMS should also be extended to the
PAC Reports and desire that the Monitoring Cell take on the added responsibility
of monitoring the timely submission of ATNs on the reports of the PAC. Towards
this, the Committee desire that separate pages for each Ministry/Department may
be added on the portal where the Lok Sabha Secretariat can upload the
Committee's recommendations requiring ATNs from Ministries concerned, with
columns showing the dates of presentation of Reports, the dates on which ATNs
are due, the replies/ATNs by Ministries concerned and vetting remarks of the
C8&AG. Considering the benefits of efficiency, economy of paper and time, and the
potential for replication of the practice by all other Parliamentary Committees, the
Committee desire that the Monitoring Cell in consultation with all stakeholders like
the NIC, C&AG, Ministries and the PAC Secretariat should develop this added
feature on the APMS within a period of three months from the presentation of this
report to Parliament. The Committee in their 207 Report, had also recommended
that ATNs on Audit Paras, whether they have been selected by the PAC for
examination or not, should be furnished by the Ministries/Departments within the
stipulated period of 4 months. In cases where the PAC have given their report on
an Audit report/para, ATN on the report would be considered to treat the para as
settled. The Committee, therefore, desire that the C&AG may upload paras
requiring ATNs onto the portal irrespective of whether they are selected or not by
the PAC for further scrutiny/examination.

(Para 6 of the 66" Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(16" Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has developed a module for
online submission/vetting of replies to PAC paras on existing APMS portal in
consultation with all stakeholders and after incorporating their suggestion and this
module is live/operational. Information in this regard have been circulated to all
stakeholders vide letter no. 8/3/2017/e-MC/129 dated 24.11.2017 with schedule of
training of PAC module.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No.
RC/PAC/93/17-18/Vol.1/87 dated 06.06.2018.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, F.No. 12(6)/E.Coord/2017 dated
22"? June, 2018


15
Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that as on 31.7.2016, the total pendency of Action taken
Notes with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was 336, out of which
ATNs on 41 paras have not been furnished even for the first time. The Department
of Revenue have however, submitted that the total paras pending with the
Department was 472 only ie. 122 in Central Excise and Service Tax, 102 in
Customs and 248 in Central Board of Direct Taxes. The Committee further observed
from the information furnished by the Audit that the number of pending ATNs as on
30.9.2016 was 263. CBEC have stated that the total pendency of paras on which
ATNs are to be submitted to PAC as on 4.10.2016 was 224 out of which ATNs on
only 2 paras pertaining to Customs have not been furnished even for the first time,
revised ATNs are to be submitted for 7 paras, ATNs on 31 paras have been
approved by Audit and the same are pending with the Ministry and the remaining
ATNs on 184 paras are pending with Audit. 5856 have further submitted that out
of the total 122 paras with Central Excise & Service Tax pending on APMS portal, on
112 paras action was to be taken by C&AG and on 10 paras action was pending on
part of the Ministry. CBDT further stated that as on date, 140 ATNs were under
consideration of the office of the C&AG for giving vetting comments. The C&AG in
32cases had given additional comments out of which in 11 cases revised ATNs had
been submitted for vetting comments of the C&AG and other 21 cases were under
examination of CBDT. In 55 cases, vetting comments had been given online and the
CBDT was in the process of sending physical copies of the final ATNs and uploading
of the same. The Committee are concerned with the indifferent approach of the
Ministry in reconciliating the pending paras with that of the Audit, despite clear cut
guidelines to furnish the ATNs within 4 months after the Audit Reports are laid in
Parliament and upload the same on the APMS portal. The Committee are
particularly dissatisfied with the delay in submission of remedial on non-selected
Audit Paras for which the pendency of the ATNs have increased over a period of
time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent requisite
measures in consultation with Audit to reconcile the status of the ATNs and adhere
to the prescribed period for bringing down the pendency status at the earliest. The
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard within two months of
the presentation of the Report.

Para 7 of 66" Report of the Public Accounts Committee (16 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

It is reported that, as mentioned above, the pendency position of Audit Paras
as on 30.9.2017 of Central Excise & Service Tax shown in the APMS portal was 122.
Out of that, 112 were pending with Audit and balance the 10 Paras were finally
settled by Audit and were pending with the Ministry for Hindi translation of the Action
Taken Notes. It is also reported that as on 30.9.2017, pendency position with of
Central Excise & Service Tax were “NIL” (for further comments on the vetting


16

comments of audit and also for submitting 11 Action Taken Note to Audit).
Pendency position received from Office of the C&AG, as on 30.9.2016 is enclosed
as Annexure-1.

2. Pendency position shown in APMS portal as on 11.4.2017 is enclosed as
Annexure-2. In this pendency position, APMS is showing 5 Audit Paras where audit
has furnished vetting comments to the Ministry very recently i.e. in March/April,
2017, and Ministry's further comments on the vetting comments of audit are being
prepared and will be submitted to audit shortly. Other 26 Audit Para shown pending
with the Ministry have been finally settled by the audit. After doing Hindi version of
the Action Taken Notes, these will also be uploaded in APMS portal on top priority.

Vetting comments of audit and Ministry’s further comments

Audit has reiterated the comments furnished by the Ministry, as stated above.
As mentioned in Annexure -1, the audit has reiterated that 71 ATNs are pending with
Audit as on 30.9.2016. The ATN on Para No.6.4.1 (DAP 1C/2014-15) of Audit Report
No.2 of 2016 pertains to Ministry of Commerce. Copy of vetting comments furnished
to Ministry vide C&AG letter dt.27.9.2017 is enclosed as Annexure-A.

In respect of pending ATNs, Audit has not furnished any comments, since
reconciliation of pendency is being done regularly between Ministry and C&AG.

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are equally concerned over the pendency of ATNs on the part
of the Ministry of Defence, though the figure has dropped marginally from 163 in
July, 2016 to 157 as on 30.09.2016 out of which ATNs on 38 paras have not been
received from the Ministry even for the first time, 84 paras on which revised ATNs
are still awaited, 30 paras on which ATNs are pending with Ministry and 5 paras are
pending with Audi. The Defence Secretary during evidence had stated that the total
outstanding paras were 164 out of which ATNs for 34 paras have not been sent to
Audit even for once. The Committee do not approve of the discrepancies in the
number of pending paras furnished by Audit vis-a-vis the Ministry and the delay on
the part of the Ministry in submission and uploading the ATNs on the APMS Portal.
The Committee urge the Ministry to take stock of the pendency of ATNs in
consultation with Audit and work out an effective mechanism so that the anomalies
are removed and ATNs are timely submitted and uploaded on the portal.

(SI.No. 1, Para 8 of the Sixty-Six Report of Public Accounts Committee,
16th Lok Sabha)

ACTION TAKEN


17

Current position of pending Audit Paras as on date is as under:

Total No. of Paras | Draft ATNs | Revised ATNs| Revised ATNs
Pendin not sent to . हि .
g Paras submitted to | awaited from | sent to Audit
Audit even हि कल
once Audit Ministry
407(157) 268) 24(30) 50(84) 21(5)

*Figures in bracket are as on 30.09.2016

As may be seen good progress has been made by the Ministry in reducing
the number of paras pending at various stages as a result of a number of corrective
measures been taken by the Ministry of Defence after the aforesaid Public Accounts
Committee meeting. To overcome delay in submission of ATNs, decision was taken
in the Ministry to link pendency position of Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Defence
with APMS portal. This has resulted in complete elimination of discrepancy aspect,
between Ministry of Defence and Audit. Further, continuous efforts on the part of
Defence Secretary, Financial Adviser (Defence Services), Additional Secretary and
Divisional Heads has resulted in reduction of a number of ATNs which is reflected on
APMS portal.

2. It is assured to the Public Accounts Committee that all out efforts are being
made at every level in the Ministry of Defence to eliminate the pending position.

QObservations/Recommendations

Ministry of Railways

The committee note that the total outstanding paras of the Ministry of Railways
were 100, out of which ATNs on 5 paras have not been received from the Ministy even
for the first time, revised ATNs on 53 paras were awaited and ATNs on 6 vetted paras
were pending with the Ministry. Though the Ministry have reportedly making efforts in
finalizing the ATNs by issuing instructions to the field officers to take necessary action
on the Reports for expediting the submission of ATNs without waiting directions from
the Zonal officers and also constituting and holding meetings of Standing Audit
Committees, the committee are, however, perturbed to note the increase in the
pendency of ATNs by 33.33 percent as on 30.09.2016. It is, therefore, imperative that
the monitoring mechanism be strengthened by the Ministry to ensure that various
measure initated towards timely submission of ATNs actually fructify.

(SI. No.; Part Il: Para No. 9 of 66"
Report of Public Accounts Committee)
(16" Lok Sabha)


18

Action taken

The increase in pendency from 31.07.2016 to 30.09.2016 is due to tabling of
two new Reports of C&AG (13 and 147 Reports of 2016) containing 41 paras.
Various efforts have since been made to clear the pendency. Since August 2016, 10
SAC meetings have been held in which the necessity to clear the paras within the
stipulated period is impressed upon the officers concerned. Two ATN Workshops
have also been held with Audit for audit paras where there is a persistent difference
of opinion between Audit and Ministry, for their early finalisation. Reminders are
also issued to officers concerned for expeditious disposal of audit paras. As a result,
the pendency of audit paras upto the Report year 2016 now stands at 95. Three
more paras have been finalised and will be submitted to Ministry of Finance/PAC
after Hindi translation bringing the pendency to 92.


19

CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT

NIL


20
CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

NIL


21

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES

NIL
NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 February, 2024 Chairperson,

18 Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


22

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH
LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8and 9

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
reply of the Government:

Para No. — NIL

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. —-NIL

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies:

Para No. — NIL

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Total:9
Percentage: 100

Total: 0
Percentage: 0

Total:0
Percentage: 0

Total:0
Percentage: 0