101

Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust
for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their 44thReport (17thLok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
---NEW. DELHI goatee


PAC NO. 2331

HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund
Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises

MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their 44thReport (17thLok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07-02-20024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07-02-20024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Pausha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (v)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
PART- 1
REPORT
PART - II

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on



PN AW AWN

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

2.
3.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

Chairperson


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this 101% Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government. on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained
in their 44" Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Functioning of Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)’ relating to
Ministry of MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES.

2. The Fourty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 16" March, 2022. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their
Sitting held on 5" February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of
the Report.

4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourty-fourth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHUR
February, 2024 Chairperson,

Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committe:


CHAPTER-!
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by

the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Forty-fourth Report (17 Lok Sabha) on "Functioning of Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)".

2.

The Forty-fourth was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on

16.03.2022. It contained thirty Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) are categorized as under:

()

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1,5,6,7,8,9, 10, 11,12, 13,14, 16, 17,18, 19,20,21,23,24,28

Total:20
Chapter - II

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL

Chapter - lil

Observations/Recommendations. in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No.
Total: NIL

Chapter - IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para No.2, 3,4,15,22,25,26,27,29,30

Total: 10
Chapter - V

=


3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry ofMicro, Small & Medium
Enterprises (MSME) on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Forty-fourth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of
this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on
some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit

comments.

4. | The Committee have found that a sizeable number of replies are interim in nature
and to be precise there are ten recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have been categorized as interim. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that complete and comprehensive replies may be furnished to them in respect of the ten
observations/recommendations as brought out in para No. 2 (iv) above at the earliest
and definitely at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.

Recommendation (Para 5)

5. The Committee's examination of the subject reveals that theTrust, for most of
the lacunae that came to light in the system, hold the MLIs to be responsible. While the
MLIs work under the regulation of RBI and have, their own Boards and other
monitoring units within their system, the Guarantee Scheme by itself had ample
provisions for monitoring, regulating through verification of documents and questioning
the officersconcerned with a view to preventing fraud and implementing the scheme
effectively. The Trust seem to have failed in discharging this oversight function by way
of ensuring that the rules that are within its mandate are followed. The Committee
therefore, urged the Ministry to consider revampingthe CGTMSE, ensure that the rules
are followed, and in cases of default on the part of MLIs or the officials of the Trust,
suitable remedial action is taken. Details of action taken in this regard may be intimated

to the Committee.

6. Ministry Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their reply has

stated as under:



“The Trust has introduced its maiden Inspection Policy in response to the
suggestions made by the committee. As per the Inspection Policy the scope of
inspection has been broadened to take care of due diligence by MLIs on sample
basis. The Trust has also implemented validations in the system to ensure
correctness of data submitted by MLIs. CGTMSE is also implementing new
Guarantee Management System. The system has been designed to obtain data
/ information based on API integration with MLIs and without human
intervention. This would ensure authenticity and consistency of data.”

7. In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit has in their vetting comment has

stated as under:
“Inspection is still an ex post facto exercise as only case on which claims have
been paid are covered Moral hazard would arise from MLIs becoming lax on
controls over loans which are guaranteed. CGTMSE depends on diligence by
MLIs till a claim arises. Preventive sample, checks of guarantees on which claims
are yet to be made to ensure proper compliance are yet to be initiated.
Preventive checks should avoid rejections or disputes at a later stage and
alsoimprove overall supervision of loans and advances when they are still
standard assets. Hence, the para may be kept open, pending for compliance.”

8. Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their final action taken
reply stated as under:

“CGTMSE has initiated inspection of live cases also i.e. cases where claim has
not been lodged, to ensure correctness of the due diligence of the MLIs.”

9. The Committee's examination of the subject had revealed that the Trust, for
most of the lacunae that came to light in the system, held the MLIs to be
responsible and that the Trust failed in discharging the oversight function by way
of ensuring that the rules that are within its mandate are followed. The Committee
had therefore, urged the Ministry to consider revamping the CGTMSE, ensure that
the rules were followed, and in cases of default on the part of MLIs or the officials
of the Trust, suitable remedial action was taken. The Committee note from the
reply of the Ministry that the Trust has introduced its maiden Inspection Policy in
response to the suggestions made by the Committee whereby the scope of
inspection has been broadened to take care of due diligence by MLIs on sample
basis; implementing validations in the system to ensure correctness of data

submitted by MLIs and-a’ new Guarantee Management System. The Committee


while observing that the CGTMSE has also initiated inspection of live cases, and
hence in this context, desire that CGTMSE should further develop a critera/
system, based on analysis of live and other cases, for collation of preventive
samples for checking guarantees on which claims are yet to be made, to ensure
proper compliance to improve overall supervision of loans and advances when

they are still standard assets.

Recommendation (Para 8)

10. The Committee appreciated the initiatives taken for promoting MSME sector
under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan and recommended that the impact of all the
guarantees extended through these new initiatives might be analyzed regularly so that
loopholes can be identified and removed promptly. The Committee found that the Trust
has engaged a professional agency to assess the impact of the scheme on the
economy. While interacting with the beneficiaries of the credit Scheme, the Agency
would cover aspects relating to impact of demonetization and the Pandemic as well.
The Committee desired that the Agency completed the project at the earliest and the
result thereof conveyed. The Committee also desired that the Ministry may give suitable
publicity to "Udyam Registration” and "Champions Portal" so to attract more units from
the MSME sector. The Committee had also stressed the importance of MLIs at ground
level to whom the applicants could have easier access. The number of MLIs which are
present stands at 145 is very small given the size of the country. The Committee,
accordingly, recommended that more MLIs may be enrolled under the credit guarantee

scheme so as to widen the reach for entrepreneurs.

11. MinistryMicro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)in their reply has stated
as under:

“Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Micro & Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) has been
on-boarding different categories of MLIs’ to disseminate the benefits of the
guarantee scheme pan India. The number of MLIs which presently stands at 146
who in turn have network of Regional / Zonal and Branch offices located in the
nook and corner of the country. Further, CGTMSE has always been bringing new
categories of MLIs under the Scheme viz. Small Finance Banks, Cooperative
Banks, NBFCs and MFis, etc. Till 2013, the coverage of Credit Guarantee

_ scheme for Micro & Small Enterprises was-in-370 districts. -However, in 2021,-it---—~

+



has reached 714 districts.” The ministry is giving utmost importance towards
popularizing Udyam Registration and Champions portal.”

12. In response to the Ministry's reply, the Audit has in their vetting comment has

stated as under:
“The Agency's report does not spell out the impact of demonetization as
expected.
As regards COVID, the report indicates that CGTMSE backed units were able to
handle the adverse impact on sales and employment better than those not
backed by CGTMSE.
As seen from para-No. 14, the coverage under scheduled Urban co-operative
bank is proportionately low at 13 against a total in India. State and District co-
operative which are in direct contact with businesses in rural, remote and local
have not been covered. While coverage is expanded through the network of MLIs
already onboarded, the number of MLIs themselves onboarded has not seen
numeric qualitative growth.
Other matters relate to promotion of scheme at Ministry level..”

13. Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their final action taken
reply stated as under:

“There are total 37 State and District co-operative Banks registered under
CGTMSE.

With a view to enlarge the group of MLIs through which the guarantee scheme is
operated, it has been the endeavour of the Trust to increase the number of MLIs.
Towards this, it has gradually been increasing new categories of lenders, the
latest being the Micro Finance Institutions which have been made eligible recently
for coverage under CGTMSE Scheme. Recently, 72" Board Meeting of Trustees
has approved the inclusion of National Cooperative Development Cooperation

(NCDC) as MLI under the scheme.

It may, however, be mentioned that considering the financial health of such
institutions, the Board and settlors have stipulated some minimum eligibility

criteria for making these institutions eligible.
॥ may also be mentioned that, CGTMSE conducts workshops / seminars for the

field staff of the MLIs to educate them about the guidelines and processes
pertaining to the Scheme. CGTMSE has conducted training programmes for the
field staff of MLIs with a view to disseminate the information about the
scheme. Such 66 training programmes were conducted by CGTMSE during
previous FY 2022 and 57 during current FY 2023.”

14. The Committee, in their report on the subject, had recommended that

“impact of all the guarantees extended through the new initiatives be analyzed


regularly so that loopholes could be identified and removed promptly. The
Committee had also noted that the Trust had engaged a professional agency to
assess the impact of the scheme on the economy. The Committee had also
desired that the Ministry may give suitable publicity to "Udyam Registration” and
“Champions Portal" so as to attract more units from the MSME sector and had
recommended that more MLIs be enrolled under the credit guarantee scheme
with a view to widen the reach for entrepreneurs. The Committee note from the —
reply of the Ministry that the Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Micro & Small
Enterprises (CGTMSE) has been on-boarding different categories of MLIs to
disseminate the benefits of the guarantee scheme pan India and that the
coverage of credit Guarantee scheme for Micro & Small enterprises districts, in
2021, had reached 714 districts. Further, it has gradually been increasing new
categories of lenders, the latest being the Micro Finance Institutions and National
Cooperative Development Cooperation (NCDC). The Committee while noting from
Audit that the report of the agency engaged to assess the impact of the scheme
on the economy did not spell out the impact of demonetization, and therefore,
desire that the CGTMSE make an analysis of its impact and submit a report to the
Committee. Further, the Committee desire to be apprised of the efforts made by
the CGTMSE to increase coverage of scheduled Urban co-operative banks and
the impact of inclusion of National Cooperative Development Cooperation on the

coverage of the entrepreneurs in rural and remote areas.

Recommendation (Para 14)

15. The Committee had noted from the background note furnished by the Ministry
that presently there are 145 registered MLIs of CGTMSE availing the benefits of CGS
which include, 22 private sector banks, 28 Non Banking Financial Companies, 51
Regional Rural banks, 6 Small Finance Banks, 6 Foreign Banks, 11 Scheduled Urban
Cooperative Bunks, 9 Financial Institutions, and 12 Public Sector Banks. The
Committee found that one of the major factors’ limiting the reach of the CGTMSE
scheme to the potential beneficiaries is the absence of MLIs near the place of work. In
view of this, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry pursue the matter with
_., the Ministry of Finance (Department of Fi ial Services), so as to expand the list_of.
“Member Lending Institution (MLIs), The Committee had also recommended that

6


CGTMSE and the Ministry, on their own, need to have a clear assessment of potential
beneficiaries of an area and MLIs implementing CGS and ensure that the information on
the MLIs and the guarantee scheme are, easily made available to the public at large.

16. Ministry Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their reply has stated as

under:

“Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Micro & Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) has been
on-boarding different categories of MLIs to disseminate the benefits of the
guarantee scheme pan India. The number of MLIs which presently stands at 146
who in turn have network of Regional / Zonal and Branch offices located in the
nook and corner of the country. Till 2013, the coverage of Credit Guarantee
scheme for Micro & Small Enterprises was in 370 districts. However, in 2021, it
has reached 714 districts.”

17. In response to the Ministry's reply, the Audit has in their vetting comment has

stated as under :

“As stated on Para No. 8, the coverage of the co-operative banks is
proportionately lower (increased from 11 earlier) against a total in India. State
and District co-operative which are in direct contact with businesses in rural,
remote and local areas have not been covered. While coverage is being
expanded through the network of MLIs already onboarded, the numbers of MLIs
themselves onboarded has not seen numerical or qualitative growth.

18. Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their final action taken
reply stated as under:

“CGTMSE has always been bringing new categories of MLIs under the Scheme
viz. Small Finance Banks, Cooperative Banks, NBFCs and MFIs, etc.

There are total number of 37 State and District co-operative Banks registered
under CGTMSE. Recently, 7201 Board Meeting of Trustees has approved the
inclusion ‘of National Cooperative Development Cooperation (NCDC) as MLI
under the scheme.

The registration criteria for these MLIs have been kept considering the risk
assessment which has been approved by the CGTMSE Board. Accordingly, State

and District cooperative Banks meeting the criteria are being registered as MLIs of
CGTMSE.” ;

19. The Committee had found that one of the major factors’ limiting the reach
___.of the CGTMSE scheme to the potential beneficiaries is the absence of MLIs near_

the place of work. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry

+


=== ander

pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services),
so as to expand the list of Member Lending Institution (MLIs) and that the
Ministry, on their own, need to have a clear assessment of potential beneficiaries
of an area and MLIs implementing CGS and ensure that the information on the
MLIs and the guarantee scheme are, easily made available to the public at large.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that C6TMSE has always been
bringing new categories of MLIs under the Scheme and that the coverage of
Credit Guarantee scheme for Micro & Small Enterprises has increased from 370
districts in 2013 to 714 in 2021. The Committee are of the considered opinion that
the coverage of the co-operative banks is proportionately lower than other banks
and while coverage is being expanded through the network of MLIs already
onboarded, the numbers of MLIs themselves onboarded has not seen sizeable
growth, either numerically or qualitatively. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that pro-active efforts may be made by the Ministry to increase the coverage by
on-boarding institutions that meet the criteria approved by the Board since all

districts in the country have still not been covered.

Recommendation (Para 18)

20. The Committee had also noted that the reluctance of banks to offer loans without
collaterals is a major reason for shortfall of funds with SMEs. The Committee endorsed
the view of the Audit that instead of rejecting applications, vigorous Information
Education Campaign need to be initiated so as to ensure that applications are submitted
in the correct format. The Committee were of the view that such a measure could help
in generating more confidence in MLIs on the efficacy of the guarantee instrument,
provide assurance and thereby give impetus for providing larger front-end support to
MSME Sector. The Committee had also recommended that as platform for providing
credit guarantee, the CGTMSE, in co-ordination with Department of Financial Services,
Ministry of Finance institute a mechanism whereby such applications in respect of which
MLIs are reluctant to offer loans to SMEs for want of collaterals or otherwise, be
reviewed with a view to ensuring that no borrower suffers for want of security. This
would, in the long term, make the MLIs/ bank comfortably forthcoming in extending the
credit and thereby increase the coverage under CGTMSE.

21... Ministry Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their reply has stated as



“CGTMSE conducts workshops / seminars for the field staff of the Member
Lending Institutions to educate them about the guidelines and processes
pertaining to the Scheme. CGTMSE has conducted training programmes for the
field staff of MLIs with a view to disseminate the information about the
scheme. 66 such training programmes were conducted by CGTMSE during

previous FY 2022.”
22. In response to the Ministry's reply, the Audit has in their vetting comment has
stated as under:

“In view of efforts made regarding Information Education Campaign the portion
relating to this can be treated as complied with

The recommendation regarding developing a mechanism for reviewing
applications where MLIs are reluctant to offer loans may be kept open, as no
action has been indicated thereon.”

23. Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) in their final action taken
reply stated as under:

“CGTMSE provides guarantee in respect of all the credit facilities extended by
the MLIs to the MSEs, meeting the eligibility criteria under the Scheme. The
applications for guarantee are lodged by the MLIs after sanction / disbursement
of loan. The MLIs do not report the loan applications rejected by them to
CGTMSE.”

24. The Committee while noting that the reluctance of banks to offer loans
without collaterals was a major reason for shortfall of funds with SMEs had
recommended that instead of rejecting applications, vigorous Information
Education Campaign need to be initiated so as to ensure that applications are
submitted in the correct format. The Committee had also recommended that as
platform for providing credit guarantee, the CGTMSE, in co-ordination with
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance institute a mechanism
whereby such applications in respect of which MLIs are reluctant to offer loans to
SMEs for want of collaterals or otherwise, be reviewed to ensure that no borrower
suffers for want of security. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry
that CGTMSE conducts workshops / seminars for the field staff of the Member
_Lending Institutions to educate them about the guidelines and processes


pertaining to the Scheme. The Committee also note from the submission of the
Ministry that the MLIs do not report the loan applications rejected by them to
CGTMSE. The Committee, while observing that the primary objective of the
Scheme is to provide guarantee against loans without collateral or third party
credit guarantee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the CGTMSE develop
a mechanism of reporting and reviewing the applications made under the scheme
in respect of which the MLIs are reluctant to offer loans without collaterals so as

to ensure that the primary objective of the Scheme is achieved.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
February, 2024 Chairperson,
Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

core mer ere es se. ae

to