HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

SECOND REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

sae
सत्यमेव

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2182

SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 612+ 2o0lF
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ........ ६.२५:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2019/ Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS . है|

COMITTEE (2019-20)
Wi

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I Introductory 1८ Is

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been _
accepted by the Government

CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government

CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 19-24
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES

॥| Minutes of the seventh sitting of Public Accounts Committee 25
(2019-20) held on 19.11.2019

il Minutes of the ninth sitting of Public Accounts Committee 27
(2019-20) held on 3.12.2019

itl Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 24
Committee contained in their Ninty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha)

* Not included to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2 Shri T. R. Baalu
3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4 Shri Sudheer Gupta
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
6 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7 Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
8 Shri Jagdambika Pal

9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Vacant

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt. M.L.K. Raja - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja_ - Additional Director

* Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his resignation from Rajya
Sabha on 05 August, 2019

vw)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Second (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Ninty-fifth Report(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Health and
Family Welfare’ relating to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

2. The Ninty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the table of Rajya
Sabha on 28 March, 2018. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 28 January, 2019. The
Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and thereafter adopted the
Report at their sitting held on 3 December, 2019. Minutes of the sittings form
appendices to the Report.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by ‘the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-lll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3 December, 2019 Chairperson
12 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(iii


CHAPTER -।

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Ninety-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Health and Family Welfare” based
on the C&AG Report Nos. of 11 of 2016 (Para Nos. 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5) and 12 of
2017 (Para No. 11.3) respectively relating to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.

2. The Ninety-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
on the table of Rajya Sabha on 28" March, 2018. It contained 18
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Health &

Family Welfare and categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11,12, 13, 14,15 and 16

Total: 10
Chapter- Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter- Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
requires reiteration:

Para Nos. 3, 4, 7, 9 and 10

Total:5
Chapter- IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph Nos. 8, 17 and 18

Total: 03
Chapter- V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
lapses/discrepancies on the part of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
financial accounting of the autonomous bodies under its control such as blocking
of funds and non-utilisation of equipment in the emergency care centre of Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital (New Delhi), excess payment of service charges and
stipends, overpayment of Transport Allowance and violation of rules while
providing rent free accommodation to a commercial undertaking. The Committee
while dealing with the issues pointed out by the Audit recommended for
strengthening internal audit mechanism and developing proper guidelines for
execution of Memorandum of Agreement and to impart training to the officers
tesponsible to make them conversant with rules and regulations to avoid similar

instances in future.

4. The final Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The
Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on their

Observations/Recommendations, which either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to furnish
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter 1! and final Action Taken Replies in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim
reply had been given by the Government within six months of the

presentation of the Report to the House.


Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) - Leasing of premises to a
commercial undertaking in violation of rules

(Recommendation Para No. 3 & 4)

6. Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) executed (December 2007) a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Hindustan Latex Limited (HLL) to set
up a modern diagnostic centre at CGHS Building (owned) Dispensary, RK Puram,
New Delhi. In terms of the MoU, HLL provided diagnostic services to CGHS
beneficiaries at CGHS rates and was at liberty to serve private Patients (non-
CGHS beneficiaries) at charges fixed by HLL. As per Audit, by giving HLL rent-free
accommodation in a prime location, CGHS incurred a loss of Rs. 1.72 crore in
license fees from 2008-09 till December 2016. However, as per Ministry, from April
2012, HLL provided 10 % discount on CGHS rates to CGHS beneficiaries serving
as well as pensioner beneficiaries and the same was formally included in new
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) signed between CGHS and HLL in January
2017.

The Committee noted that the Diagnostic Services at CGHS building (own) at RK
Puram have been started w.e.f. 9.2.2008 as a Public Public Partnership project
between HLL and CGHS for undertaking Preventive Health Check-up of CGHS
beneficiaries. CGHS provided space for operating the diagnostic laboratories
mainly for the CGHS beneficiaries, and HLL installed necessary equipment and
manpower for this purpose. HLL was allowed to charge at CGHS rates for
sustaining the project for CGHS beneficiaries. HLL was also permitted to provide
diagnostic facilities to nearby general public to sustain the facilities. As per Audit,
CGHS neither followed the procedure enunciated by the CPWD, Director of
Estates nor assessed the fair rent for the premises (in terms of orders of 13 June
1985 and 16 March 1999). Further, as per Ministry, the Memorandum of
Understanding(MoU) signed with HLL in December, 2007 did not have provision
for rent. The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the said premises
is not a General Pool Office Accommodation of Directorate of Estates and MoUD
has not issued any orders regarding rent to be charged in respect of owned
buildings. The Committee were of the view that CGHS cannot justify its stand on
the pretext of absence of specific guidelines in a specific case and since the
building was the property of Government, non- levy of rent should have been done
in consultation with the Department of Estates which was responsible for the
administration and management of Estates (Residential/Office Accommodation) of
Government of India in the metropolitan cities. Further, the Committee felt that
since CGHS was functioning for providing medical care to its beneficiaries, income
from rent would supplement the funds available for providing services. Moreover,
providing an assured clientele and allowing services to non-CGHS customers
more than ensures sustainability of the Hind Lab Project. The Committee was of
the opinion that since the Memorandum of Agreement(MoA) has now been
amended and 10% discount on CGHS rates to be given by the HLL in lieu of the
rent liability has been provided for, the amount due for period from February, 2008
to December 2016 should also be recovered.

The Committee further desired that the matter be taken up with the Directorate of
Estates to ascertain the fair/ market rent to be charged for the said property since
February 2008 and the Committee be appraised of the same.


Further, the Committee noted that the HLL, a Public Undertaking under the
Ministry, is giving 10% discount in lieu of the rent liability. The Committee
observed from the reply of the Ministry that the 10% discount agreed to by HLL Is
more than the purported loss pointed out by the Audit. The Committee was
amazed to note that HLL agreed to pay (i) more than what is actually due and (ii)
in variable terms when it is well known that rent is a fixed cost and contributes to
the economies of scale. Interestingly, the 10% discount appears to be more in the
nature of commission than rent. The Committee while opining that operational
efficiency of any project cannot be determined when arbitrary relaxations are given
desire that Public Public Partnerships should also be based on sound financial /
accounting premises.

7. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have stated
as under:-

“a) "Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has taken up the matter with Ministry of
Housing & Urban Affairs.

The Deputy Director of Estates (policy), Min of Housing & Urban Affairs vide
communication No 22011/2/2017-Pol.lII(Pt.) dated 09.04.2018 (Annexure-l)
enclosed the comments received from Executive Engineer (Lic. Fee), CPWD for
further necessary action regarding rent liability of Hindustan Latex Ltd., (HLL) for
running a diagnostic laboratory in Public mode with CGHS at CGHS building at
Sector-12, RK Puram New Delhi.

The salient comments conveyed with the approval of DG,CPWD are

“When compared with the policies of Directorate of Estate regarding allotment of
spaces to Mother Dairy & Banks, this office considers the services of Diagnostic &
lab tests is more appropriate to be placed in the category of Rs.1/- per sq. per
month. It is pointed out that as per agreement condition No 8 of MOA HLL is also
offering emergency services and is a Government Enterprise.

As services of HLL are restricted to Diagnostic & lab tests only at CGHS fixed
rates with 10% discount as per MOA executed in Public Public Partnership, so
market rent rate or charging any license fee for allotment of space is unwarranted
in this case.

However, case matter suggests a token license fee @Rs1/- per sq. per month for
space allotted to HLL. AS this project is already running under MOA, additional
liability is unforeseen in this case.”

Accordingly, Orders have been issued to the Addl. Director, CGHS(HQ) (Copy of
the OM dated 21.06.2018 is placed at Annexure-IA) for recovery of rental liability
of HLL for running the Diagnostic lab services at CGHS building at Sector 12, RK
Puram measuring about 280.81 Sq. Mts. Area @ Rs 1 per Sq. Mt for one month
as calculated by DG.CPWD i.e.., Rs.280.81 per month i.e., Rs. 3370/- per year [Rs
3369.72 (280.81x1 x 12) w.e.f February 2008 till date and ensure that M/s HLL
shall pay rent of Rs. 3370/- per year thereafter.

(b) "Orders have also been issued to Addl. Director, CGHS(HQ) (Copy of OM


5

dated 21.06.2018 is placed at Annexure-ll) to take necessary steps for
modification of MoU signed with M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd., by an addendum as per
the draft given below:

Clause ‘3’ of the MoU is modified by mutual agreement in supersession of the
clause ‘3’ in MoU signed between CGHS and M/s HLL Life Care Ltd., on 10th
January 2017 and shall read as -

3. SERVICE CHARGES

The diagnostic Centre shall charge from the CGHS beneficiary as per the rates for
a particular procedure/package deal as prescribed by the CGHS and attached as
Annexure D (rate list), which shall be an integral part of this agreement. M/s HLL
Lifecare Limited (Hindlabs, RK Puram) will charge NABL/Non NABL rates as per
the status of the lab. Hindlabs are giving a discount of 10% on CGHS rates.”

Other terms and conditions in the MoU shall remain unchanged.”

8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"67५४0 has recommended levy of concessional rate of rent @ Rs.1/- per sq.
meter on the ground that M/s HLL is offering emergent services; it is a
Government Enterprise and offering services at CGHS rate with 10% discount.
This has been accepted by the Ministry/CGHS. However, justification for charging
nominal rent when M/s HLL is getting enough clientele, services are also given to
non-CGHS customers and even other empanelled private hospitals are allowing
10% discount, is not strong."

9. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry
stated as under:-

“For rent fixation /liability CGHS follows the recommendations of CPWD. CGHS
has taken over the Postal dispensaries in 2013 at a nominal rent of Rs.1/ per year
to be paid to Department of Posts. Therefore, it is submitted that the concessional
rent recommended by CPWD may kindly be seen in sync with the usual practices
and may kindly not be seen in isolation."

10. The Committee observed that Central Government Health Scheme
(CGHS) incurred a loss of %1.72 crore in license fees from 2008-09 to
December 2016, on account of giving Hindustan Latex Limited (HLL) rent-
free accommodation in a prime location. While noting that the HLL, a Public
Undertaking under the Ministry, was giving a 10% discount in lieu of the rent
liability, the Committee had opined that operational efficiency of any project
cannot be determined when arbitrary relaxations are given and had,


6

therefore, desired that Public Public Partnerships should also be based on
sound financial / accounting premises. The Committee find that Ministry has
not responded to their specific observation regarding HLL paying more than
what is actually due and, that too, in variable terms when it is well known
that rent is a fixed cost and contributes to the economies of scale. Further,
the Ministry has also not submitted any reply about the steps taken to
improve the financial/ accounting principles underlying the Public Public
Partnership. The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that DG,
CPWD has now suggested that a token license fee of हैं 1/- per sqm per
month for space allotted to HLL may be charged as services of HLL are
restricted to diagnostic & lab tests only at CGHS fixed rates with 10%
discount as per Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) executed in Public Public
Partnership, and therefore market rent rate or charging any license fee for
allotment of space is unwarranted in this case. The Committee concur with
the observation of the Audit that justification for charging nominal rent when
M/s HLL is getting enough clientele, services are also given to non-CGHS
customers and even other empanelled private hospitals are allowing 10%
discount, is not convincing enough. The Committee while noting that both
CGHS and HLL have functioned without paying any heed to sound/rational
financial principles and the Ministry has also miserably failed to take
cognizance of the lapses made by the organizations functioning under its
aegis, recommend that henceforth a robust mechanism be put in place for
monitoring the implementation of such projects and ensuring that all
transactions are held at arms length. Further, the Committee desire that
appropriate action may be taken against the officials of CGHS and HLL for
disregarding well-settled financial principles and the officials of Ministry for

lack of monitoring.

Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) - Outsourcing of Dental services

(Recommendation Para No. 7)

11. The Committee further noted that CGHS had entered into an MoU with M/s
*Forsan Axios Technologies Ltd, in 2010 for outsourcing of Dental services for a
period of five years at units located in 13 CGHS Wellness Centres in Central
Zone and South Zone of CGHS, Delhi on an upfront payment of हैं 1.25 crore and


7

an annual authorization fee of * 5 lakhs (per year). The Committee observed that
the agency was permitted to treat private patients between 01:30 PM to 07:30
PM. The Committee were shocked to note that prime locations in Delhi were
given out at anominal rate of less than € 20,000 p.m. and the agency was
allowed to treat private patients 6 hours in a day. The Committee was
disappointed to note that the CGHS has entered into contracts in gross violation
of the established procedures of the Government of India. The Committee was
also dismayed to note the absence of monitoring by the Ministry and therefore
exhorted the Ministry to fix the responsibility on the officers involved in finalizing
such contracts and take punitive action against those found guilty. The
Committee also desired that the Ministry may issue guidelines for specifying the
procedure to be followed while entering into Public Private or Public Public
Partnerships. The Committee would also like to be apprised about whether the
properties given out to M/s.Forsan Axios Technologies Private Ltd have been
vacated by the agency after the expiration of the MoU.

12. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under:-

"The project was conceived with a view to provide dental facilities (for 22
identified Dental Procedures) for CGHS beneficiaries at dispensary level itself
under PPP Mode. For this purpose, the City was divided into two Divisions A&B-
One comprising South & Central Zone for Dental facilities in 13 dispensaries and
another zone comprising East Zone and North Zone for 15 CGHS dispensaries.
Bids were floated for two Divisions, but contract awarded was limited to only one
Division ‘A’ comprising 13 dispensaries in South & Central Zone. The bidders had
paid upfront fee of ¥ 1.25 crores against minimum prescribed bid amount of % 10
lakhs in Division ‘A’. In Division ‘B’ bidders offered low rates, only nominally
above the minimum prescribed amount, and in view of the wide variation in the
bids quoted by the two bidders, no contract was issued to any bidder in Division
‘B’. In addition, they were to pay हैं 5 Lakhs per year with 5% upward revision
annually. The project has been approved by competent authority. The project
was conceived with good intention to provide Dental care facilities nearer to the
residential areas of CGHS beneficiaries. The facility to provide Dental care nearer
to the CGHS beneficiaries is an additional facility and convenience, which cannot
be measured purely in monetary terms. Since, there was no malafide intention in
extending facilities to CGHS beneficiaries, the question of fixation of responsibility
does not arise.

The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has refused to extend the contract, which
expired on 29" February 2016. Prior to that the employees of M/s Forsan
approached District Court against vacation and stay was granted. M/s Forsan has
approached Delhi High Court for directions to CGHS not to take coercive action
against them for vacation. Subsequently, M/s Forsan has withdrawn the case in
High Court of Delhi and vacated the CGHS premises by 8" May 2018."

13. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-
“ Ministry has not responded to the following recommendation of the Hon'ble

PAC:
“Ministry may issue guidelines for specifying the procedure to be followed while


8

entering into Public Private or Public Partnerships’.

14. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry
stated as under:-

"No new Public-Private or Public-Public partnerships projects are contemplated
under CGHS. If any new Project is proposed, suitable guidelines shall be
formulated and preferably tender process shallbe initiated taking into
consideration the past experiences and the observations of Hon'ble Committee."

15. The Committee observed that Central Government Health Scheme
(CGHS) had entered into an Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with M/s
Forsan Axios Technologies Ltd, in 2010 for outsourcing of Dental services
for a period of five years at units located in 13 CGHS Wellness Centres in
Central Zone and South Zone, Delhi on an upfront payment of & 1.25 crore
and an annual authorization fee of = 5 lakhs. The Committee were surprised
to note that CGHS had allowed the agency to treat private patients 6 hours in
a day while charging a nominal rent of less than & 20,000 p.m. The
Committee were dismayed to note the absence of monitoring by the Ministry
and recommended the Ministry to fix the responsibility on the officers
involved in finalizing such contracts and to take punitive action against
those found guilty. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has stated that
the facility to provide Dental Care nearer to the CGHS beneficiaries is an
additional facility and convenience, which cannot be measured purely in
monetary terms. Further, the Ministry has stated that since there was no
malafide intention in extending facilities to CGHS beneficiaries, the question
of fixation of responsibility does not arise. In the absence of any specific
guidelines and procedures laid down for entering into Public Private or
Public Public Partnerships by the Ministries, the Committee are
apprehensive of of malafide intention. The Committee opine that a contract
on relaxed terms with a private entity which is working for maximizing its
profits has actually resulted in financial loss to the CGHS. The Committee
further observe that M/s Forsan approached District Court against vacation
and stay was. granted. The Committee are concerned to observe that due to
faulty and weak provisions of the MoU, despite refusal by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare to extend the contract that had expired on
29.2.2016, they could not get M/s Forsan Axios Technologies Ltd evicted


9

from CGHS premises till 8 May, 2018. The Committee are further unhappy to
note that the Ministry failed miserably to get the court stay vacated for more
than 2 years inspite of meeting additional expenses on account of the court
case. The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation further
desire that the Ministry may issue Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to
be followed invariably while entering any contract be it public-public/private
to obviate any such instances in future. The Committee also desire that
wherever any organization deviates from the SOPs, it must explain the
reasons for taking up that particular project and the financial justification
thereof. The Committee would also like to be apprised of rent and the annual
authorization fee paid by M/s Forsan from the date of expiration of the
contract till the firm vacated from the CGHS premises on 8 May, 2018.

Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia (RML) Hospital - Procurement of equipment without
ensuring readiness of infrastructure

(Recommendation Para No. 9 )

16. The Committee observed that the Ministry finalized the contracts for procurement
and issued Notification of Award (NoA) in December 2011 to 24 firms for supply of
various medical equipment for NECC at the Hospital without giving any heed to the
Project Management Consultant's advice (August 2011) about the slow progress of
work. The equipment valued 15.93 crore were received during 2012-2013. The
Committee were of the view that since the Ministry was aware that out of 11 milestones
only 5 milestones were completed till December, 2011 the Ministry could have delayed
either the finalization of contracts or the Notification of Awards. The Committee opined
that entering into procurement contracts despite the advice of the consultants about the
slow progress of work points to the lack of coordinated action within the Ministry. The
Committee desired that disciplinary action against the officials responsible for
overlooking the advice of the Project Management Consultant and the Committee be
apprised thereof.

17. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:-

"Ministry of Health & Family Welfare conceived the plan and approved the
construction of New Emergency Care Centre in Dr. RML Hospital in the year 2010 with
a vision to provide better medical facilities to the growing needs of patients. Since the
hospital has Trauma Care Centre for providing medical services to trauma patients, the
New Emergency Care Centre project was envisaged to provide medical facilities to the
patients reported in Emergency.


10

The contract related to construction of New Emergency Care Centre was
awarded by Ministry of Health & F.W. on 7" May, 2010 and was scheduled to be
completed and made operational by 107 October, 2010 well before starting of Common
Wealth Games, 2010. Simultaneously, the Directorate General of Health Services
invited tenders in June 2010 for procurement of various equipment required to
operationalise the Centre.

In view of delay in construction of the Centre, the contracts (Notification of
Awards) for procurement of these equipment were signed by the Procurement Cell in
Dte. GHS in November 2011 and the same were forwarded to Dr. RML Hospital for post
contract implementation in December 2011. Despite receiving contracts in December
2011, the hospital issued purchase orders (clearance) to the suppliers in February,
2012 with a view to get the equipment well in time before commissioning of the building.
This was done with the proposition to have the equipment available in the hospital when
the Centre would be ready and also to implement post contract action. Any contract
cannot be kept in abeyance for longer period.

After implementing various contracts, it was emerged that due to delay in
construction and repeated extension of deadline for completion of the building, the
Hospital decided that the equipment procured for this Centre to be distributed to various
Departments of the Hospital to utilize them in patient care services. The decision for
distribution of equipment was temporary and the equipment to be re-installed in New
Emergency Care Centre as and when the Centre would become fully functional. The
decision of distribution of these equipment to other departments of the Hospital was
particularly due to delay in construction of building which was beyond the control of Dr.
RML Hospital."

18. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“(j) Status of the equipment purchased and diverted to other departments may be
furnished to PAC.

(ii) Further, the Committee may be apprised of the action taken by Ministry against
the officials responsible for overlooking the advice of the project management
consultant.”

19. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

"As a matter of fact, in order to ensure timely commissioning of the project,
simultaneous action is taken for construction, selection of equipment and creation of
posts, so that the infrastructure so created does not remain unutilized and the facility
becomes available to the public in time. The proposal for NECC Building was
conceived and approved in 2010 and DGHS (attached office of the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare) invited the tender and finalized the contract for 24 equipment. The
contract for equipment was signed in November 2011 and was forwarded to Dr. RMLH
in December 2011. As the hospital needed to have equipment before the
commissioning of the building, the hospital issued the Supply Order to get these
equipment. Since there was delay in the construction of building, the hospital decided to
utilize the equipment by temporary transfer of these equipment to other departments


11

where these were needed. The NECC building was commissioned on 3” August, 2015
and after commissioning of building, all the equipment which were temporarily
transferred to other departments were transferred to NECC Building. As such, it may be
appreciated that temporary transfer of the equipment was in the larger interest of patient
care as these equipment did not remain unutilized. The list of equipment is annexed."
20. While observing that the Ministry finalized the contracts for procurement of
various medical equipment for New Emergency Care Centre (NECC) without
giving any heed to the Project Management consultant’s advice regarding the
slow progress of work and acquired equipment worth हैं 15.93 crore during 2012-
13, the Committee had opined that such procurement pointed to the lack of
coordinated action within the Ministry. The Committee had, therefore, desired that
disciplinary action be taken against the officials responsible for overlooking the
advice of the project management consultant.The Committee also desire to be
apprised of the reasons recorded for setting aside the advice of the consultant.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that as the hospital needed to
have equipment before the commissioning of the building, the hospital issued the
Supply Order to procure these equipment and due to delay in the construction of
building, the hospital decided to utilize the equipment by temporary transfers of
these equipment to other departments where the same were needed. As per the
list of equipment furnished by the Ministry, it is apparent that equipment were
lying idle for one to two years in many cases and further, the date of reversion of
the equipment to NECC has not been specified. Clearly, the equipment was first
acquired and then transferred without undertaking any scientific assessment of
the requirements of respective departments, replacement of the temporarily
installed equipment and life of the equipment. The Committee while opining that
failure to ensure the readiness of the infrastructure to install the equipment had
led to inefficient utilization of the same. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire that disciplinary action against the officials be
taken and they may be apprised of such action taken within three months of
presentation of this Report.


12

Dr. Ram Manohar Lohai (RML) Hospital - Non-utilisation of equipment for the
intended objective

(Recommendations Para No. 10)

21. The Committee further note that two of the equipment, valuing = 2.40 crore could
not be put to use for a period of more than 36 months, were diverted and not utilised for
the intended objective of NECC. Audit also observed that warranty period of seven
types of equipment issued to other departments/wings on temporary basis had already
expired without being used in NECC. The Ministry submitted that the decision to
distribute equipment to other departments was taken due to delay in construction of
building which was beyond the control of Dr. RML Hospital and after the building started
functioning in August, 2015, all the equipment were installed by November, 2015 and
put to the intended use. Further the validity of warranty period was two years from the
date of final acceptance i.e., date of installation of equipment. The Committee opine that
an equipment which is in regular use for two to three years in a department cannot be
taken somewhere else without providing a replacement unless it is lying idle in the
Department where it was installed for the time being . The Committee desire that the
actual utilization statement of the equipment be called for by the Ministry along with the
actual dates covered by the warranty certificates and the wear and tear be assessed to
determine whether the equipment was put to patient care. The Committee also desire
that responsibility in terms of General Financial Rules (GFR Rules 137 and 160) be
fixed against the officers responsible for irregularities in procurement of equipment.

22. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:-

"There is load of more than 30 lakh outdoor patients and more than 1.5 lakh
indoor patients in Dr. Ram Manohar Lohiya Hospital. The equipment purchased for ECS
building was put on use for the welfare of these patients. In order to assess the actual
utilization status of each equipment photo copy of log books maintained in respective
Departments where these equipment were installed is enclosed for record. GFR Rules
137(fundamental principles of public buying) and GFR 160 (transparency, competition,
fairness and elimination of arbitrariness in the procurement process) were applied in the
true letter and spirit while procurement of equipment was done, hence no violation."

23. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Ministry may furnish reply to PAC on the following recommendations:
(i) Assessment of wear and tear to determine whether the equipment was put to
patient care by obtaining actual utilization statement of the equipment along with the

actual dated covered by the warranty certificates and;

(ii) Fixation of responsibility in terms of General Financial Rules (GFR Rules 137
and 160) against the officers responsible for irregularities in procurement of equipment.”


13

24. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

“All the equipment procured for the NECC Building were put for use during their
warranty period, whether installed in other department or in NECC. It is further
submitted that the warranty period of an equipment starts from the day of the
commissioning of the equipment. As the equipment have been utilized properly in the
interest of patient care, it may be treated that there is no violation of GFR 137 and 160.
As reported by Dr. RML Hospital, all the equipment procured for ECS Building are in
use and functioning satisfactorily."

25. The Committee noted that two of the equipment, valuing हें 2.40 crore could
not be put to use for a period of more than 36 months, were diverted and not
utilised for the intended objective of NECC. Further, warranty period of seven
types of equipment issued to other departments/wings on temporary basis had
already expired without being used in NECC. The Committee while opining that
an equipment which is in regular use for two to three years in a department
cannot be taken somewhere else without providing a replacement unless it is
lying idle in the Department where it was installed for the time being and desired
that the actual utilization statement of the equipment be called for by the Ministry
along with the actual dates covered by the warranty certificates and the wear and
tear be assessed to determine whether the equipment was put to use for patient
care. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that equipment
purchased for Emergency Care Building was put to use for the welfare of the
patients and that photo copy of log books maintained in respective Departments
where these equipment were installed has been enclosed. The Committee are
surprised to find that no such copies of logbooks containing information as to
the actual utilization status of each equipment have been furnished. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry
may analyse the logbooks to assess whether the equipment was actually put to
use for patient care within their respective warranty periods. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the alternate arrangements made for the patient care
wherever these equipment were installed before directing it to the new facility i.e.
NECC. The Committee further desire that responsibility in terms of General
Financial Rules (GFR Rules 137 and 160) be fixed against the officers
responsible, for procurement of equipment which were lying unutilized and

warranties expired.


14

Safdarjung Hospital - Excess payment of service charges

(Recommendation Para No 11)

26. The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) in December 2009 directed that the
Union of India & its Departments to pay service charges for the services provided by
Municipal Corporations. Audit test check of records of the Safdarjung Hospital revealed
that the Hospital made incorrect determination of ‘use factor’ for calculation of service
charges on property tax thereby resulting in excess payment of Rs. 4.60 crore to New
Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC).

The Committee noted that as per Bye-law 3 of the NDMC Annual Rent Bye-
Laws, 2009, the ‘use factor’ for the land is to be taken into account for the purpose of
calculation of Property Tax. In the context of Safdarjung Hospital, payment of service
charges in respect of left and right Wings of OPD-III, on the basis of self-assessment
during the period 2009-10 to 2012-13 was calculated by adopting the ‘use factor’ for the
hospital land as ‘2’ instead of applicable factor ‘1’ Thus, incorrect adoption of ‘use factor’
resulted in excess payment of = 4.60 crore to NDMC during the period. The Ministry in
their evidence submitted that since the bills were raised by NDMC, Safdarjung Hospital
continued to pay those bills with no back end calculation done on part of the Hospital.
However, on being pointed out the matter was raised with NDMC and they agreed to
that the bills with respect to the left and right wing of the OPD were wrongly given to the
Hospital and in 2015-16, NDMC adjusted those amounts against the future bills and
squared up the accounts. The Committee found that responsibility to prevent any
financial impropriety lies with the Financial Advisor of the Hospital. The Committee were
of the opinion that there is need for instituting a system whereby errors of omission and
commission, especially involving interpretation of the fiscal laws and regulations made
thereunder, application thereof by the Government hospital and college, are avoided:
The Committee desired that to avoid recurrence of such instances, the Ministry may
further strengthen the Internal auditing mechanism of all the hospitals under its wings
and further ask the Financial Advisor in the Ministry to look into the cases of service tax
paid by other hospitals in pursuance to the extant rules of the Municipal Corporations.

27. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:-

"The observations of the Committee were considered and vide letter no.
G.25012/03/2016-H-I dated 07th August, 2018, necessary instructions have been
issued to Central Government Hospitals viz. Safdarjung Hospital, Lady Hardinge
Medical College & Associated Hospitals and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital for taking
necessary action and compliance as per the observation of PAC."

28. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"The Ministry has merely forwarded the observations of the PAC to the respective
hospitals vide letter dated 07.08.2018. Ministry has not included any information
regarding compliance of the PAC’s recommendations by the concerned hospitals. The
PAC may be apprised of the concrete steps taken by the Ministry to further strengthen
the internal auditing mechanism of all the hospitals under its wings.


15

Further, Ministry's reply is silent on the findings of the Financial Advisor in the cases of
service tax paid by other hospitals in pursuance to the extant rules of the Municipal
Corporations. The details of the action taken in this regard may also be apprised to the
PAC." :

29. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

"The observations of the Committee were considered and necessary instructions have
been issued to all the hospitals/institutions under the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare to take due diligence before making any payment including of self-assessment
of Property Tax of the hospital. Such payments shall be made in accordance to the
extant rules of the Municipal Corporations. Further, Financial Advisor of the Ministry has
been requested to look into the cases of service tax paid by other hospitals in
pursuance to the extant rules of the Municipal Corporations. A copy of Ministry's OM
No. G. 25012/03/2016- H-| dated 25-01-2019 in this regard is also enclosed for kind
perusal.”

30. While noting that Safdarjung Hospital made incorrect determination of ‘use
factor’ for calculation of service charges on property tax thereby resulting in
excess payment of = 4.60 crore to New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC), the
Committee had opined that there is a need for instituting a system whereby errors
of omission and commission, especially involving interpretation of the fiscal laws
and regulations made thereunder, application thereof by the Government
hospitals and colleges, are avoided. The Committee had also desired that to
avoid recurrence of such instances, the Ministry may further strengthen the
internal auditing mechanism of all the hospitals under its wings and further ask
the Financial Advisor in the Ministry to look into the cases of service tax paid by
other hospitals in pursuance to the extant rules of the Municipal Corporations.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that necessary instructions
have been issued to all the hospitals/institutions under the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare to take due diligence before making any payment including self-
assessment of Property Tax of the hospitals and Financial Advisor of the Ministry
has been requested to look into the cases of service tax paid by other hospitals in
pursuance to the extant rules of the Municipal Corporations. The Committee note
that the Ministry has not taken any steps towards improving its internal audit
system and has only issued instruction to follow the extant provisions. The
Committee are of the view that effective internal audit system of the Ministry

would go a long way in ensuring application of correct rates in payment of


16

service charge on property tax. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry may formulate and issue specific guidelines
including attachment of taxation experts for strengthening the internal audit
mechanism which would prevent such excess payments in the future and the

Committee be apprised thereof.

All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur - Irregular payment of service tax

(Recommendation Para No 15)

३1... Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) exempted certain services provided
to an educational institution by way of Auxiliary Educational Services from Service Tax
with effect from 1° July, 2012. The exempted services inter alia included any services
which educational institutions ordinarily carry out themselves but may obtain as
outsourced services from any other person. Ministry of Finance (September, 2013)
further clarified that by virtue of the entry in the negative list, it was clear that all services
relating to education are exempt from service tax.

The Committee observed that All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur
outsourced certain manpower services like security, catering, transportation, etc. and
paid service tax to the extent of Rs. 63.13 lakh in respect of these exempted categories
of services during the Financial Year 2012 — 13 and 2013 - 14. Since the Ministry found
the term “Auxiliary Services” used in the circular ambiguous, the Institute constituted
with the payment of service tax until the Finance Ministry expressly confirmed the
exemption of Education Services from Service Tax. The Committee further noted that
the Institute took-up the matter with the Service Tax Department informed that AlIMS,
Jodhpur has not deposited Service Tax to the Department, as such refund cannot be
granted to the Institute. Moreover, the Service Tax if any paid during the 2012 - 13 and
2013 - 14 also cannot be refunded as claim of refund is time barred and the refund
application are required to be filled within one year of payment of service tax. The
Committee were perturbed to note the contradictory statement of the AlIIMS, Jodhpur
which has claimed to have paid the service tax amounting to Rs. 63.13 lakh for the
financial years 2012 - 13 and 2013 - 14 and validated by the Audit and on the other
hand the Service Tax Department, CBEC, Jodhpur, refusing to have received service
tax from the Institute. The Committee would liked to be apprised to the efforts made by
the Ministry to get the term “Auxiliary Services” clarified from the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee desired that the Ministry take up the matter with CBEC urgently to find
out the reasons for their denial of receipt of Service Tax from AIIMS, Jodhpur and also
the status of refund of the same and apprise the Committee thereof. The Committee
reiterated the recommendations made in earlier paragraphs that the Financial Advisor in
the Ministry to look into the cases of service tax paid by the hospitals respectively.

32. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:-

"AIMS Jodhpur had taken up the matter with the Service Tax Department i.e.
CBEC, Jodhpur for process of refund of the Service Tax. In its reply, the Service Tax


7

Department informed that since AlIIMS Jodhpur, has not deposited Service Tax to the
Department, hence such refund cannot be granted to AlIMS. Moreover, the Service Tax
if any paid by any vendors during 2012 — 13 and 2013 - 14 also cannot be refunded as
claim to refund is time barred. The reply from the Service Tax Department is available at
Annexure — I. :

This matter was also taken up by the CAG for examination after perusing through the
reply and course of action adopted by the AIIMS, Jodhpur. The CAG in its vetting
comments have accepted the reply from AIIMS, Jodhpur. The vetting comments of the
CAG is appended below :

Action taken by the Ministry is satisfactory. In future AIIMS should be cautious in paying
such taxes."

33. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"AIIMS Jodhpur paid Service Tax to service providers during 2012 — 13 and 2013
- 14, therefore, service tax department informed that AIIMS Jodhpur has not deposited
service tax to the department as such refund cannot be granted to the Institute. Ministry
may intimate as to whether the Service Providers deposited entire amount of हैं 63.13
lakh to Service Tax Department as collected from AIMS, Jodhpur during the financial
year 2012 - 13 and 2013 - 14.
Ministry may intimate the latest status of the matter taken up with the CBEC to find out

the reasons for their denial in receipt of Service Tax and also status of refund of service
tax amount of % 63.13 lakh."

34. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

"Reply was sought from AlIMS Jodhpur regarding release of Service Tax to the
vendors and receipt of deposit of Service Tax by vendors to the Service Tax
Department. In reply, AIIMS Jodhpur vide letter dated 13.6.17 has informed that they
have received challans from vendors on submission of service tax to Service Tax
Department totaling to Rs. 61,07,198/-. The total amount paid by AIIMS Jodhpur as
Service Tax during the financial year 2012 - 13 and 2013 - 14 was Rs. 63,13,074/- .
The balance amount of Rs. 2,05,876/- along with interest of Rs. 74,067/- has also been
recovered by AIIMS, Jodhpur as also informed by them.

CBEC may have denied the receipt of Service Tax as it was not submitted by the
AIIMS, Jodhpur. The vendors submitted Service Tax for the services rendered to the
AIIMS Jodhpur on receipt of payment from AIIMS Jodhpur.

The matter was not pursued further as Service Tax department in its letter 25.11.16 has
clearly stated that refund is not possible as it is time barred."


18

35. The Committee noted that All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur
outsourced certain manpower services like security, catering, transportation etc.
and paid service tax to service providers to the extent of Rs. 63.13 lakh in respect
of the exempted categories of services during the Financial Year 2012 - 13 and
2013 - 14. However, the Service Tax Department, CBEC, Jodhpur, denied to have
received service tax from the Institute. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry take up the matter with CBEC urgently to find out
the reasons for their denial of receipt of Service Tax from AIIMS, Jodhpur. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that since AIIMS Jodhpur, had not
deposited Service Tax to the Department, such refund cannot be granted to
AIIMS. Further, the Service Tax, if any, paid by any vendors during Financial
Years 2012 - 13 and 2013 - 14 also cannot be refunded as claim to refund is time
barred. The Committee while opining that AIIMS Jodhpur should have sought
timely clarification from the CBEC if the tax rules were not comprehensible,
desire that Ministry may impart regular training for interpretation of rules and
regulations to the officers responsible for such payments in order to avoid similar

situations in future.


19

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that the contract for construction of NECC was awarded by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to M/s Hosmac Projects and was scheduled to be
completed and made operational by October, 2010 well before starting of Common Wealth
Games, 2010. The project was finally completed on 3 February, 2015 with a delay of 1576
days out of which 1384 days were attributed to site constraints and the remaining 192 days
to M/s Hosmac for slow progress/wrongful delay. The work could not be completed within
the stipulated time frame due to changes in structural designs, delay in submission and
finalization of designs by the contractor etc. The ministry submitted that building was based
on iron structure which had been under taken for the first time in Central Government
Hospital necessitating consultation with professional institutions and midcourse corrections.
Thus as per provisions of Agreement, liquidated damages @10% of contract value have
been charged for delay of construction. Accordingly, a show cause notice to the contractor
for recovery of liquidated damage for delay in construction has been issued and Dr. RML
Hospital had withheld %2.59 crores of M/s Hosmac project. The committee were shocked to
find that a building which was planned for providing emergency care to Delhi commonwealth
Games sports persons held in 2010 was completed in 2015 i.e. Well after the next Games.
The Committee was even more astonished to note that a first of a kind construction project
was started as late as in April/May 2010 to be completed within six months. The committee
would like to be apprised of the efforts made by the ministry and the DTTDC, the project
Management Consultant, before and after the beginning of the project to complete it within
six months. The committee opined that the undue delay of more than 4 years is attributed to
the unscientific manner in which the Ministry took up the project without proper homework.
The committee desired that the reasons for delay of 1384 days be inquired into and
appropriate action taken against those responsible for the same and the committee be
apprised thereof.

(SI. no. 8 of 957 report of Public Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Ministry

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare conceived the plan and approved the
construction of New Emergency Care Centre in Dr. RML Hospital in the year 2010 with a
vision to provide better medical facilities to the growing needs of patients. Since the hospital
has Trauma Care Centre for providing medical services to trauma patients, the New
Emergency Care Centre project was envisaged to provide medical facilities to the patients
reported in Emergency.


20

The contract related to construction of New Emergency Care Centre was
awarded by Ministry of Health & F.W. on 7th May, 2010 and was scheduled to be completed
and made operational by 10th October, 2010 well before starting of Common Wealth
Games, 2010.

M/s Delhi Tour and Transportation Development Corporation (DTTDC), the Project
Monitoring Consultant, was monitoring the construction work of NECC. The progress of the
construction work and related issues was monitored in various review meetings taken by
senior officers in the Ministry. It is mentioned that the building was based on iron structure,
which was undertaken for the first time in Central Government Hospitals. Since Delhi falls
under high seismic zone, it was felt by the Ministry during various review meetings that
midcourse corrections such as strengthening of iron structure are required to be studied
from some professional agency like Lloyd, IIT, etc. This process with other processes took
time resulting in delay in construction of the building. However, taking consideration of the
prefabrication of the building structure and seismic zone of Delhi, patient safety got priority.
The delay in completion of construction work could be attributed to the various midcourse
corrections due to Delhi’s location in higher seismic zone, which was one of the reasons for
delay in completion of the building. Since this is first project of its kind, it appears that the
hospital authority/PMC could not foresee the hindrances in the construction work.

Whereas the fever clinic was opened in NECC in the month of February 2015. New
Emergency Care Building was opened to public w.e.f. 3rd August 2015. Thereafter the ECS
building is operational.

M/s DTTDC vide their letter dated 20.02.2016 informed Dr. RML Hospital, New Delhi
that a liquidated damage @ 10% may be charged for delay of construction as per clause
SC-8 of the Agreement. Accordingly, Dr. RML Hospital issued a show cause notice to M/s
Hosmac Project (Contractor) for recovery of Rs.2.61 crores as liquidated damage for delay
in construction. However, hospital has also withheld Rs.2.59 crores of M/s Hosmac projects

Vetting Comments of Audit

Ministry may furnish specific replied on the following recommendations to the PAC:

(i) The updated status of recovery of liquidated damages of Rs. 2.59 crore from M/s
Hosmac may be provided.

(ii) Efforts made by the ministry and the DTTDC, the Project Management Consultant,
before and after the beginning of more than 4 years is attributed to the unscientific manner
in which the Ministry took up the project without proper homework.

(iii) Enquiry into the reasons for delay of 1384 days and appropriate action taken
against those responsible for the same.

Further Reply of the Ministry
M/s DTTDC vide their letter dated 20.02.2016 informed Dr. RML Hospital, New Delhi
that a liquidated damage @ 10% may be charged for delay of construction as per clause
SC-8 of the Agreement. Accordingly, Dr. RML Hospital issued a show cause notice to M/s
Hosmac Project (Contractor) for recovery of Rs.2.61 crores as liquidated damage for delay
in construction. Hospital withheld Rs.2.59 crores of M/s Hosmac projects. The Hosmac
approached Hon’ble High Court for delay for last instalment of payment (Rs. 2.59 crore) of


21

ECS building. The Hon’ble High Court recommended the case for Arbitration. Hon'ble
Arbitrator, Mr. Justice Devender Gupta (Retd.) issued an award dated 20.11.2018 for Rs.
22,05,09,651 to be paid to the applicant within sixty days from the issue of the Award. Later
on, M/s HOSMAC represented the case before the Arbitrator saying that the total amount is
Rs. 15,11,66,498/- instead of Rs. 22,05,09,651/-. Hon’ble Arbitrator forwarded the same to
RML Hospital stating reply if any may be filed positively on or before 29.12.2018 and no
hearing was required as the application would be decided on the basis of the averment
made in the application and reply. Dr. RMLH filed reply to the Hon’ble Arbitrator vide their
letter dated 29.12.2018. The Hon'ble Arbitrator corrected the Award under application 33 of
the Arbitration and conciliation Act 1996 for correction saying that the total amount is Rs.
15,11,66,498/- instead of Rs. 22,05,09,651.

The Hospital was directed by the Ministry to prepare a detailed Counter Reply
challenging the Award. The Counter reply prepared by Dr. RML Hospital is under
examination in consultation with Ministry of Law & Justice.

Gayatri Mishra
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

O.M. No. 29/2/1/2017-18/PAC Dated: 257 January, 2019

Observation/Recommendation

Further, the Committee while noting that ICMR, made an attempt for recovery of
over-payment of TA to the scientists and recovered an amount of Rs. 5,84,468/ i.e. a
meager 10% of the total excess payments made, opined that the situation could have been
averted had the ICMR’s internal audit mechanism been robust and aware of right/correct
interpretation of rules. The Committee desired that the Ministry may expedite seeking final
opinion from the DoPT and Department of Expenditure for early redressal of the issue in
accordance with the Hon'ble Supreme Court's decision that the waiver of recovery in few
postulated situations is to be allowed with the express approval of Dept. of Expenditure and
apprise the Committee thereof.

(SI. no. 17 of 95" report of Public Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Ministry

The proposal for waiver of recovery of overpayment of Transport Allowance in
accordance with the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s decision followed by order of DoP&T vide
O.M.No.18/63/2015-Estt. (A-l) dated 2.3.2016 providing for waiver of recovery is under
process with the Dept. of Expenditure for a decision. Whatever decision is taken by the
Department of Expenditure will be implemented by the Department of Health Research and
the ICMR. Meanwhile, the Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 21/2/2016-E. ॥(8)
(Pt.) dated 5.10.2018 has granted the approval for applicability of the facility of staff or


22

transport allowance @Rs.15,750/- +D.A. thereon for commuting from residence to office and
back to the Scientists ‘G’ of ICMR who are promoted under the Flexible Complementing
Scheme (FCS).

Vetting Comments of Audit

The final decision with regard to proposal for waiver of recovery of overpayment of
Transport Allowance in accordance with the Hon'ble Supreme Court's decision is yet to be
taken. Ministry may inform to PAC about further progress.

Further Reply of the Ministry

The proposal for waiver of recovery of overpayment of Transport Allowance was
referred to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) with the approval of
Integrated Finance Division of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Department of
Expenditure had sought certain additional information, which has since been furnished to
them. Decision of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is still awaited. The
decision of Ministry of Finance would be implemented by the ICMR. However, meanwhile
the Department of Expenditure vide their OM No.21/2/2016-E. ॥(8) dated 5.10.2018 has
granted the approval for applicability of the facility of staff car or transport allowance
@Rs.15,750/- +D.A. thereon for commuting from residence to office and back to the
Scientists ‘G’ of ICMR who are promoted under the Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS).

(V.K. Gauba)
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

O.M. No. V-25011/262/2015-HR (Pt) Dated:25" January, 2019

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee opined that the Ministry should put a sound and effective monitoring
mechanism in place when change of rules takes place with respect to any
pay/emoluments/allowances from time to time. The Committee desired that the Ministry, in
addition to improvements to ensure upgradation of knowledge for proper application of rules
and regulations, put-in place adequate effective monitoring mechanism for coordination with
audit wings of the autonomous institutions. Also, the Audit Departments of the Autonomous
Institutions under the Ministry may be, at regular interval, be imparted training to make them
conversant with current rules and regulations. Further, the Ministry may also take a
proactive step towards creation of an Audit Module for the Autonomous Institutions wherein
the payments made by Institutions are visible to the Audit to monitor and timely redressal.

(SI. no. 18 of 957 report of Public Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)


23

Action Taken by the Ministry

As an Autonomous Body, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is
governed by the provisions contained in its Memorandum of Association and Bye Laws in
managing its day to day activities. Since the organization is fully funded by grant-in-aid by
the Central Government, it follows the terms & conditions of service of their employees as
applicable to similar category of employees in the Central Government. As per the Rule 24
of the Bye-Laws on Maintenance of Accounts and Payments of funds of ICMR, the function
of the Auditor of ICMR will be exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or
any person appointed by him in his behalf.

ICMR has well established Administration, Finance & Accounts Divisions and has an
independent Sr. Financial Adviser to advice the Director General, ICMR on all financial
matters. The Administration and Finance & Accounts Divisions are headed by officers of the
rank of Joint Secretary, who are appointed on deputation from the Central Government
Departments. Officers at various levels in the Administration, Finance &Accounts Divisions
are duly conversant with the rules and regulations and have experience in their respective
fields.

The steps taken by the Department of Health Research/ ICMR for bringing further
improvement to ensure upgradation of knowledge for proper application of rules and
regulations include the following: -

(i) Recruitment by Deputation/Direct recruitment has been prescribed in the
Recruitment Rules at various levels of posts in administration, finance and accounts to
induct officials possessing relevant experience and knowledge in application of rules and
regulations.

(ii) Officers are deputed on training at the Institute of Secretariat Training and
Management (ISTM) for acquiring upto date knowledge of rules and regulations.

(iii) A circular has been issued to all concerned at ICMR Hqrs and various
Institutes to ensure strict compliance with the rules, regulations and procedures in handling
financial matters (Annexure-ll).

Vetting Comments of Audit

Ministry has not responded to PAC’s recommendation regarding creation of an Audit
Module for the Autonomous Institutions. Action taken in this regard may be apprised to the
PAC.


24

Eurther Reply of the Ministry

Ministry has not responded to PAC’s recommendation regarding creation of an Audit Module
for the Autonomous Institutions. Action taken in this regard may be apprised to the PAC.

(V.K. Gauba)
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

O.M. No. V-25011/262/2015-HR (Pt) Dated: 257 January, 2019
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
4 December, 2019 Chairperson

(2. Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 19 NOVEMBER, 2019.

The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. on 19 November, 2019 in
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

RAJYA SABHA

SN Oak ORD

9. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
10. Shri 0. M. Ramesh
11... Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Smt. Anita Pattanayak - DAI (RC)

2. Smt. Meenakshi Gupta ~ DAI (CRA)

3. Smt. Sangeeta Choure - DG (Accounts)
4. — Shri Sunil Dadhe - DGA (CE)

5... Shri K. Srinivasan - DGA(RC)

6. Shri Deepak Anurag - DGA (Cord.)

— 25 -


2

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that the meeting has been convened for (i) Briefing by
Audit on the proposal of Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) seeking
approval of the Committee for "Revision of ceilings for Exception Reporting in
Appropriation Accounts” ; and (ii) Consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports
on the  subjects:- (a) Action taken by the Government on_ the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 95" Report (167
Lok Sabha) on “Health and Family Welfare”; and (0) Action taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their 1037 Report (167 Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of Entities Engaged in Health
& Allied Sector”.

3 coaed toe kkk ee,
4 creed ceed we eee
5 tee ceed cored ee
6. ceed coed te whee

7. Thereafter, the Committee took-up for consideration and adoption
aforementioned draft Reports. The draft Reports could not be adopted as the
Members sought more time to go through them. Chairperson invited written
suggestions, if any, from the Members for inclusion in draft Reports within seven days
and desired that the draft Reports may be taken up for consideration and adoption,

subsequently.

8. The Chairperson thanked the Members and the representatives of the C&AG of
India for attending the sitting.

The Committee then adjourned.

मा -


MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD 011 3 DECEMBER, 2019.

The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1605 hrs. on 3 December, 2019 in
Committee Room No. '2', Block A, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New

Delhi.

दे 9 MPNDAAARYWD

11.
12.
13.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T.R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri M.L.K. Raja
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja
Shri U.C. Bhardwaj

- Chairperson

- Director
- Additional Director
- Additional Director


2

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Smt. Anita Pattanayak - Dy. CAG (RC)

2. Shri Parag Prakash - Dy. CAG (Accounts)

3. Smt. Meenakshi Gupta - Dy. CAG (CRA)

4. Smt. Sangeeta Chaure - DG-Accounts

5. Shri 5. Dadhe - DG (DGACE)

6. Shri Sandeep Lall -  PD-PC

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Audit officials and

stated that the following three draft reports may be taken up for consideration and
adoption:-

(i) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their 95" Report (167 Lok Sabha) on “Health and Family
Welfare”;

(ii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their 1037 Report (16 Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of
Entities Engaged in Health & Allied Sector’; and

(iii) Revision of ceilings for Exception Reporting in Appropriation Accounts.

The Committee adopted the draft Reports without any modification and authorised
the Chairperson to finalise the Report in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.

3 pore eed eke soe
4 thee अआऋऋ ory woe
5 wee see ee shee
6. see wee eR see
7 seer हा] coord yee

The Committee then adjourned.

22 -


APPENDIX-III
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CONTAINED IN THEIR NINTY-FIFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 3, 4, 7, 9 and 10
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 8, 17 and 18

था AG—

18

Total : 10
Percentage: 56%

Total : 0
Percentage:0%

Total : 05
Percentage:28%

Total : 03
Percentage: 16%