64

NON-DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 450 Report (17" Lok
Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

SIXTY - FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

(1)


PAC NO. 2293

SIXTY- FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON-DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 45" Report (17 Lok
Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on: og 0Ur2e °

LaidinRajyaSabhaon: GRU

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2023 /Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)

111)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2022-23)

INTRODUCTION .................. "जज >> जज जज ० 555

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER Ii*

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..................---.--.-

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Teiteration .....................-------.- ७-5०

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEplies ............... ce 3 जन जज 55०५5 ५5५

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 17" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2022-23) held on 03 April 2023.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Forty-fifth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

4... Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9. Shri Brijendra Singh

10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

20. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy *
21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. 6. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

” Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy elected w.c.f. 13.12.2022.

tw
(४)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this 647" Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Forty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Non-
deduction of Tax at Source” relating to Ministry of Rural Development.

2. The Forty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaj/laid in Rajya Sabha on 15"
March, 2021. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 28 March 2023. Minutes of the Sitting are
given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.

4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5 An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-I!

NEW DELHI, ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
Chairperson,
\3 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(४ )


1

CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (17" Lok Sabha) on “Non-
deduction of Tax at Source".

2. The Forty-fifth Report (17" Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid
in Rajya Sabha on 15" March, 2021 contained six Observations/Recommendations.
The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)
and these are broadly categorized as follows:

i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1 to 6
Total: 6
Chapter — Il

ii, Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter — [I

iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter — IV

iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies/no replies:
NIL

Total: NIL

Chapter - V
3. In their 457 Report (17"" Lok Sabha), the Committee observed that the failure of
the Ministry of Rural Development to deduct tax at source at the rate of 10 percent for
professional and technical services rendered by a consortium of PSU resulted in non-
deduction of tax amounting to = 7.21 crore. This was a statutory non-compliance which


SL 2
made the Ministry liable for payment of interest in terms of section 201 of the Income
Tax Act. The Committee had accordingly given the Observations/Recommendations in
their 45" Report (177 Lok Sabha). Gist of important Observations/Recommendations as
contained in this Report is given as under:
a) The Committee desired that in order to avoid such lapses in future, the Ministry
of Rural Development should devise a mechanism to hold monthly review meetings to
monitor flow of expenditure in an even manner and avoid the ‘rush’ at the close of
Financial year, and thereby ensure effective fiscal discipline and better results.
b) The Committee desired that henceforth the Ministry of Rural Development should
Strengthen their planning mechanism for selecting/posting adequate staff in all the
sections, particularly the Budgetary Division to avoid such shortcomings in future.
Furthermore, it is the duty of the head of the Ministry to keep watch over the total work-
load, the actual requirement of staff as well as their deployment in every section of this
Ministry, as per requirement.
०) The Committee desired that the Ministry should initiate appropriate action against
all the officers responsible for the lapse so that the principles of accountability and
responsibility are applied in letter and spirit.
d) The Committee emphasized upon the Ministry to develop some strong
mechanism, with adequate manpower, for timely monitoring of such transactions and
prevent recurrence of such lapses in future.
e) The Committee urged on meticulously complying with the provisions of the
Section 201 of the IT Act as well as clause 11.8.1 of the agreement and take appropriate

measures in this direction so that such instances do not recur.

4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which either need
reiteration or merit comments.

I. Non-deduction of tax at source
(Recommendation Para No. 1)

5. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Rural Development entered (February,
2012) into an agreement with the Consortium of PSUs viz., M/s Bharat Electronics
Limited (BEL), M/s. Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) and M/s ITI Limited


3

(ITIL). This consortium was collectively awarded the work of collection, consolidation
and updation of data for Socio-Economic and Caste Census on specific items of
information at Tehsil level covering all States/UTs. As per clause 11.8.1 of the
agreement, all the payments made by the authorities to the consortium were subject to
tax at source @10% under the Income Tax Act. The Committee observed that the tax at
source of 27.21 crore was not deducted from the payments aggregating to 72.16 crore
made in March, 2018 to these firms. This non-compliance of statutory provision of
section 194J of the IT Act made the Ministry liable for payment of interest in terms of
Section 201 of the Income Tax Act.

6. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:

“It is accepted that Tax at Source for payments amounting to 72.16 crore in FY
2017-18 was not deducted. However, it is submitted that the consortium to which
Payments were made, involved PSUs/Government entities. These PSUs have
declared that the amount received by them in 2017-18 for their services was
offered for tax on accrual basis in FY 2015-16 itself. In light of this fact, there was
no loss to the exchequer. Hence, the issue of penal interest rate does not arise.”

7. During vetting of the aforesaid comments of the Ministry of Rural Development,
Audit observed as follows:
“This is a case of lapse of internal controls which needs to be strengthened. The

argument that PSUs have declared the amount received by them in their Tax
returns is not a valid reason to justify non-compliance to Rules and regulations.”

8. On the Audit vetting comments, the Ministry of Rural Development replied as

under:

“Ever since the matter came to light, steps have been taken to strengthen internal
controls. These steps have resulted in enhanced compliance.”

i Non-ascertaining the fact of paying tax by the PSUs fact of paying tax by the PSUs
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

9. The Committee did not find the deposition of the representatives of the Ministry
during evidence that although tax at source was not deducted, the PSUs concerned
have paid the requisite tax on the income received to be tenable. According to the
Ministry of Rural Development, the two PSUs, namely BEL and ECIL recognized the
revenue for the concerned amount in their books in 2015-16 on accrual basis and


10.

4

the same was offered as tax during Financial Year 2015-16 itself. In case of ITI Ltd,
the Ministry apprised that it was a loss-making company and the amount received on
account of services rendered had been accounted as income but there was no
liability to pay taxes as it had carried forward losses. The Committee were
astonished to note that the Ministry ascertained the fact regarding the tax deposit by
the PSUs only after the meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development on 17th September 2021, i.e., after the gap of five
years following the deposit of the tax by the PSUs. Neither the Ministry deducted the
TDS at the time of payment nor ascertained from the PSUs regarding payment of
tax, which is highly regrettable. The Ministry woke up to discuss this issue with the
PSUs only after it was pointed out by Audit. Had this not been pointed out by Audit,
the Ministry would have been ignorant of the mistake and no corrective measures
would have been taken to avoid recurrence of such mistakes in future.

In their Action Taken Note, Ministry of Rural Development have submitted as

under:

11.

12.

“While the amount received was identified as revenue by ECIL and BEL on
accrual basis and offered for tax in FY 2015-16 itself (whereas ITI was not
eligible to pay tax by virtue of being a loss-making enterprise), however it is
agreed that as per usual practice tax was not deducted at source and the issue
could have been identified timely. In this regard, the Ministry has noted the
comments of the Committee for future compliance.”

In their vetting comments to aforesaid Action Taken Note, Audit stated as under:
“Ministry has ascertained the fact regarding the deposit of tax by the PSUs only

after audit pointed out the non-deduction of tax. This is not a primary internal
control mechanism.”

In response to the aforesaid Audit Comments, Ministry of Rural Development

submitted as follows:

“The comments have been noted. Internal control mechanisms have been
strengthened ever since the matter came to light through following actions:

1. Senior Officers' Meetings (SOMs) headed by Secretary Rural Development)
are being held on a weekly basis inter-alia to monitor the flow of expenditure
regularly.

2. Adecision to create nine more DDOs was taken by the Department in 2017-18
itself after taking into account the increased workload. These DDOs have been
operationalized from 17 April, 2018.


5

3. All the DDOs vide Ministry's OM dated 11.11.2021, have been instructed to
scrutinize the sanctions and prepare the bills as per the DDOs manual and
Statutory instructions issued from time to time. Also, sanction issuing authorities
have been instructed to clearly mention statutory deductions in the sanctions.

4. Additional cadre posts have been allocated to M/o Rural Development through
regular cadre review of the Central Civil Accounts Service, as intimated by O/o
CGA vide its OM dated 12.04.2022. A part of these additional cadre posts have
been earmarked for posting in Internal Audit Wing as and when these posts are
filled/provided by O/o CGA.”

13. The Committee in their original Report observed that in terms of clause
11.8.1 of the agreement, all payments by the authorities to the Consortium of
PSUs consisting of M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL), M/s Electronics
Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL) and M/s ITI Ltd. (ITIL) were subject to deduction of
tax at source @ 10% under Income Tax Act. The Committee found that the tax at
source was not deducted from the payments aggregating to ₹ 72.16 crore made in
2018 to these firms. Thus, failure of the Ministry to ensure compliance with the
laid down provisions and the terms of agreement resulted in non-deduction of tax
amounting to % 7.21 crore. While accepting this lapse, the Ministry of Rural
Development in their Action Taken Note informed the Committee that the
Consortium to which payments were made, involved PSUs/Government entities.
These PSUs had declared that the amount received by them in 2017-18 for their
services was offered for tax on accrual basis in FY 2015-16. The Committee are
astonished to note that this fact was also apprised to them during evidence on
the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development. in their
original Report, the Committee had expressed displeasure to note that the
Ministry had ascertained the fact from PSUs after a gap of five years following the
depositing of the tax by the PSUs, ie., after being pointed out by the Audit. The
Committee therefore, regretted to note that neither the Ministry deducted the TDS
at the time of payment nor ascertained the facts from the PSUs. Now the Ministry,
in their Action Taken Notes have agreed that as per usual practice tax was not
deducted at source and accepted that the issue could have been identified timely.
In this regard, several steps are stated to have been taken by the Ministry such as
holding of Senior Officer’s Meetings (SOMs) headed by Secretary, Rural
Development on weekly basis inter-alia to monitor the flow of expenditure
regularly, issuing instructions to all the DDOs to scrutinize the sanctions and


6

prepare the bills as per the DDOs manual and statutory instructions issued from
time-to-time, allocation of additional cadre posts to Ministry of Rural Development
advising sanctioning authorities to clearly mention statutory deductions in the
sanction order and to use proper Head of Accounts for clear classification of
works/services as prescribed in Rule 8 of DFPRs, 1978. While appreciating that all
the recommendations of the Committee have been accepted by the Ministry of
Rural Development and several steps taken to avoid such lapses in future, the
Committee feel that these steps should have been taken by the Ministry much
earlier, i.e., before pointing those out by the Audit. However, while taking note of
the steps taken by the Ministry, the Committee desire that these measures should
be constantly reviewed so that the instructions issued in this regard are
scrupulously followed by concerned officials in the Ministry of Rural
Development so as to avoid such lapses in future. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the outcome of the aforesaid measures taken by the Ministry.
Ill. Sanctioning of additional manpower tor Inerme’ SS" additional manpower for Internal Audit

(Recommendation Para No. 5)

14.The Committee were perturbed to note that the Internal Audit Wing (IAW) in the
Ministry had not detected this lapse as according to the Ministry, Internal Audit of
DDOs was not conducted due to lack of regular manpower. However, an internal
audit was conducted in 2020 for Section Officer (Cash) for the period of 2017-18,
2018-19 and 2019-20. The Committee were astonished to note that this had also
been done after the matter was pointed out by Audit. The Committee felt that the
existing internal controls as well as the budgetary mechanism in the Ministry need to
be strengthened to cope up with the wide gamut of work. Further, on the issue of
lack of manpower in the Internal Audit Wing, the Committee had been informed that
as on date, IAW has engaged 17 audit consultants for conducting Internal Audit and
a proposal for creation of additional regular manpower for internal audit has been
submitted to the Ministry of Finance. What is even more worrisome for the
Committee to note is that the IAW has issued directions in this regard on 41.11.2021
to conduct the internal audit for DDOs of schemes as well. The Committee noted in
this regard that this was done only after evidence of the representatives of the

Ministry of Rural Development was taken by the Committee. Had these steps been


7

initiated earlier, the situation of non-deduction of tax of 27.21 crore could well have

been avoided. The Committee expected the Ministry to be more vigilant and prompt

in detecting and rectifying such matters which have large financial implications. The

Committee had also desired to be apprised of the status of sanctioning of additional

manpower for internal audit by the Ministry of Finance.

15. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as

under:

“The recommendations of the Committee

promptness in detectin
for necessary complian

At present, one Accounts Officer,
(MTS) out of the total stren

pertaining to better vigilance and

g matters having financial implications have been noted

, two Sr. Accountants and one Multi Task Staff
igth of accounting cadre in the Department are posted

in Internal Audit Wing (IAW). In addition, 21 Audit Consultant (out of 25 approved

Post) as on today are also pi
for creation of 76 posts for
Finance (MoF) but the sam
No. 1254234/E. Coord.1/2020 dated 08.12.2

However, the following additional cadre
regular cadre review of the Central Civil A
CGA vide its OM dated 12.04.2022:

osted in IAW, MoRD. To strengthen IA W, a proposal
Internal Audit Wing in MoRD was sent to Ministry of
@ was not acced:

led to by the MoF vide U.O Note ID

021.

posts have been allocated through
ccounts Service, as intimated by O/o

| | No. Name of No. of Existing No. of Posts Post
Post Posts in Dio Sanctioned/ | Proposed/indica
Rural Distributed/ ted by this
Development | Awarded to Dio | office in IAW
and D/o Land Rural
Resources Development
(Excluding and D/o Land
DWS & PR’ Resources
A a) en Co) (0 (=
[ 1. Sr. AO | 04 | | 3 | |! 65 |
2. 1200 [!/“ 0 [| | 03 _]|/ a 2 7 /
3. AAO | 07 | | 180 |/ऋ a 3  /
4. Sr. 17 35 15
Accountant
[ 5. | | Accountant _| ; 03 | | 10__]| 0 | 2 |
| 6. | | 5 | | 00 | [ 01 _]|/ | 0
7. Steno. Gr. | 01 01 po
merged
[| 8. | | Steno. Gr. til | Gr. Ill / 01 | | 01 | a /
a Lower 02 , | 4
Division Clerk
10. MTS 07 [ oss a



8

To strengthen internal Audit Wing (IAW), the number of posts as mentioned in
column (E) have been earmarked for posting in IAW as and when these posts are
filled/provided by O/o CGA.”

46.In their vetting comments to aforesaid ATN, the Audit stated as follows:

“Ministry may further elucidate the steps taken on the recommendations of the
Committee pertaining to better vigilance and promptness in detecting matters having
financial implications.”

147. The Committee take note of the allocation of additional Cadre Posts through
regular cadre review of the Central Civil Accounts Service as intimidated by
Olo CGA vide its OM dated 4210412022. The Committee, however, find that the
reply of the Ministry is silent about the date and time by which these posts
would be filled. Obviously in the absence of adequate manpower, the work of
Internal Audit Wing is bound to suffer. Therefore, the Committee emphasize
that the Posts earmarked for posting in Internal Audit Wing be filled at the
earliest with a view to ensuring better vigilance and promptness in detecting
matters having financial implications before these are pointed out by the Olo
C&AG. The Committee expect that the Ministry of Rural Development would

look into this vital area so as to ensure effective monitoring of financial

matters.
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
03 April, 2023 _ Chairperson,

\3 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. - 1-6

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. — NIL
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. -NIL

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. — NIL

Total : 6
Percentage: 100%

Total : 00

Percentage: 00

Total : 00
Percentage: 00

Total : 00
Percentage: 00


_८४१ग६/- IE

ENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY

OMM
OBSERVATIONS/REC! SE SVE RNRENT

Ministry of Rural Development
Recommendations/Observations

‘The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development entered (February, 2012)
into an agreement with the consortium of PSUs viz., M/s Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) .
M’s. Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) and M/s ITI Limited (ITIL). This
consortium was collectively awarded the work of collection, consolidation and updation of data
for Socio-Economic and Caste Census on specific items of information at Tehsil level covering
all States/UTs. As per clause 11.8.1 of the agreement, all payments by the authorities to the
consortium were subject to tax at source @10% under the Income Tax Act. The Committee
observe that the tax at source of Rs.7.21 crore was not deducted from the payments aggregating
to Rs.72.16 crore made in March, 2018 to these firms. This non-compliance of statutory
provision of section 194J of the IT Act makes the Ministry liable for payment of interest in terms
of Section 201 of the Income Tax Act.

(SL No. 1; Part 1; Para lof the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee a7
Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

It is accepted that Tax at Source for payments amounting to Rs.72.16 crores in FY 2017-
18 was not deducted. However, it is submitted that the consortium to which payments were
made, involved PSUs/Government entities. These PSUs have declared that the amount received
by them in 2017-18 for their services was offered for tax on accrual basis in FY2015-16 itself. In
light of this fact, there was no loss to the exchequer. Hence, the issue of penal interest rate does
not arise.

कल्याणी मिश्रा / Kalyani Mishra
भारत MUP / Economic Adviser
oh pone सरकार / Government of India
ar 1 fears war ! Ministry of Rurai Development
कूंषि भवन, नई दिल्‍ली / Krishi Bhawan, New Dethi



Ministry of Rural Development

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development has held the Drawing and
Disbursing Officer (DDO) responsible for non-deduction of tax at source in this case by citing
heavy rush to process the bills on the last day of the Financial Year 2017-18 as the reason for the
lapse. The Committee cannot accept the plea of the Ministry as the entire episode of non-
deduction of tax at source is indicative of financial negligence and lack of accountability on the
part of officers concerned in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, desire that in order to avoid
such lapses in future, the Ministry of Rural Development should devise a mechanism to hold
monthly review meetings to monitor flow of expenditure in an even manner and avoid the ‘rush’
at the close of Financial year, and thereby ensure effective fiscal discipline and better results, In
this age of technological advancement, it would not be a difficult task to keep an eye on such
transactions at regular intervals.

The Committee also note that there was only one DDO in the Ministry at the time of the
aforesaid transaction and subsequently, in the next Financial Year ie. 2018-19, nine more DDOs
were brought into position. The Committee fail to understand as to why no timely action was
taken for posting more DDOs in 2017-18 itself, which would have prevented the lapse that
occurred during the year. This clearly reflects the poor planning for having sanctioned staff for
Budgeting Section in the Ministry, and it was only when the lapse was pointed out by Audit, that
the Ministry chose to appoint nine more DDOs. The Committee wonder as to how the quantum
of work, which was to be looked after by deployment of ten DDOs was being managed with
only one DDO. The Committee feel that, perhaps shortage of required number of DDOs is the
main reason behind this lapse. While taking this matter very seriously, the Committee desire that
henceforth the Ministry of Rural Development should strengthen their planning mechanism for
selecting/posting adequate staff in all the sections, particularly the Budgetary Division to avoid
such shortcomings in future. Furthermore, it is the duty of the head of the Ministry to keep watch
over the total work-load, the actual requirement of staff as well as their deployment in every
section of this Minist is per requirement.

As regards fixing responsibility for the lapse, the Committee have been informed that the
DDO has been asked to clarify the reasons for lapses based on which further action would be
taken by the competent authority. The Committee note in this regard that in the normal course,
such matters are to be cleared by the higher level officials in the Ministry. Therefore, the
Committee feel that all those responsible for the lapse. inclusive of those in senior positions
should be identified. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that apart from asking the DDO
to clarify the reasons for this lapse, the Ministry should also identify the other senior officials
responsible for the lapse, The Committee desire that the Ministry should initiate appropriate
action against all officers responsible for the lapse so that the principles of accountability and
responsibility are applied in letter and spirit. This exercise needs to be undertaken without further

delay. Naas {2
\\ han :

\

कल्याणी मिश्रा / Kalyani Mishra
आर्थिक सलाहकार / Economic Adviser
भारत सरकार / Govern-nent of india
sai विकास मंत्र ‘9 a! evelopment

wf v Dein



(SL No. 2; Part 1; Para 2 of the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee a7"
Lok Sabha)

Action Taken,

In order to maintain accountability and avoid repeat of such instances going ahead,
Senior Officers’ Meetings (SOMs) headed by Secretary (Rural Development) are being held on
weekly basis inter-alia to monitor the flow of expenditure regularly.

It may also be noted that the decision to create nine more DDOs was taken by the
Department in 2017-18 itself after taking into account the increased workload. But, on account of
likely operational problems, these DDOs were made functional with effect from 11 April, 2018.
However, corrective measures were taken much prior to the matter pointed being out by audit
ie. in 2021. Further, all the DDOs vide Ministry’s OM dated 11.11.2021, have also been
instructed to scrutinize the sanctions and prepare the bills as per the DDOs manual and statutory
instructions issued from time to time. Also, sanction issuing authorities have been instructed to
clearly mention statutory deductions in the sanctions.

It is acknowledged that despite the matter being examined and approved by the Head of
Programme Division and concurrence by Integrated Finance Division (IFD), the lapse could not
be avoided. Appropriate measures have been taken since then to avoid repeat of such instances.
Moreover, the then DDO was asked to clarify the reasons for the mentioned lapse. In his
response, regret has been expressed on the lapse made on his part and the concerned officer has
assured to take utmost care while dealing with such issues in future. As for the reasons for the
lapse, the arguments given by the officer for the lapse are summarized below:

a. During the year in question, only one DDO (PAO Special Cell) was honoring the
sanction orders from all Divisions of MoRD for processing in PFMS and preparing of
bills.

b. There were no clauses/instructions in the sanction orders instructing DDO (Special Cell)
for deduction of TDS by sanction issuing authority.

c. The sanction orders were issued under the object head “Other Charges” where TDS
deduction is not required. The sanctions were issued on 31" March 2018 (last day of the
financial year) by the Competent Authority and they were processed under heavy rush on
the same day.

कल्याणी मिश्रा | Kalyani Mishra
आर्थिक सलाहकार / Economic Adviser
भारत सरकार / Government of India
ग्रामीण विकास मंत्रालय | Ministry of Rural Development
कृषि भवन, नई दिल्‍ली / Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi


Ministry of Rural Development

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee do not find the deposition of the representatives of the Ministry during
evidence that although tax at source was not deducted, the PSUs concerned have paid the
requisite tax on the income received to be tenable. According to the Ministry of Rural
Development, the two PSUs, namely BEL and ECIL recognized the revenue for the concerned
amount in their books in 2015-16 on a and the same was offered as tax during
Financial Year 2015-16 itself. In case of IT! Ltd, the Ministry apprised that it was a loss making
company and the amount received on account of services rendered had been accounted as
income but there was no liability to pay taxes as it had carried forward losses. The Committee
are astonished to note that the Ministry ascertained the fact regarding the tax deposit by the PSUs
only after the meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development on 17" September 2021, ie. after the gap of five years following the deposit of the
tax by the PSUs. Neither the Ministry deduct the TDS at the time of payment nor ascertain from
the PSUs regarding payment of tax, which is highly regrettable. The Ministry woke up to discuss

rual basi:

this issue with the PSUs only after it was pointed out by Audit. Had this not been pointed out by
Audit, the Ministry would have been ignorant of the mistake and no corrective measures would
have been taken to avoid recurrence of such mistakes in future.

(SL No. 3; Part 1; Para 3 of the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (17" Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

While the amount received was identified as revenue by ECIL and BEL on accrual basis
and offered for tax in FY2015-16 itself (whereas ITI was not eligible to pay tax by virtue of
being a loss making enterprise), however it is agreed that as per usual practice tax was not
deducted at source and the issue could have been identified timely. In this regard, the Ministry
has noted the comments of the Committee for future compliance.

ie

ay णी मिश्रा / Kalyani Mishra
आर्थिक सलाहकार / Economic Adviser

SIG सरकार / Govemment of india
ग्रामीण विकास मंत्रालय / Ministry of Rural Development
कृषि भवन, नई दिल्‍ली / Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi



Ministry of Rural Development

Observation/Recommendation

Further, the Committee cannot accept the plea of the Ministry that the PSUs have already
paid the tax. Since as per clause 11.8.1 of the agreement with the PSUs and section 194J of
Income Tax Act 1961. all payments made by the authorities to the consortium are subject to
deduction of tax at source@10 percent, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should
have compulsorily deducted tax at source at the time of payment only rather than being under
the impression that the PSUs concerned would pay the requisite tax. At first, the Ministry
should have deducted the TDS and then let the Income Tax Department examine the matter, and
if required, the tax deposited by PSUs could have been refunded thereafter. The Ministry
cannot absolve themselves from not taking the responsibility for the whole issue. The Committee
are astonished to note that the Ministry had adopted a very casual approach towards deduction
of tax at source in this case due to which the exchequer had been deprived of revenue of Rs.
7.21 crore which should have come to them in 2017-18. The Committee, therefore, emphasise
upon the Ministry to develop some strong mechanism, with adequate manpower, for timely
monitoring of such transactions and prevent recurrence of such lapses in future.

(SI. No. 4; Part वी; Para 4 of the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (17"
Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

To avoid such lapses in future, necessary instructions have been issued to all Heads of
Programme Divisions and DDOs of MoRD vide OM No. Pr. AO/RD/CCA/CAG Audit/E-
376742/2021-22/1478-1486 dated 11.11.2021 (copy enclosed). Vide the OM, DDOs have been
instructed to process sanctions issued/submitted for preparing bills to be submitted to PAO-
MoRD after proper scrutiny to ensure compliance with statutory orders/instructions.

In the same order, sanctioning authorities have also been advised to clearly mention

statutory deductions (if any) in the sanction or ders. Also, sanctioning authorities have been asked
services as prescribed in Rule 8

to use proper head of accounts for clear classification of works/
of DFPRs, 1978.

awh” “>

कल्याणी मिश्रा / Kalyani Mishra
आर्थिक सलाहकार / Economic Adviser
भारत सरकार / Government of india
antes विकास मंत्रालय | Ministry of Rural Development
aft भवन ली / Kashi baawan, New Delhi



Ministry of Rural Development

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee are perturbed to note that the Internal Audit Wing (AW) in the Ministry
had not detected this lapse as according to the Ministry Internal Audit of DDOs was not
conducted due to lack of regular manpower. However, an internal audit was conducted in 2020
for Section Officer (Cash) for the period of 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20. The Committee are
astonished to note that this had also been done after the matter was pointed out by Audit. The
Committee feel that the existing internal controls as well as the budgetary mechanism in the
Ministry need to be strengthened to cope up with the wide gamut of work. Further, on the issue
of lack of manpower in the Internal Audit Wing. the Committee have now been informed that as
on date, IAW has engaged 17 audit consultants for conducting Internal Audit and a proposal for
creation of additional regular manpower for internal audit has been submitted to the Ministry of
Finance, What is even more worrisome for the Committee to note is that the IAW has issued
directions in this regard on 11.11.2021 to conduct the internal audit for DDOs of schemes as
well. The Committee note in this regard that this was done only after evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development was taken by the Committee. Had these
steps been initiated earlier, the situation of non-deduction of tax of Rs. 7.21 crore could well
have been avoided. The Committee would now expect the Ministry to be more vigilant and
prompt in detecting and rectifying such matters which have large financial implications. The
committee would also desire to be apprised of the status of sanctioning of additional manpower
for internal audit by the Ministry of Finance.

(SI. No. 5; Part 1; Para 5 of the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17 LokSabha)

Action Taken

The recommendations of the Committee pertaining to better vigilance and promptness in

detecting matters having financial implications have been noted for necessary compliance.

At present, one Accounts Officer. two Sr. Accountants and one Multi Task Staff (MTS)
out of the total strength of accounting cadre in the Department are posted in Internal Audit Wing
(IAW). In addition, 21 Audit Consultant (out of 25 approved posts) as on today are also posted in
IAW. MoRD. To strengthen IAW, a proposal for creation of 76 posts for Internal Audit Wing in
MoRD was sent to Ministry of Finance (MoF) but the same was not acceded to by the MoF vide
U.O Note ID No. 1254234/E. Coord.1/2020 dated 08.12.2021 (Copy enclosed).

wr?

कल्याणी मिश्रा / Kalyani Mishra
आर्थिक सलाहकार / Economic Adviser

आरत सरकार / Government of india

ry of Rural Development
vawan, New Delhi

fe

४ कप

भार



review of the Central Civil Accounts

However, the following additional cadre posts have been allocated through regular cadre

Service, as intimated by O/o CGA vide its OM dated

12.04.2022:

ISI. [Name Of Post ६०. of Existing Posts in|No. of Posts|/Post

INo. ‘D/o Rural Development/Sanctioned/ Proposed/indicated|
land Dio Land|Distributed/ Awarded|by this office in
Resources  (Excludingjto Dio Rural] (AW.
DWS & PR) Development and D/o

ILand Resources

(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)

i, _|Sr.AO 04 13 6

2. 12600 00 03 2

3. {AAO 07 10 a

4. | Sr.Accountant Le a9 15

IS. _|Accountant 03 10 2

6. _|PS 00 01 0

7. |Steno.Gr.1 01 01 0

(merged)
8. |Steno.Gr.Ill 01 01 he See
9. |Lower Division 02 08 Ree ed
Clerk
10. IMTS 07 08 1

CGA.
i
‘
\ ‘ \
c
A 4
है]

To strengthen internal Audit Wing (IAW), the number of posts as mentioned in column
(E) have been earmarked for posting in [AW as and when these posts are filled/provided by O/o

‘

कल्याणी मिश्रा | Kalyani Mishra

सलाहकार 1 Economic Adviser
आर्थिक सलाहक tia

सरकार / Government
भारत ee Hovey ef Pra Doveopment

शामरीण विकास मे



Ministry of Rural Development

Observation/Recommendation

The committee note that Section 201 of the Income Tax Act provides that if any person,
who is liable to deduct at source, does not deduct it or afier so deducting, fails to pay, the whole
or any part of the tax to the credit of the Government, then, such person, shall be liable to pay
simple interest @ 1 per cent for every month or part of month on the amount of such tax from the
date on which such tax was deductible to the date on which such tax was deducted. The
Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry’s contention that since the admissible taxes have
been deposited by two PSUs, liability to pay interest on the amount of tax may not be applicable.
The Committee are surprised at this complacent approach of the Ministry because despite the
issue being pointed out by the C&AG way back in 2018-19, no concrete steps have been taken in
this regard by the Ministry. The Committee would urge on meticulously complying with the
provisions of the Section 201 of the IT Act as well as clause 11.8.1 of the agreement and take
appropriate measures in this direction so that such instances do not recur. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within one month of the presentation of this
Report to Parliament.

(SI. No. 6; Part Il; Para 6of the Forty-Fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (177
Lok Sabha)

Action Taken

As stated earlier, DDO could not deduct tax at source because the sanctions were
presented on the last day of financial year i.e. 31.03.2018 which led to a lot of rush and the
mention of deducting tax at source was missing from the same. However, it is reiterated that,
PSUs had offered the amount received by them in 2017-18 for tax in 2015-16 itself on accrual
basis thereby resulting in no loss to the exchequer. Therefore, the issue of penal interest rate does
not arise.

Further to avoid repeat of such instances, DDOs have been instructed vide this office OM
No. Pr.AO/RD/CCA/CAG/Audit/E-376742/2021-22/1478-1486 dated 11.11.2021 to scrutinize
and prepare the bills as per DDO’s manual and statutory instructions issued from time to time by
Ministry of Finance and concerned Departments i.e. CBDT & CBIC. Sanction issuing authorities
have also been instructed to clearly mention statutory deductions in their sanctions.

i Mishra
कल्याणी मिश्रा | Kalyani so
आर्थिक सलाहकार 1६9३0 Advis

आरत सरकार / Government of india

मंत्रालय { Ministry of Rural
pe नई दिल्‍ली / Krishi Bhawan. New Delhi


File NO. Q-21016/12/ a Te ( ix foe 18 r No. 363498) 49
०0१68 ५0८३७) lia

Government of India

Ministry of Rural Development
Office of the Chief Controller of Accounts

Pr Accounts Office(Accounts)

ent
Room No.268/A wing
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Email-yrao.del-mord@goy.in

No. Pr AQ/RD/CCA/CAG audi¥E-376742/2021-23/1 4°98 ee Dated:1 1-11-2021

OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Sub:- Instructions regarding necessary deduetions from the funds to be released for Statutory
Compliance.

All the DDOs under the payment control of PAO-MoRD are hereby instructed to process the sanctions
issued/submitted by Sanction Issuing Authorities for preparing the bills to be submitted to PAO-MoRD afler
proper scrutiny as per the DO's Manual ind Statutory instructions issued by the Statutory Bodies like CBDT,
CBIC, M/o Finance cic. trom time to time 10 ensure the compliance of all the statutory orders/insteuctions,

While issuing the Sanction Order for release of funds, Sanction Issuing Authorities shall also ensure to
clearly mention the statutory deductions (if any) 10 be made from the sanctioned amount, so that (here will be
10 gap in processing the Sanction Orders by the 19205 while preparing bills for payments, Sanction Issuing
Authorities shall also use proper bead of accounts for proper classification of works/services a8 prescribed in
Rule 8 of DFPRs. 1978 so that the same would be clearly identified by DDO/PAO.

This is issued with the approval of Competent Authority,

As

ibaa
(M.P.Popli) oy
Sr. Accounts Officer

To,

1. Ail the Heads of Programme Divisions of MoRD
2. All the DDOs of MoRD

3. PAO(MoRD)

4. IFD, MoRD

Copy for information to:
1. PPS te Secretary-MoRD.
2. PPS to AS&FA, MoRD

3. PSto CCA, MoRD
4. PAto CA, MoRD

4

3/2022 03:42 PM
Generated from ९0106 by OHARMINDER KUMAR, SSA(BPL/SECC)-DK, SENIOR SECRETARIAT ASSISTANT, MORD on 12/0:


5
DK, SENIOR SECRETARIAT ASSISTANT, MORD on 12/09/2022 03:42 PM

Generated from ९0106 by DHARMINDER KUMAR, SSA(BPL/SECC)+


CHAPTER ता

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-Nil-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE C
REQUIRE REITERATION

WHICH REPLIES OF THE
OMMITTEE AND WHICH

-Nil-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE

FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-Nil-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
April, 2023 Chairperson,
Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)

Public Accounts Committee


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH
LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 06

(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 06
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 100%
Para Nos. - 1-6

(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 00
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 00

the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. - NIL

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 00
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 00
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. -NIL

(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 00
which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 00

Para Nos. - NIL