26
WATER POLLUTION IN INDIA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 8 Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT

ea

SEVENTEETNH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. _2234

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

WATER POLLUTION IN INDIA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 8" Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka)


we wmnans YD

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Ferner

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITEE“ ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

COMPOSLIION OF Tht eee Eee

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant

Vacant
SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K Raja - Director

Shri U. C. Bhardwaj - Additional Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION .................. तन नि कि
CHAPTER | Report
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

accepted by the Government ........- ००० ५ eee

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ..........---*-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
TeIteration ................-. बन लहर

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
७2189 ........ "नि कक

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 10" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on
47 February, 2021

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Water
Pollution in India" relating to the Ministry of Jal Shakti.

2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 117
December, 2014. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Twenty-sixth Report at their Sitting held on 47 February, 2021. Minutes of
the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat arid the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 Chairperson,

Magha,1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 8, 11, 19, 20 and 24

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

ParaNos. -3, 4, 9, 12, 15, 21 and 23
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. -6,7,13 and 17

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. - 10, 14, 16, 18 and 22

24

Total : 08
Percentage: 33.33%

Total : 07

Percentage: 29.167%

Total : 04
Percentage: 16.67%

Total : 05
Percentage: 20.834%


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth
Report (16 Lok Sabha) on "Water Pollution in India " based on the C&AG Report No. 21 of 2011-
12, Union Government for the year ended March, 2012 relating to the Ministry of Jal Shakti.

2.

The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.12.2014. It

contained Twenty Four Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the

Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Environment, Forests and

Climate Change, which informed that the matter now comes under the purview of Ministry of Jal

Shakti and are categorized as under:

(i)

(ii)

(ii

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1,2,5,8,11,19, 20 and 24
Total: 8
Chapter - Il
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. 3,4,9,12,15,21 & 23

Total: 7
Chapter - Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 6, 7, 13 and 17
Total: 4
Chapter - IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies:
Para No. 10, 14, 16, 18 and 22
Total: 5
Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Jal Shakti which inter-alia included
inadequate funding and inadequate manpower leading to improper inspection, need for regular
monitoring of National Water Policy and fixation of timelines for the proposals under the Roadmap of
policy framework, delay in the restart of Project “Neem’, need for inclusion of Industrial pollution
within the remit of National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) etc. The Committee had
accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Eighth Report.

4. The Action Taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change, which informed that the matter now comes under the purview of Ministry of Jal Shakti,
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with
action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations which either need

reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter | and final action taken replies in respect of the Recommendations contained
in Chapter V for which interim replies have been given by the Government may be furnished to them

within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House.

Inadequate funding and inadequate manpower leading to improper inspection

(Recommendation Para No. 6)
6. The Committee in their original Report inter alia recommended as under :

"...While acknowledging that calculating damage costs of environment remains a very
complicated matter as futuristic cost elements have also to be taken, the Committee
observe that only mere levy of damage costs by way of enhancing penalties may not
as such become an effective deterrent. The dismal number of inspections, totalling to a
mere 857, carried out by the Environmental Surveillance Squad (ESS) of Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in last three years (2009-2012) on 1055 grossly


-3-
polluting industries in the Country generating as much as 9982 MLD effluents reveals
the weaknesses in the enforcement regime for pollution of water vis-a-vis the quantum
of pollutants generated. Compared to this, the total number of Courts cases filed under
the Water Act as on 30.06.2012 stood at a fair 6320, also indicative of the large
number of violations taking place all over the country. The Committee further note
that, directions issued under sections 5 and 18(1)(b) of the Water Act, 1974 during the
last 3 years (2009-2012) totalling to 118 and 195 respectively included 7 directions
issued to NGRBA under section 18(1)(b) of the Act. The Committee therefore

recommend that :

(i) The proposal for enhancing the minimum penalty from Rs. 10,000 to Rs.
4,00,000 for violation of the Water Act, 1974 and the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 without amending the provisions for imprisonment with maximum

penalty upto Rs. 10 crore be implemented expeditiously;

(ii) Other options for ensuring compliance to non polluting norms by the domestic
sectors as well as for local authorities may also be explored;

(iii) A robust water inspection regime be put in place with inbuilt provisions for
mandated periodic as well as surprise checks by an empowered and well-
equipped inspection team to detect and report all cases of violation of norms;

and

(iv) Adequate funds be provided by the Union and the State Governments for this

purpose and the necessary manpower be trained to work in this regime."

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have inter alia stated as under:-

“The proposal of enhancing minimum penalty from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 1,00,000 for violation
of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 without amending the provisions for imprisonment with maximum penalty up to Rs,
10.00 crore has been dealt by the TSR Subramaniam Committee constituted to review
various Acts being administered by MoEF&CC for the purpose of amendments/repealing in


-4-

view of the current scenario. The Committee has submitted its report in the Ministry and the
same has been accepted for examination of the recommendations.

CPCB has issued directions under Section 18 1(b) of Water (prevention and Control of
Pollution ) Act, 1974 in April, 2015 to all State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control
Committees, to make mandatory for local/urban bodies to set up STPs of adequate capacity
and provide underground sewerage system to cover the entire local/urban areas and to
bridge the treatment capacity gap as well as enforcement of consent management in line
with standards for sewage treatment.... CPCB has also issued directions under Section 5 of
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 in October, 2015 to 178 towns for proper treatment
and disposal of sewage generated in their jurisdiction...

2. The waste water generation from household and cumulatively through municipal area
and its treatment is dealt under the general discharge standard notified by MoEF&CC (now
under Ministry of Jal Shakti). CPCB has proposed to enforce stringent norms for sewage
treatment and a separate set of standards are developed for treatment of sewage. CPCB
has recently proposed draft revised standards for treatment effluent of sewage treatment
plants are as under:

STANDARDS FOR TREATED EFFLUENT OF SEWAGE TREATMENTS PLANTS

SI. | Industry Parameters Standards for New
No. STPs (Design after
notification date)*
1.__| Sewage pH 6.5-9.0
2.__| Treatment Plant | BOD, mg/l 10
3. COD, mg/l 50
4. TSS, mg/l 10
5. NH4-N mg/l 5
[6. | N-total, mg/l 10
7. Fecal Coliform | <230
MPN/100m!
(8. | PO4-P, mg/l 2
Note: (i) These standards will be applicable for discharge in water resource as
well as for land disposal. The standards for Fecal Coliform may not be applied or
use of treated sewage in industrial purposes.
*Achievements of standards for existing STPs within 05 Years from date of
notification.

3. Operation and maintenance of STPs has been a matter of concern since long, which
is essentially the responsibility of the respective State Governments/implementing agencies.
State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) are vested with the powers under the Water


9.
under:

5-

(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act,1974 to take the defaulting agencies responsible for
O&M of treatment plants...”

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“The proposal for enhancing the minimum penalty from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 1,00,000 and
amending the provisions of imprisonment have yet not been implemented."

"Finalization of the draft revised standards needs to be intimated to the PAC. No other
options for ensuring compliances to non-polluting norms by the domestic sections have been
explored.”

In their further comments to the above audit observations, the Ministry interalia stated as

“Regarding the proposal for enhancing the minimum penalty from Rs. 10,000 to
Rs. 1,00,000 and amending the provisions of imprisonment, MoEF&CC is examining the
recommendations contained in the report of TSR Subramanian Committee.

MoFF&CC has completed the process of consultation with the Ministry Housing & Urban
Affairs, which is a nodal agency in the Government for laying sewerage systems and tackling
domestic wastewater in the urban areas. The revised standards for treated wastewater from
sewage treatment plants have been notified on 130 October, 2017.

To ensure compliance to norms, CPCB had issued directions under section 5 of EPA to the
Municipal Commissioners of 46 million plus cities and 20 State Capitals to setup STPs and
meet with revised/new standards. Also, directions have been issued to the Municipal
Commissioners of 118 towns located on the banks of river Ganga to setup STPs.

.all the State Governments/implementing agencies have been advised by MoEF&CC to
ensure the followings:

e In case of already commissioned STPs, ‘Consent to Operate’ under the water Act,
1974 must be obtained from the respective SPCBs/PCCs, and monitoring reports are
10 be submitted with a copy to CPCB.

e For the proposed STPs, Consent to Establish under the Water Act, 1974 needs to be
obtained from the respective SPCBs/PCCs.”


-6-
10. The Committee are concerned to note that gaps continue to exist in monitoring
mechanism leading to loopholes in ensuring compliance mechanism of the regulations for
preventing the water pollution. The Committee had advocated a robust water inspection
regime so as to detect and report cases of violation of norms but are astonished to find that
even assessment of performance of effluent treatment plants at industrial units is not
periodic but random and merely 1782 industrial units are under the purview of online
monitoring system. Further, the Committee are pained to note that the proposals of State
Pollution Control Board (SPCBs) under the “Strengthening of Environmental Regulators
(SER)” still await approvals thereby defeating the envisaged objectives of enhanced manual
monitoring network and strengthened IT infrastructure. The Committee assert their
recommendation of enhancing penalties for violation of Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 be implemented without any
further delay.

11. The Committee are dismayed to note from the reply of the Ministry that inadequate
manpower still persists and is a major hurdle in successful monitoring and performance
evaluation systems. Even in cases where the project staff have been sanctioned, further
course of action of recruitment and appointment have not yet been done. The Committee
strongly feel the need for ensuring that all staff shortages and unscientific man power
planning are done away with. The Committee, while noting that the Ministry had not adhered
to their recommendation, also desire that urgent steps be taken in matters of staff approval
and appointment under all categories in fixed timeline projects and report back within 6
months following the presentation of this Report. Also, the Ministry must finalise the
programme of training of staff and come out with purposeful and tangible results of robust

regime of monitoring and inspection.

Need for regular monitoring of National Water Policy and fixation of timelines for the
proposals under the Roadmap of policy framework

(Recommendation Para No. 7)


The Committee had inter alia made the following recommendations in their original Report:

"...The Committee observe with serious concern that while only 18 States have framed
Water Policy, most of them do not give adequate emphasis to Prevention and Control of
Water Pollution except the State Government of Kerala which seeks to address water
pollution issues. Notably, 14 States have already enacted the Ground Water Bill and
another 16 States have taken initiatives for enactment of such a Bill based on the Model Bill
circulated to the States/Union Territories for Regulation and Control of Ground Water
Development and Management. The Committee further find that as regards policy
framework, the Road Map for ‘Management of Water Pollution in India’ prepared by the
MoEF in consultation with the line Ministries addresses various important issues in
environmental management viz. hike in the penalties for contravention of its provision, a civil
administrative adjudication system to ensure fast tracking of the imposition of penalties for
environmental offenders; proposal to establish a National Environmental Appraisal and
Monitoring Authority (NAEMA) to carry out environmental appraisals and monitoring of
compliance conditions; setting up of Bureau of Water Efficiency (BWE) under the Water
Resources Ministry; legal entity status to common effluent treatment plants to facilitate
investments and enable enforcement of standards; encouragement of Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) and use of biodegradable pesticides as also explicit accounting of
groundwater pollution in pricing policies of agricultural inputs; establishment of bio-
conservative zone around water body; integrated water resources management, etc.
Taking note of the laudable objectives of the National Water Policy, 2012, the Committee

recommend :

(i) The National Water Board urgently prepare a plan of action for regularly monitoring of

implementation of the National Water Policy, 2012;

(ii) Appropriate and sustained steps may be taken to encourage all the States to formulate
clear water Policies with special thrust on prevention and control of water pollution
including ground water as well as ecological restoration of degraded water bodies, as


-8-
also reorientation of development policy of the States (as already done by the State of
Kerala) in accord with the objective of the National Water Policy 2012 and the National

Environment Policy 1992;

(iii) Mandatory periodic review be made of the implementation of various policies relevant
to the issue of water pollution, environmental conservation and findings thereof publicly

disclosed ; and

(iv) The proposals rolled out in the Road Map pertaining to policy framework be
implemented in right earnest to achieve the stated objectives within the given time

frame and the Committee apprised.

(v) An inventory of all water bodies including rivers, lakes, ponds, streams, wells, etc.

be made and digitalized within a time bound programme."

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“The National Water Policy (2012) has made several recommendations for conservation,
development and management of water resources in the country.

2. Ministry of Water Resources, RD&GR has informed that implementation of various
recommendations would require different time periods. It also requires the active
cooperation and support of the States. Accordingly, the National Water Policy, 2012 has
been forwarded to all the States/Union Territories and the concerned Ministries Departments
of Central Government for appropriate action. The National Water Policy, 2012 is being
implemented by many States.

3. MOWR, RD&GR constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. S.R.
Hashim, Former Member, Planning Commission & Former Chairman, Union Public Service
Commission for suggesting a road map for implementation of National Water Policy, 2012.
The Committee submitted its Report in September, 2013. The recommendations of the
Committee are under examination.

4. As per the National Water Policy 2012, recycle and reuse of water has been included
as Service Level Benchmarks for sewerage and sanitation. In its various programmes of the


15.

-9-

Ministry of Urban Development, reuse of treated wastewater has to be ensured by the
respective Urban Local Bodies for the sewerage schemes sanctioned by the Ministry.

5. MoEF&CC, in consultation with CPCB/SPCBs/PCCs carry out periodically review of
industrial standards as well as water quality standards which are aimed at improving
environment performance of industries in terms of operational efficient and compliance.”

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“No action for regularly monitoring of implementation of National Water Policy as well as no
periodic review have been done. No timelines have been prescribed by the Ministry for the
proposals rolled out in the Roadmap pertaining to policy framework.”

In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry inter alia stated

as under:

“1. MoWR, RD&GR has the prime mandate for implementation of the National Water
Policy. A Committee was constituted by the MoWR, RE&GR for suggesting roadmap for
implementation of National Water Policy-2012 under the Chairmanship of Dr. S.R. Hashim,
former Chairman, UPSC & former Chairman, UPSC & former Member, Planning
Commission. The Committee submitted its report to MoWR, RD&GR in September,2013.
The copy of the Report of Committee had been circulated by the MoWR, RD&GR to all the
States and UTs for necessary action/comments. The report is under finalisation in the
Ministry.”

Apart from this, MoWR, RD&GR has been impressing upon the States/Union Territories
(UTs) to formulate State Water Policies in line with the National Water Policy, 2012 and
pursued the same through correspondence to them. A statement indicating the details of
States/UTs who have formulated State water policies in pursuance of National Water Policy,
1987 and 2002 are as under:

Andhra Pradesh (2008), Goa (2000), Jharkhand (2011), Kerala (2008), Maharashtra (2003),
Rajasthan (2010), Tamil Nadu (1994), Himachal Pradesh (2005), Karnataka (2002), Madhya
Pradesh (2003), Odisha (2007), Sikkim (2009) and Uttar Pradesh (1999).

...The Governments of Bihar, Gujarat and NCT of Delhi have also initiated action for
formulation of their State water policies.

2. __.... To ensure improvement in water quality of river and other water bodies, standards
of effluent from STPS have also been made stringent and have been notified on 13!
October, 2017 after consultation with Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs. As contribution of
wastewater from domestic sector is significant, revision of standards of effluents of sewage
treatment plans will strengthen in effective control of water pollution.


-10-

The existing provisions of Water Act are being implemented through CPCB for control of
pollution and monitoring of ambient water quality of aquatic resources. Monitoring network of
Water Quality Assessment have been established throughout the country at 2500 locations
and the outcome/results help in preparation of plans for restoration of water quality. The
teview of activities is carried out on regular basis through Chairman & Member Secretaries
Conference of SPCBs/PCCs. Other Committees are also reviewing provisions for control of
pollution and enforcement of standards. Polluted river stretches have been identified along
with the sources of pollution and Municipal Authorities have been directed by SPCBs/PCCs
based on the communication from CPCB under section 18(1)(b) to set-up STPs to tackle the
untreated sewage generated in their area/town.”

16. The National Water Policy, 2012 contains several recommendations for conservation,
development and management of water resources in the country. However, the
recommendations are yet to be implemented. The Committee are of the view that merely
impressing upon the States/UTs to formulate their own State water policies will not serve the
purpose unless and until the Government at the Centre pursues the same diligently and
regularly. Further, the Committee are constrained to note that the National Water Board has
not yet prepared any action plan for regular monitoring of the National Water Policy. Instead,
the Ministry has only reported about the following States which have formulated State Water
policies in pursuance of National Water Policy, 1987 and 2002 : Andhra Pradesh (2008), Goa
(2000), Jharkhand (2011), Kerala (2008), Maharashtra (2003), Rajasthan (2010), Tamil Nadu
(2004), Himachal Pradesh (2005), Karnataka (2002), Madhya Pradesh (2003), Odisha (2007),
Sikkim (2009) and Uttar Pradesh (1999).

17. The Committee feel that the large number of States not formulating their State level
Water policies in coherence with the National Water Policy defeats the objectives and vision
of the National Water Policy 2012; let alone the aspect of regular monitoring. The Committee
also note that the submission of the Ministry is vague, which does not highlight the policies
and standards that have been reviewed. Also, the time frame for such review are reported in
a abstract way. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry of Jal Shakti to submit
a detailed statement showing the policies that have been reviewed with the details of time


-11-
along with publicly disclosed findings. Upon noticing the lack of submission of information
pertaining to the proposals rolled out in the Road Map pertaining to policy framework, the
Committee desire to know the extent of work carried out, if any, in the process of
implementing the proposals. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the

timelines prescribed for these proposals.

Delay in the restart of Project “Neem”
(Recommendation Para No. 13)

18. | The Committee in their original Report inter alia recommended as under :

"...Taking in view that the MoEF had neither developed Water Quality Goals for each
riverllake nor established any enforceable water quality standards especially for
agricultural run offs, which is one of the biggest non-point sources of pollution, the

Committee recommend that:

(i) Enforceable water quality standards for rivers/lakes/groundwater be fixed with
deterrent penalty provisions for violations thereof in consultation with Ministry of
Agriculture and Water Resources so that clear and specific standards are laid down for

pollutants such as nitrogen/phosphorus/ pesticides/ fertilizers, etc;

Vigorous and sustained efforts be made for educating/sensitizing the farmers for

(i

sustainable use of bio fertilizers/manures and Integrated Pest Management to prevent
and control deleterious agricultural runoffs due to use of chemical fertilizers/pesticides

constituting a major pollutant of water bodies especially the groundwater;


19.

-12-

(iii) Linkages be set up/strengthened amongst institutions especially Ministry of H&FW and
CPCB/MoEF/CGWB/SPCBs so that real time data collected on water quality
monitoring may be shared instantaneously for immediate concurrent action by
concerned agencies especially those having high risks to human health such as
outbreak of water borne diseases, etc; and

(iv) The project 'Neem' which had been closed mid way may be restarted so as to harness
India's rich biodiversity and to give impetus to environment friendly agricultural

practices."

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have inter alia stated as under:-

“CPCB has informed that the assessment of water quality with respect to fertilizers pesticides
contribution is already covered in the protocol of monitoring which covers nitrogen,
phosphorus, pesticides and fertilizers. The strengthening of monitoring to assess the micro
pollutants on regular basis is envisaged....MoWR, RD&GR has informed that under the
NGRBA program there is a real time water quality monitoring stations to be implemented by
CPCB at 113 locations along the main stem of River Ganga and under the data purchase
concept the linkages will be provided to access the data by other departments once the
project is implemented. NGRBA cell has been created for implementation of projects.

In addition, Ground water chemical Quality Data is collected regularly in the form of
Reports which are shared with various Central and State agencies. The Ground water level
& quality data is available on Ground Water Information System, through a link available on
www.cqwb.gov.in and at Water Resources Information System (WRIS) in public domain. In
addition a MoU has been signed between CPCB & CGWB which inter-alia included sharing
of data.

Ministry of Agriculture has informed that Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is
implementing scheme on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) with strategic and multi
pronged approach to promote the optimum use of pesticides and sensitizing farmers by
continuous feeding of research inputs on new IP & technologies. Efforts are also made to


20.

21.

-13-

ensure quality and reliable delivery of inputs by enforcing provisions made under Insecticides
Act 1968 (IIA).

In addition, Plant Protection Division of Ministry of Agriculture is implementing a
Scheme entitled “Strengthening and Modernization of Pest Management Approach in India”
since 1991 to reduce the use of chemical pesticides in agriculture to reduce adverse effects
of Chemical pesticides on quality of water and public health... "

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-
“The project ‘NEEM’ has not been restarted. Other actions taken are still in pipeline.”

In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry stated as under:

“Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare have informed that in order to
minimise to use of chemical pesticides and reduce the level of pollution, they are
implementing a scheme with strategic and multi pronged approach to promote the optimum
use of pesticides feeding of research inputs on new technologies. In addition, Plant
Protection Division is implementing a scheme “Strengthening & Modernisation of Pest
Management Approach of India” Since 1991 to reduce the use of chemical pesticides in
agriculture to reduce adverse effects of chemical pesticides on quality of water and public
health. As already brought out in reply of this Section, the activities undertaken in the
scheme with latest update are reproduced:

¢ Conducting regular pest surveillance and monitoring to access pest/disease situation.
So far up to December 2016, a total 268.66 lakh hectare area has been monitored.

e Rearing biological control agents for their use and conservation of naturally occurring
bio-control agents. Up to December 2016, 52263.78 million bio-control agents have
been released on field crops and 137.56 lakh hectares is conserved under
conservation.

e Promotion of bio-pesticides and neem based pesticides as alternative to
chemesticides. Farmers have been trained in HRD programmes to adopt bio-
pesticides and neem bases pesticides instead of chemical pesticides.

¢ HRD in IPM by imparting training to master trainers, extension workers and farmers
through Farmers Field Schools (FFS). Total 16868 nos. of FFS have been organised
up to December, 2016 in which 58620 AEOs and 506040 farmers have been trained.

¢ Organising of FFSs through KVKs/SAUs/ICAR institutes to develop sufficient human
resources.


22,

-14-

Under the HRD programmes, short duration courses of two days and dive days for
pesticides dealers/NGOs/Graduate/Pvt. Entrepreneurs and progressive farmers have
been organised. Upto December, 2016 a total of 931 HRD trainings of two days and
102 nos of five days HRD training have been organised since 2006-07 in which 41320
farmers and 4060 AEOs/pesticide dealers/progressive farmers have been trained.

Organisation of Season Long Training Programmes on major agriculture/Horticultural
crops for extension workers of the State Government up December 2016. 69 nos. of
such training programmes have been organised under which 2760 master trainers
have been trained.

Popularisation of ‘Grow Safe Food’ campaign by placing hoardings and banners at
prominent public places.

Revised 87 nos. of IPM package of practices and uploaded on farmers portal and
Directorate website in collaboration with NCIPM/NIPHM.

Establishment of bio-control laboratories for production of bio-pesticides and bio-
control agents. At present, 361 nos. of bio control labs are functioning in the country.

Further, advisories have been issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to
all the States requesting them, inter-alia, to exhort extensive functionaries to sensitise
farmers about non chemical alternatives to plant protection and judicious use of pesticides as
per the approved leaflets."

Under the project Neem, Government of India had mandated 100 percent Neem-

coating of all urea sold in the country. Realising the multi-fold benefits of neem-coated urea

on agricultural growth and consequent reduction in adverse effects of chemical pesticides

on the quality of water, the Committee had recommended restarting project “Neem” which

was stopped midway so as to give impetus to environment friendly agricultural practices.

From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee note that the Plant Protection Divisions,

Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers are promoting bio pesticides & neem

based pesticides as an alternative to chemical pesticides. Yet, the Committee still feel that

the promotion of neem coated urea is a necessity so as to do away with harmful effects of

chemical pesticides. The Committee strongly feel that to achieve sustainable benefits from

the use of eco-friendly neem-coated pesticides, it is imperative that a dedicated project like


-15-

“Neem” is re-commenced with instead of taking piece-meal measures by the Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation & farmer’ welfare.

23. The Committee appreciate the efforts of Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
under whose HRD programme, short duration courses have been conducted for pesticides
dealers/NGOs/graduate/Private Entrepreneurs but it would be more fulfilling on the part of
the Department, if farmers are also made beneficiaries in these short duration courses as
they are the ultimate/grass root beneficiaries implementing any project aimed at doing away
with chemical fertilizers. Further, the Committee reiterate that the States have also to be
taken along to consolidate efforts at the earliest so as to sensitise farmers about bio-
pesticides. All possible efforts should be made to amalgamate Central & State level efforts.
Details of the same may be reported to the Committee within six months of the presentation

of this Report.

Need for inclusion of Industrial pollution within the National River Conservation Directorate

(NRCD)

(Recommendation Para No. 17)

24, The Committee had in their original Report recommended as under:

"The Committee are surprised to find that neither the MoEF nor the States have introduced any
accountability structure either to prevent pollution of ground water or address pollution from
agricultural sources. Although CPCB has prepared a list of sources of pollution, MoEF has not
created any specific programmes to prevent effluents entering the rivers. Worse, even the
implementation of the NRCP and NLCP was flawed due to the lack of comprehensive survey to
assess the amount of pollutants discharged into rivers and lakes. The Committee observe that such
deficiencies in the finalization of projects without any scientific data on actual pollution load on water
bodies have affected the performance of the programme in so far as abatement of pollution control
is concerned. Weaknesses in control activities to ensure accountability of technical and financial
aspects of projects as also unsatisfactory level of implementation of projects in the States reveals


-16-
itself with many projects delayed beyond the scheduled completion dates and 28 projects costing
Rs. 251.27 crore constructed but not commissioned. The Committee also find that inclusion of rivers
under NRCP was not based on their pollution levels with the result more polluted rivers were not
selected for pollution control; the state-wise selection of rivers in NRCP was as symmetrical with
more river stretches approved for selection from States like MP and TN though Maharashtra,
Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh had more polluted rivers. Admittedly, States implementing the projects
faced problems in land acquisition, getting requisite permissions, technical problems, problems from
contractors, resistance from locals over proposals for construction of STPs, disputes over sites,
inability to arrest sewage flow, non-availability of land, etc contributing to non-completion of projects
resulting in poor implementation in many States. The gross ineffectiveness of NLCP in conservation

and restoration of lakes is evident from the fact that only two of the projects out of 22 test checked,
had been completed and rest had met time overrun or were abandoned. The Committee consider it
rather untenable that the NRCD does not deal with cases of industrial pollution on the specious
ground that the industrial pollution is dealt with by CPCB. The Committee therefore feel that it
would be appropriate and more efficacious if industrial pollution is also brought within the remit of

NRCD where they pollute the rivers."
25. — The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“Prevention and control of industrial pollution throughout the country is being addressed by
the Central and State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control Committees. To control
discharge of industrial effluents, CPCB and respective State Pollution Control
Boards/Pollution Control Committees monitor industries with respect to effluents discharge
standards and take action for non-compliance under the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, These activities are
coordinated by the CP {Control of Pollution) Division of MoEF &.CC to ensure uniform
approach. NRCD is regularly interacting with CP Division and CPCB in cases where
industrial pollution is polluting the rivers.

CPCB has set up an NGRBA Cell for tackling industrial pollution in Ganga river basin and are
coordinating with NUCG, MoWR, RD&GR in this regard.”

26. — While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Industrial Pollution has not been brought within the remit of NRCD so far.”


-17-

27. In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry stated as under:

“NRCD is an object oriented Directorate which provides financial assistance to States for
supplementing their efforts in sewerage management for controlling pollution in rivers. The
CP Division on the other hand takes steps for controlling industrial pollution in association
with CPCB & SPCBs, including framing of standards from various specific industries. It may
be submitted that both NRCD and CP Division work in harmony to address the issues of
pollution in rivers, including industrial pollution.”

28. The Committee are constrained to note that no efforts have been made so far in
bringing the subject of industrial pollution within the ambit of National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD). The Committee are not convinced with the Ministry’s isolated contention
that Central Pollution Control Board CCP (B) has set up an NGRBA cell for tackling issues of
industrial pollution in Ganga River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
Scheme/Programme. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that industrial
pollution related with rivers should be brought in the ambit of National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD). It seems irrational to assign the responsibility of managing industrial
pollution relating to rivers to the Control of Pollution Division of Ministry of Environment
Forests and Climate Change. As National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) has the
mandate of conserving the rivers in the country at the national level, National River
Conservation Directorate (NRCD) should also address the issues related to the effect of
industrial pollution on rivers. National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) should imbibe
the objective of managing pollution through industrial effluents in its prime agenda including
periodic review and assessment. The Committee strongly feel that with the agenda of
managing industrial pollution in rivers, getting mandated in National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD) will not only solve the issue but shall also get a strong pedestal for

enforcement.

29. The Committee take cognizance of the fact that both National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD) and CP Divisions work in harmony to address the issues of pollution in
rivers, including water pollution. However, a consolidated approach of NRC shall strengthen


-18-

the spirit and bear great results in times to come. A consolidated approach of managing
pollution in river basins through National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) shall
supplement the ongoing efforts and if any of the powers is over lapping with the Control
Pollution Division, it shall not only dilute the approach but shall also leverage the stream of

activities for proposals and approval.