 
 
141 
 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO NON-
REGISTRATION OF LEASE AGREEMENT 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (UT) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
PAC NO. 2371   O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O R T Y -F I R S T  R E P O R T    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)   (SEVENTEENTH LO K S ABH A)                                        
  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS                                                  Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29.4.2024                                                                          Presented to Lok Sabha on:              ……………..                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on:               ……………..   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I   April 2024/ Chaitra 1945 (Saka)   
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO NON-REGISTRATION OF LEASE AGREEMENT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)                        (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 PART- I  
    REPORT 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
   
 APPENDICES  
 *Minutes of the adoption of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) 
through digital circulation on 20.4.2024 
 
 
*Not appended in the report  

 
 
                                                           
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18.    Shri Derek O’Brien 
19.    Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.    Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.    Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.    Vacant2 
 
 
                   SECRETARIAT 
 
        Shri Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
        Shri Partha Goswami           -   Director 
        Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma  -   Deputy Secretary 
         
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Forty-First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO NON-REGISTRATION 
OF LEASE AGREEMENT” based on Para 3.8 of Comptroller and Auditor General's 
Report No. 24 of 2022.  
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of 
the House on 20.12.2022.   
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 20.11.2023. The Committee considered and adopted this 
Report vide digital circulation on 20.4.2024.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite 
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
INTRODUCTION 
 The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed 
examination and Report Para 3.8 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022 on the 
subject “Loss of Revenue due to Non-Registration of Lease 
Agreement”. The above para relates to acceptance of lease agreement by 
Municipal Corporation Chandigarh on non-Judicial Stamp paper without 
ensuring it was registered as a lease deed which resulted in loss of 
revenue of 29.66 lakh on account of Stamp Duty and Registration fee. 
2. While examination the Audit Para, the Committee found that 
Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh in June 2017 granted license to operate 
and manage 25 paid parking sites and 01 Multi-Level parking in 
Chandigarh to the successful bidder i.e. M/s Arya Toll Infra Ltd, Mumbai 
initially for a period of three years, extendable by further two years on a 
payment of license fee of Rs. 14.78 crore per annum plus GST at prevailing 
rates. Accordingly, an agreement was executed in June 2017 between 
Municipal Corporation and M/s Arya Toll Infra Pvt Ltd, Mumbai.  
3. Audit highlighted that the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh 
accepted the instrument as agreement on non-judicial stamp paper of Rs. 
100 without ensuring that the instrument is registered as lease deed with 
the concerned Sub Registrar. Due to non-registration of lease deed by the 
licencee and acceptance of the same by the Municipal Corporation, the 
Government was deprived of stamp duty and registration fee of Rs. 29.56 
lakh and Rs. 0.10 lakh, respectively. 
4. The Committee also learnt that Section 17 (1) (d) of the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 provides that lease of immovable properties from 
year to year, or for any term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent 
are compulsorily registerable documents. Further, the expenses for 
providing the proper stamp duty and registration fee in the case of lease 
shall be borne by the lessee. Article 35 of Schedule 1-A of the Indian 
Stamp (Punjab Amendment) Act applicable to UT of Chandigarh, which 
provides for levy of stamp duty on lease deeds at prescribed rates for the 

 
 
amount of the average annual rent, where the lease purports to be for a 
term of not less than one year but not more than five years. 
5.  On being pointed out by Audit, the Municipal Corporation stated that 
as per Clause 9 of the agreement, the licencee was to execute a 
Memorandum of Understanding/Licence Deed on stamp papers within 
seven days of issue of letter of intent and the original copy of licence deed 
was to be deposited with licensor; hence, there was no fault on the part of 
Municipal Corporation Chandigarh regarding non registration of lease deed 
because it was the sole responsibility of the Agency. 
6. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that 
the Chandigarh Administration upon noticing deficient stamp duty, as 
pointed out in the Audit objections, has rectified the same in subsequent 
tenders by incorporating the specific condition that stamp duty shall be 
payable after confirming the same from the Sub-Registrar UT, Chandigarh.  
 Further, Chandigarh Administration has cancelled the tender of M/S 
Aiya Toll Infra Limited, Mumbai and blacklisted it. An FIR No. 160/222 
dated 15.10.2022 has also been registered u/s 420 and 120 B of IPC 
against Director-cum-Authorized Representative of M/s Arya Toll Infra 
Limited for dishonor of cheques and non-payment of outstanding dues.  
7. The Committee also found that as a remedial measure, the MCC has 
adopted the process to receive as also verify the electronic Performance 
Bank Guarantee (E-PBG) for security and accessibility. Necessary 
directions have been issued to all the wings of MC, Chandigarh to use the 
E-PBG format effective from 1.7.2023 for forthcoming RFP/Tender and 
tenders going to be awarded onwards vide letter no. 1048147 dated 
11.7.2023  
8. Further, the Committee learnt that concerned employees of Municipal 
Corporation have been charge-sheeted for non-compliance of the 
Registration Act, 1908 as well as Indian Stamp Act as applicable to UT, 
Chandigarh. 
 
9.  During the course of oral evidence held on 20.11.2023 the Committee 
wanted to know as to why instead of taking preventive measures, some 

 
 
sort of preemptive measures should have been explored.  In this regard, 
the representative of Administration of Union Territory of Chandigarh 
stated as under: 
“Sir, we learnt from this that there was a vagueness in the 
clause and that has been removed. Now such things have to 
be registered on a judicial stamp paper where the stamp duty 
is payable.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1.  The Committee note that Municipal Corporation, 
Chandigarh granted license to operate and manage 25 paid 
parking sites and 01 Multi-Level parking in Chandigarh to the 
successful bidder i.e. M/s Arya Toll Infra Ltd, Mumbai in June 
2017 initially for a period of three years, extendable by further 
two years on a payment of license fee of Rs. 14.78 crore per 
annum plus GST at prevailing rates. Accordingly, an 
agreement was executed in June 2017 between Municipal 
Corporation and M/s Arya Toll Infra Pvt Ltd, Mumbai. 
 
2.  The Committee further note that Section 17 (1) (d) of the 
Indian Registration Act, 1908 provides that lease of 
immovable properties from year to year, or for any term 
exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent are 
compulsorily registerable documents. Further, the expenses 
for providing the proper stamp duty and registration fee in 
the case of lease shall be borne by the lessee. Article 35 of 
Schedule 1-A of the Indian Stamp (Punjab Amendment) Act 
as applicable to UT of Chandigarh, provides for levy of stamp 
duty on lease deeds at prescribed rates for the amount of the 
average annual rent, where the lease purports to be for a 
term of not less than one year but not more than five years.  
 
3.  The Committee during the course of the examination of the 
subject learn that Municipal Corporation accepted the 
instrument as agreement on non-judicial stamp paper of Rs. 
100 without ensuring that the instrument was registered as 
lease deed with the concerned Sub Registrar. Due to non-
registration of lease deed by the licencee and acceptance of 
the same by the Municipal Corporation the Government was 

 
 
deprived of stamp duty and registration fee of Rs. 29.56 lakh 
and Rs. 0.10 lakh, respectively. 
 
       The Committee are concerned  to note from the Action 
Taken Replies of the Ministry where the Chandigarh 
Administration has stated that Municipal Corporation of  
 
 Chandigarh was not at fault for non-registration of lease deed 
and non-deposition of stamp duty and sole 
liability/responsibility to register the lease deed before the 
Sub-Registrar was of the licensee. The Committee are further 
surprised to note in this regard that instead of admitting the   
lapse, the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh has justified 
their inaction by stating that Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh was strictly bound by the lease deed wherein 
registration of the lease agreement was nowhere mentioned. 
The Committee are of firm opinion that entire episode may 
not be  just a lapse and appears to be a  deliberate act on part 
of some vested interests of Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh in connivance and collusion with 
licensee/contractor. Above all, it appears to have happened 
due to failure to follow the systems and procedure or lack of 
it in Chandigarh Municipal Corporation.  
 
4. The Committee also learn that Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh has charge sheeted concerned employees of the 
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh for non-compliance of 
the Registration Act, 1908 as well as Indian Stamp Act as 
applicable to Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Committee 
while expressing satisfaction that disciplinary proceedings 
against concerned officials has been initiated, nevertheless,   
recommend that with a view to obviate such recurrences in 
future a robust system of IT-enabled internal control and 
checks and balances should be put in place in a time bound 
manner under intimation to the Committee. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action primarily initiated in 
this regard.  

 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 