29

REVISION OF ~CEILINGS FOR EXCEPTION
REPORTING IN APPROPRIATION ACCOUNTS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 17 Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2237

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

REVISION OF CEILINGS FOR EXCEPTION

REPORTING IN APPROPRIATION ACCOUNTS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their First Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE .
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: teqeteceeeeeeeeneae

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION .................................... -..... ..-.................

CHAPTER | Report ..
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been

CHAPTER Ill’

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

accepted by the Government ..........................

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the.Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Peiteration .............................. ०-७० -७----

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TOPICS .................. ७०००-५० ०-०-०००-० ००० ०५०५५५५५५५५५५५५ ५-०

APPENDICES

Minutes of the 10” Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on 4" February, 2021.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their First Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

i’)


९००७ ०७ ४७ # WD

11.
12.
13.
14.

16.
17.
18.

20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar |
Shri Naresh Gujral
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav
Vacant
Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

(४)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Revision of
Ceilings for Exception Reporting in Appropriation Accounts" relating to Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 6"
December, 2019. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Twenty-ninth Report at their sitting held on 4" February, 2021. Minutes of
the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For — facility ‘of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India..

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-il.

NEW DELHI; ; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 Chairperson,
Magha,1942 (Saka) Public. Accounts Committee

(४)


REPORT
PART -।

The Appropriation Account is an aid for the Parliament and the Public Accounts Committee
to ascertain performance of the Government against the budgeted provisions. These accounts
contain information regarding re-appropriation of the sanctioned provision from one unit of
appropriations to another, savings and excess of expenditure, if any, against these appropriations
as well as the supplementary grants. Keeping in line with the objectives for which these accounts
were designed, a need to simplify the form of Appropriation Accounts is felt necessary by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure - Controller General of Accounts) for making it
brief, lucid and analytical and less exhaustive.

2. According to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) over the last decade, with
the increase of 28 times in the budgetary allocation for the Government there is resultant increase
in the amount of variation under a number of heads resulting in increase in volume of printed
Appropriation Accounts (Civil). Therefore, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
submitted a proposal for upward revision of financial limits for recording reasons for variations in
the head-wise union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil). The proposal was initiated as an
attempt to improve the presentation of accounts so that the materiality of reporting is adequate. it
was felt that having lower threshold of reporting implied that the number of reasons in the accounts
would be too many and the material deviations may be lost because of large number of reported
deviations.

3. The Committee have been informed that the proposed changes do not limit in any way the
scope of Appropriation Audit which would continue to be reported to Parliament and these changes
do not in any way change the basic structure of Appropriation Accounts.

4, On receipt of this proposal from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), the
Committee considered the justification and need for the upward revision of financial limits for
recording reasons for variations in the Head-wise Union Government Appropriation Accounts
(Civil) and finalised their First Report (17 Lok Sabha) on the subject "Revision of Ceilings for
Exception Reporting in Appropriation Accounts" which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 6" December, 2019, contained five Observations and Recommendations. Action Taken
Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). A scrutiny of these Action Taken Notes reveals
that all the Recommendations of the Committee made in their First Report have been accepted by

the Government.


5. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First Report (17" Lok Sabha).
The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry are reproduced in Chapter - II of the Report.

6. While expressing their agreement with the proposed revision in the Appropriation Accounts
(Civil), the Committee in Para 4 of their First Report (17" Lok Sabha) recommended the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) to devise an effective monitoring mechanism so as to ensure

proper implementation of revised financial limits by each and every Ministry/Department.

7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have stated
as under:

“The Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the year 2018-19 have been

prepared and finalized on the basis of the revised financial limits. The necessary instructions

to adhere to the revised financial limits have also been issued."
8. While approving the proposed revision of financial limits for recording reasons for
variations (excess and savings) in the Head wise Appropriation Accounts (Civil), the
Committee impressed upon the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to devise
an effective monitoring mechanism so as to ensure proper implementation of revised
financial limits by each and every Ministry/Department. In this regard the necessary
instructions are stated to have been issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) to adhere to the revised financial limits. The Committee hope that the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) would take necessary steps to ensure that these
guidelines would be strictly observed by each and every Ministry/Department and any

slackness in complying with the said revision is strictly dealt with.

9. While observing that Appropriation Accounts relating to Railways, Defence and Postal
Services are not in line with the said proposal of revision of financial limits in Appropriation
Accounts (Civil) for the year 2018-19 and onwards, the Committee in Para 5 of their First report
(17" Lok Sabha) had recommended the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to
apprise the said changes to the aforesaid Ministries so that they may take suitable steps for
carrying out those changes in their respective Appropriation Accounts atleast from the year 2019-
20 and onwards after obtaining concurrence from the C&AG in order to maintain parity among the

preparation and presentation of all the Appropriation Accounts.


10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have stated
as under:

"The office of Controller General of Accounts prepared the Union Government Appropriation
Accounts (Civil). The Appropriation Accounts of Railways, Post and Defence are prepared
by the respective Departments. These Departments have been informed about the revision
of ceilings and asked to take up the matter with the Office of C&AG for necessary
compliance."
11. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) by way of informing the Ministry of Railways, Defence and Department of
Posts about the revision of ceilings and asking them to take the matter with the office of
C&AG for necessary compliance, the Committee impress upon the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) to ensure that these Ministries/Departments comply with the
instructions issued in this regard at the earliest so as to make parity among the four
Appropriation Accounts from the year 2019-20 and onwards after obtaining concurrence of
the office of C&AG and the Committee be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

NEW DELHI; , ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_February, 2021 Chairperson,

Magha,1942 (Saka) . Public Accounts Committee


नर Cosesvettons [pecommendactians aye | / Recommendations laave lacey 0७४४४ by the-Go b tho-Goyt
है Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure

Observation/ Recommendation:

Para 1:- “The Appropriation Account is an aid for the Parliament and
the Public Accounts Committee to ascertain performance of the
Government against the budgeted provisions. These accounts contain
information regarding re-appropriation of the sanctioned provision from
‘ene unit of appropriations to another, savings and excess of
expenditure, if any, against these appropriations as well as the
supplementary grants. Keeping in line with the objectives for which
these accounts were designed, a need to simplify the form of
Appropriation Accounts is felt necessary by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure — Controller General of Accounts) for
making it brief, lucid and analytical and less exhaustive.”

(Para No. 1 of the 1°
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17" Lok Sabha)


Action Taken

Observation of Public Accounts Committee. Not for comments.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of

India vide their U.O. No dated

(Annie G. Mathew)
Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
F.No.12(9/E.Coord/2017 Dated 5" June, 2020

ie


Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure

Observation/ Recommendation:

Para 2:- “According to the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) over the last decade, with the increase of 28 times in the
budgetary allocation for the Government there is resultant increase in
the amount of variation under a number of Heads resulting in increase
in volume of printed Appropriation Accounts (Civil). Therefore, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) submitted a proposal
for upward revision of financial limits for recording reasons for
variations in the head-wise union Government Appropriation Accounts
(Civil). The proposal was initiated as an attempt to improve the
presentation of accounts so that the materiality of reporting is
adequate. It was felt that having lower threshold of reporting implied
that the number of reasons in the accounts would be too many and the
material deviations may be lost because of large.number of reported
deviations.”

(Para No. 2 of the 1*
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17" Lok Sabha)


Action Taken

Observation of Public Accounts Committee. Not for comments.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of
India vide their ७.०. No............dated...........

)

(Annie G. Mathew)
Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
F.No.12(9/E.Coord/2017 Dateds’* June, 2020


Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure

Observation/ Recommendation:

Para 3:- “The Committee have been informed that the proposed
changes do not limit in any was the scope of Appropriation Audit which
would continue to be reported to Parliament and these changes do not
in any way change the basic structure of Appropriation Accounts.”

(Para No. 3 of the 1%
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17" Lok Sabha)

oe REE


Action Taken

Observation of Public Accounts Committee. Not for comments.

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the
C8&AG of India vide their ७.0. |५०............ dated...

ree

Uv QUI

(Annie G. Mathew)
Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
F.No.12(9/E.Coord/2017 Dated ५" June, 2020

pa


Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure

Observation/ Recommendation:

Para 4:- “Considering that the proposal has been finalized after
obtaining the concurrence of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, and the adequate justifications provided by the
Ministry of Finance for the need for upward revision of financial limits
for recording reasons for variations (excess and savings) in the Head-
wise Union Government Appropriations (Civil), the Committee are in
consonance with the proposed revision in the Appropriation Accounts
for the year 2018-19 and onwards and recommend the same. In this
regard, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) to devise an effective monitoring
mechanism so as to ensure proper implementation of revised financial
limits by each and every Ministry/Department.”

(Para No. 4 of the 17
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(177 Lok Sabha)

—-|le-


Action Taken

The Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the year
2018-19 have been prepared and finalized on the basis of the revised
financial limits. The necessary instructions to adhere to the revised

financial limits have also been issued (copy enclosed).

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of
India vide their U.O. [५०............५४४५...........

ai ne

(Annie G. Mathew)
Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
F.No.12(9)/E.Coord/2017 Dated 5” June, 2020

Ae

(1

\d
-\l- apn?
ran aw


Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure

Observation/ Recommendation :

Para 5:- “The Committee understand that Appropriation Accounts
relating to Railways, Defence and postal Services are not in line with
the said proposal of revision of financial limits in Appropriation
Accounts (Civil) for the year 2018-19 and onwards. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that these Ministries may be apprised of the
said changes so that they may take suitable steps for carrying out
those changes in their respective Appropriation Accounts atleast from
the year 2019-20 and onwards after obtaining concurrent from the
C&AG in order to maintain parity among the presentation of all the
Appropriation Accounts. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the steps taken in this regard.”

(Para No. 5 of the 1%
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17" Lok Sabha)

~lan


Action Taken

The O/o Controller General of Accounts prepares the Union
Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil). The Appropriation
Accounts of Railways, Post and Defence are prepared by the
respective Departments. These Departments have been informed
about the revision of ceilings and asked to take up the matter with the

Office of C&AG for necessary compliance (copy enclosed).

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of
India vide their U.O. No............dated...........

Pane)
Lau ७०४०४

(Annie G. Mathew)
Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
F.No,12(9)/E.Coord/2017 Dated 5* June, 2020

-I3—-



Confidential

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-
21) HELD ON 4™ FEBRUARY, 2021. :

The Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) sat on Thursday, the 4" February, 2021

from 1430 hrs to 1440 hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

onan Fk YO DN

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
Members
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri. Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shree Sudheer Gupta
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv. Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav

-५-


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri T.G.Chandrasekhar - . Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.R.Mishra - Director

Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - Additional Director

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

1. Shri Deepak Anurag - Director General
2. Shri K.S. Subramaniam - Director General
3. Ms. Kavita Prasad - Director General
4... Shri S. V. Singh - Principal Director
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the

office of C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions
of the Members on the following Draft Reports:-

i Peery poeees Pevees
ii. creer perecs pores’

iii, eae pooner pores

iv. creeed perees ह Fevers

v. creer freer peers

vi. Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations contained in 17 Report (17th Lok Sabha) on
the subject “Revision of Ceilings for Exception Reporting in Appropriation

Accounts”.
vii. Preers Pevers pores
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports

without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light
of factual verification done by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.

अऋऋ ऋऋर nnd

-19 +


(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1 to 5

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para No. - Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. - Nil

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. -Nil

=th—-

05

Total : 05
Percentage: 100%

Total : 0

Percentage: 0

Total : 0
Percentage: 0

Total : 0
Percentage: 0