ASSESSMENT OF ENTITIES ENGAGED IN
HEALTH & ALLIED SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Third Report (16 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

THIRD REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमैव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2183

THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

ASSESSMENT OF ENTITIES ENGAGED IN

HEALTH & ALLIED SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Third Report (160 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

SE

सत्यमेव
Presented to Lok Sabha on: .5.../2.:.22/4

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 6.12 6 2019

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2019/ Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I

CHAPTER I

CHAPTER Itl*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V

il

Introductory

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from Government

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
teplies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES

Minutes of the seventh sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2019-20) held on 19.11.2019.

Minutes of the ninth sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2019-20) held on 3.12.2019.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha)

* Not included to the cyclostyled copy of the Report.

PAGE

civ

cil)
1-17

18-14

20
22.

24.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Vacant’

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

९० 3 9 2७७ PWN

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Additional Secretary
2. Smt. M.L.K. Raja - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja_—- Additional Director
4. Dr. Sheetal Kapoor - Committee Officer

* Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his resignation from Rajya
Sabha on 05 August, 2019

(19


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Assessment of Entities Engaged in Health & Allied Sector’ relating to the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue).

2. The One Hundred and Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the
table of Rajya Sabha on 19 July, 2018. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 9 August, 2019. The
Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and thereafter adopted the
Report at their sitting held on 3 December, 2019. Minutes of the Sittings form
appendices to the Report.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type-in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Third Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-lll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3 December, 2019. Chairperson
12 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(iii)


CHAPTER -1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Third Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Assessment of Entities
Engaged in Health & Allied Sector " based on the C&AG Report No. 27 of 2017
Union Government relating to the Ministry Finance (Department of Revenue).

2. The One Hundred and Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the
table of Rajya Sabha on 19.07.2018. It contained sixteen
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance

(Department of Revenue) and are categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16

Total: 13
Chapter — Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL

Chapter — Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3 and 12
Total: 2
Chapter - IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 4
Total: 1
Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Finance which
inter-alia included lack of data on non-filers, issues relating to alternate
medicines, absence of 80 G certificates, absence of data for sector specific
analysis, disallowance of expenditure on account of referral fees paid by medical
practitioners, absence of information on beneficiaries under international welfare
etc. The Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations

in their One Hundred and Third Report.

4. The Action Taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal
with action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations

which either needs reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire that action taken note in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter | and final action
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V for
which interim reply have been given by the Government may be furnished

to them within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House.

Data on non-filers
Recommendation (Para No. 3)

6. The Committee had observed that with the rise in popularity of systems of
alternative medicines, the practices in these fields are flourishing. The Committee
were of the view that the data available with agencies like Central Council of
Indian Medicine and other registering agencies for medical professionals
engaged in the practice of alternate medicines be also analyzed to identify the
non-filers. However, the Committee while noting that demand for alternative
medicines has increased had opined that tax incentives be given to only those
manufacturers who comply with quality control standards.

7. 116 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-


"Vide the Finance Act 2016, the government has phased-out or
grandfathered all profit linked deductions which were earlier available to the
manufacturing sector. There is no specific tax incentive currently allowed for
manufacturing activity in pharmaceutical sector. However, certain profit-
linked deductions continue to be allowed under Chapter VI-A of the Act.

Hence, the recommendation for giving tax incentives to drug
manufacturing companies who comply with quality control standards is not
found acceptable in accordance with the stated policy of the Government
of phasing out deductions and exemptions."

8. The Committee had observed that with the rise in popularity of
systems of alternative medicines, the practices in these fields are
flourishing and accordingly desired that the data available with agencies
like Central Council of Indian Medicine and other registering agencies for
medical professionals engaged in the practice of alternate medicines be
analyzed to identify the non-filers. The Committee while noting that the
Ministry has not replied to their recommendation adjure it to take urgent
steps to scrutinize the data available with the registering agencies to bring
forth the details of the non-filers and apprise the Committee thereof within
one month of the presentation of this Report to the House.

9. Further, the Committee had recommended in their original Report
that tax incentives be allowed to only those manufacturers who have
complied with quality control standards implying thereby that any tax
incentive be allowed only after verifying that the pharmaceutical
manufacturer has adhered to certain quality control norms. The Committee
are of the firm opinion that those alternative medicinal preparations should
comply with consistent standards to improve the quality of the drugs in
general so as to provide them an international platform and to effectively
utilize their untapped potential. The Committee while reiterating their earlier

recommendation that tax incentives be allowed to only those


manufacturers who have complied with quality control standards also
desire that deductions even under Chapter VI A, as indicated by the
Ministry, be allowed only to those manufacturers who adhere to quality

control norms.

Overlapping nature of Section 10 (23C) and Section 11

Recommendation (Para No. 7)

10. The Committee in their original report had noted that under section
10(23C), the income of certain funds, Universities, educational institutions,
hospitals, etc., that deal with philanthropy works is not to be included in the total
income and similarly, Section 11 of the Act governs the grant of exemption to
income of a charitable trust or institution. The Committee had opined that Section
10(23C) and section 11 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 are overlapping in nature
and cover the same purposes (philanthropy or charity) leaving scope for
confusion and varying interpretations that allows the assesses to take unfair
advantage of excluding the income or claiming exemption; utilizing one of these
two provisions that suits them. The Committee observed that absence of clear
definitions renders the provisions amenable to misuse. The Committee noted
from the reply of the ITD that though the provisions of the two sections are
overlapping so far as purposes (philanthropy or charity) are concerned,
conditions prescribed in the Act are to be fulfilled for these two sections
separately which are to be examined by the Assessing officer/CIT at the time of
grant of exemption/approval. The Committee were of the view that the Assessing
officers should ensure that two sections are not misused by those trusts/
hospitals who have not applied their income for charitable purposes since it
defeats the object of the law. The Committee, therefore, had desired that to
eliminate possibility of misuse by permitting an assessee to claim similar benefits
under both the sections, specific instructions may be issued/ reiterated.

11... The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“Section 11 (7) was inserted in the Act vide Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014
which provides that where a trust or an institution has been granted
registration for purposes of availing exemption under section 11, and the
registration is in force for a previous year, then such trust or institution
cannot claim any exemption under any provision of section 10 other than
that relating to exemption of agricultural income and income exempt under

4


12.

13.

section 10(23C). Hence, there is no legal bar on a trust registered u/s
12AA to be approved u/ s 10(23C) or vice versa and consequently avail
benefit under either of the two sections subject to the fulfillment of the
conditions specified in the respective provisions of the Act.

Vide circular No. 14/2015 it has already been stated that provisions of
section 11 and 10(23C) are two parallel regimes and operate
independently in their respective realms although some of the compliance
criteria may be common to both. An entity has to fulfill the eligibility criteria
for claim of exemption u/ s section 11 or 10(23C) independently of each
other and the entities claiming such exemption are examined by the
prescribed approving authorities for such claim made by them. Hence, the
present legal framework being clear and unambiguous, no further need
arises to issue any instructions or further clarification in the matter."

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"Ministry had stated during Exit Conference (May 2017) that the powers to
grant approval under section 10 (23C) and for registration under section
12A of the Income Tax Act have been combined and vested with a single
authority, viz. CIT (Exemption) who would be deciding the eligibility for
exemption under both the sections to reduce the scope of any assessee
availing exemptions under the alternate section if denied exemption under
one section. It is reiterated that, in view of the risks involved, this needs

careful monitoring."

In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry

stated as under:

14.

"Noted, the Circular No. 14/2015 has already been uploaded on official
website for effective use by officers concerned."

The Committee had noted that Section 10(23C) and Section 11 of the

Income Tax Act, 1961 are over-lapping in nature & cover the same

purposes (philanthropy or charity) leaving scope for confusion & varying

interpretations that allow the assessees to claim exemption, utilizing one of

5


these two provision that suits them. The Committee, therefore, had desired
Income Tax Department to eliminate possibility of misuse by issuing or
reiterating specific instructions in this regard. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that an entity has to fulfill the eligibility criteria for
claim of exemption u/s section 11 or 10(23C) independently of each other
and the entities claiming such exemption are examined by the prescribed
approving authorities for such claim made by them. The Committee further
note from the observation of the Audit that the powers to grant approval
under section 10 (23C) and for registration under section 12A of the Income
Tax Act have since been combined and vested with a single authority, viz.
CIT (Exemption) who would be deciding the eligibility for exemption under
both the sections to reduce the scope of any assessee availing exemptions
under the alternate section if denied exemption under one section. The
Committee observe that though both the sections are intended to operate
independently of each other, the cases pointed out by the Audit indicate
that exemption under one section was given while disallowing the same on
the grounds of existence of profit motive under another. While welcoming
the initiative of the Government whereby the powers to grant approval
under section 10 (23C) and for registration under section 12A of the
Income Tax Act have been combined and vested with a single authority,

viz. CIT (Exemption), the Committee desire that a robust monitoring
mechanism may be developed and the assessing officers be well anchored
to identify and monitor cases so that the benefits under both Section
10(23C) and Section 11 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to a particular

assessee in a given assessment year are ruled out.

Lack of details of beneficiaries sponsored by the charitable

hospitals/ trusts
Recommendation (Para no. 8)

15. The Committee noted that Section 11(c) of Income Tax Act, 1961 provides
that the income derived from property held under trust/hospital created for a

6


charitable purpose which tends to promote international welfare in which India is
interested to the extent such income is applied for such purposes outside India
shall not be included in the total income. The Committee were of the view that a
charitable purpose which tends to promote international welfare in which India is
interested is a subjective phrase, open to different interpretations, which needs to
be aptly verified. The Committee were, therefore, of the view that the Trust may
obtain a certificate from the Ministry of External Affairs stating that the income
has actually been applied for such a purpose that promotes international welfare
in which India is interested for claiming such exemption. The Committee had
desired that the details of all beneficiaries who have been sponsored by the
hospitals/ trusts for availing benefits outside India during last five years may be
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report
to the House.

16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

"The information relating to details of beneficiaries availing benefits outside
India during the last five years, is not possible as such information is not
captured in the return of Income. However, cases coming for scrutiny are
examined for allowability of such expenses, if such expenses are shown in
books of accounts."

17. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"As desired by PAC, the details of scrutiny assessments where issues
pointed out by PAC have been examined viz. the details of all beneficiaries
who have been sponsored by the hospitals/ trusts for availing benefits
outside India during last five years, may be provided."

18. In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry
stated as under:

"As intimated by the field charges, no case pertaining to Health & Allied
sector with respect to implications of Section 11(C) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 has been reported. Therefore, the report may be treated as NIL."

19. The Committee had noted that Section 11(c) of Income Tax Act, 1961

provides that the income derived from property held under trust/hospital

created for a charitable purpose which tends to promote international

welfare in which India is interested to the extent such income is applied for
7


such purposes outside India shall not be included in the total income. The
Committee had desired that the Trust/ hospital may obtain a certificate
from the Ministry of External Affairs stating that the income had actually
been applied for such a purpose that promotes international welfare in
which India is interested for claiming such exemption. The Committee are
unhappy to note that the Ministry has not responded to their specific
recommendation and desire that the reply of the Ministry to the same may
be submitted within one month of the presentation of this Report. The
Committee further desire that all income pertaining to charitable hospitals/
trusts should be included in the total income and waivers / rebates /
deductions/ exemptions may be allowed following verification by the

Ministry of External Affairs.

20. The Committee, further, note from the reply of the Ministry that
information relating to details of beneficiaries availing benefits outside
India during the last five years, is not possible as such information is not
captured in the return of Income. While noting that there is no mechanism
to identify the beneficiaries under Section 11(c) , the Committee desire that
disclosure of the details of the expenditure incurred on the beneficiaries
who have been sponsored by the hospitals/ trusts for availing benefits
outside India may be made mandatory to ensure transparency and fairness
in such sponsorships. The Committee further recommend that a
mechanism be also put in place to verify the genuineness of the
beneficiaries sponsored by the charitable hospitals/trusts claiming benefits

under the Income Tax Act, 1961.

Need for sector specific analysis

Recommendation (Para No. 9)

21. The Committee in their original report had observed that the specific tax
incentives provided by Government have a definite revenue impact and can be
8


viewed as an indirect subsidy to tax payers, also referred to as ‘tax expenditures’.
The revenue impact of tax incentives was assessed by way of ‘Revenue
Foregone’, now termed as ‘Revenue Impact of Tax Incentives under the Central
Tax System’. The quantum of revenue foregone is the chief parameter to assess
the impact of tax deduction which is treated as a measure of tax expenditure
incurred for the promotion of organized activity (viz. creation of infrastructural
facilities, accelerated depreciation as an incentive for capital investment) in the
targeted sector. The Committee had noted that the Income Tax Department (ITD)
has not undertaken any impact analysis to assess the outcome of relief provided
to assessees engaged in the private healthcare sector. The Committee had
further noted from the reply of ITD that direct tax concessions were provided by
the Government as part of overall fiscal incentives to realize the macroeconomic
objectives and to achieve policy goals of development and growth in various
sectors of economy and no such quantitative exercise had been undertaken by
the Department to assess the outcome of reliefs provided to private hospitals,
medical colleges/research institutes, diagnostic centres etc. The Committee were
of the considered view that sector specific information would enable the ITD to
analyze the sector specific issues and efficacy/ misuse of the sector specific
provisions. The Committee had opined that with computerization, the analysis of
the information collected from various sources has become easier and therefore,
had desired that necessary modifications/ additions should be made in the forms
to be filled by the assessees to enable sector specific analysis.

22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

"Income Tax Return Forms for the Assessment Year 2018-19 were
modified and many new sub-codes were provided to entities related to the
Health Sector which inter-alia includes General Hospitals, Speciality and
super speciality hospitals, Diagnostic centres. Hence, now it has become
easier to do sector specific analysis."

23. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

"Although Ministry has stated that ITR forms for AY 2018-19 were modified
and many new sub-codes were provided to entities related to the Health
Sector and sector specific analysis will become easier; it is reiterated that
sector-specific impact analysis may be undertaken to assess the outcome
of relief provided to assessees engaged in the private healthcare sector."


24. In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry

stated as under:

“Noted.”

25. While observing that quantum of revenue foregone is the chief
parameter to assess the impact of tax deduction which is treated as a
measure of tax expenditure incurred for the promotion of organized activity
in the targeted sector, the Committee have noted that the Income Tax
Department has not undertaken any impact analysis to assess the outcome
of relief provided to assessees engaged in the private healthcare sector.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that from the
Assessment Year 2018-19, IT return forms have been modified to include
many new sub codes to the entities related to the Health Sector and that it
has now become easier to do the sector specific analysis. The Committee
while acknowledging the initiative of the ITD to modify the Income Tax
Returns, desire that the sector specific analysis may now be taken up
urgently to analyze the efficacy/misuse of sector specific tax deduction/tax
subsidy as this will go a long way in ensuring efficient use of tax incentives

and enabling modifications or ‘any other additions needed thereto.

Absence of Section 80G Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 11)

26. The Committee had noted that donation u/s 80G entails revenue foregone
on account of exemption to recipients and also deduction to donors. As per Audit,
out of eighty seven cases falling under stand-alone hospital category, the section
80G certificates were available only in 10 per cent of cases. The Committee had
further noted that in the absence of section 80G certificates, it was not clear as to
how the Assessing Officers cross-verified the donation receipts vis-a-vis the
claims. Further, there is no provision in the ITD module to enable validation of
section 80G certificates by Assessing Officers on similar lines as is done in the
case of TDS certificates under TRACES. According to ITD, the automated

10


generation of 80G certificates on similar lines as under TRACES would not be
feasible to implement and would be extremely complicated for small donors and
small exempt organizations who would have to submit a statement to the
Department and then obtain a certificate to be given to the donor. However, there
was a provision in the Income tax return for providing PAN/TAN of the donee so
as to enable checking of the correctness of the claim while processing the case
by the Department. The Committee were of the view that the ITD may issue
specific instructions to be followed while giving and receiving donations. The list
of the donors should invariably have either PAN/ Aadhar number quoted against
each of them and the ITD before allowing deduction/ exemption make a test
check of a prescribed percentage of donors on random basis and the donees to
ensure correctness of the claims.

27. 116 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

"Currently, the donor availing deduction under section 80G is required to
file the details of PAN of the donee and the amount of donation in his/her
return of income but the donee entity registered u/s 12AA or approved u/s
10(23C) in receipt of donation is not required to file the donor wise details
of such donation received. A mechanism akin to TRACES system for
matching of each claim of donation u/ s 80G by donor to the income
disclosed by donee would require a scheme similar to Centralised
Processing of Statement scheme as in the case of TRACES, the
legislative backing for which has to be provided.

Under the current provisions of the Act, no format for the manner in which
receipt of donation received has been prescribed in the Act/rules.
However, under the sub-rule (3) of Rule 17CA, format of a receipt to be
issued by an electoral trust in respect of donation received has been
specified.

Further, w.e.f 01.04.2018 no deduction u/ s 80G shall be allowed in
respect of any cash donation exceeding two thousand rupees.
Accordingly, all donations above the sum of two thousand rupees will be
through the banking channel and thereby recording the details of the
donors."

11


28. The Committee while noting that there is no provision in the Income
Tax Department module to enable validation of section 80G certificates by
Assessing Officers on similar lines as is done in the case of TDS
certificates under TDS Reconciliation, Analysis and Correction Enabling
System (TRACES) had desired that the ITD may issue specific instructions
to be followed while giving and receiving donations and the list of the
donors should invariably have either Permanent Account Number (PAN) or
Aadhar number quoted against each of them. The Committee had also
desired that ITD before allowing deduction/ exemption should make a test
check of a prescribed percentage of donors on random basis to ensure
correctness of the claims. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that though the donor availing deduction under section 80G is
required to file the details of PAN of the donee and the amount of donation
in his/her return of income but an entity registered u/s 12AA or approved u/
5 10(23C) in receipt of donation is not required to file the donor wise details
of such donation received. The Committee further, note from the reply of
Ministry that w.e.f 01.04.2018 no deduction u/s 80G shall be allowed in
respect of any cash donation exceeding two thousand rupees and
accordingly, all donations above the sum of two thousand rupees will be
through the banking channel and thereby recording the details of the
donors. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the Government
should also ensure that the entities registered under Section 12AA and
10(23C) maintain a list of donors with either their PAN or Aadhar numbers
quoted against each of them. Further, since donations up to two thousand
rupees are still allowed in cash, receipts issued to such donors should also
mandatorily have PAN/Aadhar quoted against them. Such a step would
ensure transparency in giving/ receiving donations and also leave a trail for
audit.

12


Disallowance of expenditure incurred on freebies

Recommendation (Para No. 12)

29. The Committee had noted that the referral fees paid to the doctors by
private hospitals, nursing homes, diagnostics centres etc. for referring patients
and payments made on account of advertisement expenses by the medical
practitioners were allowed, although such expenditure has been held as
disallowable and “unethical” as per CBDT’s directives and Indian Medical Council
(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 read with
Homoeopathic Practitioners - (Professional Conduct, Etiquette & Code of Ethics)
Regulations respectively. The Committee, however, observed that despite the
directives in this regard, such benefits are still being distributed, though in other
forms. The Committee were of the view that in order to ensure transparency in
the business activities, such expenses, being related to promotion of business,
be allowed to be incurred from the profits after tax of the
hospitals/pharmaceutical and allied industries and similarly, these may be made
taxable in the hands of the beneficiaries.

30. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

"CBDT has issued Circular No. 5/2012 dated 1.8.2012 titled “Inadmissibility
of Expenses incurred in providing freebies to Medical Practitioner by
Pharmaceutical and allied Health Sector Industry”. Para 3 of the said
states that:

Section 37(1) of Income Tax Act provides for deduction of any revenue
expenditure (other than those failing under sections 30 to 36) from the
business Income if such expense is laid out/expended wholly or
exclusively for the purpose of business or profession. However, the
explanation appended to this sub-section denies claim of any such
expense, if the same has been incurred for a purpose which is either an
offence or prohibited by law.

Thus, the claim of any expense incurred in providing above mentioned or
similar freebies in violation of the provisions of Indian Medical Council
(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 shall be
inadmissible under section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act being an expense
prohibited by the law. This disallowance shall be made in the hands of
such pharmaceutical or allied health sector Industries or other assessee
which has provided aforesaid freebies and claimed it as a deductable
expense in its accounts against income.”

13


31.

Hence, it is clear from the above paragraph that now when such expenses

are disallowed under Sec. 37(1), it implies that such expenses shall have to be

incurred from profits after tax of the hospitals/pharmaceutical and allied

industries. In other words, disallowance of expenditure under the Income-tax Act

means that such expenditure cannot be reduced from the taxable profits.

32.

As regards to the other issue of such expenditure to be made taxable in

the hands of the beneficiaries, attention is sought to Paragraph 4 of the said

Circular:

33.

“It is also clarified that the sum equivalent to value of freebies enjoyed by
the aforesaid medical practitioner or professional associations is also
taxable as business income or income from other sources as the case may
be depending on the facts of each case. The Assessing Officers of such
medical practitioner or professional associations should examine the same
and take an appropriate action.

This may be brought to the notice of all the officers of the charge for
necessary action.

Hence, it is clear from the above paragraph that the aggregate amount of
such expenses is taxable in the hands of the beneficiaries as per extant
law.

Accordingly, no action needs to be taken on the recommendation of the
committee."

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments

“CBDT circular no.5/2012 dated 1.08.2012 has not specified disallowance
of items of expenditure other than freebies given by pharmaceutical or
allied healthcare industries that are deemed as unlawful under the Acts,
rules and regulations specific to private healthcare sector assessees. It is
reiterated that the Assessing Officers are taking divergent views due to the
lack of clarity in CBDT instructions in this regard. Hence the CBDT may
issue further necessary clarifications to ensure uniformity and consistency
in assessments, even without amending the law. Action taken in this
regard may be intimated to audit."

4


34. In their further comments to the above said audit observations, the Ministry
stated as under:

"In this regard, it is stated that CBDT’s Circular No. 5/2012 not only covers
the freebies but it covers all kind of expenses which are prohibited under
Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics)
Regulations, 2002 (‘MCI Regulations’) including referral fee. In this regard,
Para no.3 of the CBDT Circular No.5/2012 is reproduced as below:

Quote

3. Section 37(1) of Income Tax Act provides for deduction of any revenue
expenditure (other than those failing under sections 30 to 36) from the
business Income if such expense is laid out/expended wholly or exclusively
for the purpose of business or profession. However, the explanation
appended to this sub-section denies claim of any such expense, if the same
has been incurred for a purpose which is either an offence or prohibited by
law.

Thus, the claim of any expense incurred in providing above mentioned or
similar freebies in violation of the provisions of Indian Medical Council
(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 shall
be inadmissible under section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act being an
expense prohibited by the law. This disallowance shall be made in the
hands of such pharmaceutical or allied health sector Industries or other
assessee which has provided aforesaid freebies and claimed it as a
deductible expense in its accounts against income.

Unquote
Further, it is also relevant to refer to para no.6.4.1 and 6.4.2 of the MCI
Regulations 2002 which prohibits receipt of any consideration or return for
referring, recommending a patient. The relevant paras of the MCI guidelines
are reproduced as below: -

Quote
6.4 Rebates and Commission:

6.4.1 A physician shall not give, solicit, or receive nor shall he offer to give
solicit or receive, any gift, gratuity, commission or bonus in consideration
of or return for the referring, recommending or procuring of any patient
for medical, surgical or other treatment. A physician shall not directly or
indirectly, participate in or be a party to act of division, transference,

15


assignment, subordination, rebating, splitting or refunding of any fee for
medical, surgical or other treatment.

6.4.2 Provisions of para 6.4.1 shall apply with equal force to the referring,
recommending or procuring by a physician or any person, specimen
or material for diagnostic purposes or other study/work. Nothing in this
section, however, shall prohibit payment of salaries by a qualified physician
to other duly qualified person rendering medical care under his supervision.

Unquote

In view of the above position, it is stated that there is no ambiguity in
CBDT’s Circular No.5/2012 as it covers all kind of expenses which are
prohibited under MCI Regulations,2002 including the referral fee which are
prohibited under said guidelines. Accordingly, no action needs to be taken
on the recommendations of the Audit.

35. The Committee had noted that the referral fees paid to the doctors by
private hospitals, nursing homes, diagnostics centres etc. for referring
patients and payments made on account of advertisement expenses by the
medical practitioners were allowed, although such expenditure has been
held as disallowable and “unethical” as per CBDT’s directives and Indian
Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations,
2002 read with Homoeopathic Practitioners - (Professional Conduct,
Etiquette & Code of Ethics) Regulations respectively. The Committee had,
however, observed that despite the directives in this regard, such benefits
were still being distributed, though in other forms. The Committee in their
original report had observed that in order to ensure transparency in the
business activities, such expenses, being related to promotion of
business, be allowed to be incurred from the profits after tax of the
hospitals/pharmaceutical and allied industries and similarly, these may be
made taxable in the hands of the beneficiaries. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that the claim of any expense incurred in providing

above mentioned or similar freebies in violation of the provisions of Indian

16


Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations,
2002 shall be inadmissible under section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act being
an expense prohibited by the law. This disallowance shall be made in the
hands of such pharmaceutical or allied health sector industries or other
assessee which has provided aforesaid freebies and claimed it as a
deductable expense in its accounts against income. Further, the
Committee note that the sum equivalent to value of freebies enjoyed by the
aforesaid medical practitioner or professional associations is also taxable
as business income or income from other sources as the case may be
depending on the facts of each case. The Committee desire the Ministry to
provide number of cases where the expenses claimed by private hospitals,
nursing homes, diagnostics centres etc. for referring patients and other
freebies were disallowed by the Department in last three years and
similarly the number of cases where such income was added to the
medical practitioners’ income and the action taken against them as stated

above.

36. The Committee, further, reiterate that though the MCI has termed
freebies and such other expenditure as “unethical”, the practice is,
however, widely prevalent. The Committee feel that mere disallowance of
expenses without taking any action against those giving and receiving
such prohibited expenses will not help in curbing the malpractice. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that, instead of terming such expenses
‘unethical’ and only disallowing them, the emphasis should rather be on
transparency and to ensure the same, disclosure of such freebies by both
the parties may be made mandatory which will, in turn, rule out the

possibility of any tax gap arising out of such freebies.

17


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee observed that the fees charged by health professionals, private
hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, medical colleges, diagnostic centres,
pathological labs, medical supply stores etc. for their services are mostly received in cash,
which has a potential for evasion of tax. The Committee were of the view that an
estimation of the probable number of medical professionals, private hospitals, diagnostic
labs, medical supply stores etc. in the country would be useful to gauge the efficacy of
the measures taken by the Department to broaden the tax base in the health sector and,
therefore, desired that the ITD may in coordination with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and State
Governments collect authentic and accurate data and apprise the Committee thereof.

[Observations/Recommendation No. 4 of 103" Report of the Public
Accounts Committee (16"LokSabha)]

Action Taken by the Ministry

The process of collecting authentic data is being done upon after consultation with
respective stakeholders. Besides the Department collects information from time to time to
widen tax base and as well as to deepen the tax base. The information received from
various sources is processed for various suitable actions, provided under the Income Tax
Act.

This has been vetted by Audit vide their letter No. 167/RADT/52-2016/Vol.VI
dated 08/04/2019.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

Ministry may provide thedetails of action taken by Income Tax Department to co-
ordinate with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation and State Governments with the objective of widening and
deepening of the tax base in the healthcare sectormay be intimated.

Reply on vetting comments of Audit by Ministry of Finance

The Department is considering the availability of information, scope, mechanism
and terms of the MoU to be signed with regard to data exchange with the Ministry of

—|8-


Health and Family Welfare. Officers of Ministry of Statistics & Programme
Implementation (MoSPI) visited this Directorate of Income Tax Systems to discuss the
format of data requested by MoSPI for 7th Economic Census and other modalities.
Department would propose to MOSPI to share information with PAN of Medical
Professionals collected during its door to door survey.

[Ministry of Finance F.No. 246/07/2016-A
& PAC-II dated 9 August, 2019]

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3 December, 2019 Chairperson
12 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

-- 14 -


MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 19 NOVEMBER, 2019.

The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. on 19 November, 2019 in
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. २. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

RAJYA SABHA

SNOaR WD

9. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
10. Shri ९. M. Ramesh
11. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Smt. Anita Pattanayak - DAI (RC)

2 Smt. Meenakshi Gupta - DAI (CRA)

3. Smt. Sangeeta Choure - DG (Accounts)
4. — Shri Sunil Dadhe - DGA (CE)

5. Shri K. Srinivasan - DGA (RC)

6. Shri Deepak Anurag - DGA (Cord.)

207


2

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that the meeting has been convened for (i) Briefing by
Audit on the proposal of Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) seeking
approval of the Committee for "Revision of ceilings for Exception Reporting in
Appropriation Accounts" ; and (ii) Consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports
on the  subjects:- (a) Action taken by the Government on _ the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 95" Report (16"
Lok Sabha) on “Health and Family Welfare”; and (b) Action taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their 103 Report (16" Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of Entities Engaged in Health
& Allied Sector”.

3 tek pores press eee
4. अत peers seer eee
5 eek ee ee we
6 peers press frend eee
7. Thereafter, the Committee took-up for consideration and adoption

aforementioned draft Reports. The draft Reports could not be adopted as the
Members sought more time to go through them. Chairperson invited written
suggestions, if any, from the Members for inclusion in draft Reports within seven days
and desired that the draft Reports may be taken up for consideration and adoption,

subsequently.

8. The Chairperson thanked the Members and the representatives of the C&AG of
India for attending the sitting.

The Committee then adjourned.

ea


MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 3 DECEMBER, 2019.

The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1605 hrs. on 3 December, 2019 in

Committee Room No. '2', Block A, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New

Delhi.

© ON 2ARYWN

=
°

11.
12.
13.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T.R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri M.L.K. Raja
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja
Shri U.C. Bhardwaj

- 2Q—

- Chairperson

- Director
- Additional Director
- Additional Director


2

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Smt. Anita Pattanayak - Dy. CAG (RC)

2. Shri Parag Prakash - Dy. CAG (Accounts)

3. Smt. Meenakshi Gupta - Dy. CAG (CRA)

4. Smt. Sangeeta Chaure - DG-Accounts

5. Shri S. Dadhe - DG (DGACE)

6. Shri Sandeep Lall -  PD-PC

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Audit officials and

stated that the following three draft reports may be taken up for consideration and
adoption:-

(i) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their 957 Report (16" Lok Sabha) on “Health and Family
Welfare”;

(ii) Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their 103 Report (167 Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of
Entities Engaged in Health & Allied Sector’; and

(iii) Revision of ceilings for Exception Reporting in Appropriation Accounts.

The Committee adopted the draft Reports without any modification and authorised
the Chairperson to finalise the Report in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.

3 cd eee seek Pood
4 eke seer see Cad
5 eee crest eee cones
6 ood eee see ee
7 अर eee Hee ered

The Committee then adjourned,

_9>-


APPENDIX-III
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,13,14,15 and 16
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of

the reply of the Government:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3 and 12

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 4

= 2a

16

Total : 13
Percentage:81%

Total: 0
Percentage:0%

Total : 02
Percentage:13%

Total : 01
Percentage:6%