 
 
0 
 
148 
 
SHORT LEVY OF TAX AND INTEREST DUE 
TO EXCESS ALLOWANCE OF ITC ON 
PURCHASE OF CAPITAL GOODS 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (UT) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
1 
 
PAC NO. 2378 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O R T Y -
E I G H T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
                                       
   
 
    Presented to Hon’ble Speaker Lok Sabha on:  29.4.2024 
                                                                  
    Presented to Lok Sabha on:              …………….. 
 
               Laid in Rajya Sabha on:    …………….. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
April 2024/ Chaitra 1945 (Saka) 
SHORT LEVY OF TAX AND INTEREST 
DUE TO EXCESS ALLOWANCE OF 
ITC ON PURCHASE OF CAPITAL 
GOODS 

 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)                        (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 PART- I  
    REPORT 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
   
 APPENDICES  
 *Minutes of the adoption of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) 
through digital circulation on 20.4.2024 
 
 
*Not appended in the report 

 
 
3 
 
                                            
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18.    Shri Derek O’Brien 
19.    Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.    Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.    Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.    Vacant2 
 
 
                   SECRETARIAT 
 
        Dr. Sanjeev Sharma             -   Joint Secretary 
        Shri Partha Goswami           -   Director 
        Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma  -   Deputy Secretary 
        Shri Inam Ahmed                 -    Committee Officer 
         
  

 
 
4 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been authorized 
by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Forty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on “SHORT LEVY OF TAX AND INTEREST DUE TO EXCESS 
ALLOWANCE OF ITC ON PURCHASE OF CAPITAL GOODS” based on Para 3.9 of 
Comptroller and Auditor General's Report No. 24 of 2022.  
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of 
the House on 20.12.2022.   
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 20.11.2023. The Committee considered and adopted this 
Report vide digital circulation on 20.4.2024.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite 
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI      ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)         Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
PART-I 
REPORT 
 
 
The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and 
Report Para 3.9 of the Report No. 24 of 2022 on the subject “Short Levy of Tax and 
Interest due to Excess Allowance of ITC on Purchase of Capital Goods”.  While 
examining the subject under consideration, the Committee acquiesced themselves of 
the revelations of short levy of tax of Rs. 8.54 lakh (including interest) owing to the 
allowance of excess ITC (Input Tax Credit) on purchase of capital goods by the 
designated office. The above para relates to assessment done under section 29 of the 
Punjab Value Added Tax Act, 2005 as extended to UT of Chandigarh read with section 
9 of Central Sales Tax Act 1956 
 
2. The Committee learnt that Section 13(1) of Punjab VAT Act (extended to UT, 
Chandigarh) provides that a taxable person shall be entitled to input tax credit, in such 
manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed, in respect of input tax on 
taxable goods, including capital goods, purchased by him from a taxable person within 
the State, during the tax period. 
 
3. Further, it also came to light before the Committee that in terms of provisions 
contained in item No. 16 of Schedule ‘B’ appended to Punjab VAT Act as extended to 
UT Chandigarh, Capital goods i.e. Plant and Machinery and parts thereof are liable to 
tax at the rate of five per cent. 
 
4. Moreover, Section 32 (3) of the Act provides that if a person fails to declare the 
tax in a return, he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one and half per 
cent per month on such amount of tax from the due date for payment till the date he 
actually pays such amount of tax. 
 
5. In light of the above provision of the Punjab VAT Act (extended to UT, 
Chandigarh), the Audit (October, 2019) flagged a major aberration from the records. 
Audit noticed (October 2019) from the records relating to the assessment of M/s Sukhija 

 
 
6 
 
Real Estate Pvt. Ltd., for the year 2011-12 that the designated officer had incorrectly 
allowed input tax credit (ITC) of ₹ 5.72 lakh on the purchase value of capital goods of ₹ 
52.49 lakh, instead of admissible ITC of ₹ 2.62 lakh. Computation of ITC at a rate higher 
than the prescribed rate of five per cent had resulted in excess allowance of input credit 
tax amounting to ₹ 3.10 lakh, apart from interest payable amounting to ₹ 5.44 lakh under 
Section 32(3) of the Act. 
 
6. The Committee further came to know from the Audit Report that on being pointed 
out (June 2020 & January 2022), the Department, while admitting the objection, stated 
(February 2022) that with the approval of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, the 
order had been amended as per the provision of Section 29(7) of Punjab VAT Act, and a 
rectification assessment order with a demand for ₹ 10.79 lakh (including tax, interest 
and penalty) had been raised. Final outcome was awaited. The matter was referred to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs in January, 2022. 
 
7. Regarding the action taken by the Chandigarh UT Administration, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in their written note submitted the details before the Committee as 
produced below:- 
 
“The case for the year 2011-12 was rectified u/s 29(7) of PVAT Act, 2005 as 
extended to U.T. Chandigarh. Additional demand of ? 10.78 lakh was created 
and the dealer had filed an Appeal before 1st Appellate Authority i.e. Deputy 
Excise & Taxation Commissioner (Appeal), U.T. Chandigarh vide appeal no. 
138/2021 dated 28.02.2022 after depositing the 25% of the additional demand of 
Rs 2,70,000/- vide Tr. No. 81 dated 08.03.2022 against the rectification order. 
The appeal has been rejected by the 1st Appellate Authority vide order dated 
13.07.2023. Thereafter, the dealer has filed an Appeal before the Hon’ble VAT 
Tribunal on dated 25.09.2023 against the order of DETC (Appeal), which is still 
pending. 
 
Further, disciplinary action has been recommended against the concerned officer 
vide office memo no. 4275 dated 18.04.2023 (Annexure A). 

 
 
7 
 
 
Chandigarh Administration has also issued directions to all the ward in-charges 
vide memo No 4233 dated 18.4.2023 so that such irregularities do not occur in 
future and officers have been directed to follow the due procedure as per extant 
Act and Rules.” 
 
8. While deposing before the Committee during the course of evidence, the 
representative of the UT, Chandigarh stated as below:- 
 
“Para 3.9 is regarding the excess allowance of ITC worth Rs. 8.54 lakh where we 
have accepted the findings of the Audit.  A rectification order was made and a 
demand of Rs. 10.78 lakh was made.  On receiving Rs. 10.78 lakh demand, the 
assessee appealed before the first appellate authority after paying 25 per cent 
tax.  The appeal has been denied.  Now, they are before the hon. VAT tribunal 
challenging the order of the assessing authority and also the first appellate 
authority. Due action has also been taken against the officers.  SOP has now 
been set so that these kinds of issues do not happen in future.” 
 
9. Responding further to a query of the Committee, the representative of UT, 
Chandigarh submitted as under:- 
 
“Sir, we assure you and also commit you that this will not be repeated.  Now, the 
institutional corrective mechanisms have been installed.” 
 
10. When enquired about the realisation of Rs. 10.79 lakh including tax interest and 
penalty in full from M/S Sukhija Real Estate Limited, the representative of UT, 
Chandigarh further submitted before the Committee as mentioned under:- 
“Sir, as I mentioned, the demand for Rs. 10.78 lakh in the rectification order was 
given.  When this demand was given, the assessee appealed against the order of 
the demand before ethe first appellate authority.  The first appellate authority 
rejected the appeal and when he went for the first appeal, he paid 25 per cent of 
the demand due which is as per the provision of the law under the Punjab VAT 
Act and now since his appeal is before the VAT Tribunal, depending on the order 
of the hon. VAT Tribunal, concerned process for the recovery of the pending 
demand will be completed.”  
 
11. The Committee also found from the Final Action Taken Notes of the Ministry that 
as a remedial measure, the Chandigarh Administration have issued an advisory 
regarding the framing of assessment in future vide office memo no. 4233 dated 
18.04.2023. 

 
 
8 
 
 
  
PART II 
        OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
1. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee were 
apprised of the provision of the Punjab Value Added Tax (VAT) Act (extended to 
UT, Chandigarh) which inter-alia mandates that capital goods i.e. Plant and 
Machinery and Parts thereof are liable to tax at the rate of five percent. The 
Committee, in this context, note that the C&AG vide their Report No. 24 of 2022 
under Para 3.9 have flagged the issue arising out of wrong computation of ITC 
(Input Tax Credit) leading to short levy of tax of Rs. 8.54 lakh, including interest. 
From the records relating to the assessment of M/s Sukhija Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. 
for the year 2011-12, it surfaced that the designated officer had incorrectly 
allowed ITC of Rs. 5.72 lakh on the purchase value of capital goods of Rs. 52.49 
lakh, instead of admissible ITC of Rs. 2.62 lakh. Thus, the erroneous computation 
of ITC at a rate higher than the prescribed rate of five percent had resulted in 
excess allowance of input credit tax amounting to Rs. 3.10 lakh, apart from 
interest payable amounting to Rs. 5.44 lakh under section 32(3) of the Act. 
 
2. The Committee are perturbed to take note of the existence of such fallibility 
in cases of basic calculation leading to loss to the revenue collection. In an era of 
technological advancement and usage of softwares in office work places, the 
error in calculation can be easily managed and obviated. Keeping in view the 
collateral financial damages such human errors may cause, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to engage and utilize the emerging technologies in the 

 
 
9 
 
Excise and Taxation Department of UT, Chandigarh and elsewhere to mitigate the 
losses to exchequer and to ensure efficient handling of accounts.  
3. The Committee, after thorough scrutiny of the audit findings and the Action 
Taken Notes of the Ministry are of the firm opinion that Departments of the 
Government handling revenue matters need to have robust mechanism in place 
for maintaining a proper check and balance on the assessment/collection 
procedures of taxes etc. In the instant case, the error in calculating the ITC by 
designated Officer/office was highlighted after 8-9 years of the occurrence though 
the Audit Findings and the total recovery is still due on account of the pendency 
of the 2nd appeal of the dealer before the VAT Tribunal, as can be ascertained 
from the facts provided by the Ministry. The Committee are of the view that there 
is probability of existence of other instances of similar nature, wherein erroneous 
computation of assessment cause loss of revenue to the Government. Such 
possibility, even if remote, should not remain unexamined and the Ministry 
should explore all possible measures to undertake a holistic review of the 
Departments under their purview to cull out such anomalies and take corrective 
action at the earliest while also fixing due accountability of the same. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to initiate an inquiry without any delay 
and  conduct internal audit of the Excise and Taxation Department, UT, 
Chandigarh in particular and other Departments also in a time bound manner. 
4.  The Committee take cognizance of the submissions made by the 
representative of Union Territory of Chandigarh that SOP has been prepared and 
institutional corrective mechanism have been instituted to ensure that such 
errors  in assessment of tax do not occur in future. Though the Committee find 

 
 
10 
 
this corrective measure to be a step in right direction, they have not been made 
aware with the finer details of such mechanism. The details of such SOP and 
corrective mechanism for cross checking and filtering the steps involved in 
assessment ought to be brought in public domain for ensuring transparency and 
fixing accountability. The erring officials should not be spared and proper 
provision of punitive measures need to be not only incorporated in the SOP but 
also be complied with in ‘Letter and Spirit’. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to keep a watch over the implementation of their SOP and mechanism 
so instituted to prevent occurrence of such aberrations in future.   
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI      ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)         Public Accounts Committee 
 
  
 