149 
 
 
REFORMS IN BANKING SECTOR 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


PAC NO. 2379 
 
 
H U N D R E D  A N D  F O R T Y  N I N T H  
R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29.04.2024 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: ………….…….. 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ……………………. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
April 2024/ Vaishakh 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
REFORMS IN BANKING SECTOR 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
   
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………… (iii) 
PART I Report………………………………………………  
PART II Observations/ Recommendations………………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the Public 
Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 20 
February, 2024 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.     Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Brijendra Singh 
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13. Shri Jayant Sinha 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.     Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.     Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr  Sanjeev Sharma            -    Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Partha Goswami           -    Director 
3.  Shri Atul Bhave                    -     Deputy Secretary 
 
4.  Smt. Rinku Awasthi              -     Committee Officer 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having 
been authorised by the Committee, do present this Hundred and Forty-
seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Reforms in Banking 
Sector” relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services.  
2. This preliminary Report is based on the detailed examination and oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of 
Baroda, UCO Bank, Bank of Maharashtra, Bank of India, Central Bank of 
India, Union Bank of India, Canara Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, Indian 
Bank and Punjab & Sind Bank taken on 20 February, 2024.  
 
3. The Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the Draft 
Preliminary Report on the aforementioned subject pending examination of 
other witnesses and authorized the Chairperson to finalise the same and 
present it to the Hon’ble Speaker.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and 
form Part- II of the Report. 
5.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance and Public Sector Banks for 
tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
6.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat. 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
 07 Vaishakha, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 

PART-I 
REPORT 
REFORMS IN BANKING SECTOR 
I. Introductory  
 
1. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) took up the subject ‘Reforms in Banking 
Sector’ for detailed examination and took oral evidence of various stakeholders who also 
furnished background notes on the subject.  
As per the Background note submitted by the Department of Financial Services, the 
Government, over the last few years, have taken various reform measures to address the 
issues related to credit discipline, responsible lending and improved governance, adoption 
of technology, and proper regulation of cooperative banks. These include, inter alia, the 
following:  
(i) Credit discipline was instilled through – 
(a) the enactment of the Insolvency and bankruptcy Code(IBC); 
(b) set up of the Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) to 
monitor corporate loans across banks coupled with transparent recognition of 
stressed loans as NPAs; and  
(c) systematic checking of high-value accounts for wilful default and fraud. 
(ii) Recognition and resolution of stress - To protect financial institutions in case of default 
or payment delay by large borrowers, RBI/Government has taken multiple steps which 
include, inter alia, the following— 
(a) A comprehensive principle-based framework has been put in place for early 
recognition and time-bound resolution of stress in the borrower accounts, 
manifesting in payment default. Delayed resolution is disincentivised under the 

framework as lenders are required to make additional provisioning in case of 
resolution plans are not implemented within specified timeline.  
(b) Concrete steps have been taken in resolution of specific, large-value stressed 
accounts under the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. 
(c) Minimum provisioning requirements have been prescribed for both standard 
advances and non-performing advances which are expected to mitigate the 
impact of default by large borrowers, on the financial health of the lenders. 
(d) Institution of comprehensive, automated Early Warning Systems (EWS) in banks, 
use of third-party data and workflow for time-bound remedial actions, to 
proactively detect stress, reducing slippage into NPAs. 
(e) Regulatory framework for Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) has been 
amended to strengthen transparency in the ARC sector and to improve the 
corporate governance standards in ARCs; and 
(f) Market based mechanisms have been strengthened to enable the financial 
institutions to better manage the credit risk on their balance sheets through a 
comprehensive framework for transfer of stressed assets to eligible transferees. 
(iii) Technology has massively expanded digital transactions through the Jan-Dhan – 
Aadhaar – Mobile (JAM) linkage, interoperable Bank Mitras, UPI and DBTs.  
(iv) A Reform Agenda of PSBs through a unique Enhanced Access & Service Excellence 
(EASE) Reforms has been initiated. It has enabled objective and benchmarked 
progress on all key areas in PSBs — viz., governance, prudential lending, risk 
management, technology- and data-driven banking, and outcome-centric HR. An 
independent agency has been engaged by Indian Banks’ Association to measure 
bank-wise performance on a comprehensive set of parameters against respective 
benchmarks on reform priorities. 
(v) Governance in PSBs has been strengthened through— 

(a) arm’s length selection of top management through Financial Services Institutions 
Bureau (FSIB); 
(b) introduction of non-executive chairmen in nationalised banks; 
(c) widening talent pool and instituting performance-based extensions for MD; 
(d) instituting appraisal by Boards of top management and Non-Official Directors 
(NODs);  
(e) effectively using NODs by giving them mandate akin to that of independent 
directors; and 
(f) filling up top positions through market recruitment.  
(vi) With the amalgamation of banks, the efficacy of the banking sector has been enhanced 
by leveraging economies of scale and synergies. Amalgamation has enabled the 
amalgamated banks─ 
(a) to raise funds from the markets at a cheaper cost; 
(b) greater financial capacity to support growth; and 
(c) to increase thrust on adoption of technology for efficient banking and cost 
optimisation. 
(vii) Maintaining general confidence level of bankers in taking prudent risks- To support 
decision-making and to prevent harassment for genuine commercial decisions by 
bankers, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been amended to prohibit conduct 
of inquiry/investigation of offences relatable to decision taken by public servant in 
discharge of functions, without previous approval of the authority competent to remove 
him.  
( Reference- Background Note of DFS) 
 
II. Performance of banking sector 
2. The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, in their Background Note 
have further submitted that as a result of Government’s overarching policy response to 

recognition of stress, resolution of stressed accounts, recapitalisation and reforms in banks, 
the financial health and robustness of public sector banks has since improved significantly. 
They further informed the Committee as follows- 
(i) Asset quality has improved significantly with— 
 Gross NPA ratio declining to 3.74% (₹3.52 lakh crore) in Dec-23 from 4.97% 
(₹2.79 lakh crore) in Mar-15 and from a peak of 14.58% (₹8.96 lakh crore) Mar-
18. 
 Net NPAs declining to ₹0.78 lakh crore (0.85%) in Dec-23 from ₹2.15 lakh crore 
(3.92%) in Mar-15 and from a peak of ₹4.54 lakh crore (7.97%) in Mar-18. 
(ii) Resilience has increased with provision coverage ratio increasing from 46.04% in Mar-
15 to a healthy 92.7% in Dec-23. 
(iii) Capital adequacy has improved significantly with capital adequacy ratio improving by 
290 bps to reach 14.35% in Dec-23 from 11.45% in Mar-15. 
(iv) During FY 2022-23, PSBs have recorded highest ever aggregate net profit of ₹1.05 
lakh crore against ₹0.67 lakh crore in FY 2021-22. Further, PSBs have recorded 
aggregate net profit of ₹0.98 lakh crore in the first nine months of FY 2023-24.  
(v) PSBs declared dividend of ₹20,964 crore to shareholders (GoI share- ₹13,804 crore) in 
FY 2022-23 against total dividend of ₹13,170 crore to shareholders (GoI share- ₹8,718 
crore) in FY 2021-22. 
(vi) Enabled by implementation of comprehensive reforms, the financial health of PSBs has 
improved significantly, enhancing their ability to raise capital (in the form of both equity 
and bonds) from the market. PSBs have mobilised capital of ₹4.20 lakh crore from the 
market from FY 2014-15 to FY 2023-24 (up to 31.12.2023). 
( Reference- Background Note of DFS) 
  
 

III. Reforms as initiated by the Reserve Bank of India  
3. The Committee, during the course of examination of the subject, were informed that 
Asset Quality Review initiated by RBI in 2015 revealed high incidence of NPAs in banks. 
Following the AQR results banks initiated transparent recognition, reclassifying standard 
restructured advances as NPA and providing for expected losses on such advances. 
Government implemented a comprehensive 4R’s Strategy of recognising NPAs 
transparently, Resolution and Recovery, Recapitalising PSBs, and Reforms in the financial 
ecosystem.  For the speedy recovery process the government brought (IBC) i.e. the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. Before the IBC came into force in 2016, companies under 
bankruptcy proceedings would take inordinately long time to be liquidated. The IBC 
provided for a market-linked and time-bound resolution of stressed assets. The IBC made it 
easier for banks to recover their defaulted loans.  As part of the strategy, the government 
infused an unprecedented Rs 3,10,997 crore to recapitalise PSBs during the last five 
financial years -- from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The recapitalisation programme provided much-
needed support to the PSBs and prevented the possibility of any default on their part.  The 
banking reforms undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India in the recent past can be 
summed up as under-  
(i) Establishment of National Asset Reconstruction Company Limited, NARCL, together 
with IBC, has helped in creating institutional structures to address the recurring 
stress on banks’ balance sheets.  To ensure timely and better realisation in One-
Time Settlements (OTSs), online end to-end OTS platforms have been set up.  
(ii) Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 has been enacted to enable confiscation of 
fugitive economic offenders’ property. Heads of PSBs have been empowered to 
request for issuance of look-out circulars.  For mitigating risk on account of 
misrepresentation and fraud, use of third-party data sources for comprehensive due 
diligence across data sources has been instituted.  For effective monitoring and 
ensure proper due diligence in project financing, Board approved Loan Policies of 

PSBs now mandate tying up necessary clearances/approvals and linkages before 
disbursement, scrutiny of group balance sheet and ring-fencing of cash flows, and 
appraised of non-fund and tail risk.  For faster processing of loan proposals, Loan 
Management Systems have been put in place for personal and MSME loans.  
(iii)  National Financial Reporting Authority has been established as an independent 
regulator for enforcing auditing standards and ensuring audit quality. For effective 
and strengthen governance at the Board level, the position of Chairman and 
Managing Director (CMD) has been bifurcated into separate positions of a 
Nonexecutive Chairman and a MD & CEO.  A professional Banks Board Bureau 
(BBB) has been created for arm’s length selection of non-executive Chairmen and 
whole-time directors.  Amalgamation of banks that created stronger and larger banks 
with higher economies of scale, low costs and eventually increased profitability.   
(iv) Strengthening Regulatory Framework: The RBI has taken steps to strengthen the 
regulatory framework for banks, including revised prudential norms for capital, 
liquidity, and risk management. This is aimed at ensuring that banks have adequate 
buffers to withstand shocks and maintain financial stability.  
(v)  Improving Governance and Risk Management Practices: The RBI has emphasized 
the need for banks to improve their governance and risk management practices. This 
includes strengthening internal controls, enhancing data governance, and adopting 
robust cyber security measures.  Promoting Financial Inclusion: The RBI remains 
committed to promoting financial inclusion and expanding access to banking 
services for all segments of society. Initiatives such as Jan Dhan Yojana and 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana have been instrumental in achieving this goal.  
Enhancing Digital Banking Infrastructure: The RBI has recognized the importance 
of digital banking and has taken steps to enhance the digital infrastructure of the 
banking sector. This includes promoting the adoption of digital payments, developing 
innovative banking solutions, and strengthening cyber security measures.   

(vi) Consolidation and Rationalization of Public Sector Banks: The RBI has supported 
the consolidation and rationalization of public sector banks (PSBs) to create stronger 
and more resilient institutions. This is expected to improve the efficiency and 
profitability of PSBs.  Encouraging Private Sector Participation: The RBI has taken 
steps to encourage private sector participation in the banking sector. This includes 
easing licensing norms and promoting foreign direct investment (FDI) in the sector.   
(vii) Expanding the Scope of Banking Activities: The RBI has expanded the scope of 
banking activities by allowing banks to engage in non-banking financial activities 
(NBFA) such as mutual funds and insurance. This is aimed at creating a more 
diversified and competitive financial sector.   
(viii) Enhancing Customer Protection: The RBI has taken several measures to enhance 
customer protection in the banking sector. This includes strengthening grievance 
redressal mechanisms, promoting financial literacy, and improving transparency in 
banking practices.   
(ix) Promoting Sustainable Banking Practices: The RBI has encouraged banks to adopt 
sustainable banking practices and incorporate environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) considerations into their lending decisions. This is aimed at 
promoting sustainable and inclusive economic growth.   
(x) Strengthening Supervisory Framework: The RBI has strengthened its supervisory 
framework for banks by adopting risk-based supervision and enhancing off-site 
monitoring. This is aimed at identifying and addressing potential risks early on. 
(Ref- Background note of Punjab National Bank Page 40-43) 
 
IV. Enhanced Access And Service Excellence (EASE) Reforms  
4. The Punjab National Bank, vide their Background Note, have elaborated that the 
EASE Reforms Agenda was launched in 2018 by the Government and PSBs with the 
help of the Boston Consulting Group. EASE 1.0 resulted in significant improvements in 

resolving NPAs transparently. EASE 2.0 introduced new reform Action Points across six 
themes to promote responsible banking, customer responsiveness, credit off-take, 
financial inclusion and digitalization, governance, and HR. EASE 3.0 aimed to enhance 
banking experiences for customers by leveraging technology, with initiatives such as 
Diala-loan and PSBloansin59 minutes.com, partnerships with FinTechs and E-
commerce companies, and tech-enabled agriculture lending. EASE 4.0 committed PSBs 
to customer centric digital transformation through tech-enabled, simplified, and 
collaborative banking. EASE 5.0 will maintain its emphasis on improving digital customer 
experience and promoting integrated and inclusive banking using data-driven 
approaches in all areas.  
5. Further elaborating on the matter, the Bank informed that EASE 6.0 (FY 24) is 
focused on:  
 Delivering excellence in customer service with digital enablement: Hassle-free 
branch banking experience, Seamless call-center experience, intuitive 
mobile/internet banking, complaint redressal, customer acquisition, retention and 
relationship deepening and Inclusive near-home service delivery.   
 Digital and analytics-driven business improvement: Comprehensive digital 
banking for MSMEs, Banking solutions for Agri value chain, Digital marketing for 
enhanced customer engagement, Digitally-enabled sourcing and servicing of 
CASA deposit base and Partnership banking.  
  Tech and data enabled capability building: Strengthening specialized analytics 
function, Increased adoption of cloud technologies, Digital and analytics driven 
risk management, collections and recovery, strengthening cyber security and 
preventing cyber frauds.   
 Developing people and enhancing HR operations: Analyze drivers for employee 
Productivity, promote gender diversity, Strengthening specialization, succession 

planning and leadership Development, Data-driven manpower planning, role 
clarity, and target setting. 
(Ref- Background note of Punjab National Bank Page 40-43) 

V. Reforms as implemented by the Bank of Baroda 
5. According to the Background note submitted by the Bank of Baroda, the banking 
reforms have been primarily in the areas of technology, control of asset quality, capital 
norms, inclusiveness, regulation of other financial entities etc. Specifically the following 
reforms have been witnessed in the system which are noteworthy.  
(i) First has been the increasing use of technology in finance. Technology in finance 
has been an important enabler that has empowered to create a more inclusive and 
efficient financial ecosystem. Banks have been innovating and enhancing the quality 
and reach of their services using technological solutions for some time now. 
However, this got accelerated during the COVID period when mobility became a 
challenge and technology came to the rescue for fulfilling all our banking needs. The 
demands placed by the circumstances compelled banks and financial institutions to 
rethink their business processes and review their strategies. Video KYC, JAM trinity, 
Account Aggregator framework and other digital initiatives have enabled a decisive 
entry of the country into a digital finance era.  
(ii) Second was the continued focus on inclusiveness. The Reserve Bank has 
accelerated its efforts towards building an inclusive financial system where access to 
financial services is not limited to a basic bank account, but everyone has access to 
formal channels of credit and they are able to use their banking account to make 
digital payments. India’s payment systems are among the best in the world with real 
time fast retail payment system, UPI, enabling transactions of about Rs. 12 lakh 
crore per month in value and almost 26 crore transactions in daily volume. Financial 
inclusion needs to be redefined by developing bespoke products and services that 
are best suited to different strata of the society depending upon their income level. 
This shall include innovative solutions that make it easier for people to not only 
access basic but also to use a variety of financial services. Towards this end and to 
enable easy, adequate, and customized credit, the Reserve Bank has made 
provisions for differentiated banking license. These are niche banks which can help 

plug the gap in meeting specialised needs for banking products and services across 
a wider and diverse spectrum. In this endeavour RBI has adopted a three-pronged 
strategy which involves setting up of financial intermediaries for extending digital 
credit or facilitating digital loans, nurturing technological infrastructure to ensure safe 
and seamless credit disbursal and adopting a customer-first regulatory approach. As 
a first step in tackling supply side issues in the financial inclusion, new financial 
intermediaries have been introduced for provision of credit and to ensure financial 
services are available to the customer at ‘when and where basis’, thus translating 
into a truly ‘anywhere anytime banking’. This includes initiatives such as P2P lending 
Platforms, Digital Only NBFCs, Digital Banking Units etc. It is expected that such 
units would enable customers to have cost effective, convenient and enhanced 
digital experience of such products and services in an efficient, paperless, secured, 
and connected environment with most services being available in self-service mode 
at any time.  With the objective of creating market infrastructure for inclusive credit, 
India has made significant strides in creating enabling digital infrastructure in 
financial services space. UPI, GSTN, TReDS, JAM Trinity and Account Aggregators 
(AA) to cite a few. This strong ensemble of digital infrastructure has stabilised and as 
it matures, would pave way for expansion of credit in a seamless and timely manner 
which could be made digitally available in an almost paperless environment. AA’s 
capability to aggregate financial data spread across different financial service 
providers and to leverage this data to build analytics and insights to help consumers 
in their financial planning would allow financial service providers to offer customized 
products to their customers. The AA framework also has an important element of 
‘electronic consent architecture’ which is an improvement upon the open banking 
regimes of many developed countries. As UPI transformed the way people pay, the 
Account Aggregator has potential to transform credit by making it more seamless 
and accessible for everyone using digital infrastructure. The next trinity consisting of 
UPI, e-KYC and AA is expected to enable the next revolution in banking in the 

provision of customised and inclusive credit services. Last, the focus has been on a 
customer-first regulatory approach. This change in the banking business model with 
supportive technological transformations has expanded the realm of what’s possible. 
To encourage the use of UPI for medical and educational services, limit for 
payments to these institutions has been increased from Rs 1 lakh to Rs 5 lakh per 
transaction. It has also been proposed to introduce additional use cases through 
programmability and offline functionality for CBDCs, to also enable transactions with 
poor and limited internet connectivity. Recently, Virtual Rupay cards and UPI 
connectivity has been launched in Sri Lanka, and Mauritius as well. 
(iii)  Third, in recent years, several regulatory and supervisory initiatives have 
strengthened the banking sector. An Insolvency and Bankruptcy code (IBC) and the 
establishment of a National Asset Reconstruction company (NARCL) have created 
the institutional environment for addressing stress in banks’ balance sheets on an 
enduring basis. Off-site surveillance systems have been made sharper and more 
comprehensive by harnessing SupTech – a web-based end-to-end workflow 
application called DAKSH and an automatic data reporting platform called the 
Centralised Information and Management System (CIMS). Big data techniques are 
being leveraged to supplement supervisory initiatives while Cyber Range — a virtual 
controlled environment and tool — helps in cyber security drills. Mergers have 
brought in efficiency gains while a regulatory sandbox propels innovation. Extension 
of depositor protection cover, upfront payment of deposit insurance and the 
integration of various ombudsman schemes under one umbrella has made the 
dispute redressal mechanism simpler and more responsive, all boosting public 
confidence in the banking system. RBI is also working on building a cloud facility for 
the financial sector in India. Further, RBI has proposed to adopt framework for 
‘authentication of digital payment transaction’. Internationally, RBI and BoE have 
signed a MoU relating to cooperation and exchange of information in relation to 

CCIL. This will enable the BoE to allow CCIL as third country CCP, which is a pre-
requisite for UK banks to clear transactions through CCIL. 
(iv)  Fourth, the focus has been on financial stability. Banks are required to comply with 
the prudential regulations issued by the Reserve Bank and are required to maintain 
sufficient capital buffers to absorb losses. The other crucial element of financial 
stability is robust governance. Robust governance is the cornerstone of stability and 
prosperity of any organisation, safeguarding the integrity and ensuring that all 
decisions are taken in the best interest of stakeholders.  
(v) Fifth has been the development of new partnerships between FinTech companies 
and banks. Banks are seen leveraging technological partnerships with FinTechs in 
various ways to provide better products and better serve their customers. In this 
partnership, FinTechs can contribute their technology expertise, while banks bring 
their domain expertise. This collaboration allows banks to enhance their digital 
capabilities and meet the expectations of tech-savvy customers. The RBI has taken 
several measures to strengthen the same in banks. The Reserve Bank’s guidelines 
now require banks to have a diverse and independent board of directors, with a mix 
of executive and non-executive directors with certain minimum qualifications and 
experience. The oversight from Board of Directors must be supported by robust risk 
management, audit and compliance functions. A FinTech repository, by the Reserve 
Bank Innovation Hub, is expected to get operationalized by April 2024.  
(Ref- Background note of Bank of Baroda Page 22-24) 
 
 
VI. Reforms as implemented by the State Bank of India 
 
6. As per the Background note submitted by the State Bank of India, the main agenda 
for banking reforms under current scenario include the following:  
• Deepening Base III and IFRS adoption. 

•  Digitization, financial inclusion and AI. 
•  Environment, Social and Governance and Climate finance.  
•  Customer redressal system.  
• HR Initiatives.  
• Banks to continue to adopt advance methods under Basel III on risk 
management, capital management disrupted due to COVID-19. 
• Banks to adopt IFRS reporting standards and expected loss-based provision 
for better accounting of risk. 
•  IFRS S2 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1st 
January 2024 on climate risk.  
Further, it was noted that Digitization, financial inclusion and AI are being 
increasingly adopted by the banking system in the following manner- 
•  Banks to continue digitalisation of products and processes for better user 
experience and faster turnaround time.  
• Greater platformization of lending process for wider market reach and 
reducing turnaround time. 
•  Co-lending with NBFC.  
• Use of AI/ML for hyper customisation, risk management.  
• Thrust towards green / paperless banking using digitalisation. 
The Committee also noted that the growing threat of climate change has resulted in 
incorporation of ESG criterion in lending decision (Environment, Social and 
Governance and Climate finance) 
• Banks to institute risk management practices to incorporate and assess 
climate induced financial risk 
•  Transparent reporting of emissions by banks.  
• Mobilize green deposits as per RBI guidelines. 
•  Secure international funds under Paris Agreement for financing climate 
mitigation.  

•  Focus on ethical AI and data privacy. 
•  Third party risk in digital initiatives.  
SBI submitted in their background about the recent reforms in Customer redressal system & 
HR Initiatives. They are as follows- 
• Customer redressal system to be reformed as per evolving trends in digitization. 
 • Use of technology such generative AI to enhance customer redressal. 
 • Expanding the reach of women centric banking / financial services. 
 • Manpower training in new digital skills to enhance productivity. 
(Ref- Background note of State Bank of India Page 1-3) 
 
VII. Reforms as implemented by Canara Bank 
 
7. The Committee were informed through the Background Note that Canara Bank is 
using an early warning system is a set of guided processes that helps in identifying risks at 
an early stage. An AI-powered EWS integrates data from a multitude of sources, from both 
public domains through external sources as well as from within the bank. With the help of 
this data and algorithmic intelligence, different indicators are projected that can help the 
bank to detect early warning signs of possible financial distress. To strengthen the 
integrated credit monitoring process, Canara Bank has procured an IT based & AI powered 
automated EWS solution that extracts, consolidates and analyses data input from external 
(market data aggregators) internal (CBS, etc.) and manual data entry from branches. A 
dedicated URL (white listed) for all Canara Bank users is enabled for accessing EWS 
solution (https://dccanewsweb2/SASLogon/login). Bank EWS alerts generated in the 
package are being utilized as monitoring tool for identifying inherent weakness in the 
account/s. This well-designed EWS package in the bank is not just effective for credit risk 
monitoring but also serving the related purposes of fraud control and regulatory compliance. 
EWS section of TM Vertical is monitoring the loan accounts (FB+NFB) with an exposure of 
Rs.3 Crores and above at bank level irrespective of banking arrangement (whether sole 

banking, multiple banking or consortium). The following 42 RBI Scenarios, 84 DFS 
Scenarios & 1 Bank induced scenarios are being utilized for detecting EWS in loan portfolio. 
(Ref- Background note of Canara Bank Page 24) 
 
 
VIII. Reforms as implemented by the Indian Overseas Bank 
8.  As per the Background Note provided by the Indian Overseas Bank, they have fully 
implemented Basel III guidelines and the reforms initiated by them include the following- 
(i) Quality of lending 
The Bank has designated Risk Management Department to assess the negative 
market metrics pertaining to any specific industry and accordingly place those 
segments under stressed sector wherein Bank approach toward those segments will 
be with more diligence and additional compliance parameters. In respect of credit 
appraisal, the Bank has subscribed to various due diligence tool including drawing 
credit information reports in order to ensure that the prospective clients are 
complying with eligibility threshold of the Bank in terms of credit history/ default 
trends. In respect of large value advances, Bank has already put in place “rigorous 
due diligence and appraisal measures” policy to ensure the quality of advances at 
the appraisal stage itself. Further, the Bank is already in process of integrating 
various market participants API with that of Bank’s LOS in order to ensure that the all 
the key financial inputs are validated at source without any manual intervention, 
thereby appraisal being made without compromising on the data integrity. 
 
(ii) Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) 
Indian Overseas Bank has initiated various steps to arrest slippages even when the 
account starts appearing in SMA0.The Bank has a robust lending policy to ensure 
quality lending. Regular review of sanctioned loans is being held by ROs and CO. 

Page 12 of 14 Continuous Surveillance System is prevalent for all working capital 
limits of Rs 1 Cr and above, depending on the nature of loans causing concern and 
on the geographical areas where weaknesses are observed, the Bank strengthens 
its review processes to avoid NPAs. For example, while Rs 50 lakhs and above SMA 
loans are being reviewed by the GMs Committee on a monthly basis, the Education 
Loans causing concern in the Southern Regions are being reviewed by the EDs 
every month. Thus, the Bank adopts flexible and need based strategies to reduce 
NPAs. NPA Automation menu provides the probable slippages of the month well 
ahead in time for prompt follow-up and recovery. Bank has in place a robust EWS 
(Early Warning Signal) system with 143 triggers fully implemented and the triggers 
are examined by the Bank on a monthly basis. SMA0, SMA1 and SMA2 Reports are 
generated and updated on a daily basis. System alerts are in place for Limit expired 
and Drawing Power expired. System also alerts the Branches on insurance renewal 
required of the prime and collateral securities Bank is utilizing the services of 
Artificial Intelligence based detective agencies who are specialized in tracing the 
absconding borrowers and also assets using technology. 
(iii) Indian Overseas Bank have implemented the EASE reforms in the following manner- 
 1. LOS introduced for Mudra Loans, KCC Loans upto 1.60 lakhs and Personal 
Loans.  
2. Tool to capture customer experience and feedback digitally on various channels 
such as Mobile App, Internet Banking, SMS, Email, Social Media, ATM, Call Centers 
& Branches developed.  
3. Analytical model deployed for Personal Loan, Vehicle Loan, Housing Loan, MSME 
loans, MF investment and New Credit cards.  
4. Analytical model predicting the risk of customer attrition developed 
5. Number of financial transactions through bank's own MB/IB channels increase 
with addition of new features in Internet/Mobile Banking Application. 

 6. Tool to share lead generated from the digital channels with the contact center 
developed.  
7. AA-dashboard to track and monitor the requests raised/ received through AA 
ecosystem developed. 
 8. Bank has enabled E-Pathshala for all the staff members, with it Total average 
learning hours per employee increased.  
9. Personalization of learning management systems, across the 3 recommended 
dimensions (scale, role and performance) enabled.  
10. Online marketing budget dedicated to advertisement (with links) allotted and cost 
per click and click through rate tracked. 
 11. Online Death Claim Settlement Portal with online access developed.  
12. Cross-functional team set-upped with process document/ SOP that outlines the 
design, working principles and reporting structure.  
13. Enhanced focus on Contact Centre performance i.e. reduction in avg. waiting 
time, avg. handling time, call abandonment rate.  
14. Increase in Digital Transactions.  
15. Increase in Retail disbursements through digitally initiated customer requests. 
 16. Improved coverage of early warning signals system.  
17. Deepening Financial Inclusion: Continued improvement in service & coverage.  
18.Governance and HR: Increased focused on personnel development and objective 
evaluation. 
(Ref- Background note of Indian Overseas Bank Page 11-14) 
 
IX. Reforms as implemented by the Union Bank of India  
9. Union Bank of India, have in their background note, stated that stress testing 
at micro cluster level has been started for effective credit monitoring and to have a 
check on the future portfolio build.  Cross-functional teams were established to drive 

end-to-end product implementation with Minimum Value Product (MVP) based 
releases and to reduce the Turn-Around-Time (TAT).  Bank had gone live on the 
Account Aggregator Framework.  Employee grievance portal and periodic employee 
feedback for holistic employee development was introduced. Customer-friendly 
banking enabled by modern capabilities, Unified customer view at outbound call 
center with sentiments and speech analytics has been introduced.  100% of the 
branches were provided with tablet for customer self-service and for staff’s 
assistance to customers.  Further measures have been adopted including Integration 
of all customer complaint/feedback channels into a consolidated complaint 
management portal/system with universal complaint ID,  Strengthening of cyber 
security model cyber fraud mitigation and Grievance redressal and governance,  
Promotion of gender diversity in the bank,  Adoption of staff friendly initiatives in the 
bank, Strengthening specialization, succession planning and leadership 
development in the bank,  Improvement in the productivity of the workforce in the 
bank and  Strengthening of specialized analytics function for robust data governance 
and model management. 
(Ref- Background note of Union Bank of India Page 10-11) 
11. During the oral evidence, the representatives of the Department of Financial 
Services detailing about the reforms in banking sector and initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) stated as under-  
“Over the last few years, the Government has initiated various banking 
reforms addressing the issues of credit discipline, focusing on responsible 
lending and improving the governance in addition to adoption of the 
technology, amalgamation of banks, recapitalization of public sector banks, 
and restructuring of banks under stress. This has resulted in improving the 
overall financial health of the banking sector in the country which is visible 
from the fact that currently no scheduled commercial bank is under prompt 
corrective action of the RBI. It is highlighted that at one point, eleven Public 

Sector Banks were placed under PCA and they have come out of all the 
restrictions imposed by RBI. To further instill credit discipline and to protect 
financial institutions in case of default or delay in payment by large 
corporates, the Government of India and RBI has taken multiple steps 
instituting IBC and CRILC, systematic checking of high-value accounts for 
wilful default and fraud, early recognition and time-bound resolution of 
stress in those accounts and comprehensive automated early warning 
systems. Financial inclusion has been propelled, by offering affordable and 
accessible banking services to ensure that unbanked and underbanked 
individuals can participate in the formal financial system through Jan-Dhan 
accounts, aadhaar and Mobile trinity which has been made interoperable 
and we have Bank Mitras who are interoperable and the UPI. Reforms as 
part of the unique enhanced access &service excellence (EASE) Reforms 
Agenda pursued since 2018-19 and this has enabled Public Sector Banks 
in improving their financial health significantly and equipped them better to 
deliver in their role. Over the years, this EASE agenda has catalyzed 
reforms in diverse areas including digital and analytics initiatives in 
banking, growth in retail and MSME lending, credit underwriting, NPA 
management, customer service, financial inclusion, and HR policies of the 
banks. Governance reforms effected in PSBs for strengthening and 
enabling greater autonomy to the Boards of banks while making them 
accountable and in line with global best practices. We are recruiting the top 
management through Financial Services Institutions Bureau (FSIB) (earlier 
known as Banks Board Bureau). Then, we have bifurcated the post of 
Chairman & Managing Director (CMD) into that of a non- executive 
chairman and an MD & CEO in nationalized banks, and we have also 
instituted performance-based extensions for MDs, and appraisal of top 
management and NODs by Boards. With the amalgamation of banks, the 

efficacy of the banking sector has been enhanced by leveraging 
economies of scale and synergies. Dena bank and Vijaya bank were 
amalgamated with Bank of Baroda w.e.f 2019. The largest ever 
amalgamation exercise in Indian Public Sector Banking Sector culminated 
in 2020 wherein 10 Public Sector banks were amalgamated into four 
anchor banks with effect from 1st April, 2020. To ensure that the affairs of 
the co-operative banks are conducted in a manner that protects the 
interests of the depositors, by increasing professionalism, enabling access 
to capital, improving governance and ensuring sound banking through RBI, 
the Banking Regulation Act was also amended to cover the cooperative 
banks. As a result of implementation of reforms in the financial system and 
particularly in Public Sector Banks by the Government, all Public Sector 
Banks are now profitable and have stronger balance sheets. India’s 
banking sector is sufficiently capitalized, resilient and well-regulated and 
has withstood the global downturns as well. Sir, the asset quality has 
improved significantly with gross NPA ratio declining to 3.74 per cent in 
December, 2023 from a peak of 14.58 per cent in March, 2018.  Resilience 
has increased with provision coverage ratio increasing from 46 per cent in 
March, 2015 to a healthy 92 per cent in December, 2023. Capital adequacy 
has improved significantly with the ratio improving by 290 basis points to 
reach 14.3 per cent in December, 2023 from 11.45 per cent in March, 
2015. Improved financial health of banks is reflected in PSBs having 
recorded highest ever net profit of rupees one lakh crore in last financial 
against Rs. 0.67 lakh crore in FY 2022. Further, PSBs have recorded 
aggregate net profit of Rs. 0.98 lakh crore in the first nine months of the 
current financial year. PSBs have declared dividend of around Rs. 21,000 
crore to the shareholders out of which the Government of India has got Rs. 
13,804 crore in the last financial year.  Considering the improvement in 

profitability, PSBs are expected to declare higher profit in the current 
financial year. ” 
( Ref- Verbatim Proceedings dated 20 Feb, 2024-forenoon- Page 9-14) 
12. The representatives of the Department of Financial Services further deposed during 
evidence as follows- 
“Sir, there are challenges of Public Sector Banks with regard to the deposit, 
CASA. Basically, they are losing this CASA shares. It is not only for Public 
Sector Banks but for Private Sector Banks, this is coming down. This may 
become a challenge in the years to come because the advances and loans 
are growing at a faster pace than the rate at which the savings are 
growing. The reason which we generally discuss is that many people are 
now transferring their savings from banking sector to mutual fund and to 
the markets etc. So, that is one challenge Sir. Another challenge with the 
Public Sector Banks is huge NPAs which have been written off although in 
their balance sheets, those have been technically written off but the 
borrowers’ liability to repay those loans to the Public Sector Banks 
remains. They are not in their books but they are still in their agreements to 
recover.  That is again a very big challenge with public sector banks.  Then 
there is the competition with the private sector banks.  It is a question of 
efficiency and who is more efficient in their outreach to the customers.  Our 
banks have been doing very well in terms of the IT infrastructure.  All of 
them have been able to upgrade to a large extent but the moment it is 
required to go the bank branches, there the efficiency is slightly is lacking 
as compared to the private banks.  There we are emphasizing them to 
improve in their customer services when they have one-to-one interaction.  
Similarly, their customer care service, 24X7, that also needs to be 
improved.  This does not apply to bigger banks like SBI, etc., they will have 

a very efficient customer care service but for smaller banks, that is still a 
challenge.  So, these are some of the issues.  At the same time, RBI is 
also putting many issues like expected credit loss.  Currently, one asset 
becomes NPA then only you to make provision but now RBI is 
contemplating that even if the asset has not become NPA, you will have to 
make some provision for it which may further affect the banks capacity to 
lend more. Cyber security is another challenge.” 
( Ref- Verbatim Proceedings dated 20 Feb, 2024-forenoon- Page 15-16) 
13. Explaining the initiatives taken by the Canara Bank in respect of the banking 
reforms, the representatives of Canara Bank submitted during evidence as follows- 
“The actual reforms in the banking sector for the last ten years are 
aggregated in three areas namely recapitalisation, asset management, and 
digital transformation. Due to recapitalisation because of the Government 
support and thereafter, amalgamation of Syndicate Bank with the Canara 
Bank in 2020, our functioning has started improving continuously. 
Gradually, it has developed a lot of internal working of all those things. As 
on date, our current CRAR is over 16 per cent. This is one of the best 
among Public Sector Banks. So, in the last three years, we are able to 
raise Rs. 25,000 crore from the public. This shows that the confidence 
building measures that we have taken are helping us, and so, we are now 
capable of independently maintaining adequate capital for growth. We are 
maintaining well above the stipulated minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio. 
The second one is asset management. We are maintaining the asset 
management. Just four years back, our credit growth was well below three 
per cent. Now, the annual credit growth is more than 14 per cent. So, we 
could achieve this because of the compartmentalisation or the 
verticalization. A special focus has been given especially on the MSMEs 

where the clusters are there. We introduced several cluster-based 
products. About 60 per cent of our branches are located in rural and semi-
urban areas, which are also helping us in doing that. Regarding priority 
sector lending, as against 40 per cent, we have already achieved 56 per 
cent. That is a continuous process. We have also achieved underwriting 
standards quite high in this by introducing the rule-based business in 
technology and all those things. That has helped us in controlling further 
slippages. Our stressed assets, including SMA-0, 1 and 2 are now less 
than 4 per cent. This shows that in the next few years, there would not be 
any immediate threat. Because of the credit growth and maintenance of 
well balance sheet, the gross NPA percentage has come down to 4.39 per 
cent which was around 12 per cent four years back. As a net NPA also, it 
was near to 5 per cent but now, it is only 1.32 per cent. Our PC Ratio is 
about 89.16 per cent, and we are comfortable on that. Last year, it was the 
first time that we had earned the profit of five digits, that is, Rs. 10,600 
crore. In the current Financial Year, just in three quarters, we surpassed 
that amount of Rs. 10,600 crore and achieved a net profit of Rs. 10,700 
crore. That is also helping in maintaining the health CRAR. When it comes 
to stressed asset management, we are also encouraging the DRT, 
SARFAESI, OTS, and the IBC. The IBC has definitely helped us a lot. In 
the last six years, we could recover almost Rs. 16,400 crore through IBC.” 
(Ref- Verbatim Proceedings dated 20 Feb, 2024-forenoon- Page 29-31) 
14. Elucidating upon banking reforms during evidence, the representatives of Bank of 
India submitted as follows- 
 
“We have taken so many initiatives and steps, including formulation of 
certain schemes and things like Nari Shakti Scheme, upgraded savings 

accounts and Star MSME welcome offer. We have started Star Energy 
Saver Scheme for renewable energy, BOI Star Export Credit Scheme for 
the exporters and Star Channel Finance Scheme for the MSME units. As 
regards the organisational structure, we have done lot of organisational 
structuring with respect to credit underwriting. So, the branches are 
sanctioning only up to Rs. 10 lakh now and beyond that, it is going to the 
underwriting centres like SMECCs, UCs, RBCs, and SKVKs. Apart from 
that, we have ten large corporate branches and 18 emerging corporate 
branches through which the entire credit underwriting takes place. This is 
with respect to credit underwriting; otherwise the branches are the source 
of marketing for credit proposals. As regards collection, we have zonal 
collection centres in each of our 69 zonal offices, which help us improve 
the collection efficiency and reduce the SMA number which is there on the 
books and also reduce the fresh slippages. Apart from that, we have 25 
asset recovery branches at present, which help in improving the 
recoveries through various sources like DRTs, NCLT etc. This is how we 
are trying to improve the overall credit quality in the Bank and also 
improve the return on assets. On HR side, regarding capacity building, we 
have already undertaken HR transformation initiative. Job Family concept 
has already taken place right from top till the bottom to the branch level 
officers. There is a MOOCS model, which is helping our officers – clerical 
and even the sub-staff – on capacity building. Then, we have done lot of 
collaborations with other institutes - foreign institutes and local institutes – 
for capacity building and skill building of our staff. Lot of fintech 
onboardings have happened in the Bank. We have done collaborations 
with the NBFCs for co-lending and pool-purchase. Then, I have already 
told you about the BOI Mobile Omni Neo App. Regarding data analytics, 
we have already onboarded one vendor for data analytics, AI and ML. 

That has already started. The Lead Management System through the 
CRM project has already been launched in the entire Bank and branches 
are using it. Digiting processing of MUDRA loans has also started along 
with the MSME loans. These are all initiatives on the technology side 
which the Bank has already taken. On the ESG side, we have done net 
zero and also introduced Green Deposit Framework in the Bank.  Apart 
from that, we have already sanctioned 5,468 MW of renewable energy 
capacity building till 31st December, 2023, which will help us in the ESG 
framework. We have launched a customised product under the Roof Top 
Solar Scheme also from the Bank of India side. As regards gender 
diversity, under the ESG, 29 per cent of our total workforce is female 
workforce. “ 
( Ref- Verbatim Proceedings dated 20 Feb, 2024-forenoon- Page 39-43) 
 
Opportunities in banking reforms 
15. As per the written information submitted to the Committee: 
Data analytics is an upcoming field where financial institutions are able to gain 
insights into customer behaviour, market trends, and emerging risks, enabling them 
to make more informed credit decisions. Data-driven finance is not just about 
collecting and analysing information; it's about using that information to drive 
innovation, create value for customers, and build sustainable, resilient financial 
models to the benefit of the system. To enable responsible use of data, RBI has 
introduced the Account Aggregator framework which enable customers to control 
their data and provide permission for it to be shared with third-party service 
providers, for provision of various financial products and services seamlessly. It is 
expected that AA framework would accelerate the development of alternative lending 
models such as cash flow-based lending and marketplace lending or what we 

popularly known as peer-to-peer lending. This would enable small businesses, 
including street vendors that may not have traditional collateral, to secure a loan. As 
technology continues to advance, we expect more innovative models to emerge that 
leverage data, automation, and artificial intelligence to transform the lending 
landscape.  
16. Future of banking would witness a major shift in customers’ choices and 
preferences with enhanced expectations from the banking industry. Each of the 
developments would present unique opportunities and challenges to the existing and 
newer players. It has to be borne in mind that sometimes the disruptions can be so 
sudden that it is impossible to anticipate them. This would include adoption of 
development of suitable business models with strong governance frameworks, better 
information management, and changes in the mode of working, building of enhanced 
resilience capabilities and a more responsible societal and environmental role for 
banks.  
17. Increased use of Social Media and Information Mediums in the banking 
ecosystem. Social media is an alternative platform for reaching millions of 
customers. Indians, on average, spend about 2.4 hours daily on social media. 
Further, the number of social media users has been growing steadily. The analysis 
of social media use has the potential to help banks in reviewing their strategies in 
terms of customer segmentation, customer acquisition and furthering financial 
inclusion plans. Social media can also be used in customer grievance redress 
management.  
18. The Committee have been informed that with advancement in digital banking, 
cyber security will remain an important challenge for all stakeholders. The increasing 
use of IT systems by banks, remote working arrangements, accelerated adoption of 
digital banking services by customers, along with increasing dependence on third 
parties for various services would warrant enhanced resilience capabilities to ensure 
business continuity. This would include building strong defences against cyber-

attacks and malicious attempts at disrupting, disabling or destroying a computing 
infrastructure or stealing confidential information and data. Banks would need to 
undertake constant upskilling of personnel. Continuous knowledge acquisition and 
staying ahead of the curve would become even more crucial.  
19. The Committee learnt that an emerging area of focus is making finance 
available for transitioning to a low carbon economy. The Committee were informed 
about the global challenge that climate change poses to our planet and its impact 
which is reverberating across the world. The Indian Government has already 
committed to reduce the total projected carbon emissions from now till 2030 by one 
billion tonnes, reduce carbon intensity of the economy by more than 45 per cent by 
2030, and achieve ‘Net Zero’ emissions by the year 2070. As a central bank, we also 
have a responsibility to promote sustainable economic growth which includes 
transition to a low-carbon economy. Banks will have to play an essential role in 
financing the transition to a low-carbon economy by channelizing finance to 
sustainable and green projects as well as by developing new financial products that 
incentivise green initiatives.  
(Ref- Background note of Bank of Baroda Page 24-25)  
  

PART –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The banking system in India has evolved over several decades which is now well 
established and has been serving the credit and banking needs of the economy.  However, 
to ensure that banking sector in the country remain resilient and maintain a delicate 
balance between growth and risk mitigation, regular monitoring of capital-related matters 
as well as culture of compliance, credit discipline, transparency, responsible lending and 
improved governance calls for sustained efforts.  In the above backdrop, the Committee 
selected the subject “Reforms in Banking Sector” suo-moto. In this sequel, the Committee 
took evidence of representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
and some PSBs to examine and ascertain measures being undertaken by them to fine-tune 
their systems to align with the framework outlined by the regulatory authorities insofar as 
fostering economic growth and protecting the interests of stakeholders is concerned.  
However, owing to paucity of time, detailed examination of the various intricate 
aspects of the subject could not be undertaken by the Committee.  Moreover, the 
Committee are disappointed that despite several reminders, responses to queries of the 
Committee were not received.  Pending views of other witnesses including non-official 
witnesses; experts; and the regulatory authorities on the subject and the detailed analysis 
of replies of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, which are still 
awaited, this Report of the Committee may be considered as a preliminary report. 
  
2. In the interregnum, while noting that the financial landscape is poised with 
continued evolution, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Financial Services)/ PSBs undertake sustained efforts with focus on innovation, 
adaptive strategies, vigilant governance and enhanced risk management practices to 
ensure sustainable progress and resilience in the sector.  
3. The Committee note that the increased reliance on technology exposes banks 
to heightened cyber security risk and, therefore, urge the Ministry/ PSBs to adopt 
robust cyber security strategy to curb not only operational and business risks but 
also potential digital transformation failures. 
4. The Committee note that United Nations (2006) defined financial inclusion as 
the "provision of access to credit for bankable people and firms, to insurance for all 

insurable people and firms and savings and payments services for everyone.” The 
Committee while opining that banking services should be readily available to all the 
bankable people in India, desire the PSBs to make concerted efforts to promote 
financial inclusion by ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate 
credit where needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low-income 
groups at an affordable cost. The Committee desire to be apprised of the impact of 
consolidation of PSBs on facilitating geographical diversification, penetrating new 
markets and extending customer base.  
5. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that despite 
significant increase in the number of bank accounts opened under the Jan Dhan 
Yojana, a substantial proportion of these accounts remain dormant or have low 
utilization.  The Committee desire that  Banks should approach Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) account holders and make them aware of the benefits of an 
active bank account including  income generation by way of interest on savings and 
available insurance benefits and also organize camps for spreading awareness about 
digital technology for availing banking services. 
MSMEs AND FARMERS 
6. The Committee while noting that credit gaps persist in sectors such as MSMEs, 
agriculture and among women entrepreneurs, desire that concerted efforts may be made 
for reaching out to these sectors and devising innovative financial products and services 
that cater to their unique needs. Further, the Committee desire that faster and simpler 
mechanism may be devised to address stress in the vulnerable MSME and agricultural 
sectors to facilitate their development. 
FRAUD MANAGEMENT 
7. The Committee note that the risks to the consumer have also substantially increased 
with increasing instances of data breaches, fraudulent apps and deep fakes and urge upon 
both the banks and the regulatory authorities to make efforts to ensure safe and friendly 
tech-banking to the customers. The Committee, here, would in no uncertain words 
emphasize that the Ministry should look into the possibilities of suggesting changes in the 
relevant laws which relate to cyber crimes, fraudulent transactions, and phishing 
operations harming the customers and depriving them of their life-long savings. The 

Committee further desire that the compliance of e-KYC and no frill accounts must be 
regularly undertaken by the authorities. 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
8. The Committee note that the RBI in ‘The Statement on Developmental and 
Regulatory Policies’, has recognised that climate change can translate into financial risks 
for regulated entities. It has further held that this could have broader financial stability 
implications and that climate-related financial risks may emanate either directly from 
climate change events or as an outcome of efforts to mitigate climate change. The 
Committee desire that Banks may urgently integrate climate-related risks into various risk 
processes and promote sustainable practices within the banking industry thereby reducing 
its environmental impact.  
The Committee would formulate their detailed recommendations on this subject 
after conclusion of the examination/evidences on the subject. In the interim, the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) should furnish Action Taken Replies to the 
Committee. 
****** 
   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
 07 Vaishakha, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 