INDO-NEPAL BORDER ROAD PROJECT

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

ie
सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

89


PAC NO, 2319

EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

INDO-NEPAL BORDER ROAD PROJECT

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
REPORT
PART- |

1. | INTRODUCTION

| | PROJECT PLANNING

3. | FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

| *| QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING

Co PART -il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

| | Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24)
held on 17-01-2024.

| | Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24)
held on 05-12-2022.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CPN AA RYDE

AEBON=S

wanna

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

ri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

n

5.
Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
1. Satya Pal Singh

ri Brijendra Singh

hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

i)

5
Ss
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
5

hri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

hri Shaktisinh Gohil

ri Derek O’Brien

hri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

5
Dr. K Laxman
Ss
|]

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sanjeev Sharma
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja
Shri Girdhari Lal
Shri Vijay Mishra

मी ४४ ० :-

- Joint Secretary

- Director

- Deputy Secretary
- Committee Officer


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal
5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9. Shri Brijendra Singh
0... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
1. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
2. Shri Jayant Sinha
3. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni ‘
4. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
5. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
6. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
7. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
8. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

20. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Eighty-Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Indo-Nepal Border Road Project” based on C&AG's Report No. 23 of
2021 (Performance Audit) relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 05-04-2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) took oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on 5 December, 2022. The Committee
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 17 January, 2024. The
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
17 January, 2024 Chairperson,
27 Pausha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART-I

Introduction

The Indo-Nepal Border Road Project

The Committee learnt that Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) approved in November,
2010, the proposal of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for construction /upgradation of 1377
km of strategic border roads along Indo-Nepal Border (INB), to enable the SSB to dominate
the sensitive border effectively, in the States of Bihar (564km), Uttar Pradesh (640 km) and
Uttrakhand (173 km) at a total estimated cost of Rs. 3853 Crore with a timeframe of five
years i.e. by March 2016.

These roads are of strategic and operational significance to the Border Guarding Forces
(BGFs) deployed along the borders. Since these roads are being laid parallel to the border
they will enhance mobility of the SSB. These roads shall also meet the requirement of
border population and facilitate development of border areas.

Construction work was to be executed by the respective State Governments through their
Public Work Departments. While funds for the road construction cost were to be provided
by the Government of India, all other expenses like cost of land, statutory clearances and
maintenance of roads were to be borne by the concerned State Governments. However,
the project could not be completed by March 2016 due to delays in acquisition of land and
obtaining of environment, forest and wildlife clearances by the three states. Therefore,
extension of time was given by the CCS in February, 2018 up to 31.12.2019 for completion
of those ongoing works which were free from encumbrance and up to 31.12.2022 for
completion of balance work involving land with encumbrance.

High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) of MHA which is headed by Union Home
Secretary is a fast track mechanism to scrutinize and appraise/approve projects of border
infrastructure. It has been empowered by CCS to consider any change in the projects in the

time and cost estimates within overall ceilings sanctioned by CCS. HLEC in December,


2019/ January, 2021 further extended the timeline upto 31.12.2022 for the whole project
ie. encumbrance free stretches and stretches with encumbrance.

C8&AG Report No. 23 of 2021 (Performance Audit) on the subject 'Indo-Nepal Border Road
Project pertaining’ to Union Government, Ministry of Home Affairs covering the period
2010-11 to 2018-19 updated upto March 2021 deals with issues such as Project Planning,
Financial management, Contract management & Execution of works and Quality assurance
& monitoring.

The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the subject for detailed examination
and report. Considering the significance of the issues involved in the matter, the subject
was carried forward by the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24). In the process of
examination of the subject, the Committee obtained background material and detailed
written replies from the Ministry of Home Affairs. They also took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and obtained post evidence replies. The

issues so discussed are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

When the Committee wanted to know about the intended objectives of the Indo Nepal Border
Road Project and the extent of achievement thereof, the Ministry in a written reply informed as
under:-

"In 2010, Cabinet Committee on Security was approached with the primary
objective of development of roads along the Indo-Nepal Border (1377 Km) as these
roads were considered of strategic and operational significance to the Border
Guarding Forces (BGFs) deployed on these borders viz. the Sashastra Seema Bal
(SSB) on the Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. The proposed roads will
primarily run parallel to the borders, thereby adding to the mobility of the BGFs and
enabling them to dominate the sensitive borders more effectively. Before the project
people living along the Indo-Nepal border faced many difficulties due to number of
tivers, riverines and inhospitable terrain.These roads were also to meet the
requirements of border population and catalyse better implementation of
development initiatives in border areas. These roads have brought immense socio
economic development in the far flung areas of border districts of Bihar, UP and
Uttarakhand. The increased presence and enhanced mobility of security forces and
police due to Indo- Nepal Border road Projects has brought sense of security in
border populace. Due to construction of these roads, various welfare scheme/
health/education/business outreach has increased in the border areas. Around 208
Nos villages, 23 small towns, by 404kms in Bihar 60 Nos villages/ by 219 kms in UP
and 14 villages/Hamlet by 52.4 kms in Uttarakhand were provided connectivity by

2


these roads apart from connectivity to SSB deployment locations. 355 Border out
Posts have been provided connectivity directly and 41 BoPs with link road.
Dominance of SSB has increased along the border after construction of these roads.
These roads have increased business avenues, commercial activities and
agricultural produce thus ushering an era of socio-economic prosperity in the area
where the connectivity was provided by the roads constructed by this Border road
project."

8 Toa query as to whether the State Authorities involved in the Project were consulted at the
conceptualisation stage, the Ministry in a written reply, stated as under :-

"On the basis of long standing request of the people of border States and other

stakeholders including security and intelligence agencies, MHA has conceptualized

the project and initiated consultation with the State Governments of Uttarakhand,

Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Assam and SSB to finalize the requirements of Strategic

roads along these borders. Detailed discussions were held in a series of meetings

held in MHA with all the stake holders to arrive at a consensus on the

implementation strategy as also to decide the issues relating to land acquisition,

cost implications, road alignment, requirement of statutory clearances and payment

for compensatory afforestation, time schedule for completion, future maintenance,

etc. In pursuance of deliberations held in these meetings, State Governments of

Uttrakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar had submitted the proposals, the draft Cabinet

note was circulated to all concerned State Governments and their concurrence and

acceptance was obtained in advance. Moreover, State Government had agreed to

provide land for the scheme free of cost and carry out maintenance after

construction as the project was very beneficial to the populace of States living along

the border."

9 While elaborating on the roles and responsibilities that were assigned to the authorities at

the Centre and those at the State level with regard to Indo Nepal Border Road Project, the

Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

"In November 2010, CCS approved the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project, which has

the provision that these strategic road projects will be implemented jointly by the

Govt. of India and State Government concerned with the following
modalities/implementation strategy: -

The Capital expenditure for construction of proposed roads will be borne by the
Central Government while expenditure on account of cost of land acquisition,
compensatory afforestation and future maintenance of the roads will be borne by
the respective State Governments from their own resources.

State PWDs will preferably be the first choice as executing agencies for
construction of these roads. It was envisaged that this project was started taking the
full confidence and support of State Governments.

The executing agency shall, in consultation with the BGFs, State Governments and

3


MHA to finalize the alignment of the roads.

Since the project was envisaged with initial alignment on available map as due to
urgency and expedite the project, State PWDs or any other agency engaged for this
purpose was to undertake the preparation of DPR/Cost estimates in respect of
works assigned to them in phased manner keeping in view the implementation
schedule. It was assured by the State Governments that land and other clearances
will be provided to the projects in an expedited manner."

10 When asked about the reasons for variation in the cost of INBP Project as it was Rs 3853
Crore in Nov 2010 which was subsequently pegged at Rs 2656.93 Crore (842.86 km)
before revising it to Rs 3472.25 Crore by HLEC, the Ministry stated as under:-

i."(i) The physical components (1377 km) and financial projections (Rs. 3853 Crores)
were preliminary and indicative in nature at the time of approval of CCS in Nov 2010.
It was mentioned in the CCS note itself that physical length,scope of work,
alignment, financial projections were likely to change after finalization of DPRs. This
aspect has been mentioned in CCS note and HLEC has been empowered to grant
approval within the overall cost limit. All approvals have been issued under the
overall ceiling cost of the project. It should be noted that when the alignment was
finalized and DPRs were approved by HLEC as per provisions of CCS note, the
length and various other provisions were finalized as per real ground conditions and
with enactment of Right to Fair Compensation, Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act (RFCTLARR Act 2013). The delay was caused
in land acquisition thus number of variations occurred beyond control of the
stakeholders. DPR were prepared and appraised as and when the feasibility of each
stretch became clear to the state government agencies. So far 842.65 kms has
been approved by HLEC from time to time with revised approved cost ofRs.3468
Crores (approx), which is within the overall approved cost limit as mentioned in the
approved CCS note.

ii, Due to the pendency of Wildlife Clearance and Forest Clearance for 299 km in
Pilibhit, Dudhwa, Ketarniaghat in Uttar Pradesh, pendency in finalization of
alignment of road in the area of proposed Pancheshwar Dam in Uttarakhand, delay
in land acquisition due to court cases in East and West Champaran districts of Bihar
after advent of Right to Fair Compensation, Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act (RFCTLARR Act 2013). Moreover, cost
escalation due to inflation since the year 2010 viz. increase in the cost of material,
labour and Tool & Plant and also due to change of scope of work like provision of
culverts, bridges, drains etc. also due to natural calamities of flood especially in
Bihar, construction of roads under the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project was not
completed within the timeline and the cost was revised.

4


ii. In Bihar, total project cost approved by MHA in 23°, 240 and 250 HLEC meeting
(May 2011 to Jan 2013) was Rs. 1655.98 Crores for length of 552.29 km. Later on,
due to factors mentioned below, the cost of project increased to Rs. 2428.67 Crores

(approx.).

a. Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13
after sanction of the project in all districts. On 1१ Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition
Act 2013 came into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old
Act process halted completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to
accept land compensation based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process
under RFCTLAAR Act 2013 was started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of
approximately five years. Beside this, demand of residential / commercial rate in
place of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have also affected the land acquisition
process.

b. Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in
time to contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and
Madhubani requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender was
invited in these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates.

c. In West Champaran district, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj
so called king in ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as
personal land by District Administration.

d. Closure of Rail Rake Point: Railway had closed the Bathnaha and Raxaul
Railway Rake point for carriage of stone aggregate and unloading in Araria
district which led to delay and cost escalation."

11. To a query regarding the composition of High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC), its
function and powers and the basis for granting extension upto 31st December, 2019 and further
upto December 2022, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

"Composition of the HLEC is as under:
Chairman-_Home Secretary

Members:

Foreign Secretary,

Secretary, Department of Expenditure,
Secretary, MoD,

Secretary (BM), MHA

Chief Secretary of the States.


DGs of BGFs.

DG, CPWD

Financial Advisor (Home),
JS (BM), MHA

Functions:To take administrative / financial decisions on all security related issues
concerning Border Management viz. fencing and flood lighting of the border,
construction of Border Out Posts, roads and other essential infrastructure in the
border areas.

Powers: The HLEC has the financial powers to take decisions on proposals
involving an expenditure upto Rs. 500 Crores. HLEC has full powers for
administrative approval and for according financial sanctions for undertaking works
of fencing and flood lighting, construction of roads and bridges, Border Out Posts.

A detailed note on fast-track mechanism in the shape of a High Level Empowered
Committee (HLEC) is also available in para 5.1 (V) of the CCS Note of 2010.

Basis for approving extension upto Dec 2019 and further upto Dec 2022:

ii, The time extension for the Indo-Nepal Border Road project was due to the
lack of capacity, inadequacy and delay on the part of the concerned land
acquisition authorities and executing agencies of State Govt., court cases in
land acquisition after advent of RCFTLARR Act 2013.

Uttarakhand

MOU was signed in year 2014, the completion date for project was 2016, but the
project was sanctioned on 18.08.2016 due to finalization of areas which would not
fall in Indo-Nepal Pancheswar Dam. Thereafter, date of completion was extended
upto December 2019. Due to litigation from km 30 to km 55, there was delay in
execution of work for approximately 3 years and therefore, time extension was
given upto December 2022.

Bihar

i. Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13 after
sanction of the project in all districts. On 1४ Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition Act 2013 came
into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old Act process halted
completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to accept land compensation
based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process under RFCTLARR Act 2013 was
started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of approximately five years. Beside this,
demand of residential / commercial rate in place of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have
also affected the land acquisition process.

ii. People having land possession but no valid paper to proof their entitlement, dispute in
land apportionment among family members etc. caused problems in disbursement of
compensation.

iii. Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in time to


12..

contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and Madhubani
requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender has been invited in
these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates and delayed the project too.

iv. In West Champaran, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj so called king
in ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as personal land by

District Administration.

v. Closure of Rail Rake Point: Railway had closed the Bathnaha and Raxaul Railway
Rake point for carriage of stone aggregate and unloading in Araria district which led to

delay and cost escalation.

2, CCS in 2010 empowered the HLEC to consider and approve the variation in length,
cost estimates, alignment, inter-se change in time schedule and also to consider
contingent requirements pertaining the main works which may not have been perceived
at that time. Further, CCS in 2018 has empowered HLEC to consider any change in the
projects in time and cost estimates within overall ceiling sanctioned by CCS.

3. The issue of timelines was deliberated in detail with all the three State Governments
and the Border Guarding Force (SSB). After assessing the encumbrances in proposed
road stretches, capabilities of the State executing agencies and assurance given by
them, extension of time upto December, 2019 for encumbrance free road stretches and
December, 2022 for the stretches with encumbrance was approved by CCS in 2018."

As regards the current status of the Project, the Ministry informed asunder :-

Physical progress of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project as on
30.11.2022
Executing Length of Road Roads under progress
agency road Compl Formation | Formation
approved eted
८ completed | yet to be
by HLE! (in km) | (inkm) Id
(in km) (in kn lone
(in km)
Formation. Formation
completed yet to be
(in km) done
(in km)
Road 562.3 aa 405 147.3
Construction
Department



[ Bikar |
| PWOUP | UP 235.35 198.5 219 16.35
PWD 55 42.7 52.4 2.6
Uttarakhand
Total 842.65 431.2 676.4 166.25

The Ministry during the course of evidence furnished updated information
regarding Physical & Financial progress of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project-as on

30.11.2022, which is as under:-

‘Particulars | Bihar [UP | | Tota |
1. Estimated Length 552.27 574.53 km 1299.80 km
(As approved by km
CCS 2018)

2. DPRs approved. 552.27 237.38 km री km 844.65 km
(by HLEC) km
3. DPRs awaited 7 337.15 Km 118 Km 7 km
(Length with (Road (Road alignment
encumbrance) alignment affected by proposed
affected by| India- Nepal Joint
Forest Pancheshwar Dam
&Wildlife areas) | Project on river Kali)
4. Estimated Length 11.5 लि km oo 17.5
of road km
(land acquisition yet
to be completed)
5. Length of road जि a“ km नाम |
(Forest/Wild life
clearance awaited)
6. Work completed 190. we Km 42.70 Km
09 431.34
Km Km



7. Work — under | | Km ey Km
progress 214. 244.84
न 76 Km
(Formation km
completed)
8. Total work 404. “ee Km 52.5 Km 676.15
progress 85
Km
12.1 The Committee observed that in the district of Siddarthnagar from

Aligarhwa to Ganwaria, and Khunwa-Banganga - Bhusaula, only 0.45 kms. of reserve
forest areas comes under this project and desired to know about any initiative for forest
clearance. In this regard, the Ministry informed as under:-

“In UP, the construction work has been completed in the district of
Siddarthnagar from Aligarhwa to Ganwaria and Khunwa-Banganga-
Bhusaula."

12.2 The Committee also desired to know about the status of forest clearance
in area from Latahawa Ghat to Pakarhiwa via Karamaini, Ramnagar, Kakarahwa, and
Bajha where about 0.81 kms. of forest comes under the road project. In this regard while
furnishing the details the Ministry informed as under:-

"In UP, in the district of Siddarthnagar from Latahawa Ghat to
Pakarhiwa via Karamaini, Ramnagar, Kakarahwa and Bajha, the
construction work is completed."

12.3 The Committee observed that under Indo-Nepal border road projects in the
district of Siddharthnagar, a 31.35 kms road which goes from Malgahiya to Harivanshpur,
also got disturbed because of shift of river Banganga. The Committee desired to know
whether the Government has taken this into consideration and the action taken in this
regard. The Ministry informed as under:-

"Bridge at Banganga river is complete. Channelization of river under
the bridge is in progress."


12.4 The Ministry inter-alia informed that the work could not be completed as per the approved
plan due to the State-wise reasons mentioned below:
b. Bihar .
i. Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13 after
sanction of the project in all districts. On 1१ Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition Act 2013 came
into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old Act process halted
completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to accept land compensation
based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process under RFCTLAAR Act 2013 was
started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of approximately five years. Beside this,
demand of residential / commercial rate in place of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have
also affected the land acquisition process.

ii. People having land possession but no valid paper to proof their entitlement, dispute in
land apportionment among family members etc. caused problems in disbursement of
compensation.

iii. Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in time to
contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and Madhubani
requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender has been invited in
these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates and delayed the project too.

iv.In West Champaran, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj so called king
in ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as personal land by
District Administration.

v.Closure of Rail Rake Point: Railway had closed the Bathnaha and Raxaul Railway
Rake point for carriage of stone aggregate and unloading in Araria district which led to
delay and cost escalation.

vi. In the year 2017, Goods and Service Tax GST came into force which has increased
the cost.

0. Time over run - 07 Years (2017 to 2024),
d. Cost overrun - Rs 772.69 Crore

Uttarakhand
Tenders for work from km 0.00 to 12.00 were invited in 2014 and work was
completed in year 2016 within the sanction cost. Work from km 12.00 to km 55.00
was approved by HLEC on 18.08.2016 due to finalization of areas which would not
fall in Indo-Nepal Pancheshwar Dam. Thereafter,from km 30.00 to km 55.00 work
got delayed due to litigation from year 08.2017 to 12.2020.

Expected time over run: 06 years (March 2023).

10


Cost overrun Due to extra 18% GST.

Uttar Pradesh

Work progress is as per approved DPRs and sanction as well as it is within

sanction cost.The expected time overrun is 06 years 03 months (upto June,

2023).
Initially land acquisition rates were based on old rates, which were revised on
demand of land owners as per provision of revised “The Right to Fair
compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013”and consequently GoUP, 6.0. No. 2/2015/215/Ek -
132015-20(48)/2011 dt. 19.03.2015, in this regard. As a result, revised estimates
were sanctioned by May, 2017. After the sanction, all formalities of LA done
accordingly.

i. 337 KMs length is to be taken up in the II"? phase in EPC mode which lies
in forest and wildlife area.

ii. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of flyovers and deviations from
approved alignment, a meeting through Video conferencing to review the
mitigation measures suggested by Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun,
was held on 04.11.2022 with all stake holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-
Nepal Border, UP, PWD, Lucknow.

iii. In meeting, Wil expressed that the mitigation measures (08 fly overs and
re-alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake holders were requested
to proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations. It is decided
that the WII, Dehradun will provide co-ordinates at the interval of 100m of
re-alignment proposal at 05 places, which are still awaited.

13. When asked to elaborate on the constraints encountered in land acquisition and timely
obtaining of environment, forest and wildlife clearances experienced in three States, the Ministry in
a written reply informed as under:-

"Bihar

i, Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13 after
sanction of the project in all districts. On 1४ Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition Act 2013
came into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old Act process
halted completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to accept land
compensation based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process under
RFCTLAAR Act 2013 was started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of
approximately five years. Beside this, demand of residential / commercial rate in place
of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have also affected the land acquisition process.

11


ii, People having land possession but no valid paper to proof their entitlement, dispute
in land apportionment among family members etc. caused problems in disbursement of
compensation.

iii, Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in
time to contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and
Madhubani requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender has
been invited in these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates and
delayed the project too.

iv. In West Champaran, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj so
called king in ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as
personal land by District Administration.

Uttar Pradesh (UP)

Initially land acquisition rates were based on old rates, which were revised
on demand of land owners as per provision of revised “The Right to Fair
compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013"and consequently GoUP, 6.0. No. 2/2015/215/Ek -
132015-20(48)/2011 dt. 19.03.2015, in this regard. As a result, revised
estimates were sanctioned by May, 2017. After the sanction, all formalities
of LA wasdone accordingly.

2.337 KMs length is to be taken up in the II"¢ phase in EPC mode which lies
in forest and wildlife area.

3. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of flyovers and deviations from
approved alignment, a meeting through Video conferencing to review the
mitigation measures suggested by WII, Dehradun, was held on 04.11.2022
with all stake holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD,
Lucknow.

4. In the meeting, WII expressed that the mitigation measures (08 fly overs
and re-alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake holders were
requested to proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations. It
was decided that the WII, Dehradun will provide co-ordinates at the interval
of 100m of re-alignment proposal at 05 places, which are still awaited.

Uttarakhand
In Uttarakhand, for the stretch from km 0.00 to-km 12.00, there was already

forest clearance for the existing old road. It was felt that for developing the 2-
lane road under INBR Project, forest clearance was not required. Tenders

12


14.

were invited to start the work meanwhiledue to newly grown trees on the
already sanctioned forest land in the duration of 24 years, forest department
objected on cutting ofthese trees and ordered to stop the work by
suggesting to apply Ex-Post facto approval for already sanctioned forest land
was applied and due to this situation work got delayed. Re- approval of the
forest land given by Govt. letter no. 08B/UCP/08/51/2013/FC/214 dated
20.11.2013. Work was completed in the year 2016 within the sanctioned
cost."

To a specific query as to why preparatory work for obtaining clearances had not been

undertaken to ensure timely start of the construction of border roads and against 1377 Km, HLEC
approved only 27 DPRS of 842.86 km, the Ministry informed as under:-

15.

"As per approved CCS Note of the Project in 2010, it is mentioned that alignment has been
taken as per available maps. It will be the responsibility of the State Govts. to provide land
and obtain other clearances. CCS was duly informed that the physical components and the
financial projections as made in the note i.e. 1377 KM for Indo-Nepal Border Road Project
are indicative in nature. The physical length, scope of work, alignment, financial projections
are likely to change after finalization of DPRs. In such cases, HLEC will take appropriate
decision on the basis of examination by the Technical Committee and its recommendation.
All efforts to obtain land and other clearances were made by respective State Govts. but
due to reasons beyond control, the clearances and land availability could not materialize.
Accordingly, as per mandate given by CCS, after considering all facts submitted by
respective State Govts. Agencies in their DPRs which were submitted subsequently after
getting clearances, vetting and recommendations of Technical Committee comprising of
technical experts and CPWD, HLEC has approved only viable DPRs."

AUDIT FINDINGS

|- PROJECT PLANNING
(A) Change in alignment in Bihar

Audit observed that in West Champaran (Bihar), initial alignment proposed by CCS

(September 2010) was in proximity with the INB touching Valmikinagar, which was on the
northernmost side of the wildlife reserve area. However, even though wildlife clearance under the
"Single Window System" was available for the border road, Road Construction Department (RCD),
Government of Bihar did not apply for the same and changed the alignment (April 2011),
presuming that wildlife clearance would not be given by the MoEFCC. Accordingly, the alignment
was shifted to the southernmost boundary (April 2011) of the wildlife reserve area which was more
than 20 km away from the international border. This shift in alignment did not serve the desired
purpose as it was beyond the patrolling jurisdiction of the SSB which extended up to 15 km.

13


16. According to the reply of RCD, Bihar, shifting of alignment, from northernmost side of the
wildlife reserve area to the southernmost boundary (April 2011) of the wildlife reserve area which
was more than 20 km away from the international border, was as per the guidelines and according
to it only rural habitations were permitted to take up non-forestry activity in forest areas and no
extension or widening of roads as also construction of bituminous roads was allowed in forest
areas.

17. Regarding the change in distance and alignment of the roads under the Project, the
representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence apprised the Committee as under:-

"When the preliminary estimate was given in 2010, it was on the basis of the preliminary
inspection, which is always the case. When our executing agencies go on on-ground DPR
preparation, there is always a change in distance. This happens in every project.
Sometimes there is a change in some alignments and sometimes there is no need in some
places, some link roads, etc. are not required, so this changes."

18. | When asked to specify whether State Governments involved with the project were
authorised to change the approved plan and whether the same was brought to the notice of the
approving authority, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

"The conceptual planning of INBR at the time of CCS note was based on available
maps but while finalizing the alignment on the ground during survey, alignment of
INB road was considered out of Valmiki Tiger Reserve (VTR) due to the limitations
to construct the road in VTR as explained by RCD, Bihar. Further since SH 64 and
other roads were already available hence SSB BOPs, which are established near
Indo-Nepal Border, kept functioning through these available roads and construction
of INBR from Madanpur facilitates further movement of SSB towards east of the
border. This alignment has duly been vetted by RCD Bihar and agreed by SSB
before being approved by MHA.
The jurisdiction of BOP for 15 kms from the International Border is for chasing,
searching, seizure, etc. The patrolling is generally carried out along the border on
border roads or foot tracks available on the border and INB road along the Valmiki
Tiger reserve is facilitating SSB in carrying out the patrolling as well as maintains
the sanctity of the Tiger reserve.

As per para 5.1(iii) of the CCS Note of 2010, the executing agency shall, in
consultation with the BGFs, State Governments and MHA finalize the alignment of
the roads.

The alignment was vetted by RCD Bihar and approved by MHA. Change in alignment was
brought to the notice of MHA."

14


19. Asked to furnish the reasons for fixing the alignment by ignoring the guidelines relating to
construction in eco sensitive zone (in 2010), the Ministry in their Action Taken Note inter-alia
informed as under:-

" It has been replied by RCD, Bihar that there was no ignorance of guidelines relating to
construction in eco sensitive zone as the alignments proposed were outside the Valmiki
Tiger Reserve Forest area in Bihar. Further, no other alignment in Bihar was passing
through any other Sanctuary/ National Park. "

20. 108 query as to why Bihar Govt. did not approach the MOEFCC for permission under
single window system for border roads, the Ministry in their Action Taken Note inter-alia informed
as under:-

" There was no need to approach the MoEFCC through single window system as the
alignment proposed was outside the Valmiki Tiger Reserve."

21... When asked whether the survey along with SSB personnels were carried out to access the
actual site condition at the time of fixing of initial alignment i.e. before the approval of project by
Cabinet in September 2010 and the basis on which the the state Govts. had prepared the
preliminary estimates which were approved by the Cabinet in 2010, the Ministry in their Action
Taken Note inter-alia informed as under:-

"In 2006, the Department of Border Management, MHA called for a comprehensive
proposal regarding the development of roads, which are of operational and strategic
significance to the SSB in the Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan borders. The proposal of SSB
were discussed at in several meetings at various levels with all stakeholders. During the
period 2006 to 2010, the proposal was scrutinized and modified at different stages. The
modifications in alignments were discussed & finalized in consultations with Govt. of Bihar
and SSB. Later on, it was decided to obtain in-principal approval of CCS for preparation of
DPR in the year 2010. It was also submitted before CCS that the physical components and
the financial projections are preliminary & indicative in nature and are likely to change after
finalization of DPR."

22. As regards the checks and balances that have been put in place to ensure consistency
with the approved project plan, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

The executing State Government agencies have their internal control mechanism, and
standard procedures for executing the work as per the approved project plan. These
consist of work manual, roles and responsibilities of various officers, quality assurance plan,
Indian Road Congress (IRC) Code, Specifications of MoRTH and Terms and Condition of
Contract Agreement.

15


23.

DPR submitted by State agencies were vetted and scrutinized by BFR Cell headed
ADG(Border), CPWD and the DPR was appraised by the Technical Committee consisting
of Domain Experts and headed by DG, CPWD.

CCS in 2010 has authorized HLEC to consider and approve the variations in length, cost
estimates, alignment, inter-se change in time schedule and also to consider contingent
requirements pertaining to the main works which may not have been perceived at that
stage subject to overall umbrella approval of the CCS. Accordingly, the projects are placed
before HLEC for review and taking decisions.

Apart from Executing agencies inspection mechanism, MHA and SSB officials are
conducting field/ground inspections and reports being submitted accordingly.

State agencies are being pursued rigorously to improve quality assurance, Contract and
financial management.

MoUs have been signed and being implemented with the State executing agencies.
Implementation of BIM guidelines in all new and ongoing projects.

In MHA, regular monitoring through expenditure and progress review meetings where
monthly/quarterly/yearly expenditure and work plan are being monitored by higher Officials.

BM-| division, MHA is in process of developing Project Monitoring Portal (PMP) and Project
Monitoring Unit for smooth and expeditious implementation of border infrastructure works.

Asked asked whether any Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)/Guidelines for

implementation of the project were issued to States, the Ministry informed as under:-

"Implementation of the project is being done as per contract document clauses, Indian
Road Congress (IRC) Codes and Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways (MoRTH)
Specifications, Indian Standard Code (IS Code) specification.DPR submitted by State
agencies were vetted and scrutinized by BFR Cell headed ADG(Border), CPWD and the
DPR was appraised by the Technical Committee consisting of Domain Experts and headed
by DG, CPWD. A/A & E/S is issued based on DPR and concerned executing agencies are
responsible for execution and technical soundness of the scheme."

B. Non-connectivity to BOPs from the main alignment of proposed roads

24,

Audit noticed that as on March 2021, 363 BOPs (81 per cent) were away from the main

alignment of the proposed border road. Out of 363 BOPs, 125 BOPs were away at a distance of
ranging one km to 20 km and 16 were away at a distance of more than 20 km. No provision was
made to provide the connectivity to such BOPs which were away from the proposed border road.

16


25. — While apprising about the connectivity of BoPs, the representative of the Ministry

during the course of examination stated as under:-

"But original plan was not per se to connect the BoPs but to have a road close to the
border. The intent was to have a road close to BoPs where link roads and feeder

roads can be planned later on. It is there in the CCS draft."

26. The representative of the Ministry, during examination of the subject informed that
as on date, 471 BOPs are on the border and that 413 BOPs were connected.

27. When asked to furnish a brief note on the importance of Border Out Posts (BOPs), the
Ministry stated as under:-

"Border Out Posts (BOPs) of SSB are deployed on the International Border. The BOP
personnel undertake regular patrolling on the Border in their AOR (Area of Responsibility)
to prevent any anti-national activity, smuggling of Narcotics, Arms, Ammunition, Human
trafficking etc. across the border. Construction of BoPs is funded through a separate
budgetary head under different plan and BoPs are constructed by Engineering wing of SSB
/ CPWD."

28. To a specific query regarding the status, number and the location of BOPs required to be
constructed as per the project, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

"The Indo-Nepal Border Road Project is for construction of Border road and no BOPs were
envisaged to be constructed under this Project. SSB has clarified that the present INBR
project was approved for the main road connecting important places along Indo-Nepal
Border and not only the roads to BOPs. It is to further add that on the border, BOPs have
come first nearest to the border and INBR has come subsequently along the appropriate
and the best feasible alignment been as decided by the Executing Agencies of INBR with
concurrence of SSB."

29. | When asked about the facilities provided to the BOPs for their effective operation, the
Ministry in a written reply, informed asunder:-

"To enhance operational efficiency various facilities like accommodation for BOP
personnel, water supply, electricity, Gen sets, Solar Plants, fencing, night vision device,
vehicles communication and surveillance equipments etc. have been provided to the
BOPs."

17


30. In regard to the level at which the construction of 363 (81%) BOPs away from the main
alignment of the proposed border road, was approved and the objectives and the cost involved
therein, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“BOPs on the border were established first nearest to the border as per the operational
requirements and INB road Project comes subsequently. Further best feasible alignment
of INB Road project has been adopted by the executing agencies after concurrence of
SSB. Out of 363 BOPs, 328 BOPs are situated within 1.5 km from the Indo-Nepal
Border Road (INBR) and only 35 BOPs, including 20 BOPs in Valmiki Tiger Reserve
(VTR), are situated beyond 1.5 km from the INBR. The main objective of the BOPs is to
be located nearest possible location of International Border so as to prevent any anti-
national activity, smuggling of narcotics, arms, ammunition, human trafficking, etc.
across the border and as well as within 15 km on Indian side of Indo-Nepal Border. Key
Location Plan (KLP) of the BOP is approved by Director General, Sashastra Seema Bal
keeping in view the operational requirement and various other factors. Whereas the Indo
Nepal Road was envisaged on the basis of request of State Government to provide
connectivity to important places along the border, not only to provide connectivity to the
BOPs. All road alignments were finalized after concurrence of SSB.Connectivity to the
SSB BOPs have been ensured through this Indo-Nepal Border Road Project as well as
other roads from various schemes of the State Governments. A separate scheme is
under process to provide link roads, foot tracks to remaining SSB BOPs and important
patrolling routes.”

31. To a specific query whether BOPs, away from the main alignment, are being utilized, the
Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“All the BOPs are functioning and being utilized and it has been ascertained by the SSB
that for its effective functioning, BOPs are established nearer to the border as far as
possible.

Further it is also clarified that jurisdiction of BOP for 15 Kms from the International Border is
for chasing and searching operations. The patrolling is carried out along the border on the
available border roads or foot tracks available on the border and INB road is facilitating
SSB in carrying out the patrolling. SSB along with state Govt agencies has been part of the
proposal and decision making process in finalization of road alignment.

Connectivity to the SSB BOPs have been ensured through this Indo-Nepal Border Road
Project as well as other roads from various schemes of the State Governments.”

C. Proposed road alignment away from the international border

32. The Committee have learnt through the Audit scrutiny that though the actual work of the
SSB involves patrolling the international border from pillar to pillar, the patrolling jurisdiction of SSB

18


is 15 km from the international border for chase, search and seizure. Audit observed that in Bihar,
the alignment finalized by the RCD in April 2011 was away from the international border at 14
locations in West Champaran district at a distance ranging from 16 km to 41 km. Resultantly, in
these stretches, SSB would be constrained to patrol effectively as the border roads would be
beyond its jurisdiction. In this regard, the Ministry in its reply stated that a separate proposal to
provide basic infrastructure facilities including road connectivity to the BOPs of Border Guarding
Forces (BGFs) is under consideration.

33. On being asked as to when the Ministry decided to make a separate proposal for providing
basic infrastructure facilities including road connectivity to the BOPs of Border Guarding Force and
the reasons as to why it was not done at the conceptualisation stage the Ministry in a written reply
informed as under:-
“gh meeting of Empowered Committee of Border infrastructure (ECBI) was held on
06/08/2015 under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary.

As per the direction of ECBI, Department of Border Management was mandated to assess
the requirement of basic infrastructure in BOPs and the same may be provided after co-
ordinating provision of the same with the respective Administrative Ministries. Thereafter
DPRs for Rs. 449.65 Cr for construction of link roads for 95 BOPs were submitted to MHA
by MoRD and SSB after receiving the same from the State Agencies. After going through
the DPRs, MHA vide ID no. 11012/13/2022-BM-V, dated 07/03/2022 returned the proposal
to SSB for re-assessment with firm/updated cost estimates of the link roads be obtained
from the State Govt agencies and also to review/ re-assessment of proposed links roads to
confirm non-duplicity. Stretch wise re-assessment of link roads are being done by State
Agencies, who are taking it with various agencies constructing roads in the State and forest
area details. The confirmed cost & other details are awaited from respective State Govts.
As it would have not been practically possible to provide connectivity to all BOPs through a
single alignment, therefore, this was not part of the original scheme. However, this will be a
separate Border Infrastructure and Management (BIM) BOP Project under different
budgetary head and will not be a part of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project.”

34, Regarding Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for constructing roads at the Indo-
Nepal border under the Project , the representative of the Ministry during the course of
examination stated as under:-
"Sir, there is no SOP for that. It is as per the availability of the land, as per the
obstructions, natural obstacles, etc. All those things are taken into account while

laying the road."

19


35. To support their contention that there are many MDR/PMGY roads all along those
kilometers where traffic is running to visit Nepal borders and that , SSB and residents have no
constraint at all to visit BOPs nearby border and Valmiki Nagar Tiger Reserve, the Ministry
submitted a List of such roads along Indo-Nepal Border as furnished by RCD, Bihar. The Ministry
also furnished a copy of communication dated 20.10.2016 of SSB regarding proximity of BoPs to
International Border.

D. Constructing of Bridges without connecting to main alignment (Paragraph 2.1.4)

36. According to Audit, 15 bridges were constructed in the alignment of the roads along the
Indo-Nepal border in Bettiah (West Champaran District) of Bihar before August 2016. After their
construction, the alignment of the roads was changed by the Road Construction Department of
Bihar. There was no clarity on whether the bridges were connected to the revised alignment. Audit
team along with the engineers of the RCD, Bettiah (West Champaran District) conducted joint
physical verification of three approachable bridges and found that the bridges were incomplete with
no approach roads. The bridges remained unutilised (March 2021) as they were not connected to
toads.

37. To a specific query about the reason for changing the alignment of roads along the Indo-
Nepal Border in Bettiah of Bihar where 15 bridges were constructed and whether any provision for
physical inspection of the work carried out by the executing agencies, has been included in the
MoUs with States, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

Bihar
Audit team found 15 no. of bridges are not connected by approach road. Presently 9 no. of
bridges have been connected and rest 6 bridges are yet to be connected. Work on these
remaining bridges is in progress and they will be connected along with completion of the
project. All above constructed bridges fall along approved alignment and will be fully utilized
after being operational.

As per the MoU signed between MHA and the State PWDs, while executing the project, the
State PWDs are required to strictly implement the quality control/assurance functions as
per Indian Road Congress Codes, MoRTH Guidelines and RCD, Bihar's quality plan and as
per CPWD norms. Physical inspection is being carried out by MHA and SSB officials
regularly

38. As regards the number of bridges that are connected with realigned roads and whether the
same are being utilized, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“Bihar has informed that all 118 Nos of constructed bridges falls on the approved alignment.
Total no. of constructed bridges in Indo-Nepal Border Road Project in Bihar is 118 Nos
(NABARD- 117, MHA-01). Out of 118 constructed bridges, 104 bridges have been
connected with approach road and are being utilized and connectivity of the rest is in

20


progress. All proposed bridges fall on approved alignment and none on re-alignment and
hence there is no additional Capital Expenditure involved.”

E. Delays in Acquisition of Land

39. Audit noted that there was considerable delay in acquisition of Land in the States of Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar which led to non-completion of the project.

40. | When asked about the reason for delay in acquisition of Land in the States of Uttar
- Pradesh and Bihar, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“Bihar

i. Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13 after
sanction of the project in all districts. On 11 Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition Act 2013 came
into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old Act process halted
completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to accept land compensation
based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process under RFCTLAAR Act 2013 was
started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of approximately five years. Beside this,
demand of residential / commercial rate in place of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have
also affected the land acquisition process.

ii. People having land possession but no valid paper to proof their entitlement, dispute in
land apportionment among family members etc. caused problems in disbursement of
compensation.

iii. Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in time to
contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and Madhubani
requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender has been invited in
these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates and delayed the project too.

In West Champaran, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj so called king in
ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as personal land by District
Administration.

Uttar Pradesh

i. Uttar Pradesh has intimated that in Uttar Pradesh, initially land acquisition rates were
based on old rates, which were revised on demand of land owners as per provision of
revised (RFCTLAAR Act 2013)’and consequently GoUP, G.O. No. 2/2015/215/Ek -132015-
20(48)/2011 dt. 19.03.2015, in this regard. As a result, revised estimates were sanctioned
by May, 2017. After the sanction, all formalities of LA done accordingly.”

21


41. On being asked about the efforts made for acquiring the land, the Ministry in a written reply
informed as under:-
“Regular meetings were conducted by Secretary / Joint Secretary (BM) for resolving the
issues with concerned State Govt. Authorities. The issues of pending land acquisition were
also deliberated in HLEC with concerned State Govt. for expeditious resolution. For forest
and Wild Life Clearances meetings with MoEFC and Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun
were conducted.

Various meetings are held at the level of District Land Acquisition Officer, District
Magistrate and Commissioner level in the States for expediting land acquisition.

RCD, Bihar has informed that for coordination with DLAO, meeting with DM, DLAO were a
regular process to expedite the Land Acquisition process. In this regard, regular camps
were organised in each block by District Land Acquisition Officer to collect the requisite
papers and to resolve the issues being faced by landholders. Besides this, meetings at
different levels were organised to resolve the issue and expedite disbursement of
compensation to land holders. The meetings details are as follows-

Details

Chief Secretary, Bihar, with all concerned DM: - 27-06-2017
Chief Secretary, Bihar with All concerned DM: - 28-11-2017
Chief Secretary, Bihar with all concerned DM: - 27-02-2018
Pr. Secretary, RCD with all concerned DM: - 26-07-2018
Principal Secretary, RCD with all DM :24-10-2018

Addl. Chief Sect. RCD, Bihar with DM, Batia: 24-04-2021

DM, Kishanganj with DLAO - 05-05-2021

Camps are being organized for collection of requisite papers from land holders in different
villages to expedite disbursement of compensation.

UTTARAKHAND

UKD PWD made joint inspection of forest land, geological inspection, counting of trees,
meeting with village, block, and district level committee, FRA meetings, transfer CA Land,
signing of forest proposal by PWD, revenue, and forest department officials thereafter
proposals submitted to GOI through conservator of forest and state forest nodal officer on
28.05.2014 by completing all process Forest clearance of 12.00 to 55.00km was finally
approved on 28.10.2016.

Uttar Pradesh (UP)

Initially land acquisition rates were based on old rates, which were revised on demand of
land owners as per provision of revised “The Right to Fair compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013’and
consequently GoUP, 6.0. No. 2/2015/215/Ek -132015-20(48)/2011 dt. 19.03.2015, in

22


this regard. As a result, revised estimates were sanctioned by May, 2017. After the
sanction, all formalities of LA done accordingly.
i. 337 KMs length is to be taken up in the II"? phase in EPC mode which lies
in forest and wildlife area.
ii. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of flyovers and deviations from
approved alignment, a meeting through Video conferencing to review the
mitigation measures suggested by WII, Dehradun, was held on 04.11.2022
with all stake holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD,
Lucknow.

iii. In meeting, WII expressed that the mitigation measures (08 fly overs and re-
alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake holders were requested to
proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations. It is decided that
the WII, Dehradun will provide co-ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-
alignment proposal at 05 places, which are still awaited.”

42. When the Committee sought to know about the average time taken before a settlement
was reached and the terms and conditions of the Rehabilitation and Relocation (R&R)
arrangements entered into, the Ministry has in a written reply informed as under:-

“Land was acquired after giving the compensation of land. There is no Rehabilitation and
Relocation (R&R) in Uttar Pradesh State.

No Rehabilitation and Relocation cases in Uttarakhand

Bihar informed that 11 houses fall along Indo-Nepal Border Road Project in Sitamarhi district.
Rehabilitation and Relocation (R&R) is in process according to the provisions of RFCTLARR
Act, 2013.”

43. As regards whether the Ministry at any time before the approval of Cabinet (2010) had
assessed the impact on the project which might take place after the implementation of New Land
Acquisition Act and what mitigation measures were taken up by the Ministry, the Ministry in their
Action Taken Note informed as under:-

“The Indo-Nepal Border Road project was conceptualized in the year 2006 and in principal
approval of Cabinet was obtained in the year 2010. The New Land Acquisition Act, 2013,
was although under consideration in the Parliament since the year 2007 however it came in
the force w.e.f. 01.01.2014 only hence without final shaping, passing and publication of any
Act, its impact can’t be assessed. Accordingly, while taking the approval of Cabinet in
year 2010, no mitigation measures were taken up by the Ministry in anticipation of passing
of New Land Acquisition Act. “

23


F. Approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPR)

44... 609 pointed that as a result of failure to obtain forest/wild life clearances in Uttar Pradesh
and delay in finalization of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Pancheshwar Dam on river Mahakali
by the Ministry of Water Resources in Uttrakhand, as of March 2021, DPRS for only 842.86 km out
of the targeted 1262.36 km of roads (67 per cent) were approved leaving DPRS for 419.50 km of
road length (33 per cent) yet to be approved. Audit observed that MHA did not ensure that
preparatory works such as land acquisition and Forest/Wildlife clearances were completed by the
States before approval of DPR.

45. On being enquired about the details of efforts, if any, undertaken to ensure completion of
preparatory works such as land acquisition, Forest/ Wild life clearance by the States before
approval of DPR, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“After approval of CCS note, MHA has made constant endeavour for completion of preparatory
works by the State Govts. Regular meetings and visits were made by MHA officials to ensure
early completion of preparatory work.

RCD Bihar informed, DPR were prepared on the basis of detailed survey of site such as
feasibility of alignment/ Existence of Reserved Forest / Protected Forest / Wild life, quarry of
stone aggregate, borrow area of earth, Hydraulic survey of river or other water bodies, soil
investigation, Design of crust and hydraulic structures, Forest, Shifting of Electric poles/
telephone lines/ water supply pipe lines/ Temples/ Public Utilities is studied by DPR Consultant
and incorporated accordingly in DPR.

i, On the basis of approved alignment, Land Acquisition Plan is prepared showing each
affected plot and its area. Then plot wise area is measured and total required land area is
calculated. Total cost of land acquisition is calculated on the basis of nature of land (Non-
agricultural / agricultural / Residential/ Commercial) and its area to be acquired. Valuation of
land and amount of compensation is decided by District Collector on the basis of MVR and
after that compensation were awarded

ii, Then Detailed Project Report is prepared taking into account of cost of Civil construction,
Land Acquisition, Forest / Environmental, Utility shifting etc..

ili. The Detailed Project is then approved by the competent authority and administrative
approval is issued by the Govt. After allocation of fund in administrative approval, Land
Acquisition Process is initiated by District Administration. Hence before approval of DPR, no
effort regarding land acquisition, Forest/ Wild life clearance had taken place. All preparatory
works such as land acquisition, Forest/ Wild life clearance etc. started after approval of Project.

iv. HLEC approved one package of Sitamarhi on 24-05-2011, Four packages (West

Champaran, Supaul&Araria) on 11-04-2012, Two Packages (Sitamarhi &Madhubani) on 21-01-
2013.

24


46.

PWD UKD

1. PWD UP has informed that in UP, the stretches of 16 DPRs of Indo-Nepal
Border Road Project lie in forest/wildlife area which requires forest/wildlife
clearances.

2. WII has submitted report (2022) vide letter dtd. 04.08.2022. In this report,
provision of Flyovers at 08 places and change in approved alignment of 05
places in a length of about 39 Km have been proposed.

3. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of flyovers and deviations from
approved alignment, a meeting through V.C. to review the mitigation
measures suggested by WII, Dehradun, was held on dt. 04.11.2022 with all
stake holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD, Lucknow.

4. In meeting, WII expressed that the mitigation measures (08 flyovers and re-
alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake holders were requested to
proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations as recorded in the
minutes of meeting. It is decided that the WII, Dehradun will provide co-
ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-alignment proposal at 05 places. These
are still awaited.

In Uttarakhand preparatory work for forest clearance started in 2010 after GO! letter
26.11.2010. In previously sanctioned forest length from km 0.0 to 12.00 DPR was
approved on 04.07.2011. For the remaining length, after completing all formalities
required as per SOP (Forest department) i.e. joint inspection of forest land, geological
inspection, counting of trees, meeting with village, block, and district level committee,
FRA meetings, transfer CA Land, signing of forest proposal by PWD, revenue, and
forest department officials thereafter proposals submitted to GOI through conservator of
forest and state forest nodal officer on 28.05.2014 by completing all process. GOI kept
the proposal pending due to Pancheswar Dam project and it was finally approved on
28.10.2016."

As regards, the reasons for stalemate in land acquisition and obtaining wildlife/forest

clearance, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“Bihar

RCD Bihar has informed about stalemate of land acquisition that District Land
Acquisition Officer, Betia has handed over 109.56 km out of 111.098 km in west
Champaran but due to Court cases/Arbitration approx. 3.00 km is affected and rest
in length of 22 km there is disbursement issue because people having pocession of
land but do not have legal documents to proof their entitlement on paper, dispute in
land apportionment among family members etc. too causes problem in
disbursement of compensation.

25


There are 294 plots in west Champaran having nature of Bakast category, the land
donated by Rajgharana (Betia Raj) to their staff in ancient times. These lands are
needed to be notified either personal land or Govt land by District Administration.
Yet decision has to be taken by District Administration. People creates hinderance
at site for demanding higher rate compensation.

In Motihari district, DLAO has handed over 65.452 km out of
75.002 km and balance 9.55 km is affected due to court cases/arbitration.

Uttar Pradesh

i. PWD, UP has informed that in Uttar Pradesh, initially land acquisition rates
were based on old rates, which were revised on demand of land owners as
per provision of revised “The Right to Fair compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013"and
consequently GoUP, G.O. No. 2/2015/215/Ek -132015-20(48/2011 dt.
19.03.2015, in this regard. As a result, revised estimates were sanctioned by
May, 2017. After the sanction, all formalities of Land acquisition are done
accordingly.

ii, Further, in UP 337 KMs length is to be taken up in the ॥१४ phase in EPC
mode which lies in forest and wildlife area. To resolve the issue of excessive
cost of flyovers and deviations from approved alignment, a meeting through
V.C. to review the mitigation measures suggested by Wil, Dehradun, was held
on dt. 04.11.2022 with all stake holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border,
UP, PWD, Lucknow. In meeting, WII expressed that the mitigation measures
(08 fly overs and re-alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake holders
were requested to proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations
as recorded in the minutes of meeting. It is decided that the WII, Dehradun
will provide co-ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-alignment proposal at 05
places. These are still awaited.

Uttarakhand

In Uttarakhand, no stalemate in land acquisition and obtaining wildlife/forest clearance.”

47. On being asked to specify the length of road in each State for which DPRs are yet to be
approved due to pending land acquisition and delay in obtaining forest/wildlife clearance and the
efforts being made to complete the DPRs within timeline, the Ministry in a written reply informed as
under:-

“Uttrakhand has informed that no such case of forest/Wildlife clearance and land

acquisition is pending in Uttarakhand State. However,80 km road length is pending
due to non finalization of India Nepal Joint Pancheswar Dam DPR.

26


It has been informed by PWD, UP that in UP, 337 KMs length is to be taken up in
the II"? phase in EPC mode which lies in forest and wildlife area. To resolve the
issue of excessive cost of flyovers and deviations from approved alignment, a
meeting through V.C. to review the mitigation measures suggested by WII,
Dehradun, was held on dt. 04.11.2022 with all stake holders by Chief Engineer,
Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD, Lucknow. In meeting, WII expressed that the
mitigation measures (08 fly overs and re-alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All
stake holders were requested to proceed as per joint consensus after detailed
deliberations as recorded in the minutes of meeting. It is decided that the WII,
Dehradun will provide co-ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-alignment proposal
at 05 places. These are still awaited.”

G. Deficiencies in approved DPRs in Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh

48. In the approved DPRs, audit observed various deficiencies like deficient designing of road
in Uttrakhand and overestimation in estimates of 11.93 crore in Uttar Pradesh.

49. On being asked about the procedure for approval of DPR, parameters for verification taken
into account and whether technical experts of the relevant field are consulted prior to approval of
DPR, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

i. “MHA has a mechanism in the form of Technical Committee headed by DG,
CPWD and HLEC headed by Home Secretary for efficient planning and
monitoring of such projects and after consultation with all stakeholders

ii, The proposals were finalized by State government agencies in consultation
with SSB and sent to MHA. MHA submitted these proposed DPRs to Border
Fence and Roads (BFR) cell headed by ADG(Border) CPWD.

iii, DPR submitted by State agencies were vetted and scrutinized by BFR Cell
headed ADG(Border), CPWD and the DPR was appraised by the Technical
Committee consisting of Domain Experts and headed by DG, CPWD.A/A &
E/S is issued based on DPR and concerned executing agencies are
responsible for execution and technical soundness of the scheme.

iv. The recommended proposals of Technical Committee are thereafter
appraised and approved by a High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC)
headed by Union Home Secretary and respective Chief secretaries and
DGs of BGF as members.

v. To further streamline the process comprehensive guideline for creating
Infrastructure under “Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM)” has

27


vi.

vii.

viii,

xi,
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
XV.
xvi.
xvii.
xviii.
xix.

been issued on 13.10.2022.

These guidelines are based on the General Financial Rules 2017 Manual
for procurement of works 2022, CPWD Works Manual and other relevant
SOPs including CVC guidelines

Under BIM guidelines, for approval of projects a DPR may contain following
components.
Details of land required.

. List of approval of statutory clearances from appropriate bodies.

Environment impact assessment study.

Social and economic impact assessment,

Detailed survey and geotechnical studies.

Geological, hydrological studies.

Design and drawings.

Estimated cost

Timeline for important milestones and completion of work.

Quality Assurance plan

Purchase/procurement of items/equipments preferable through GeM
Maintenance clause.

50. When asked whether any third party audit of the DPRs is conducted to ensure
transparency, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-.

“As per the extent guidelines, there exists no provision for 3° party audit of DPRs. However,
DPRs are vetted and appraised at the level of Border, Fence and Roads Cell, CPWD and by
Technical Committee consisting of domain experts and headed by DG, CPWD.”

51. As regards remedial measures taken to address the audit objections on deficient designing
of road in Uttrakhand and overestimation in estimates of 11.93 crore in Uttar Pradesh, the Ministry
informed in a written reply as under:-

1.

“PWD, Uttarakhand has informed that new estimates are being framed on
the basis of latest IRC code and MoRTH provisions. However, work for 2
lane road from Km 0.00 to 12.00 was sanctioned in year 2011 as per
MORTH 4" revision and BM/SDBC was taken as per existing previously
constructed 1.5 lane crust thickness of 415 mm. This was scrutinized by
CPWD and approved by HLEC. However, crust thickness of 540 mm with
DBMIBC has been taken as per MORTH 5" revision from km 12.00-55.00.

28


2.

Itis also intimated that at present aforesaid road surface is in good condition
and need no requirement to increase the crust thickness. However, in future,
whenever the stretch will be reconstructed, it will be done as per traffic
census and M/o RTH specification requirement applicable at that point of
time.

PWD, UP has intimated that as per old MoRTH data book rates were
different for different capacity of machines as per quantum of work. Rates of
machines have been taken in the DPRs as per quantum of work. Now as
per new data book revised in October 2019 (2nd revision), works have been
categorized as large (>500 Cr.), medium (200-500 Cr.) and small (<200 Cr.).
Accordingly, data book provides for machine and their rates for small,
medium and large projects. New estimates are being framed on the basis of
new data book.”

H. Memorandum of Understanding

52. Audit noticed that there was delay of 10 years in signing of MoU with State Governments of
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.

53. When asked about the salient features of the MoUs signed with three State Governments
for the purpose of INBR and whether signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the
State Governments was a pre-requisite or it was decided later on, the Ministry in a written reply
informed as under:-

"(1) Salient features of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)

|. It emphasizes on timeline Specifies that executing agencies will carry out various
services such as survey, finalization of alignment, preparation of DPR, etc.

Il. It specifies that executing agencies shall be responsible for liaison with State Govt. /
local authorities for acquisition of land and forest / environmental clearance.

Ill. Provision of ‘liquidity damages’
IV. Executing agencies to submit monthly physical and financial progress to MHA.

(2) There is a provision of MoU in CCS Note as approved in the year 2010."

(31, 1071)

29


54. To a specific query as to why signing of MoU with State Govt. of Bihar and UP took 10
years, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“Considerable time was taken in consensus on some terms of MOU and as well as Agency
Charges due to which the MOU signing process was delayed.

(i) The MoU with Uttrakhand was signed in April, 2014. However, with Uttar Pradesh, it was
signed only in the month of March 2021and with Bihar in 23.07.2020 as there was no
consensus on some terms and as well as on the agency charges as @ 9.5% was being asked
by the executing agencies for implementation of the project whereas MHA wanted to restrict
the agency charge to 7% of the sanctioned amount. However, it was ensured that the
executing State Govt. agencies carry out the assigned work as per terms and condition of
MoUs even before finalization and signing.”

55. The representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence apprised the Committee
that during the continuous review and inspection with the agency the Ministry had decided on the
projected date of its completion and inter-alia stated as under:-

"... In Bihar we will be able to complete it in December 2024. In Uttar Pradesh, it
will be completed by June 2023 and in Uttarakhand by March 2023.

56. During the course of examination, the representative of the Ministry while apprising the
Committee about the status of stretches with encumbrance inter-alia stated as under:-

"Here we would like to tell about the stretches with encumbrance. Issues related to
land acquisition and mutations are still pending in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, which
are part of the PWD system there. and R.C.D. They are working on that. Since they
also have to finish the work quickly, they have assured us that they will be able to
finish these land acquisition cases which are mostly mutation cases by March. Uttar
Pradesh has 299 km of forest and wildlife clearance. Uttarakhand has 118

kilometers, which | have said earlier also. That is because of non-finalisation of

proposed Pancheshwar Dam."

30


ILFINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
A. Injudicious release of funds by MHA

57. Audit pointed that utilization of funds was not properly managed as MHA released funds to
the States though the unspent balance of previous years were not utilized by the State
Governments. This resulted in blocking of funds with the State Governments during the
years 2013 to 2016.

58. Asked whether the release of funds to the States concerned was as per the extant
provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR), the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-
“All provision of GFR and other regulations in vogue were scrupulously followed by MHA.
All funds were released after Integrated Finance Division IFD(H)'s concurrence and
utilization certificate with work progress were taken from States.”

59. As regards steps contemplated to ensure optimum utilisation of funds by states, the
Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

1. “MHA has kept a close monitoring mechanism and utilization certificates
of funds are being obtained from the executing agencies and a comparative
analysis of the progress of work viz-a-viz fund utilization is being conducted.
Further, MHA has adopted the revised procedure for release of fund under
Central Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring / utilization of funds
released as issued by Ministry of Finance vide Office Memorandum no.
1(18)/PFMS/FCD/2021 on 9.3.2022.

2. Accordingly, in case of Central Sector Scheme having annual outlay of
more than Rs. 500 Crore and implemented without involvement of State
agencies, it shall be mandatory to implement such schemes through the
Treasure Single Account (TSA) model. This will ensure that the funds of
these schemes are released “Just-In-Time “from the Consolidated Fund of
India to the beneficiaries/vendors.

3. Further, in case of Central Sector schemes having (a) annual outlay of less
than Rs. 500 Crore or (b) the schemes are being implemented by agencies
of the State Governments etc. Ministry has to designate a Central Nodal
Agency (CAN) for implementing such scheme.

4, Furthermore, MHA has also issued detailed guidelines namely “Border
Infrastructure & Management (BIM) Scheme” on 13.10.2022 for compliance.

31


60.

5. Regular Progress Meetings are also being convened in MHA on monthly
basis for taking stock of progress made so far as well as for utilization of
funds / parking of funds.”

Regarding the criteria followed for release of funds to the States which had unspent and

unutilised balance of previous year, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“1,MHA has adopted the revised procedure for release of fund under Central
Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring/utilization of funds released as
issued by Ministry of Finance vide Office Memorandum No.
1(18)/PFMS/FCD/2021 on 9.3.2022

2. Accordingly, in case of Central Sector Scheme having annual outlay of more
than Rs. 500 Crore and implemented without involvement of State agencies, it
shall be mandatory to implement such schemes through the Treasure Singh
Account (TSA) model. This will ensure that the funds of these schemes are
released “Just-In-Time” from the Consolidated Fund of India to the
beneficiaries/vendors.

3. Further, in case of Central Sector Scheme having (a) annual outlay of less than
Rs. 500 Crore or (b) the schemes are being implemented by agencies of the State
Governments etc. Ministry has to designate a Central Nodal Agency (CNA) for
implementing such scheme.”

(B) Irregular release of funds by MHA and diversion of funds by State Governments

61.

Audit noticed that MHA sanctioned ₹ 2.34 crore on inadmissible components like utility

shifting and afforestation to the State of Uttar Pradesh. Further, the State Government had
diverted/incurred expenditure on inadmissible components aggregating 13.41 crore.

62.

On being asked whether any comprehensive list of admissible components was shared

with the States or the same was included in the MoUs with the State authorities concerned, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

63.

“As per the ccs approval the state Government shall bear the cost of land acquisition,
payment for compensatory afforestation and as per MOU cost of shifting utilities shall be
borne by respective state governments.”

Regarding the monitoring mechanism in place to ensure that the project is executed as per

the approved plan and the fund is spent for the intended purpose, the Ministry in a written reply
informed as under:-

32


“The project is reviewed at different levels like Technical Committee (TC), chaired
by DG, CPWD, High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC), chaired by Home
Secretary. Regular meetings in MHA at senior level to review the physical and
financial progress of the project. Revised procedure for release of funds under
Central Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring / utilization of funds released
as issued by Ministry of Finance vide Office Memorandum 10.
1(18)/PFMS/FCD/2021 on 9.3.2022 is also being followed by MHA.

In Uttarakhand, for proper utilization of funds, regular state level review meetings
are being conducted by SE, CE, HOD and Principal Secretary.”

The status of adjustment is as under:

PWD, UP has informed that request has been made to MHA for adjusting the
amount from release of funds in F.Y 2022-23 after deducting Rs. 2.34 Cr. vide letter
No. 44INB/2INM/2013 dt. 20.05.22. PWD, Uttrakhand has informed that Rs. 8.34
Cr. made for forest clearance NPV and Tree cutting has been fully refunded and
adjusted." (37, LOP1)

(C) Non-accounting of Interest earned and Unadjusted advances and interest

64, Audit noticed that MHA did not account for the interest of = 36.74 crore earned by the State
Government on unutilised central funds. Further, the advances and interest thereon aggregating
136.60 crore for mobilisation advance and equipment advance are yet to be recovered from the
contractors in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.

65. As regards mechanism that has been put in place to oversee the extent of fund utilisation
by States and the details of the amount of Central fund lying unutilised by States till date the
Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“Funds to the State Government are released after checking the utilization certificate
for funds released earlier. The utilization of the funds released, physical and financial
progress are reviewed in the Ministry of Home Affairs at regular intervals at the
senior level with all stakeholders. Uttrakhand PWD is submitting regular monthly
financial progress to MHA and submitted UC’s of spent amount timely. Monthly
monitoring at chief engineer level and regular monitoring at Secretary PWD level are
being conducted by State Government. Expenditure as on dated 30.11.2022 is Rs.
172.93 Cr against the allotment of Rs. 209.14 Cr. Rs 36.21 Cr. is the unspent
amount lying with PWD, Uttrakhand and 99% of fund will be utilized by march
2023 and balance amount will be transefered to CNA account.”

33


66.  Queried about the assessment of interest accrued thereon and provision for treatment of
interest accrued in the MoUs with the States, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

७1, Uttrakhand has informed that Rs. 209.14 Cr. has been released by M.H.A. to
PWD Uttrakhand. As per SBI, Champawat total interest earned against the allotment
is 39.79 Cr. (Financial Year 2015-16 to year 2021-22). Interest amount of Rs 39.79
Crore has been deposited by PIU Thuligarh, Tanakpur vide letter 364/cash dated
23.05.2022 in consolidated fund of India.

2. Further, PWD, UP has already informed that total interest earned upto 10/12/2021
amounting to Rs. 1.87 Cr. has been transferred to MHA SECTT. Central Secretariat
Branch as per direction of MHA vide letter No. 11014/9/2018-BM-V(Vol-IIl) dt.
11.10.2021 and same has been intimated vide their office letter no.
15141NB/21INB/13 dt. 13.12.2021"

67. When asked about the action taken for and the extent of recovery made against Rs 136.60
crore from the contractors in UP and Bihar for mobilisation advance and equipment advance, the
Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-
"Bihar
1. RCD, Bihar has informed that
Mobilization Advance: - Total mobilization advance in West Champaran (Betia),
Kishanganj, Madhubani, Motihari and Sitamarhi were Rs 93.99 Cr. Out of which Rs
91.99 Cr was recovered before Audit and rest Rs 2.00 Cr was recovered on 20-07-
2021, Hence total Mobilization Advance of Rs 93.99 Crore have been recovered.
Equipment Advance (P & M Advance): - Total Equipment Advance in Betia&
Kishanganj have been given of Rs 9.48 Crore. Out of which Rs 6.286 Crore has
been recovered and Rs 3.19 Crore in Kishanganj is under process of recovery from
running bill.
(2) UP has informed that Mobilization advances/Equipment advances of Rs 22.32
Cr. have been fully recovered as per conditions of contract total interest earned upto
10/12/2021 amounting to Rs. 1.87 Cr. has been transferred to MHA SECTT. Central
Secretariat Branch as per direction of MHA, vide letter No. 11014/9/2018-BM-V(Vol-
Ill) dt. 11.10.2021 and same has been intimated vide this office letter no.
15141INB/21INB/13 dt. 13.12.2021. UP and Bihar Government have been requested
to look into the matter and take action if any lapse has been conducted by the
Officials of executing agencies."

34


68. The representative of the Ministry during the course of examination apprised the

Committee as under:-

"The interest that was pending with Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand has been

returned to us."

D. Cost escalation on account of slow progress of works

69. The Committee noted from Audit observation that due to the slow progress of construction
of roads, the projects costs were increased by ₹ 831.30 crore in 21 stretches.

70. When asked whether reasons had been ascertained for slow progress of construction of
roads leading to cost escalation of Rs 831.30 crore in 21 stretches and the findings thereon, the
Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-.

“(i). RCD, Bihar
Total project cost approved by MHA in 237 240 and 25" HLEC meeting (May 2011

to Jan 2013) was Rs. 1655.98 Crores for length of 552.29 km. Later on, due to
factors mentioned below, the cost of project increased to Rs. 2428.67 Crores

(approx.).
Cost Escalation and slow Progress of work:

ii. Delay in Land Acquisition: Land acquisition process was started in 2012-13
after sanction of the project in all districts. On 1% Jan 2014, new Land Acquisition
Act 2013 came into effect. After new LA Act, ongoing land disbursement under old
Act process halted completely. Land holders protested the acquisition and denied to
accept land compensation based on old Act. At last, fresh Land Acquisition process
under RFCTLAAR Act 2013 was started in year 2015, which resulted into a delay of
approximately five years. Beside this, demand of residential / commercial rate in
place of agriculture rate, court cases etc. have also affected the land acquisition
process.

iii. People having land possession but no valid paper to proof their entitlement,
dispute in land apportionment among family members etc. caused problems in
disbursement of compensation.

iv. Due to introduction of new Land Acquisition Act 2013, land could not be given in
time to contractors, therefore Contractors of West Champaran, Sitamarhi and
Madhubani requested for foreclosure of the contract agreement. Then re-tender has
been invited in these three districts which resulted into revision of estimates and
delayed the project too.

35


v. In West Champaran, 294 plots are of Bakast category (Gifted by Betia Raj so
called king in ancient time to people) which needs to be notified or de-notified as
personal land by District Administration.

vi. Closure of Rail Rake Point: Railway had closed the Bathnaha and Raxaul
Railway Rake point for carriage of stone aggregate and unloading in Araria district
which led to delay and cost escalation.

vii. In the year 2017, Goods and Service Tax GST came into force which has
increased the cost.

All above factors delayed the project adversely and resulted increase in cost of
material, manpower and tools and plants with respect of time.

Corrective measures:
i. Efforts are being taken to expedite the disbursement of land compensation.
ii, Regular monitoring of physical progress of work.

PWD, UP

PWD, UP has informed that against Sanctioned length of 235.35 Km, formation
work has been done upto 219.05 Km. It is further informed by PWD, UP that in Uttar
Pradesh, there exists no price escalation clause in the contract bond hence no price
escalation was paid to the contractors and for ongoing packages, no escalation will
be paid for the works.

i, The financial as well as physical progress are regularly monitored
through regular meetings by senior officials in MHA. The
bottlenecks are considered and directions are issued. Further,
regular spot visits are also made

ii, The physical components (1377 km) and financial projections (Rs.

3853 Crores) were preliminary and indicative in nature at the time
of approval of CCS in Nov 2010. The physical length, scope of
work, alignment, financial projections were likely to change after
finalization of DPRs. This aspect has been mentioned in CCS note.

iii, However, due to the pendency of Wildlife Clearance and Forest
Clearance for 299 km in Uttar Pradesh, pendency in finalization of
alignment of road in the area of proposed Pancheshwar Dam in
Uttarakhand, delay in land acquisition due to court cases in East and
West Champaran districts of Bihar after advent of Right to Fair
Compensation, Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and

36


Resettlement Act (RFCTLARR Act 2013) and cost escalation due to
inflation since the year 2010 viz. increase in the cost of material, labour
and Tool & Plant and also due to change of scope of work like
provision of culverts, bridges, drains etc, construction of roads under
the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project was not completed within the
timeline and the cost was revised."

71. On this subject, the representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence, informed

as under:-
"Sir, the cost escalation that has happened is due to slow progress. For that,
the MHA had to take steps. For that, we have created a mechanism of
efficient planning and monitoring. We have issued guidelines in the form of a
Border Infrastructure and Management Guidelines this year, which contain
provisions from project planning to project implementation and its quality
assurance. It mainly contains the GFR General Finance Rules, 2017, Manual
for Procurement of Works, 2022, CPWD Works Manual and CVC Guidelines.”

72. He further informed as under:-

"..At that time, so many guidelines were not available exclusively. They have
been created. Now these are the minimum things that the executing agency
has to do before preparing the DPR, whether it is the central executing
agency or the state executing agency. It covers everything from environment
to availability of land, geological and hydrological studies, designs and

drawings and quality assurance plans."
73. The representative of the Ministry also apprised the Committee as under:-

"Sir, some of the other steps that have been taken include technical and
financial appraisal to be ensured by the technical committee. That committee
is headed by DG, CPWD. Only then does it come to the High Level
Empowered Committee. Its approval is given only after a proper approval.

37


Third party quality assurance has also been provided in it. Uttar Pradesh has
implemented it. The process of setting up a project monitoring unit is also at a
very advanced stage, so that it can go to the field and monitor it regularly and

take the work forward."

॥ CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AND EXECUTION OF WORKS

A. State-wise progress of the INBR Project

74.. Audit highlighted that the progress of the work of construction of roads in all the three
States was slow and the road construction could not be completed despite the lapse of ten years
i.e. 2011-2021. Out of targeted 1262.36 km road to be constructed along the Indo-Nepal border,
only 367.48 km of road (29 per cent) has been completed (surfacing work) as of March 2021. The
major reasons for delay in progress of work were delay in acquisition of land/forest clearance.

75. When asked to specify the steps taken to set up co-ordination mechanism amongst all the
stakeholders to resolve the pending issues of land acquisition and forest clearance to complete the
project expeditiously and in a time bound manner and whether the task of development of roads of
operational and strategic significance along the Indo-Nepal border would be completed, within the
revised timelines (December 2022), the Ministry stated as under:-

“4, In Bihar, the physical progress before audit and current physical progress is
as under:

Sanctioned length - 552.29 km

Length of formation work before Audit - 221.23 km

Length of formation work at present - 404.68 km

RCD, Bihar has informed that work is projected to be completed by Dec. 2024.

2. Uttrakhand has informed that 42.70 Km. surfacing is completed out of
sanctioned length of 55.000 Km. and balance 12.300 km. road stretch will be
completed by March 2023. For 690 M bridge project tender disposal is in
progress. Further, 80 km road length is pending due to non finalization of
Pancheswar Dam DPR.

3. Uttar Pradesh has informed that, against Sanctioned length of 235.35 Km, at
the time of audit, the status of completed length (Black Top) upto Dec., 2019
was 132.6 Km however as on date i.e. 30.11.2022, the status of completed
length (Black Top) is 198.55 Km. For wild life and forest clearance status, kindly
refer reply furnished in para 26 above. The work is projected to be completed by
June 2023.

38


4.Detailed reply to these Paragraphs along with documentary proof has been
given in ATN (copy enclosed) which is as under:

For checking the progress made so far and to clear bottlenecks, if any regular
monthly review meeting is taken by Joint Secretary (BM-1), MHA with all stake
holders to accelerate the pace and directions are issued. Review meetings on
even higher levels are also taking place in MHA regularly and the significant
progress has been made in the formation work.”

76. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have informed about the proposed revised
timelines as approved by HLEC which are as under:

Agency Encumbrance free | Stretches with encumbrance
stretches
RCD, 30.6.2023
Bihar 31.12.2024
PWD, UP | 30.6.2023 Two working
seasons
after
Forest/wildlife
clearances
PWD, 30.6.2024 Two working
UKD seasons after _ finalization रण
Pancheshwar Dam Project between
India and Nepal

The Ministry in their ATN also stated that as on date, there is no cost
overrun above the coverall cost of the project as approved by CCS in the
year 2010. However, if cost escalates, the actual cost will be submitted
for the approval of competent authority.

39



(B) Contract Management

77.

Audit noticed various irregularities in tendering process, such as not allowing minimum time

for submission of bids, invitation and opening of bids before according Technical Sanction, delay in
execution of contract bonds, non-evaluation of bidding capacity and irregular award of contract, etc.

78.

Queried whether provisions of GFR were adhered to during the award of contracts in the

States concerned, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as under:-

79.

“ (1) Bihar has its own GFR and award of contract has been done as per Bihar GFR and
adhered to.

(2) UP has informed that award of contracts done as per prevailing state financial rules
analogous to GFR.

(3) Uttrakhand has informed that tenders were invited & disposed as per the state
procurement _rule(framed as per GFR guidelines) &circular issued time to time"

When asked to furnish their comments on the audit observation, the Ministry, in a written

reply, stated as under:-

"As the responsibility of execution of work was of State Government executing agencies,
State executing agencies and authorities were involved in the oversight of tendering
process, the State Authorities may look into the matter as per rules prevalent and take
corrective measures accordingly.

Improper tendering process:

Uttrakhand has intimated that a short time tender was invited for km.0.00 to 12.00
as per their office Order dated 09.05.2013 as issued by Office of Engineer of Chief,
PWD, Dehradun by which 15 days’ time was given from date of publication to date
of opening of tender.

A copy of OM dated 09.05.2013 of PWD Uttarakhand having time limit of 30 days
for normal tendering and 15 days’ time for Short term tendering is at Annexure O of
ATN.

Invitation and opening of bids before according Technical Sanction and delay in
execution of contract bonds:

1. The PWD UP has quoted the, Para no. 375 (a) and 318 (Technical Sanction) of

40


Financial Hand Book (FHB) Volume VI as under:
Para 375

“It is fundamental rule that no work shall be commenced unless a properly detailed
design and estimate have been sanctioned.

Para 318 C (Technical Sanction)

“Technical Sanction to the estimate must be obtained before work is commenced”.

2. PWD UP has further mentioned that these fundamental rules have been
followed. There is no rule mentioned for calling and opening for Bids in relevant
Para 375 of FHB Volume - VI. Relevant reference from FHB Volume VI is at
Annexure P of ATN.

3. PWD, UP has also mentioned that aforesaid recommendation of the
Performance audit has been noted and has been complied with for further bidding
and award of contracts.

Non-evaluation of bidding capacity and irregular award of contract:

RCD Bihar has informed that bids were invited through E-Tendering and as per
Rule 158A of Bihar PWD Code, a two bid/ envelope system-technical and financial
bids shall be used. M/S JKM was the lowest bidder and qualified in Bidding
capacity as well. Hence work was awarded to the lowest bidder. At the time of start
of work, Manpower and machineries were insufficient at site but later on it has
been rectified by the contractor.

As per tender notice clause 4.3

(d) Major items of construction equipment proposed to carry out the contract or
evidence of arrangement; of possessing them on hire/ lease/ buying as defined
therein. *

4.3 (9) Qualification and experience of key site management and technical
personnel proposed for contract.

2. RCD Bihar has further informed that the Bidder had submitted the affidavit in
which it was already stipulated that "However in case we are lowest in more than
one package, we shall arrange the total machinery/ equipment for all such
packages in which we are lowest, by way of new purchase/ lease/hire as per
agreement requirement of all such packages as per SBD Clause 4.5 B (a) of ITB, to
ensure simultaneous start of those packages & completion as per schedule.
Accordingly, there was no procedural irregularity."

41


80. In regard to the corrective steps taken to address the deficiencies pointed out by Audit, the
Ministry , in a written reply, informed as under:-

“1, MHA has enhanced its efforts for early completion of the projects already sanctioned by
HLEC by regular monitoring of progress during various work review meetings headed by
Joint Secretary/ Secretary. Instructions for regular and increased inspections by MHA and
SSB officials have been issued. Various bottlenecks of Wild life /forest clearance are being
pursued rigorously by Secretary Border Management

2. MHA has also issued detailed guidelines for “Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM)
Scheme” on 13.10.2022 where efforts to streamline the process of planning,execution,
monitoring has been attempted by DOBM.

3. Bihar:

i. Efforts to complete LA process in West Champaran and East Champaran
ii, | Regular camps for collection of requisite papers are organized village wise.
iii. | Payment to contractors through PFMS to check financial irregularities.
iv. Regular meeting with contractor and engineers to monitor progress of work.
v. Efforts are being taken to connect the constructed bridges with approach
roads.
vi. Regular quality check by EE/SE/CE/Flying Squad team.

4. Uttarakhand has informed that as per new revised guidelines issued by Uttarakhand
Government in 09/11//21, corrective measures have been taken to address the issues
pointed out by Audit.”

(C) Award of work without availability of encumbrance free land

81. Audit pointed out that the work was awarded without ensuring land free from encumbrance
which caused arbitration and termination of contracts at various stages. This led to stoppage of
work on 408.98 km (396.98 km in Bihar and 12 km in Uttrakhand), ie. 49 per cent road length of
the approved DPRS, up to five years. In Uttar Pradesh, the work of 8 stretches were completed
after a delay ranging upto 69 months from the target date of completion. In Uttrakhand also, there
was time overrun of 49 months in completion of 12 km of road length.

82. When asked to offer justification on award of work without ensuring land free from
encumbrance resulting in arbitration and termination of contracts at various stages and thereby
stopping of work on 49 percent of road length of the approved DPR upto five years in Bihar and
Uttar Pradesh, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

42


“ (i) PWD, Uttrakhand has informed that in a previous State Government scheme tender
was invited in 2011 for 12 Km and 12.00 m wide formation road as per the forest sanction,
Government letter 3545/14-3-658/34 dated 30.09.1987 “The construction work has
been completed with the promulgation of Forest Protection Act 1980. Government of
India permission is not required. ** assuming that Forest sanctionhas already been
acquired in 12 km length for 18.00 mtr width i.e., 19.802 Hect. land.During this period
trees were grown on the already sanctioned forest land. Forest department objected for
cutting of trees& suggested to apply Ex-Post facto approval for already sanctioned forest
land. Forest department immediately ordered to stop the work till the disposal of same.
Due to this situation work got delayed which is beyond the control of department. Re-
approval of the forest land sanctioned by govt. letter no. 08B/UCP/08/51/2013/FC/214
dated 20.11.2013 and after that the work was completed in year 2016 within the sanction
cost. This way the work completed in Rs.11.46 Cr. against the sanctioned cost Rs. 12.30 Cr.
in year 2016. Therefore, there was no cost overrun due to delay in providing encumbrance
free land but saving money in favourur of Government. They have further informed that it is
clear that no extra cost burden on govt. due to time overrun.

1. PWD, UP has informed that works were started in stretches where land was available.
Issues regarding land acquisition were resolved subsequently and packages completed. In
stretches where encumbrance due to Forest and Wildlife was involved, issue is still
pending. In UP, against Sanctioned length of 235.35 Km, at the time of audit the status of
completed length (Black Top) upto Dec., 2019 was 132.6 Km however as on date i.e.
30.11.2022, the status of completed length (Black Top) is 198.55 Km.

iii, RCD Bihar to update
iv. There was existing road of 174 km road to be only upgraded to two lane and

rest 379 km lie in green field alignment. Work was awarded to contractor
considering upgradation of existing road and land acquisition may take
place in green field alignment. Work was started in the existing road and two
package have been completed in year 2015 1.6., Kuawari By pass to Sikti
(Length 12.00 km) &Dhabeli to Fatehpur (length 12.20 km) in Araria district.”

83. Regarding any assessment made about the unfruitful expenditure made on arbitration
process, the Ministry , in a written reply, informed as under:-

"1. RCD, Bihar has informed that no unfruitful expenditure have taken place on arbitration
process.

ii. Uttrakhand has informed that in already sanctioned forest land from Km 0.0 to
12.00 awarded work to contractor was stopped by forest department and asked for
reapproval of forest land, thereafter agreement was terrminated. Agreived by the
decision, contractor got an award of Rs. 1.92 Cr. By arbitration, which was paid to the
contractor born by State government.

43


iii. PWD, Uttar Pradesh has informed that there is no arbitration in their contracts”

(D) Other irregularities

84. Audit noticed many irregularities in execution of works such as excess payment on claim
against carriage of earth, extra payment due to non-deduction of below Bill of Quantity (BOQ)
value, excess payment for price neutralisation, excess and unauthorised payments on vehicles and
unfruitful expenditure were noticed.

85.  Queried about any internal Audit conducted in the matter, the Ministry, in a written reply,
informed as under:-

11२60, Bihar has informed that AG Audit are conducted yearly. The lapses of recovery
of mobilization advance was pointed out by AG. Accordingly, recovery of Rs 93.99
Crores have been made and Total Equipment advance of Rs 6.286 Crore has been
recovered and Rs 3.19 Crore in Kishanganj is under process of recovery from running
bill.

ii, PWD, UP has informed that in UP, there is a mechanism of internal audit wherein
correction measures are suggested. Such as proper record should be maintained of
quality control tests and recovery of mobilization/equipment advances. Now
Mobilization advances/Equipment advances of Rs 22.32 Cr. have been fully recovered
as per conditions of contract

iii, Uttarakhand has informed that in Internal Audit done by SE in year 2021 and 2022
such type of irregularities was examined and no such case of excess payment against
claim against carriage of earth, extra payment due to non-deduction of below BOQ etc.
Only two vehicles are allowed exclusively for the project where by no unauthorized
payments on vehicles.”

86. When asked about the measures taken to strengthen the internal controls ensuring non-
recurrence of lapses, the Ministry, in a written reply, inter-alia stated as under:-

"A. Bihar
The point wise reply of Bihar is as under:

1.Project is still in progress and interim payment is being done. Recovery of

Difference cost of Bulk and Packed Bitumen of Rs. 2,89,279 has been recovered and
in Kishanganj division, it is under process.

44


2. (i) As per PWD code and SBD clause-12, Superintending Engineer and Chief
Engineer are empowered to sanction extra carriage for construction material, if
required to be used in any project. Superintending Engineer verified the requirement of
extra carriage of material for that site and then recommended to Chief Engineer for its
approval. Payments made after proper sanction of claim by competent authority.

i. Similarly, in case of Mirganj to Kuari & Sikti to Dhaweli Package under
agreement with M/s Bharatia Infra, the provision of 1km lead in DPR is not feasible
to carry the earth. M/S ASIP and AMR is executing Refugee colony to Mirganj
package whereas M/S Bharatia Infra is executing Mirganj to Kuari-Sikti to Dhaweli.
Both agency has signed the work agreement in year 2013 based on the DPR
prepared in year 2011. Refugee colony to Mirganj length in green field is 9.7 km
and on existing alignment in 44 km. M/S ASIP-AMR has started work in 2013 but
in green field area. Due to delayed land acquisition, likely to complete the whole
work in March -2024. The delay in land acquisition was also due to non-
classification of land, title of bakast land, encroachment on gairmazarua land, which
took a lot of time and with the constant persuasion of district administration, the
encumbrance free land has been obtained up till this year.

ii. Although in 2011 lead of earth work was kept 1 km from the site to keep the
cost within the limit during MHA meeting, but the revised technical — sanction
and approval of MHA has been obtained on enhanced km of lead for stretch
Refugee Colony to Meerganj". The payment has been made as per actual
measurement. This portion is on the border line with Nepal. North side of this
alignment is adjacent to border, where digging of earth in jurisdiction of Nepal was
not allowed. On the other hand, south of the main alignment there is complete
habitation. Therefore, villagers did not allow the procurement of earth. The
procedure for sanction of extra carriage has been followed and is based on revised
estimate already approved for Refugee Colony to Meerganj.

ii, For Meerganj to Kuari & Sikti to Dhabeli portion, revised estimate is under
approval. In both the cases the payment will be checked and ensured that claims
are settled on the basis of sanctioned revised estimate. If there is any inadmissible
payment made, it will be recovered in upcoming bills.

3. Deduction of below Bill of Quantity(BOQ) has been done.
4, Excess payment in price neutralisation has been adjusted.

5. To supervise the quality of work and monitoring of progress of Indo-Nepal
Border Road Project, regular inspection are required. For the purpose of periodic
and regular inspection, vehicles were hired and payment was made. However,
there existed no provision for it in the project cost.

B. Uttar Pradesh

45


The reply of Uttar Pradesh is as under

1 Non recovery Not concerned with INB, UP.
of difference
of cost of
bulk and
packed
bitumen
2 Excess Not concerned with INB, UP.
payment on
claim against
carriage of
earth
3 Extra Not concerned with INB, UP.
payment due
to non-
deduction of
below BOQ
value
4 Excess Not concerned with INB, UP.
Payment for
price
neutralization
5 Excess and The scheme Indo-Nepal border work
unauthorized was started in 2010-11. For project
payments on related requirement viz. supervision
vehicles and inspection etc. vehicles were
required and used for execution of
Indo-Nepal Border Project in 07 districts
as per minimum requirement. As per
prevailing practice, two vehicles are
allowed for execution of works in
normal working division.
Divisions of Indo-Nepal Border work are
placed in interior and remote areas.
Therefore, more number of vehicles are
required to be deployed for typical work
like Land Acquisition, survey and
supervision ७०. Hence a bare
minimum expenditure on vehicles for
aforesaid purpose is evitable.

46



i, Executing agencies/PWD have installed and strengthened testing
laboratories to ensure quality as Divisional level as per contract provision.

ii, | UP PWD engaged RITES as Third party inspection for quality assurance of
works.
iii, On 22.11.2022, MHA asked willingness of agencies viz. RITES, EIL, QCI,
CRRI, IIT (Roorkee) along with cost estimates for TPI of the project.

iv. In Uttarakhand for non-recurrences of such lapses regular monitoring and
internal audits are being done at division and SE level.

Unfruitful expenditure
A comprehensive reply has been given in the ATN which is
as under:

1. The observation pertains to Phulwaria Ghat to Bahar village in Sitamarhi
district.

2. RCD Bihar has submitted that Phulwaria Ghat to Bahar village in Sitamarhi
district was been awarded to M/s Rajesh Kumar Garg in Jan 2013 at a cost of
Rs 64.53 Crore. But due to slow progress of work the contract has been
terminated. Till date of termination of contract, the bridge work at Phulwaria
Ghat was constructed up to Pier level (up to Sub Structure).

3. Later on, re-tender had been invited for remaining work, and awarded to M/s
Classic Engicon. At present, work is in progress and all work including previous
work will be part of Indo-Nepal Road project. At present Super Structure work of
above bridge is running.

According to RCD, Bihar, there is no unfruitful expenditure"

IV. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING

A. No provision of third party inspection

Audit brought out that CCS Note envisaged that provision of the third-party inspection for
the project was to be ensured for quality and timely completion of the project. However, it was not
ensured either by the MHA or by the State Governments

47


88. Asked to specify the reasons for not ensuring the provision of third-party inspection of the
project for quality and timely completion of the project, as envisaged in the CCS Note, the Ministry ,
in a written reply, inter-alia informed as under:-

"RCD, Bihar and PWD, Uttrakhand have informed separately that tests are conducted
time to time to maintain quality. In Bihar, quality tests being performed in the contractor's
lab situated in the camp sites, whereas in Uttrakhand tests are conducted from time to
time in the empanelled NABL laboratories. Brief summary as follows.

Package-1- 211 No.

Package-2- 281 No.

Further, the issue was also considered and forward steps are taken by MHA for
which vide letter dated 22.11.2022 agencies viz. RITES, EIL, QCI, CRRI, IIT
(Roorkee) have been requested to give their consent alongwith cost estimate for
aforesaid inspection of the project within a week's time. Further, CPWD has also
been requested to provide a list of reputed TPls who can be contacted for the
work for third party inspection in Bihar, UP and Uttrakhand under the Indo —Nepal
Border Road Project.

i. Executing agencies/PWD have installed and strengthened testing
laboratories to ensure quality as Divisional level as per contract provision.

ii, | UP PWD engaged RITES as Third party inspection for quality assurance of
works.

ili. | On 22.11.2022, MHA asked willingness of agencies viz. RITES, EIL, QCI,
CRRI, IIT (Roorkee) along with cost estimates for TPI of the project.

In Uttarakhand for non-recurrences of such lapses regular monitoring and
internal audits are being done at division and SE level.

Engineers India Limited (EIL), Quality Control of India (0७), Central Road
Research Institute (CRRI), Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES
Ltd.), Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee (IIT, Roorkee) have been
requested to give their consent along with cost estimates for inspection of the
Indo-Nepal Border Road Project in Bihar and Uttarakhand. Quotations have been
received from RITES Ltd., QCI.

Third Party Test are being conducted by the approved NABL labs in Uttarakhand
as per MORTH norms to ensure the quality check. Total third-party test
conducted are as follow: Package-1- 211 no. and Package-2- 281no.Iin addition
to this proposal and consent is also invited from IIT Roorkee and CRRI.

Regarding the Monitoring mechanism the representative of the Ministry during the
evidence inter-alia informed as under:-

48


"Sir, there is talk of a coordination mechanism and a monitoring mechanism. For
this, we always call SSB and they have also done inspections regularly. It is
important to check the quality on the ground, because quality is the highest element
in it. It works for them. They do it and tell us from time to time. We are also
developing a project monitoring portal, which will be activated in a few days. With
this, we will be able to monitor projects on a real-time basis."

8. Quality test of material and monitoring of the project

89. Audit pointed out that in Uttar Pradesh, mandatory tests of samples at various road levels
were not carried out as per norms leading to shortfall ranging from 28 per cent and 91 per cent.
Further, there was substantial shortfall in field inspections by Chief Engineer and Superintending
Engineers. This was fraught with the risk of sub-standard work.

90. Regarding the mandatory norms of field inspection to be conducted at various construction
sites by Chief Engineer and Superintending Engineers and whether the same was followed, the
Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

"All the executing agencies have given affirmative reply.

i. RCD, Bihar has informed that there is internal mechanism for quality
monitoring in Road Construction Department. There are three tier system for
quality monitoring system.

i. Quality checking in Contractor's lab at work site.
ii, Quality Check by EE/ SE/CE in Divisional office lab.
ili, Quality check by four flying Squad Teams under control of Chief Engineer,
Testing, Training and Research Institute (TTRI), Patna in central laboratory
situated at RCD, Secretariat, Patna.
1 PWD, Uttrakhand has informed that as per CPWD work manual 2014, norms
for periodic inspection by SE and above outside the headquarter is atleast one
during every five running bill. As per required norms of 10 inspections, SE has10
inspections, CE has § inspections, and HOD has 3 inspections till date.

ii PWD, UP has informed that proper monitoring of works is done by different
level officers and they have also engaged third party audit agency viz. RITES"

91. | When asked about the mechanism by which it was ensured that the road was not fraught
with the risk of sub- standard work, the Ministry , in a written reply, informed as under:-
“The reply of executing agencies is as under: -
Bihar has informed that there is internal mechanism for quality monitoring in Road
Construction Department, Bihar. There are three tier system for quality monitoring
which are as follows -
i. Quality checking in Contractor's lab at work site
ii. Quality Check by EE/ SE/CE in Divisional lab.

49


iii,

Quality check by flying Squad Teams under control of Chief Engineer, Testing,
Training and Research Institute (TTRI), Patna in central laboratory situated at
RCD, Secretariat, Patna.

Uttrakhand has informed that all works are being carried out as the MORTH
specification. In house test &Third Party Test (By NABL approved labs) are being
conducted as per the norms to ensure the quality.

Details of the test conducted so far is mentioned below

S.No. Type of Construction No of No. of Shortfall
tests to tests (Percentage)
be carried
carried Out
out
1 Sub Grade 427 430 Nil
2 Granular Sub Base 514 659 Nil
GSB

3 Wet Mix 902 902 Nil
Macadam(WMM

| | Dense Bituminous 1630 1848 Nil
Macadam/Bituminous
Concrete (DBM/BC

5 Concrete work(M-20, 1136 2173 Nil
M-30, M-35

| 6 | Stone mason a | 167 Nil

(3) UP has informed that in UP proper monitoring of works is done by different level
officers and they have also engaged third party audit agency viz. RITES.

92. As per Audit, three bridges in Bettiah (West Champaran District) remained unutilised till
March 2021 as they were not connected to roads.When asked about the status, the Ministry , in a
written reply, informed as under:-
"RCD, Bihar has informed that these three bridges are still incomplete. Work in
Betiah district is running and all these bridges will be connected with approach road

up to Dec. 2024 and be utilised fully.”

93. When queried about the opinion of Chief conservator of forests in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar

in respect of Indo- Nepal Border Project, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

“No case of forest clearance in Bihar.

50


PWD, UP has informed that 337 KMs length is to be taken up in the II"4 phase in EPC mode
which lies in forest and wildlife area. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of flyovers and
deviations from approved alignment, a meeting through V.C. to review the mitigation measures
suggested by WII, Dehradun, was held on dt. 04.11.2022 with all stake holders by Chief
Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD, Lucknow. In meeting, Wil expressed that the
mitigation measures (08 fly overs and re-alignment at 05 places) are inevitable. All stake
holders were requested to proceed as per joint consensus after detailed deliberations as
recorded in the minutes of meeting. It is decided that the WII, Dehradun will provide co-
ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-alignment proposal at 05 places, which are still awaited.”

94,

Asked about the use of Fire lines in the protected areas in Uttar Pradesh and upgradation

of these lines under the INBR , the Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

95,

“SSB have been using fire lines in forest areas in UP for movement and patrolling both but
fire lines are partly in transverse direction to the Border and partly along the border. Also,
many fire lines are inaccessible and not connected, hence, inter-BOP distance increases
significantly by using Fire lines. Ministry has finalized alignment in combination of both i.e.
by new road and also by strengthening fire lines"

As on October 2022, Forest/Wildlife clearances were yet to be received in respect of 299

km stretch of roads. When asked about the status of these clearances, the Ministry, in a written

reply,

informed as under:-

“PWD, UP has informed that 337 KMs length is to be taken up in the II"? phase in EPC
mode which lies in forest and wildlife area. To resolve the issue of excessive cost of
flyovers and deviations from approved alignment, a meeting through V.C. to review the
mitigation measures suggested by WII, Dehradun, was held on dt. 04.11.2022 with all stake
holders by Chief Engineer, Indo-Nepal Border, UP, PWD, Lucknow. In meeting, WII
expressed that the mitigation measures (08 fly overs and re-alignment at 05 places) are
inevitable. All stake holders were requested to proceed as per joint consensus after
detailed deliberations as recorded in the minutes of meeting. It is decided that the WII,
Dehradun will provide co-ordinates at the interval of 100m of re-alignment proposal at 05
places, which are still awaited. MHA is making efforts to resolve the issue by finding a
minimal requirement of passageway for SSB personnel which will be acceptable to SSB
and Wildlife Authorities with required mitigation measures.”

51


96. On a specific query about the steps taken to expedite the land acquisition process in Bihar
(11.5 Km) and U.P(6Km) and the likely date by which the land acquisition may get completed, the
Ministry , in a written reply, informed as under:-
1. Bihar has informed that regular meeting with DLAO, DM and Secretary or Addl.
Chief Secretary, RCD is being held to expedite the Land Acquisition process.
Regular camps were organised in each block by District Land Acquisition Officer to
collect the requisite papers and to resolve the issues being faced by landholders.
Besides this, meetings at different levels were organised to resolve the issue and
expedite disbursement of compensation to land holders. The meetings details are
as follows-
DM, Kishanganj with DLAO - 05-05-2021
Chief Secretary, Bihar, with all concerned DM: - 27-06-2017
Chief Secretary, Bihar with All concerned DM: - 28-11-2017
Chief Secretary, Bihar with all concerned DM: - 27-02-2018
Pr. Secretary, RCD with all concerned DM: - 26-07-2018
Principal Secretary, RCD with all DM :24-10-2018
Addl. Chief Sect. RCD, Bihar with DM, Batia: 24-04-2021

2. UP has informed that land acquisition is in progress. Out of remaining 06 Km,
01 more Km has been acquired and rest 05 Km will be acquired upto March, 2023.

Intensive efforts are being made to complete the land acquisition by the
respective State Govts. agencies."

97. When asked as to why the key locations of the Border Out Posts were not finalized at the
conceptualisation stage of the Project itself, the Ministry , in a written reply, stated as under:-
“Key location of the BOPs had been approved and BOPs had also been established
before conceptualisation stage of the INBR hence best feasible alignment was
finalized by SSB and the executing agencies and approved by MHA.”

98. While informing about the provision of Third-Party Inspection in the Project and the status
in this regard, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:-

“Since it was informed by the State Agencies that necessary measures of quality inspection
has been put in place, MHA was. assured that State agencies are following the requisite
requirement. However, MHA has repeatedly requested the State Govt. agencies to ensure
3१ Party Inspection. On 22.11.2022, MHA asked willingness of agencies viz. RITES, EIL,
QCl, CRRI, IIT (Roorkee) along with cost estimates for TPI of the project. The willingness /

52


response of RITES and QCI have been received and under examination. Willingness of the
other agencies is still awaited.”

99. The Ministry informed that a revised procedure under the Central Sector Scheme had been
issued by the Ministry of Finance in March 2022. While furnishing the details, the Ministry, in a
written reply, informed as under:-

“The Central Nodal Agency to execute the work of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project.

i. Bihar has informed that all payments to Contractor is being done through
Central Nodal Account (CNA) and tagged with PFMS.

ii, UP has informed that there is a central nodal account (CNA) account in SBI
in the name of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project UP PWD Which is in
operation.

ili, Uttrakhand has informed that opening of CNA account PWD, Uttrakhand
wrote to MHA vide letter no. 535/Cash dated 30.08.2022 for the directions.
In this connection on 05.12.2022 instructions were received to open Nodal
account at State level, which is under process.”

100. The Ministry informed that no funds have been allocated to Uttrakhand PWD after 8th
September 2016. When asked about the status and whether at this pace the Ministry will be able to
complete the INBR by the end of December 2022, the Ministry while furnishing the reply of the
State government stated as under:-
“Uttrakhand has informed that Fund could not be utilized alloted for the project
on time due to the following reasons:
a. Litigation in stretch from km 30.565 to km 55.00.
b. Non construction of 690 m span bridge over Chalthi river from km
29.875 to km 30.565.
c. Due to COVID pandemic in year 2020,2021.
d. Damage occurred at site due to heavy unseasonal rainfall in year
2021 and 2022.
Work is likely to be time March 2023 except 690M span Bridge work. 99% of the
allotted fund will be utilized by March 23.

Financial Progress

Sanction Allotment Expenditure as on Status of
Cost (In Received (In dated 30.11.2022 Work
Cr. Cr.
Rs. 265.11 Rs. 209.14 Rs. 172.93 Cr. Under
Progress

53


101. Queried whether the Ministry had ensured that the release of funds was in conjunction with
the actual progress of work on the ground as per approved plan, the Ministry, in a written reply,

informed as under:-

“1. MHA has adopted the revised procedure for release of fund
under Central Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring /
utilization of funds released as issued by Ministry of Finance vide
Office Memorandum no. 1(18)/PFMS/FCD/2021 on 9.3.2022.

. Accordingly, in case of Central Sector Scheme having annual outlay

of more than Rs. 500 Crore and implemented without involvement
of State agencies, it shall be mandatory to implement such
schemes through the Treasure Single Account (TSA) model. This
will ensure that the funds of these schemes are released “Just-In-
Time “from the Consolidated Fund of India to the
beneficiaries/vendors.

. Further, in case of Central Sector schemes having (a) annual outlay

of less than Rs. 500 Crore or (b) the schemes are being
implemented by agencies of the State Governments etc. Ministry
has to designate a Central Nodal Agency (CAN) for implementing
such scheme.

. Furthermore, MHA has also issued detailed guidelines namely

“Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM) Scheme” on
13.10.2022 for compliance.

. Regular Progress Meetings are also being convened in MHA on

monthly basis for taking stock of progress made so far as well as for
utilization of funds / parking of funds.

. Progress of work has been accounted for with release of fund after

concurrence and vetting of Integrated Finance Division (Home).
Utilization certificate and work progress in percentage was taken for
each road project.”

54


PART-II

Observation/Recommendation

Introductory

A modern and advanced network of roads along our borders assume special
significance as they help in not only the mobility of Border Guarding Forces (BGFs)
but in addition, maintaining a healthy relations in all the spheres with our

neighbouring countries.

Consequent to gleaning and sifting through all the information, material and
facts available before them, the Committee have come out with specific and pertinent
recommendations which have been brought out in this part of the Report. The
Committee learnt that India and Nepal share an open border of 1751 kilometres which
runs along the five States, namely Bihar, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and
West Bengal. Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), the designated border guarding force on
INB, operated from Border Out Posts (BOPs) along the border but many of the BOPs
were not connected by roads. The lack of road infrastructure severely limited the
mobility of the troops as fast operations could not be launched against anti-National

and criminal elements.

As per the Audit Observations, the Committee learnt that Government of India
(GOl) approved (November 2010) the construction/up-gradation project of 1377 km of
strategic border roads along INB in the States of Bihar (564 km), Uttar Pradesh (640
km) and Uttarakhand (173 km) at a cost of = 3853 crore with a time frame of five years
with effect from 2011-12 for the completion of the project. The roads were to provide
connectivity to Border Out Posts by running parallel to the international border, and
would meet the requirements of the population in the border areas. The Sashatra
Seema Bal, the designated border guarding force along the Indo-Nepal Border, was

55


to benefit from this project by achieving faster mobility of troops to dominate the

sensitive border more effectively.

C&AG Report No. 23 of 2021 (Performance Audit) on the subject 'Indo-Nepal
Border Road Project pertaining to Union Government, Ministry of Home Affairs
covering the period 2010-11 to 2018-19 updated upto March 2021’ deals with issues
such as Project Planning, Financial management, Contract management & Execution

of works and Quality assurance & monitoring.

The Report and the issues contained therein have been examined and brought
out heading wise by the Committee and duly commented upon in the forthcoming

paragraphs.

Indo Nepal Border Road Project
1. The Committee note that Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) approved in

November, 2010, the proposal of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for construction
upgradation of 1377 km of strategic border roads along Indo-Nepal Border (INB), to
enable the SSB to dominate the sensitive border effectively, in the States of Bihar
(564km), Uttar Pradesh (640 km) and Uttrakhand (173 km) at a total estimated cost of
Rs. 3853 Crore with a timeframe of five years ie. by March 2016. Public Works
Department (PWD) /Road Construction Department (RCD) of State Govts of Bihar, UP
and Uttrakhand were the executing agencies. While the cost of construction was to
be borne by Central Government, State Governments had to bear the cost of land,
ensure wildlife and forest clearances, other statutory clearances and look after
maintenance of roads. The Committee also note from the Audit observation that the
project could not be completed by March 2016 due to delays in acquisition of land
and obtaining of environment, forest and wildlife clearances by the three States.
Therefore, extension of time was given by the CCS in February, 2018 up to 31.12.2019
for completion of those ongoing works which were free from encumbrance and up to
31.12.2022 for completion of balance work involving land with encumbrance. High

56


Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) of MHA which is headed by Union Home
Secretary empowered by CCS to consider any change in the projects in the time and
cost estimates within overall ceilings sanctioned by CCS in December, 2019, further
extended the timeline upto 31.12.2022 for the whole project i.e. encumbrance free
stretches and stretches with encumbrance.

The Committee, while noting from the submission of the Ministry that based on
the recommendation of Technical Committee, the timelines, as approved by HLEC in
December, 2019/ January, 2021, have been further extended for encumbrance free
and encumbered stretches separately are constrained to observe that a strategically
important project has been delayed due to lack of proper survey and planning at the
initial stages. In light of strategic significance of the project, aimed at enhancing
troop mobility, controlling anti-national activities, and facilitating border area
development, the Committee are of the considered opinion that swift resolution of
issues involved and timely completion of this project is imperative for bolstering
national security and ensuring effective border management. The Committee while
hoping that the work on the encumbrance free stretches would have been completed
within the timelines desire to be apprised of the details of the completed and the
ongoing projects and therefore, recommend that earnest efforts should be taken to
ensure completion of the other stretches within the revised timelines. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this regard mentioning inter
alia the details of strategic initiatives taken till now to avert any potential impact on
law and order in border areas due to delays in the execution of the Indo Nepal Border

Road Project.

Status and Physical progress of INBRP

2. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that out of the estimated length
of 1299.80 km, Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for encumbrance free length of 844.65
km had been approved by High Level Empowered Committee and DPRs for length

57


with encumbrance for a total of 455.15 km , which included 377.15km in Uttar Pradesh
and 118 Km in Uttarakhand, were still awaited . The Committee also note that work
had been completed for only 431.34 Km and was under progress (Formation
completed) for 244.81 km under the Project. While noting that for around 50 percent
of encumbrance free length, either the work was in progress or was not taken up
even after more than 10 years of the inception of the project, the Committee while
expressing disappointment at the slow pace of the project recommend the Ministry to
take proactive measures to expedite the completion of works on these encumbrance
free segments on priority basis with a view to achieving faster mobility of troops to

dominate the sensitive border more effectively.

Approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)

3. The Committee also note from the audit observation that the approval of 26
DPRs costing Rs. 2634.91 crore by High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) without
ensuring availability of land and requisite clearances resulted in time and cost
overruns. In view of the inordinate delay in the completion of the INB Project due to
various factors like land acquisition and other statutory clearances, the Committee
are constrained to observe that these delays could have been avoided had the HLEC
taken into consideration the land acquisition and clearances issues that might crop
up in the execution process, prior to giving approval to this Project. The Committee,
therefore, hope that learning from the past, necessary approvals shall be obtained in

advance before approving the DPRs.
Delays in Acquisition of Land

4, The Committee learnt during the course of their examination that under the
Indo Nepal Border Road Project, the State Governments were responsible for
acquisition of land. Audit highlighted that the process of acquisition of land was very
slow and the delays in acquiring land led to cost and time over run and litigation with

58


contractors. Audit pointed out that while the project was conceived in 2006 in the
Ministry, the change in land acquisition Act was under consideration in Parliament
since 2007. After the conceptualization of the project in the year 2006, in- principle
approval of Cabinet was obtained for the same in the year 2010 only and no
mitigation measures were taken up by the Ministry in anticipation of passing of New
Land Act. In this regard, the Ministry submitted that although the Act was under
consideration in the Parliament since the year 2007, it came in force w.e.f. 01.01.2014
only and without final shaping, passing and publication of any Act, its impact could
not be assessed and therefore, while taking the approval of Cabinet in year 2010, no
mitigation measures were taken up by the Ministry in anticipation of passing of New
Land Act. The Committee do not find the reply of the Ministry plausible as before
conceptualisation of any project, a detailed feasibility study and due diligence must
be undertaken encompassing all prevailing and foreseeable scenarios, with a view to
bringing forth an action plan for the project. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
detailed note on the feasibility study conducted before mooting the proposal for

INBR project be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.

5. As regards the action being taken for land acquisition by State Governments,
the Committee have been informed that while UP Government was to complete the
acquisition of remaining 05 Km upto March 2023, the Bihar Government was holding
meetings to acquire the remaining stretch of 11.5 Kms. The Committee while hoping
that State Government of Uttar Pradesh has completed the land acquisition expect to
be apprised of the details thereof. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the
progress made by the Bihar Government in acquiring the remaining stretches. The
Committee wish to point out that substantial time has already lapsed in the matter
and therefore further delays should be avoided to obviate fresh litigations by the
stakeholders. The Committee also desire that all pending issues with the
stakeholders may be resolved amicably and expeditiously to ensure completion of

59


the Project as per schedule and they be informed of the outcome of the concrete

measures taken in the regard.

Issues related to forest clearances

6. The Committee note that as of March 2021, forest/wildlife clearances were still
awaited in respect of Uttar Pradesh. Uttar Pradesh Public Works Department (PWD)
submitted several proposals for forest and wildlife clearance to the Forest
Department during the period from October 2013 to April 2018. The deficiencies in
these proposal submitted by UP PWD led to further delay in forest/wild life clearance.
Delays in obtaining forest/wildlife clearance also impacted the preparation of DPRs
and the eventual construction of roads in a timely manner. While apprising the
Committee about awaited Forest/Wildlife clearances, the Ministry informed that on
account of non-finalisation of proposed Pancheshwar Dam, Uttar Pradesh has 299
km while Uttarakhand has 118 kilometers of Forest/Wildlife clearances pending.
Regarding forest clearances in Uttar Pradesh, it has been informed that the Ministry
of Home Affairs (MHA) has taken up the issue and a team comprising of SSB
officials, Forest officials (UP), PWD (UP), BFR Cell (CPWD and MHA had visited the
stretches and based on the findings, a Secretary level meeting was held with Wildlife
Institute of India (WII) & other stake holders. However, there has been a divergence
of views as Wildlife Institute of India has proposed for Flyover on 08 places and
change in alignment at 05 places while MHA has sought minimal requirement of
passageway for SSB personnel acceptable to both SSB and Wildlife Authorities with
required mitigation measures. In this regard, while recognizing the paramount
significance of Indo-Nepal Border Road Project, the Committee are of the considered
view and in no unequivocal terms recommend that the matter be taken up afresh in
wake of the urgency of the requirement of patrolling along the border and the
importance of Forest! wildife preservation concerns for bringing out an effective and
acceptable solution. The Committee are also of the view that the existing fire lines

60


near border roads in the wildlife areas, wherever roads cannot be built due to Forest/
wildlife concerns, may be used to ensure seamless connectivity. In view of the fact
that statutory clearances will be obtained by the Uttarakhand Government only after
finalization of proposed Pancheshwar Dam between India and Nepal, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the updates of action being taken by the two
Governments in this matter. The Committee would, here, insist that efforts should be

expedited to prevent undue delay in the completion of the strategic Project.

Extra financial liability

7. Regarding incurrence of extra financial liability over and above the sanctioned
cost of the Project, the Committee learn from the submission of the Ministry that no
cost overrun above the overall cost of the project as approved by CCS in the year
2010 was incurred. The Committee however, note that on the contrary, the State
Government of Bihar has submitted in its written replies that there has been a cost
overrun of Rs 772.69 crore, State Government of Uttarakhand stated that there is cost
overrun due to extra 18% GST. In view of the replies of the State Governments, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the justification of the Ministry with regard to
the matter of cost overrun incurred by the State Governments vis-a-vis the view taken

by the Ministry.

Special mechanism for strategic Projects

8. The Committee note that under the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project, Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) were awaited for lengths with encumbrance for a total of
455.15 km , which includes 377.15km in Uttar Pradesh and 118 Km in Uttarakhand. In
Uttar Pradesh, road alignment is affected by Forest & Wildlife areas while in case of
Uttarakhand, it is affected by Pancheshwar Dam on river Kali, which involves interest
of both India and Nepal. Recognizing the strategic importance of projects ensuring
national security with the development of border areas, the Committee strongly

believe that a specialized approach is obligatory to ensure swift coordination and

61


resolution of challenges, particularly in States, where road alignments are intricately
tied to Forest & Wildlife areas. With a view to streamline the decision-making
process and accelerate the progress of these projects of vital nature, aligning with
the broader objectives of national security and border development, the Committee
opine and recommend that the Ministry may pursue the State Governments to use
the single window clearance system invariably so that the statutory clearances and
toad alignments affected by Forest & Wildlife areas for the strategic projects such as
the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project are not hindered and related issues are

effectively addressed.

Non-connectivity to Border Out Posts (BOPs) from the main alignment of proposed

roads

9. The Committee note that out of 471 Border Out Posts (BOPs) established by
SSB, 355 are connected by roads and on completion of Indo Nepal Border Project, 81
more BoPs will be connected. Out of 355 BOPs, 247 BOPs are on the alignment of
the main border road and the remaining 108 BOPs are connected with the main Indo
Nepal Border road through other roads constructed under various schemes by Rural
Engineering Organisation(REO) such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY), Border Area Development Programme (BADP) etc. According to the
Ministry, the original plan was not per se to connect the BoPs but to have a road
close to the border. The Ministry added that the intent was to have a road close to
BoPs where link roads and feeder roads can be planned later on. Further, a separate
scheme is under process to provide link roads, foot tracks to remaining SSB BOPs
and important patrolling routes. Taking note of the fact that SSB is performing its
operational needs through BOPs on INB road and through connectivity of other
roads for these BOPs, the Committee in no uncertain words recommend that the
Ministry may undertake immediate action to finalize and execute the Scheme for
providing link roads and foot tracks to remaining SSB Border Out Posts (BOPs), and

62


important patrolling routes in a time-bound manner under intimation to the

Committee.

Construction of Bridges without connecting to main alignment

10. The Committee note from the Audit Report that in the West Champaran District,
34 bridges were sanctioned for Rs. 395.75 crore (March, 2013) and majority of these
bridges were completed before August, 2016. Further, after the bridges were
constructed, RCD, Bihar changed the road alignment between the chainage 10.60 to
77.36 in Bettiah due to the existence of forest land along the old alignment finalized
in April, 2011. Audit pointed out that there was no clarity on whether 15 bridges
constructed in these chainages were linked to the new alignment and whether the
bridges would be utilized in the new alignment in future or not. In this context,
however, RCD Bihar in its Action Taken Notes affirmed following a joint inspection
of bridges of West Champaran district by SSB and RCD officials in March 2023 that
all 34 bridges fall on the proposed alignment of Border Road. In this context, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should also conduct an inspection of the
bridges in coordination with executing authorities concerned at the State level to
ascertain that all bridges constructed under the Project are connected with the
approach roads /main alignment of the roads and furnish the findings thereof to the
Committee. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of the plan
charted out for optimum utilisation of the bridges constructed under the Project.

Irregular release of 2.34 crore by MHA

11. The Committee note from the audit findings that as per the Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU), the expenditure on shifting of utility services and forestation
charges were to be borne by the State Governments. Scrutiny of records in MHA

63


revealed that HLEC in its 457" meeting approved the revised estimates of three DPRs
aggregating Rs. 195.81 crore and two DPRs aggregating Rs. 147.23 crore respectively,
which included the charges of Utility Shifting and forestation aggregating Rs. 2.34
crore sent by UP Government. The approval of utilities shifting charges aggregating
Rs. 2.34 crore by MHA was thus, irregular. In this regard, the Ministry stated that the
matter was deliberated in the Steering Committee meeting and PWD, UP requested
that the extra sanction of Rs. 2.34 Crore be adjusted in the grant for next financial
year. The Committee, in this regard, desire that an enquiry be instituted by the
Ministry to ascertain the reasons for irregular release of Rs. 2.34 Crore. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry issue necessary instructions to strengthen
the internal checks in the Ministry to avoid recurrence of such lapses in future.

Works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo-Nepal Border
Road Project

12. The Committee learn from the replies furnished by the Ministry that after the
selection of this subject for detailed examination by the Committee, several pending
works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo-Nepal Border
Road Project have since been completed or taken off in Uttar Pradesh. The works
completed inter-alia include road in the district of Siddarthnagar from Aligarhwa to
Ganwaria and Khunwa-Banganga-Bhusaula, construction from Latahawa Ghat to
Pakarhiwa via Karamaini, Ramnagar, Kakarahwa and Bajha, and pending work
relating to the bridge on the Banganga river. Besides the work of channelization to
bring the stream of the river, which has shifted, under the bridge is in progress. The
Committee, while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministry pursuant to the
constant push of the Committee, recommend that channelization work in areas
where river streams have shifted may be completed in a time bound manner so as to

expedite the overall completion of the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project.

64


Monitoring _of Infrastructure Projects on the National Border

13. The Committee note that the Ministry has adopted the revised procedure for
release of fund under Central Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring /
utilization of funds released as issued by Ministry of Finance. The Committee have
been informed that it shall be mandatory to implement such schemes through the
Treasury Single Account (TSA) model which will ensure that the funds of these
schemes are released ‘Just-In-Time' from the Consolidated Fund of India to the
beneficiariesivendors. Further, they learn that MHA has also issued detailed
guidelines namely “Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM) Scheme” for
compliance. The Committee have been further apprised that progress of work has
been accounted for with release of fund after concurrence and vetting of Integrated
Finance Division (Home) and Utilization certificate and work in progress in
percentage was taken for each road project. Besides, the Ministry is in the process
of developing Project Monitoring Portal (PMP) and Project Monitoring Unit for
smooth and expeditious implementation of border infrastructure works. While noting
the initiatives taken by the Ministry for monitoring the progress of the projects and
fund release, the Committee recommend that development of the Project Monitoring
Portal (PMP) and Project Monitoring Unit should be completed in a time bound
manner. The Committee also recommend that mechanism within a specific timeline
be devised to ensure real time updation of the entries in the portal for effective
monitoring of the projects and fund utilization by the State Governments in this
regard. The Committee further desire that mechanism should also put in place to
ensure strict adherence to the provisions of the “Border Infrastructure &
Management (BIM) Scheme" for the successful implementation of the Indo-Nepal

Border Road Project.

65


In summation, the Committee desire and expect that all their
recommendations are implemented in the right earnest and at the time of submission

of the Action Taken Notes tangible outcomes are observed by them.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_17 January, 2024 Chairperson,
27 Pausha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

66