99

“Extra expenditure due to delay in finalizing
power purchase agreements through Open
Access: West Central Railway”

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

NINETY-NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. - 2329
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

“Extra expenditure due to delay in finalizing
power purchase agreements through Open

Access: West Central Railway”

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
N DEL

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


Contents

[| Introduction 1

uw Extra expenditure due to delay in finalizing power purchase agreements 1
through Open Access: West Central Railway

| PART -॥

| OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS | 9-1 |

Appendix

* Minutes
1. Minutes of sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 21.11.2023

2. Minutes of sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on ....02.2024

*To be appended later.

iii


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4... Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. — Shri Jagdambika Pal
6... Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K, Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien’
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Partha Goswami - Director
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad - Under Secretary

Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.

iv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this 99 Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Extra expenditure due to delay
in finalizing power purchase agreements through Open Access: West Central Railway” based on
Para No. 4.2 of C&AG Report number 25 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the Parliament on 20
December 2022.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) selected the subject for detailed examination and

report during their current term i.e. 2023-24. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways at their sitting held on 21.11.2023. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24)
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05.02.2024.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in
connection with the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in the
matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
sts. February, 2024 Chairperson,
a. Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



PART-1

Introduction

1. Ministry of Railways issued (March 2015) instructions to all Zonal Railways to get
direct power from Generating Companies through Open Access and ensure provision of
Availability Based Tariff (ABT) Meters. Despite entering into the Agreement in March
2016 under Open Access, power supply was commenced only from January 2017
mainly due to delay in provisioning of ABT Meters. Delay in shifting to Open Access
resulted into extra expenditure on power purchase amounting to Rs.75.10 crore.

2. The C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 for the year ended March 2021 contains
significant results of the compliance audit of the Ministry of Railways of the Union
Government.

3. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid C&AG Report
for examination and report.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), considered the subject for detailed
examination, took oral evidences of the representatives and other officials of Ministry
of Railways on 21 November, 2023 and obtained written replies on the same.
Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Committee examined the
subject in detail.

PARA 3.4

5. “Extra expenditure due to delay in finalizing power purchase agreements
through Open Access: West Central Railway”

In order to reduce the traction tariff to optimize unit cost of transportation,
Ministry of Railways (MoR) decided (December 2014) that Zonal Railways shall plan for
availing cheaper power from conventional/renewable sources on short/medium/long
term basis through Railway Energy Management Company Limited (REMCL).
Accordingly, MoR issued instructions (March 2015) to all Zonal Railways to plan to get
direct power from Generating Companies (GENCOS)/Traders etc. in the States where
the cost of power is higher, adopting Medium/Long Term Open Access route. MoR also
directed (February 2015) all the Zonal Railways to make suitable arrangements for
providing the Availability Based Tariff (ABT) meters at all Traction Sub Stations (TSSs)
during 2015-16. Requirement of providing the ABT meters was reiterated in March 2015
and April 2015. REMCL invited and processed the tender for procurement of power
through Open Bidding for a period of three years. Quantum of power allocated to West
Central Railway (WCR) was kept at 55 MW at the request of WCR. Letter of Award
(LOA) was issued in favour of the successful bidder {M/s Jindal India Thermal Power
Limited (JITPL)} on 26 February 2016 and Agreement for procurement of Power was
entered into between WCR and M/s JITPL on 15 March 2016. Audit however noted that
the Power supply through Open Access from JITPL was commenced from 10 January
2017 in four TSSs (Traction Substation) and between 19 January 2017 and 20 April
2017 in remaining eight TSSs. Despite MoR's repeated instructions (February 2015,

March 2015 and April 2015) for installation of ABT meters at the TSS points, WCR
1


Administration did not procure the necessary equipment (ABT meters). Estimate for
provision of ABT meters was prepared only in April 2016 and sanctioned in May 2016.
The ABT meters were finally procured and installed between the period 10 January
2017 and 20 April 2017. Thus, there was delay of more than a year in preparation of
Estimate as well as procurement of ABT meters. The WCR Administration failed to
comply with the MoR's instructions on ensuring availability of ABT meters. WCR
Administration approached (March 2016 and April 2016) the Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut
Prasaran Nigam Ltd. (RVPN)/Jaipur to install ABT meters at Railway's 12 TSSs and to
issue ‘No Objection Certificate (400) for WCR. The RVPN pointed out certain
discrepancies in the ५४८२७ application for NOC and requested (August 2016) the WCR
Administration to attend/rectify the discrepancies. WCR Administration took four months
for complying with the requirements of RVPN. Finally, RVPN issued NOC to WCR on
29 September 2016 for purchase of 55 MW power in Medium Term Open Access for
the period from 01 March 2017 to 31 December 2019. Thus, there was delay on the
part of WCR Administration in approaching RVPN for arranging the ABT meters and
issue of NOC for power supply through Open Access. Due to delay on the part of WCR,
power supply through Open Access from M/s JITPL could be commenced in four 1855
from 10 January 2017 i.e. with a delay of about 10 months (from the date of entering
into Agreement with M/s JITPL i.e. 15 March 2016). In the remaining eight TSSs, power
supply through Open Access was commenced between 19 January 2017 and 20 April
2017. Thus, delay in observance of MoR’s instructions for fulfillment of pre-requisite
requirements for purchase of power through Open Access deprived the Railway
Administration to achieve savings in traction energy bills. Despite availability of power at
lower rate of Rs. 4.09 per kWh, WCR Administration purchased power at higher rate of
Rs. 6.50 per kWh118 . Failure of WCR Administration in availing the lower rate resulted
into huge extra expenditure of Rs. 75.10 crore during the period from 15 March 2016 to
10 January 2017. The matter was referred to MoR in May 2022. In their reply (June
2022), MoR stated that the provision of ABT meters and Current Transformer and
Potential Transformer (CT/PT) for Open Access could not have been achieved without
the consent of State Transmission Utilities (STUs), who initially lingered in the matter for
want of eligibility of Railway as ‘Open Access” customer as “Deemed Licensee”. As
soon as confirmation was issued by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)
on 5 November 2015, WCR made all possible efforts for availing power through open
access. And, since STUs were going to lose their valuable customer (i.e., the Indian
Railway), they tried to create obstacles to clear open access to the railway. Railway
Administration also stated that, after signing of PPA (Power Procurement Agreement)
with M/s JITPL on 15 March 2016, the railway took the minimum required time for
completing ABT meters and CT/PT work and open access started from January 2017.
The reply of MoR was not acceptable. WCR Administration failed to ensure the timely
availability of ABT-compliant meters at the TSS points in 2015-16 despite MoR's
repeated instructions of February/ March/April 2015. Railway's contention regarding
ambiguity about ‘Deemed Licensee” status of the railway was also not acceptable
because the process for procurement of the much-required ABT meters had not started
even after entering into an agreement (15 March 2016) for procurement of power
through open access. An estimate for the same was prepared in April 2016 and was
sanctioned in May 2016. The railway was aware of its ‘Deemed Licensee’ status vide

2


Ministry of Power's letter dated 6 May 2014, even pending CERC confirmation, the
railway could have initiated action to procure the ABT meters in compliance with
Railway Board's above instructions, but Railway Administration did not initiate
procurement of the requisite equipment till after entering into the agreement. Thus,
lackadaisical approach of Railway Administration towards procurement of power
through open access at a cheaper rate resulted in loss of Rs. 75.10 crore to the railway
due to a delay in the flow of power through open access, for about 10 months.

6. The Ministry in their Background Note have stated as under:

a “In order to reduce the traction tariff to optimize unit cost of transportation,
Ministry of Railways (MoR) decided (December 2014) that Zonal Railways
shall plan for availing of cheaper power from conventional/renewable sources
on short/medium/long term basis through Railway Energy Management
Company Ltd (REMCL).

b. Ministry of Railways issued instructions (March 2015) to all Zonal Railways to
plan for availing power directly from the Genérating Companies
(GENCOS)/Traders etc. in the States where the cost of power is higher,
adopting Medium/Long Term Open Access route. MoR also directed
(February 2015) all the Zonal Railways to make suitable arrangements for
providing the Availability Based Tariff (ABT) meters at all TSSs during 2015-
16.

c. REMCL invited and processed the tender for procurement of power through
Open Bidding for period of three years. Quantum of power allocated to West
Central Railway (WCR) was kept at 55 MW in Rajasthan state. Letter of
Award (LOA) was issued in favor of the successful bidder (M/s Jindal
India Thermal Power Limited (JITPL) on 26th February 2016 and
Agreement for Procurement of Power was entered into between WCR and
M/s JIPTL on 15th March 2016.

d. Although Railway Board had advised for suitable arrangements for providing
ABT meters and CT/PT, there was ambiguity about 'Deemed Licensee’
status, which was raised by various State Electricity Boards/Transmission
Utilities. Railways were defending the ‘Deemed Licensee’ status, for
procurement of power through ‘Open Access’, in CERC. /t was only after
CERC'’s order dated 05. 11.2015, in a petition No. 197/MP/2015 filed by
Indian Railways, seeking grant of permission for procurement of power
through Open Access against various agencies involved for power flow, that
Railway was confirmed as ‘Deemed Licensee’ eligible for procurement of
power through ‘Open Access’. As soon as confirmation issued by CERC
came into notice, WCR made all possible efforts for availing power through
‘Open Access’.

e. After confirmation of Railway as Deemed Licensee’ eligible for procurement
of power through Open Access, Railway made all out efforts for arranging
ABT meters and issue of NOC. Railway wrote letters to RVPN on
04.03.2016, 24.03.2016, 12.04.2016 and 25.04.2016 with a request to
provide ABT meters & 0.2 S class CT/PT by charging Railway for the same.
Physical meetings with Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited
(RVPN) officials were also held at different levels by Sr.DEE, CEDE and
PCEE/WCR in RVPN office, Jaipur. Thus Railway had made all possible
efforts. Since State utilities were not willing to lose their valuable customer

3


7.

(Indian Railways), having substantial financial implication, they delayed the
matter.

This activity did not involve Railway network alone. It involved State agencies
and their network also, where Railway has no direct access, and without
consent and involvement of the State agencies, ABT meters could not have
been installed. Procurement of ABT meters and associated equipment could
not be initiated without knowing the suitability/compatibility of ABT meters
and associated equipment with the State Transmission Utilities (STUs)
network, and they continued fo delay the matter on these issues.

g. There are many States where Railways have still not been able to get Open

Access due to the lackadaisical working of various State STUs and
permissions not being granted by various State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions. Their various orders are being challenged in Hon'ble Appellate
Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL), Delhi. Power supply through Open Access
from JITPL was commenced from [0th January 2017 का four
TSS and between 19th January 2017 and 20th April, 2017 in remaining
eight TSSs in Rajasthan state.”

When the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure

procurement of direct power from Generating Companies through Open Access and
to ensure that provisions of Availability Based Tariff (ABT) Meters were strictly
compiled with, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

8.

“The steps taken by MoR are as follows-

i. Zonal Railways were advised on 27.05.15 to provide details of ABT meters
to REMCL for inviting bid.

ii, Further, a meeting was held on 10.09.15 with all Zonal Railways, wherein,
inter-alia Zonal Railways were instructed to verify the class of CT/PT
available at GSS (Grid Sub Station) from STUs and based upon the same
only, STUs (State Transmission Utility) be asked to provide CT/PT & ABT
meter.

ii. A review meeting was held on 04.12.15 with all Zonal Railways.

iv. A D.O. letter was sent to GM/WCR from Railway Board on 16.02.2016 to

take up the issue with Chief Secretary of the Rajasthan state.

v. Further, a D.O. letter was sent to Chief Secretary, Rajasthan from Railway

Board on 31.03.16 requesting to expedite the process of granting NOC to
Railways to take power as Deemed Licensee. Subsequently, a follow up
D.O. letter was also sent on 28.04.16.

Further, a meeting was conducted with Principal Secretary (Energy) & CMD,
RVPNL on 12.05.2016 for issue of NOC by RVPNL and to discuss the issues
regarding provision of ABT meters and CT/PT.”

When asked to provide a detailed explanation for the delay in commencing

power supply through Open Access from M/s Jindal India Thermal Power Limited
(JITPL). in, four Traction. Sub. Stations. (1599) from January.10, 2017, despite the.
agreement being entered into on March 15, 2016, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:


9.

“The delay in commencing power through Open Access can be attributed to
following:-

(1) Legal issue involved due to challenges made to ‘Deemed Licensee’ status
of Railways by various agencies involved in transmission of electricity.

(2) RVPNL took a lot of time to clear the case as it was revenue loss by
losing their valuable customer (i.e. Railway). They tried to create
obstacles in the path of clearance of Open Access to Railway. This
activity not only involved Railway network but alsoinvolved State
agencies and their network, where Railway has no direct access and
without the consent and involvement of state agencies, ABT meters could
not have been installed.

(3) Procurement of ABT meters and associated equipments could not have
been initiated without knowing the suitability of ABT meter and
associated equipments with State STU network, for which they chose to
linger on the matter.

Despite various correspondences with Rajasthan State and various meetings
with RVPNL officials at the level of S..DEE, CEDE and PCEE, matter was
lingered on by the State Government.”

On being asked about the specific reasons that led to the delay in the

procurement and installation of Availability Based Tariff (ABT) meters at the TSS
points, as highlighted by the audit, and how may have this impacted the overall
process of power procurement through Open Access, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

10.

“Although Railway Board had advised for suitable arrangement for providing
ABT meters and CT/PT, certain ambiguities about ‘Deemed Licensee’
status, were raised by various State Electricity Boards/Transmission
Utilities. Railways were defending the ‘Deemed Licensee’ status for
procurement of power through ‘open Access’ in CERC. It was only after
CERC’s order dated 05.11.2015 in a petition No. 197/MP/2015 filled by
Indian Railway, seeking grant of permission for procurement of power
through open access, against various agencies involved in power flow,
Railway was confirmed as ‘Deemed Licensee’ eligible for procurement of
power through ‘open access’. As soon as the confirmation. was issued by
CERC, WCR made all possible efforts for availing power through Open
Access.”

When the Committee enquired about the reasons proffered by the concerned

State Governments for the delay in facilitating timely procurement of ABT meters and
associated equipments by the West Central Railway, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

“Initially West Central Railway requested Rajasthan State Transmission
Utility i.e. Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited (RVPNL) to install
ABT meters at desired locations for which Railway shall bear the expenditure

5


11.

(as was done in Madhya Pradesh state of WCR's jurisdiction) as Railway had
no prior experience of such activities. Moreover, this activity was requiring
accessibility to RVPNL's transmission network. RVPNL vide their reply dated
26.04.2016 informed that supply of ABT meters through their tender will take
6-7 months. Therefore, WCR had to initiate the process of procurement and
installation of ABT meters and associated equipments.”

When asked as to why despite knowing that instructions were issued on

March 2015 to all Zonal Railways regarding procurement of direct power from
Generating Companies through Open Access and to ensure compliance regarding
the Availability Based Tariff (ABT) Meters, timely procurement of ABT meters and
associated equipments by the West Central Railway was not done well in time, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

12.

“The ‘Deemed Licensee’ status of Railway for procurement of power through
open Access, was challenged by various agencies involved with power flow.
Hence West Central Railway had to withhold the activity for availing power
through Open Access. Further, installation of ABT meters could not have
been done without the consent of State Authorities. It was only after CERC’s
order dated 05.11.2015, in a petition No. 197/MP/2015 filed by Indian
Railway seeking grant of permission for procurement of power through open
access against various agencies involved in power flow, Railway was
confirmed as ‘Deemed Licensee’ eligible for procurement of power through
‘Open Access’. As soon as_ theconfirmation wasissued by
CERC, WCR made all possible efforts for availing power through Open
Access.”

On being asked about the efforts made by the Ministry and the Zonal Railway

to establish better co-ordination with the concerned State Governments, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as under:

13.

“WCR's jurisdiction involved mainly two states namely Madhya Pradesh and
Rajasthan. WCR could manage to persuade Madhya Pradesh State to allow
Open Access in time as well as necessary coordination in installation of ABT
meters and associated equipments by State Government itself as they have
more expertise in this field and Railways were new to Open Access.
However, despite various correspondence with Rajasthan State and various
meetings with RVPNL officials at the level of Sr.DEE, CEDE and
PCEE, the State Government chose to linger on the matter.”

When enquired about the steps taken by the Department to ensure that debit

entry inthe electronic credit ledger and cash ledger is invariably verified before
granting refund, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Payments to Power Generating and Power Distribution companies are
made on the basis of terms and condition agreed with them. It is noted that
neither any claim for refund has been made nor any refund has been issued

“16 any such providér So far. As per contract terms, Performance Guarantee is


submitted in the form of Bank Guarantee by the companies MMPTCL,
JINDAL and NVVN which is released as and when contract is completed.”

14. On being asked whether all railway zones have now been procuring power
from power generating companies through Open Access and the steps being taken
by the Ministry and the concerned zonal railways towards this end, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

“There are 7 States which are yet to grant NOC- Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana & West Bengal. In
these States, power could not be procured from generating companies
through Open Access due to non-availability of NOC. Various D.O. letters
have been written from Apex level of MoR. Litigation between IR and
SERCs/State Utilities at APTEL, wherein final hearings have been completed
in June, 2023 and Order is awaited.”

15. On being asked to explain the delay in shifting to Open Access system which
resulted into extra expenditure on power purchase amounting to Rs.75.10 crores, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The delay in shifting to Open Access can be attributed to following:-

(1) Legal issues arising on account of challenges made to ‘Deemed Licensee’
status of Railways by various agencies involved in transmission of
electricity.

(2) RVPNL took a lot of time to clear the case asitwas going to
suffer revenue loss by losing their valuable customer (i.e. Railway). They
tried to create obstacles in path of clearance of Open Access to
Railway.

(3) Procurement of ABT meters and associated equipment could not have
been initiated without knowing the suitability of ABT meter and associated
equipment with state STU network, for which they chose to linger on the
matter.”

16. When asked as to what measures are the Railway Administration
implementing to ensure timely compliance with Ministry instructions and pre-requisite
requirements for future power procurement through Open Access to avoid similar
delays and extra expenditures, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“West Central. Railway has already started to procure the entire traction power
requirement through Open Access. Further, it is to mention that provision of
ABT meters can be ensured only after getting NOC from STU and clearance
from the state authorities-regarding specification of ABT meters. Zonal
Railways take appropriate action accordingly.”

17. On being asked to provide details on the efforts made to assess and rectify
the lapses identified in the audit report, particularly concerning the delayed
implementation of ABT meters and the resulting financial implications, the Ministry in
their. written reply stated as under:


“West Central Railway has already started to procure the entire traction
power requirement through Open Access. Hence, the entire process of
purchasing power through open access has already been complied with.
Delay in installation of ABT meters occurred due to the following reasons:

1) There was the matter of deemed licensee pending which was confirmed by
Hon'ble CERC’s order dated 05.11.2015 in a petition No. 197/MP/2015.

2) State Government delayed the matter as RVPNL was losing a valuable
customer.

3) Correspondence was done with the state bodies for installation of ABT
meter but they later gave the letter to railway mentioning that “supply of
ABT meters through their tender will take 6-7
months". Thereafter, Railway took necessary action immediately for
purchase and installation of ABT meters and associated equipments.”

4) Here it is once again reiterated that procurement of ABT meters and
associated equipment could not have been initiated by the Railway without
knowing the suitability of ABT meter and associated equipment with State
STU network, for which the State agency chose to linger on the matter.


PARTI
OBSERVAITONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Introduction

1... का order to reduce the traction tariff to optimize the unit cost
of transportation, MoR (Ministry of Railways) issued (March 2015)
instructions to all Zonal Railways to get direct power from
Generating Companies through Open Access and ensure provision
of Availability Based Tariff (ABT) Meters. Despite entering into the
Agreement in March 2016 under Open Access, power supply was
commenced only from January 2017 mainly due to delay in
provisioning of ABT Meters. Delay in shifting to Open Access
resulted in extra expenditure on power purchase amounting to Rs.
75.10 crore. Some of the issues contained in the Audit Report have
been examined by the Committee and commented upon suitably in
the succeeding paragraphs.

Delay by WCR_ Administration in approaching Rajasthan Rajya
Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd. (RVPN) for Installation of Availability

Based Tariff’ (ABT) compliant meters and issue of NOC

2. The Committee note from audit observation that despite
MoR’s instructions/repeated instructions of February/ March/April
2015 to ensure timely procurement of ‘Availability Based Tariff
(ABT) compliant meters at the TSS points in 2015-16, the WCR
Administration did not promptly do the needful to secure and
install the necessary equipment (ABT meters). The ABT meters
were finally procured and installed between the period 10 January
2017 and 20 April 2017. Thus, there was delay of more than a year
in the procurement of ABT meters as well as in preparation of
estimates resulting into huge extra expenditure of Rs. 75.10 crore
during the period from 15 March 2016 to 10 January 2017. From the
submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that this activity did
not involve Railway network alone. It involved State agencies and
their network also, where Railway has no direct access, and
without consent and involvement of the State agencies, ABT
meters could not have been installed. Procurement of ABT meters
and associated equipment could not be initiated without knowing
the suitability/compatibility of ABT meters and associated

9


equipment with the State Transmission Utilities (STUs) network and
they continued to delay the matter on these issues. The Committee
observe that it was only four months after CERC’s. order. dated
05.11.2015 confirming the Railway as ‘Deemed Licensee eligible for
procurement of power through ‘Open Access’, that the Railway
wrote letters on 04.03.2016, 24.03.2016, 12.04.2016 and 25.04.2016
to RVPN with a request to provide ABT meters & 0.2 S class CT/PT.
This resulted in wastage of four precious months. Further, from the
submission made by the Ministry, the Committee note that Zonal
Railways were advised on 27.05.15 to provide details of ABT meters
to REMCL for inviting bids. Besides, a meeting was held on
10.09.15 with all Zonal Railways, wherein, inter-alia Zonal Railways
were instructed to verify the class of CT/PT available at GSS (Grid
Sub Station) from STUs and based upon the same only, STUs
(State Transmission Utility) were to be asked to provide CT/PT &
ABT meters. The Committee are of the view that after MoR’s
repeated instructions of March/April 2015 to obtain ABT compliant
meters, the Railway Administration should have straight away
initiated the process for completing the procurement and
installation of ABT meters without delays. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry need to streamline and fast
track the procedures for procurement of all items that are relevant
to the Railways’ operational network.

Non-implementation of Letter of Award (LOA) in a timely manner

3. The Committee note from audit observation that the Power
supply through Open Access was commenced from 10 January
2017 in four TSSs (Traction Substation) and between 19 January
2017 and 20 April 2017 in remaining eight TSSs despite issuance of
Letter of Award (LOA) in favour of the successful bidder i. e. M/s
Jindal India Thermal Power Limited (JITPL) on 26 February 2016
and Agreement for procurement of Power between WCR and M/s
JITPL on 15 March 2016. The Committee further note that delay in
observance of MoR’s instructions for fulfillment of pre-requisite
requirements for purchase of power through Open Access deprived
the Railway Administration of the savings in traction energy bills.
Despite availability of power at lower rate of Rs. 4.09 per kWh, WCR
Administration purchased power at higher_rate of Rs. 6.50 per kWh.
From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that

10


although Railway Board had advised for suitable arrangements for
obtaining power through ‘Open Access’, there was ambiguity about
‘Deemed Licensee’ status, which was raised by various State
Electricity Boards/Transmission Utilities. Railways were defending
the ‘Deemed Licensee’ status, for procurement of power through
‘Open Access’, in CERC. The Committee are of the view that in the
first place, spending as many as four months in clearing the
discrepancies at the application stage, which contributed to the
delays and wasteful expenditure should have been avoided. The
Committee are also of the view that after CERC issued orders dated
05.11.2015 confirming the Railway as ‘Deemed Licensee’, obtaining
power through open access should have been ensured promptly.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the status in this regard.

FEI IOS IO II ITI फेक के

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

>> February, 2024 Chairperson,
. Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

11