81

PROCUREMENT OF X-ENGINES

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

EIGHTY FIRST REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No. 2311

EIGHTY FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PROCUREMENT OF X-ENGINES

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 18.12.2023

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 18.12.2023

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS Pages
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iii)
INTRODUCTION oa
PART- I
REPORT
PART-II

OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS.

APPENDICES

iv |

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
18.07.2023

| ४ |

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
14.12.2023

* Not appended to the report

(ii)



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal

6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

41. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien*
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Partha Goswami - Director
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Vijay Mishra - Executive Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.

-fi-


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty First Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Procurement of X-Engines” based on Para 3.2 of C&AG Report number
20 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the
Parliament on 20 December 2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report during their current term i.e. 2023-24. The Committee took oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Indian Navy at their
Sitting held on 18.07.2023. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 14.12..2023. The Minutes of the Sittings of
the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the
Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence and Indian Navy for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
_14 December, 2023 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

—jli-


REPORT
PART-I
PROCUREMENT OF X-ENGINES

A. EXCESS HOLDING OF INVENTORY- NON-CONSIDERATION OF IMMINENT
DECOMMISSIONING

X-Engines are used onboard SS Class of ships as the main propulsion plant.
These have a specific period of life and are required to be replaced after exploitation for
certain running hours.

2. Navy Instructions 2006 (NI-1/S/2006), inter-alia, stipulate that in respect of
shipborne equipment, provisioning is to be done based on Beyond Economical Repair
(BER) and Anticipated Beyond Economical Repair (ABER) or against special sanction
of competent authority for maintaining maximum stock ratio of R1 (between reserve and
on-board).

3. Audit noticed (November 2019) that inventory holding of X-Engines was in
excess of the stock level prescribed by NI 2006. The number of X-Engines to be held
by Indian Navy, including those installed on-board ships was N30 for a complement of
N13 ships. However, the holding of X-Engines was N31. Audit while masking sensitive
and confidential information, scrutinised the case and reported as under :-

> Indian Navy concluded four contracts (October 2013, March 2015, March 2016
and April 2016) for procurement of N19 X-Engines for N21 ship against ABER
(approved between February 2009 and October 2013), from Original Equipment
Manufacturer (OEM) i.e, M/s ‘C’ at a total cost of USD 6,46,40,000 (Rs. 414.01
crore), inclusive of warranty up to 36 months from the date of supply. The BGTs
were received between May 2014 and November 2016.

> Two ships viz., UU and VV were decommissioned as per the decision of the
competent authority (March 2015) in April 2016. However, N24 X-Engines
earmarked to be fitted on-board these two ships, were not excluded from the
contract concluded in April 2016.

> As of March 2016, the number of X-Engines held in stock was N32, as against
N10 required as per NI-2006. Hence, placement of orders in March 2016 and
April 2016 for a total number of N15 X-Engines (N33 + N10) was not warranted.

> Two more ships WW and XX were decommissioned in January 2018. As such,
the requirement of X-Engines for the remaining N13 ships in terms of NI 2006
worked out to N30 (N34 on board N13 ships and N24 as reserve) as against the
holding of N31 X-Engines (December 2019). Thus, N17 X-Engines worth Rs.

1|Page


242.40 crore received between September 2014 and November 2016, were held
in stock as of December 2019. है

> The warranty of all the X-Engines had since expired in storage.

4. This Audit Para was taken up by Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) for
detailed examination. The Committee called for background information and took oral
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) and this
examination revealed a series of pertinent observations and challenges that have been

critically assessed.

In August 2020, Audit raised concerns about the procurement process for X-
Engines, leading to excess inventory. The Ministry justified the stockpile, citing the short
service life of X-Engines as under:-

".....Due to the short service life of X-Engines, sufficient stock of these X-Engines
are to be held in stock for replacement at short notice."

5. Regarding the inventory holdings in excess of stock level, the representative of
the Ministry during the course of examination explained that the stocking policy had
been in place since 1987, maintaining a R2 ratio of spare X-Engines to installed ones.
The Ministry argued that this was necessary due to the short X-Engines service life and
long procurement lead times, as under:-

"The first one refers to the inventory holdings in excess of stock level prescribed
in NI-1S of 2006. The background to stocking policy of X-Engines of these ships
since induction of the ships in 1987 has been in the ratio of R2 for each spare X-
Engine to the installed X-Engines. This is primarily due to the short service life of
these X-Engines and long lead time for procurement. Further, these guidelines
were reiterated in 2014 also. It is highlighted to the Committee that the NI is a
general guideline and does not cater for equipment specific service
requirements."

6. Regarding the observation related to procurement quantities and non-
consideration of imminent decommissioning of two ships in 2016, the representative of
the Ministry during the course of examination stated as under:-

“The second observation related to the procurement quantities of 2016 contracts,
which have not taken into consideration the imminent decommissioning of two
ships in 2016.It is highlighted that Nil stock situation directly affecting the
operational capability of the platforms was experienced on four occasions before
2016, that is 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2013. The only procurement undertaken
since 1995 was for two X-Engines in 2009. The subsequent indent from:2009 to
2013 had all got bunched up and fructified into contracts on three occasions, that

2|Page


is in 2013, 2015 and 2016.The decommissioning of the two ships in 2016 could
not be taken into account as it would have resulted in delay in supply of the
required X-Engines. The RFP had already been issued in February, 2015 before
the decision to decommission these two ships was taken. Further, the uncertainty
created due to Crimea Annexation also necessitated early placement of orders to
secure the supply chain. This was the reason for it."

7. Explaining further, the representative of the Ministry stated that during a specific
period, various activities had a significant impact on their supply chain. Fortunately,
existing orders were already in progress, allowing for timely deliveries. However, they
encountered a temporary challenge when considering the extension of two ships’
operational lifespan beyond 30 years. After conducting a Life Review Board
assessment, they decided to decommission the ships, leading to a surplus of additional
X-Engines in their inventory for a two-year period. Eventually, they returned to a normal
state. This period highlighted the difficulty in synchronizing the decommissioning
timeline, the induction of new X-Engines, and the actual decommissioning of the ships.
The representative of the Ministry has submitted as under:-

"_...n0ow when all these activities that took place, the entire supply chain got

impacted at that particular time. But fortunately for us at that time, since the
orders were already in motion, the delivery took place for us. But temporarily, in
between, there were two ships that we were thinking of stretching to beyond 30
years. But when we did their Life Review Board, the condition was such that we
felt it is safer for us to decommission it that time. For that period of two years, the
additional X-Engines that we had got became excess on our ledger. But two
years further down the line, we came to normal place again. So, there was a
temporary period when our decommissioning timeline, our induction of new X-
Engines timeline, and the actual decommissioning of the ships, we were not able
to match it all the times."

B. MAKE IN INDIA

8. When asked about the source of procurement, the Ministry's representative
explained that they now have established procedures in place. They emphasized their
focus on the "Make in India" initiative for these X-Engines, indicating that the company
has been invited to engage in partnerships with suitable Indian firms for local
manufacturing in India.

C. SPARES AND INDIGENOUS MAINTENANCE

9. When asked about the availability of spare parts for X-Engines, the Ministry's
representative stated that they have already established a significant indigenous
maintenance capability within the country. They mentioned that they have been
conducting overhauls of M/s 'C' X-Engines through naval establishments over a 30-year
period, indicating a wealth of experience in this area. While there are challenges related
to the availability of certain spares; they mentioned having measures in place to

3|Page


address these challenges. Their long-term solution involves developing the indigenous
industry to bolster spare parts availability.

10. In further justification of the procurements made, the Ministry's representative
explained that the extension of service life beyond the design life of twenty years
necessitated additional efforts to maintain the operational readiness of these ships. The
procurements conducted in 2016 were crucial in ensuring the full operational availability
of these ships in the prevailing operational scenario. They emphasized that no
additional procurement has been undertaken since then. Furthermore, they pointed out
that the subsequent decommissioning of two ships in 2018 could not have been
predicted at the time of the 2016 procurements.

11. | When asked about the excess stock of newly purchased X-Engines worth Rs.
213.96 crore in October 2020, considering the imminent decommissioning of ships, the
end of warranty cover, and the expiration of the calendar life in storage, the Ministry's
representative explained that during the audit, there were four indents for these X-
Engines in progress. The audit correctly pointed out that, given the decommissioning,
one of those orders should have been canceled. However, at that time, they did not
consider it wise to do so. They did not have the benefit of audit guidance when these
indents were being procured. Since they had not engaged in such procurement for 25
years, it was a new development for them. They believed that it was still a good idea to
receive these X-Engines because they had plans to extend the service life of each of
these ships to thirty years. So, from their perspective, they believed there would not be
an issue with overstocking.

D. DELAY IN PLACEMENT OF ORDER AND RECEIPT OF X-ENGINES

12. Regarding the expiration of warranty for the X-Engines in storage, the Ministry's
representative explained that the X-Engines preserved in storage have a calendar life of
at least ten years, allowing them to be used as replacements on ships until Year Y1.
They also emphasized that these X-Engines are accepted after undergoing
performance trials during their acceptance stage, ensuring their performance post-
installation, precisely when required. The representative further mentioned that
procuring these X-Engines based on emergent requirements was not feasible due to the
extended lead times associated with procurement. As an example, they cited an order '
placed in 2013, which took four or five years for the X-Engines to be delivered.

E. FUTURE ROADMAP

13. During the course of the examination, the Ministry's representative stated that
there had been no consequential wastage of public money. They explained that all the
X-Engines had been earmarked for installation within their service life. They also
mentioned that the benefits of bulk procurement had been accrued when concluding the .
2016 contracts. Additionally, the representative pointed out that these procurements

4|Page


had ensured the operational readiness of SS Class of ships in the ongoing operational
scenario. They further stated that, despite all these considerations, a concrete roadmap
had been prepared for the management of X-Engines in these ships to cater to future
requirements

5|Page


PART-II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee take note of the critical role played by the X-Engines in
achieving high navigational speeds required by the Indian Navy’s SS Class Ships.
The SS Class Ships are missile corvettes acquired by Indian Navy and integrated
into their fleet. These X-Engines have a short life time, thereby, necessitating a
sufficient stock for prompt onboard replacements. The Engine provisioning
guidelines of 2014 were introduced to address past stock shortages and prevent
future stock situations. However, the audit has brought to light several issues
regarding the inventory holding of X-Engines, non-consideration of de-
commissioned ships while placing order, and non-adherence to stock levels

prescribed under NI-2006, which warrant careful scrutiny.

2. The Committee note that the Navy’s Instruction is a general guideline and
does not cater for equipment specific service requirements. It has been reported
that the matter of 'Nil ' stock situation directly affecting the operational capability
of the platforms was experienced on four occasions before 2016, that is in 2006,
2009, 2012 and 2013. The only procurement undertaken since 1995 was for two
engines in 2009. The Committee also note that the subsequent indents from 2009
to 2013 had all got bunched up and fructified into contracts on three occasions,
that is in 2013, 2015 and 2016. The Committee have been informed that the
decommissioning of the two ships in 2016 could not be taken into account as it
would have resulted in delay in supply of the required X-Engines. Also, the
Request for Proposal had already been issued in February, 2015 before the
decision to decommission these two ships was taken. It has also been informed
that the uncertainty created due to Annexation of Crimea also necessitated early

placement of orders to secure the supply chain.

3. The Committee observe that in all likelihood the procurement decisions in
2015 and 2016 were influenced by geopolitical uncertainties, which necessitated
bulk procurement to address potential supply chain-disruptions due to the
Crimea crisis. The Committee note.the affirmation of the Ministry that there has
been no consequential wastage of public money on account of ending of

6|Page


warranty as all the X-Engines have been earmarked for installation within their
service life. It has also been stated that the benefits of bulk procurement have
been accrued on account of the conclusion of contracts in 2016. The Committee
believe that the procurements have ensured operational readiness of SS Class
ships in the on-going operational scenario. The Committee desire that the
concrete roadmap prepared for the management of X-Engines of these ships may

strictly be followed for catering the future requirements.
PREVENTION OF RESOURCE WASTAGE

4, The Committee appreciate the decision of Indian Navy for taking timely
measures in the context of Crimea Annexation. However, they are not inclined to
agree with the decision of not reducing the number of X-Engines on account of
decommissioning. In Request for Proposal (RFP)s, Indian Navy could consider
adding the clause that the number of items may be increased / decreased at the
time of final order, if not already included which is a general clause for each
tender/Request For Proposal. The Committee, therefore, desire that Indian Navy
should prepare standard Tender Document and conduct a thorough and timely
review of X-Engines stock levels annually for all depots and initiate the process
for procurement, maintenance, re-use, disposal/de-commissioning, as the case
may be, and implement corrective measures as per guidelines in Navy
Instructions (NI) -2006. The Committee, further, desire that future procurements
should be based on actual needs, while simultaneously maintaining a plan for

contingency/crisis keeping the national interest paramount.
ENHANCING ‘MAKE IN INDIA' AND RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS

5. The Committee appreciate the Indian Navy for Innovative X-Engine Design
prepared by their officer(s). Currently the progress is theoretical and its
industrial production and its evaluation for use is yet to be done. The Committee,
emphasize the need to expedite actions aimed at achieving indigenous
production of X-Engines, aligning with the goals of the ‘Make in India’ initiative
and therefore, recommend that the Indian Navy needs to undertake research and
development initiatives to address the current challenges and. explore innovative
approaches.

7|Page


COLLABORATION WITH RELEVANT INDUSTRIES AND ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS

6. The Committee are of the opinion that by investing in preservation
techniques, specialized lubricants, and equipments/processes required, for
innovative storage methods, Indian Navy can mitigate the effects of prolonged
inactivity of the X-Engines and enhance their operational reliability. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that collaboration with relevant industries and
academic institutions may be made for exploring the best storage practices.
Further, training of manpower may also be undertaken for the purpose.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
14 December, 2023 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

8| Page