88

IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (PFMS)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 547 Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

EIGHTY - EIGHTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO, 2318

EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC FINANCIAL

MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (PFMS)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 547" Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER Ill

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the 50एशाशशशाए............... ...............-
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government.
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.......
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no

Li) 0): ... ७०-७0 >तज जज जज जज 3० 5५5 ५9५५

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Public
Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 17-01-2024.
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty-Fourth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

11. Shri Brijendra Singh

12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K Laxman
18. Shri Derek O’Brien
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-23) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth
Lok Sabha) "Implementation of Public Financial Management System (PFMS)"
relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 147 December, 2022. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Committee considered and adopted the Eighty-eighth Report at their Sitting held on
17 January, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are given at Appendix-!.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-//.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
170 January, 2024 Chairperson,

27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty Fourth Report (17" Lok Sabha) on "Implementation of Public
Financial Management System (PFMS)".

2. The Fifty Fourth was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on -
14.12.2022. It contained sixteen Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure and are categorized as under:

(i) " Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16

Total: 14
Chapter - Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. NIL
Total: 0
Chapter - Ill

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. 3
Total: 1
Chapter - IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:

Para No. 11
Total: 1
Chapter - V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed

certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure which inter-alia included under-utilization or non-utilization of the

1


allotted funds leading to escalation of cost and cost overrun; non synchronization of
financial planning of the scheme with the plan prepared for the rollout of PFMS; low
expenditure against budget provision on all the components resulting in savings
ranging from 45 per cent to 75 per cent of the budget provision; slow progress in
development of own infrastructure for the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU);
non creation of infrastructure for either State Project Management Units (SPMUS);
SPMUS functioning without necessary supervisory level officers and technical
support personnel and the process of staffing related to DPMUs yet to commence
etc. The Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in
their Fifty Fourth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty Fourth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters
of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government, on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need

reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter | of the Report, positively within six
months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.

Human resources capabilities.

6. The Committee note that Project Implementation Committee(PIC), the apex
level body for providing policy advice, strategic guidance and taking all key
decisions, was mainly involved in deciding on relatively less important issues
pertaining to human resource deployment such as engagement and continuation of
consultants and outsourced technical team. Notably, no Human Resource Policy
defining roles/responsibilities as recommended in the DPR or guidelines for
benchmarking of performance of functionaries and performance appraisal
mechanism for continuation in assigned role(s)/responsibilities were framed.
Regarding HR policy and steps taken to attract field/domain experts from external
agencies the Ministry has only indicated that PFMS has been merged into CGA
organization and is a part of the regular activities of the office of Controller General
of Accounts. The Committee feel that given the scale and expansion of PFMS, a
technically qualified workforce is required to not only address the various challenges
being faced in the implementation of the system and integration of various schemes

2


into the system but also to fix accountability. Further, in wake of rising cases of cyber
attacks on banking and financial systems, the Committee are concerned that in the
absence of a dedicated workforce, a key strategic system like PFMS can possibly
encounter new threats every now and then owing to advancements in technology.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may not rely solely on the
CGA organization but take concrete initiatives to attract field/domain technical
experts for strengthening the PFMS.

7. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“1. The ICAS officers and other officials of CGA Organization are posted in
PFMS in the capacity as domain experts on accounting and fund flow
mechanism. To cater to technical requirement of PFMS, 65 posts of NIC
officers have been created in PFMS at various levels (DDG to Programmer
level) out of which 26 NIC Officers/Officials are currently in position and 25
resources outsourced from M/s TCS (contracted by NIC) are deployed. To
further augment technical HR strength of PFMS, an additional 638 technical
resources have been deployed in PFMS for the development of IT platform,
APIs, External Integration, testing, hosting/deployment, maintenance
and regular upgradation of PFMS platform, support to stakeholders etc.
These technical resources have been deployed through outsourcing from
various reputed firms at an annual cost of Rs 68.47 crores as follows -
a. 120 IT Professionals from M/s Corporate Infotech Private
Limited (CIPL) w.e.f. 18.02.2019.
b. 158 IT Professionals from M/s Tata Consultancy Services Pvt
Ltd. w.e.f. 01.10.2020 and additional 24 IT Professionals have
also been hired.
6. 332 technical resources hired from M/s Nelito Systems Limited
were hired w.e.f. 01.01.2019 for deployment in the State
Directorates and line Ministries for providing technical support to
PFMS stakeholders at State Level. Ministries and Departments.
d. On the advice of DG NIC, 04 Security Auditors are hired
through MeiTY empanelled firm M/s Essential Infosec Private
Limited for a period of 03 years. These resources do continuous
audit of applications developed and ensure security compliance.
This would be done on a continuous basis for all changes and
additions to ensure that subsequent changes comply with
security requirements.
e. Approval for hiring of 15 retired officers as consultants has
been accorded by the Finance Secretary & Secretary
(Expenditure) this year.

2. PFMS architecture was envisaged in 2008. To upgrade the PFMS
architecture in line with the latest technology, a proposal for hiring of
Strategic & Technical consultant to review the existing PFMS
architecture is under consideration. These consultants are expected to study
the existing PFMS design and architecture and propose solution for improving
performance and security along with technological up gradations required.

3


8.

3. To provide technical expert advice to strengthen the processes, enhance
security protocols and improve user experience in PFMS, a Technology
Advisory Committee (TAC) has been constituted vide OM dated 20/02/23 &
24/03/23 under the chairmanship of Professor M.J.Shankar, CEO
Pravartak, IIT Chennai, Ms Tulika Pandey, Scientist G, MeiTY, Sh.
Satyapal Singh, Senior Manager IT Operations, DSCI, Sh. Arul Kumar,
Expert, Enterprise Application Architecture, NPCI, Sh Noorul Ameen,
Scientist E, CERTF in along’ with NIC and = domain
officers (Annexure C). Thus, experts from academia and Industry are also
being on boarded for broad basing the technical advisory base.

4. To strengthen the cyber security of PFMS against new and emerging
security threats and to provide a structured guidance in this regard, a
committee under the chairmanship of Additional CGA PFMS has been
constituted for examining and drafting IT & Cyber Security Policy for
PFMS vide OM No. V-12022/1/2022-PFMS/IT&CS/CN-9558/2206-2215 dated
02.08.2022& 17.02.2023 (Annexure D). The external experts in the
committee are Ms. Tulika Pandey, Scientist 5, MeiTY, Ms.Varsha Uswal,
CM, RBI(DIT), Sh Jatinder Grover, ACM, SBI (ISD), Sh Noorul Ameen,
Scientist E, CERT-Fin, Sh Shyam Sundar, DDG,NIC, Ho DNDC, Shastri
Park along with members from PFMS and NIC. The IT and cyber security
policy for PFMS is in advance stage of formulation.

5. To ensure that PFMS protocols meet the NIST and other international
standards, the process of acquiring the ISO 27001 certification for PFMS
was initiated w.e.f. 01.01.2022 which is in advance stage. As part of this
certification, standardization of around 18 ISMS policies for PFMS as per the
international best practices have been adopted.

6. Comprehensive Security Audit for PFMS to look at not only application
security but also the peripheral security is being done since the last two years
through MEITY empanelled agencies. The current security certificate is valid
upto November 2023.

Thus, all efforts are being made to broaden the technical advisory group
of PFMS, enhance the technical expertise and onboard latest
technological developments.”

While observing the rising cases of cyber attacks on banking and

financial systems, the Committee were concerned that in the absence of a
dedicated technical workforce, a key strategic system like PFMS can possibly
encounter new threats every now and then owing to advancements in
technology and had recommended that the Ministry may not rely solely on the
CGA organization but take concrete initiatives to attract field/domain technical
experts for strengthening the PFMS.


The Ministry in their action take note has inter alia highlighted that the
ICAS officers and other officials of CGA Organization are posted in PFMS in
the capacity as domain experts on accounting and fund flow mechanism. To
cater to technical requirement of PFMS, 65 posts of NIC officers have been
created in PFMS at various levels (DDG to Programmer level) out of which 26
NIC Officers/Officials are currently in position and 25 resources outsourced
from M/s TCS (contracted by NIC) are deployed. To further augment technical
HR strength of PFMS, an additional 638 technical resources have been
deployed in PFMS for the development of IT platform, APIs, External
Integration, testing, hosting/deployment, maintenance and regular upgradation
of PFMS platform, support to stakeholders etc. These technical resources
have been deployed through outsourcing from various reputed firms at an
annual cost of Rs 68.47 crores. Besides, a committee under the chairmanship
of Additional CGA PFMS has been constituted for examining and drafting IT &
Cyber Security Policy for PFMS. The Ministry also stated that in addition to
initiating the process of acquiring the ISO 27001 certification for PFMS , a
proposal for hiring of Strategic & Technical consultant to review the existing
PFMS architecture to upgrade the PFMS architecture in line with the latest
technology is being considered.

The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry to
broaden the technical advisory group of PFMS, enhance the technical
expertise and onboard latest technological developments.The Committee
however, note from the Annexure F to the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry,
showing the details of Sanctioned viz-a-viz Working Strength as on 30.04.2023,
that the post of Additional CGA is vacant and only 04 Dy. CGAs are posted
against sanctioned strength of 12 Officers. Similarly, there is shortage in
posting against the sanctioned strength at all the levels except Group B
Gazetted (PS), with total working strength being as low as 182 against total
sanctioned strength of 389 (approx 47%). The Committee also note with
concern that the technical staff, forming the backbone of PFMS rollout, has
been largely hired from various private agencies. In the opinion of the
Committee, for a strategically important system like PFMS where lacunae in
appointment of personnel at any level may prove disastrous, the fact that not
only the post of Additional CGA is vacant but technical staff has been largely
hired from private agencies paints an alarming picture. To alleviate these
concerns, the Committee desire that they may be apprised of the steps being
taken by the Ministry to ensure the security of a core system such as PFMS
being manned by less than 50% of its sanctioned strength and mostly out-
sourced staff. Further, while emphasising the need for regular meetings of the
Technology Advisory Committee (TAC) constituted by the Ministry to provide
technical expert advice for PFMS, the Committee desire that the measures
being taken to expedite the process of acquiring the ISO 27001 certification for
PFMS and finalisation of the IT and cyber security policy formulated for PFMS
should also be shared with them.


SPMUs

9. The Committee note that State Project Management Unit (SPMU) was
visualised with the responsibility of customisation of implementation plan to
synergise it with regional variations in requirements of system design, training,
monitoring and evaluation needs. As per audit observation, in the absence of
dedicated infrastructure and decision making officers to coordinate and synergise
PFMS with regional variations, effective functioning of SPMUs could not be ensured.
Further, no duty list of functionaries of SPMUs had been prepared nor was there any
oversight mechanism to monitor the activities of SPMUs. On the issue of shortage of
manpower at all levels, leading to delays in approval for technology solution
framework for PFMS, the Ministry furnished details of status of deployment of
officers/ Staff in PFMS State Directorate as 1 Jt. CGA (SAG) against the sanctioned
strength of 19 and 6 Dy. CGA (JAG) against a sanctioned strength of 36. They
further stated that additional charges have been given to Jt. CGA, and Dy. CGA to
ensure that all SPMUs are fully functional. From the Ministry’s response it is evident
that the SPMUs are yet to achieve their sanctioned strength. Ministry’s response
regarding restructuring of manpower also remains unsatisfactory as they have only
assigned additional charge to some officersover their regular duties. The Committee
feel that in the absence of dedicated services, infrastructural issues are not being
highlighted sufficiently owing to which, many SPMUs are housed in temporary
spaces and the progress in regard to hiring of office space is moving at snail's pace.
The Committee recommend that issues plaguing the SPMUs as_ regards
infrastructure and Manpower must be dealt with promptly so as to ensure effective
functioning of SPMUs. The Committee may be apprised of the concrete steps taken
in this direction.

10. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“The management of State Directorates (erstwhile SPMUs) is governed by
Department of Expenditure’s Order dated 05.04.2021 (Annexure A) which
created dedicated PFMS Regional Directorates within the PFMS Division to
oversee the functioning of State Directorates in each State. Steps taken to
resolve Infrastructure and manpower issues of State Directorates are
submitted for consideration -

1... Infrastructure

i. All 36 PFMS State Directorates/UTs are operational from adequate
office premises provided either by the Centre (in 11 Slate Directorates/UTs
through CPWD) or by the State government (in 22 State Directorates/UTs).
In remaining States/UTs office premises have been hired from PSU, private
parties etc. Renovation works wherever required has also been undertaken.
Computers, furniture. Internet connectivity and other equipment have been
provided for all State Directorates.

ii. | The procedure of hiring is done in accordance to the policy set up by
DoE vide order F.No.C-13015(827)/MFCGA/ PFMS/201I7-18/6629 dated

6


07.08.2018. A detailed Infrastructure Report pertaining to PFMS State
Directorates as on 21.04.2023 is placed as Annexure E.

2. | Manpower in State Directorates

The States directorates (earlier SPMUs) are manned by Domain
experts and outsourced technical manpower.

i. 02 Senior Accounts Officers and 02 Assistant Accounts Officers posts
have been created in each Directorate to handle the administrative issues of
the state directorate and provide handholding and support to the state
government officials. Altogether 148 domain officers including 74 Sr AOs
and 74 AAOs are posted by O/o CGA in various State directorates. The
current staffing in State Directorate is at Annexure F.

ii. In addition, 332 technical resources have been hired to provide
technical support to various State directorates. The list of deployment of
these technical resources in various states is at Annexure G.

iii. | The roles and responsibilities of staff posted in State Directorates have
been delineated along with the performance evaluation mechanism vide
office OM No. AD-11001/13/2022-PFMS/C.No. 10952/ Rollout Vertical/3152
dated 20.09.2022.

iv. The performance of State PFMS units is assessed based on the
completion of the assigned tasks and responsibilities. Further, State PFMS
units send a fortnightly status and progress report to HQ that are reviewed
along with resolution of constraints faced, if any. Periodic review meetings
are taken by the Joint CGA responsible for the State Directorates.

v. Trainings and Capacity building meetings are held with the State
Directorate staff on all latest developments so that they can in turn handhold
user state departments.

Thus, all efforts are being made to strengthen the State directorates and
make their functioning effective.”

11. Taking note of the absence of dedicated infrastructure and decision
making officers in SPMUs to coordinate and synergise PFMS with regional
variations the Committee in their original report had recommended that issues
plaguing the SPMUs as regards infrastructure and Manpower must be dealt
with promptly so as to ensure effective functioning of SPMUs. In their Action
Taken Notes, the Ministry has inter alia submitted that all 36 PFMS State
Directorates/UTs are operational from appropriate office premises provided
either by the Centre (in 11 Slate Directorates/UTs through CPWD) or by the
State Government (in 22 State Directorates/UTs). In remaining States/UTs
office premises have been hired from PSUs, private parties etc. Renovation


work wherever required has also been undertaken. Computers, furniture.
Internet connectivity and other equipment have been provided for all State
Directorates. Further 02 Senior Accounts Officers and 02 Assistant Accounts
Officers posts have been created in each Directorate to handle the
administrative issues of the state directorate and provide handholding and
support to the State Government officials. Altogether 148 domain officers
including 74 Sr. 805 and 74 AAOs are posted by O/o CGA in various State
directorates.

In respect of infrastructure provided to State Directorates, the
Committee however note through Annexure E annexed to the Action Taken
Reply of the Ministry that there is scarcity of even basic infra i.e. Desktops/
laptops required to carry out roles and responsibilities in an IT driven
organisation like PFMS. It was found that in Madhya Pradesh State Directorate,
there is only one laptop and nil desktop is available while for Andaman &
Nicobar, 25 Computers are provided. Considering the geographical and
volume of transactions the data shown in Annexure E seems odd. As regards
human resources, as per the sanctioned and working strength of State
Directorates as on 30.04.2023 as furnished by the Department in Annexure F, it
has been noticed that 10 and 28 posts of Senior Accounts Officer and
Assistants Accounts officer respectively are vacant. With a view to ensuring
effective functioning of SPMUs, the Committee, while reiterating their
recommendation that the issues plaguing the SPMUs as regards infrastructure
and Manpower must be dealt with promptly, recommend that the Ministry
should ensure that not only the infrastructural requirement of SPMUs are met
but their Human resources strength matches their sanctioned strength.

Project Implementation Committee

12. The Committee note that the Project Implementation Committee (PIC) was
conceived as the apex level body for providing policy advice and strategic guidance
for taking all key decisions and for regular monitoring. The composition of the PIC
was such that it took experts from Department of Banking, NIC, JS & FA for financial
guidelines, JS (Pers.) for HRD issues, JS (PF) for overall planning, representatives
from PFMS, JS (DBT) for DBT related issues etc. The PIC meetings were held under
the Chairmanship of the Controller General of Accounts. The Committee have been
apprised that with the PFMS becoming a part of the regular functions of CGA, the
PIC ceased to function after the 19th meeting and in order to review all the issues
relating to the activities of PFMS, a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC) was
constituted which included DG NIC and JS (DBT), Cabinet Secretariat as Members.
Since the constitution of Senior Level Review Committee in 2019,only four meetings
were held till 23.9.2020 to review all issues relating to the activities of PFMS
including financial overview of the progress of PFMS. The Committee feel that since
PFMS is still evolving, regular monitoring and guidance becomes essential. The
Committee, therefore,recommend that in order to make regular review a part of
decision making process at the apex level and for effective monitoring of
implementation of PFMS, SLRC should meet not only more frequently but also at


fixed intervals. Further, owing to the changed composition of apex level body for
PFMS, the Committee apprehend whether, owing to the altered composition of
SLRC various issues plaguing PFMS such as coordination, HR Policy, Infrastructure
etc., could be addressed. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the
detailed composition of the present SLRC. The Committee would also like the
Ministry to ensure that SLRC is sufficiently empowered to address issues of overall
planning and representation of domain experts.

13. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

“Department of Expenditure vide Order dated 05.04.2021 (Annexure
A) created a dedicated PFMS Division within the O/o CGA to
exclusively look after the work of Design. Development and
Implementation of PFMS under overall guidance and supervision of
Department of Expenditure. Since the creation of the PFMS Division,
regular PFMS review meetings are held by O/o CGA and DoE to
review the overall progress and implementation of the new
developments/ initiatives in PFMS.

To review all the issues relating to the activities of the Public Financial
Management System, a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC) has
been constituted. So far 5 meetings of SLRC have been conducted (On
14.10.2019, 19.02.2020, 21.07.2020, 25.9.2020 and 11.05.2023) to
review the progress of PFMS. The current composition of the SLRC is
as follows (Annexure H) —

i. Controller General of Accounts, Chairperson
ii. Additional CGA (PFMS division) Member

iii. Additional CGA(ARFR). Member

iv. Director general. (NIC). Member

vy. Joint Secretary (PI 5). DoE. Member

Joint Secretary (DBT Mission). Cabinet Secretariat, Member

vi.

The aforementioned composition of SLRC has been chosen to ensure
representation of domain as well as technical experts. Based on the
recommendations of the 5" SLRC meeting dated 11.05.2023. The
SLRC is being considered for further broad-basing by including
members from Department of Financial Services (DFS) and MEITY.”

14. The Committee in their original report had noted that Project
Implementation Committee (PIC) which was envisaged as the apex level body
for providing policy advice and strategic guidance for taking all key decisions
and for regular monitoring ceased to function after PFMS became a part of the


regular functions of CGA and in order to review all the issues relating to the
activities of PFMS, a Senior Level Review Committee (SLRC) had been
constituted. The Committee had, therefore, inter alia desired that SLRC should
meet not only more frequently but also at fixed intervals.

The Ministry in their action taken note have inter alia responded that since
the creation of the PFMS Division within the O/o CGA to exclusively look after
the work of Design. Development and Implementation of PFMS under overall
guidance and supervision of Department of Expenditure with effect from
05.04.2021, regular PFMS review meetings are held by O/o CGA and DoE to
review the overall progress and implementation of the new developments/
initiatives in PFMS. To review all the issues relating to the activities of the
Public Financial Management System, a Senior Level Review Committee
(511२0) has been constituted. So far 5 meetings of SLRC have been conducted
(On 14.10.2019, 19.02.2020, 21.07.2020, 25.9.2020 and 11.05.2023) to review the
progress of PFMS. Further, based on the recommendations of the 5 SLRC
meeting dated 11.05.2023. The SLRC is being considered for further broad-
basing by including members from Department of Financial Services (DFS)
and MEITY.

The Committee find it disappointing to note that measures have not yet
been taken to ensure meetings of the SLRC are held regularly and at specified
intervals. This may impede regular monitoring and guidance, importance of
which is very high, given the rapid growth of payment technologies and
expansion in role of PFMS. Therefore, while appreciating the recommendation
of broad-basing SLRC by including members from Department of Financial
Services (DFS) and MEITY, the Committee reiterate their recommendation of
ensuring that the SLRC meet not only more frequently but also at fixed
intervals. The Ministry may provide details of concrete action taken in this
regard.

DBT Monitoring Cell

15. |The Committee note that DBT Monitoring Cell of PFMS was to be created to
handle activities such as Fund Transfer Order (FTO) reconciliation with external
system and banks; response reconciliation with banks; failure reconciliation,
updating Deemed Success/Failure status received from National Payment
Corporation of India (NPCI), development of new protocols and functionalities like
alert systems etc. The Committee have also been apprised that due to the increase
in DBT disbursements under various Governments’ schemes to farmers, MGNREGA
workers, and workers of unorganized sectors, the day to day monitoring has become
very essential. Additionally, a large number of technical issues like Digital Signature
Certificates (DSC) enrollment, file sharing response, system malfunctioning, non
credit of money in the beneficiaries account due to server issues, delay in credit,
non-receipt of responses from bank, etc. needs to be monitored and resolved on a
regular basis. Further, as per Ministry’s response, after on-boarding of PAHAL and
other schemes on PFMS, the load on the system and grievances of the beneficiaries
will be much more. Considering these factors, the role of Ministry in effective
monitoring of these schemes to ensure timely payment to beneficiaries cannot be
denied. However, the Committee note that no steps have been taken to create
Monitoring Cell as envisaged by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its

10


proposal. Keeping in view the substantial increase in load on PFMS due to inclusion
of various schemes for disbursement of funds, the Committee recommend that the
Monitoring cell may be created at the earliest. Further, the Ministry may ensure that
a regular feedback mechanism is developed within the Monitoring Cell to instantly
bring to the notice the issues that are being encountered at the grass-root level by
IAs so that they be addressed and modifications carried out, if needed, well within
the prescribed time frame. The Committee also recommend that Ministry may also
try to make PFMS more citizen-centric by enabling alerts providing estimated time of
credit of money into the beneficiary's accounts to citizens via SMS and enabling a
grievance redressal link to report delay/non-payment of the same.

16. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as under:-

1 In 2019, EFC recommended that PFMS shall create a dedicated DBT
Monitoring Cell within PFMS. The approval of Hon'ble FM for the
recommendations of EFC was communicated vide 1.0. Note dated
06.09.2019.

2. The in-principle approval of DoE was conveyed vide 1.0. Note dated
30" August 2019 for setting up of DBT Monitoring Cell consisting of the
existing staff. Thus, a DBT Monitoring cell was made functional with the
existing officers/ officials in PFMS.

3. Due to the increase in number of schemes involving DBT payments
using PFMS to farmers, Jan Dhan Account holders and workers of
unorganized sectors, etc., the monitoring of the same has become
more important. Moreover, more than 80 external systems have
already been integrated with PFMS and approximately 10 external
systems are in the pipeline. A large number of technical issues like
DSC enrolment, file sharing response, system malfunctioning, non-
credit of money in the beneficiaries account, delay in credit, non-receipt
of responses from bank, etc needs to be monitored on a regular basis.

4 After due consideration in the Department of Expenditure, approval of
Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) was conveyed vide |.D.
Note Dated 26.10.2021 for hiring 30 manpower for DBT Monitoring Cell
through GeM. The process of setting up DBT Monitoring Cell is
underway.

5 Under Citizen Centric Service, PFMS has started sending SMS to the
beneficiaries under NSP (National Scholarship Portal) w.e.f. March-
2021. PFMS has enhanced the facility of sending SMS and extended it
to the beneficiaries of other DBT Schemes w.e.f. January 2022. For the
year 2022-23 around 8, 97, 71,525 SMS’s have already been sent.”


17. Highlighting the need for day to day monitoring of PFMS due to
substantial increase the workload owing to inclusion of various schemes for
disbursement of funds and inability of Ministry to address this issue due to
non-creation of Monitoring Cell despite the recommendation of the
recommended by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the Committee had
recommended that Monitoring cell be created at the earliest.

The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have inter alia mentioned that
after due consideration in the Department of Expenditure, approval of Finance
Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) was conveyed on 26.10.2021 for hiring 30
personnel for DBT Monitoring Cell through GeM and the process of setting up
DBT Monitoring Cell is underway. The Committee are surprised to note that,
even after receiving the required clearance on October 26, 2021, for the
appointment of personnel for the DBT Monitoring cell, the process of setting
up DBT Monitoring Cell is yet to be completed. While appreciating the
Ministry's Citizen Centric approach by extending SMS alerts to the
beneficiaries of other DBT Schemes w.e.f. January 2022, the Committee would
also like to stress that due to the increase in number of schemes involving
DBT payments using PFMS to farmers, Jan Dhan Account holders and
workers of unorganized sectors, the importance of monitoring has increased
manifold. The Committee would, therefore, once again emphasise that DBT
Monitoring Cell be created at the earliest so that effective monitoring of
payments that reach people at grass root levels is ensured.

errerd

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
17" January, 2024 Chairperson,

27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee