MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS

MINISTRY OF COAL

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

TWELFTH REPORT

—_ हफ़्॒

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


! PAC NO. 2193
TWELFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS EBL ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
ES RE PUNT SS COMMITTEE

(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS

MINISTRY OF COAL

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March 20201 Phalguna 1941 (Saka)

<Q


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-2020)........ (iii)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
PART-1
1 INTRODUCTORY 1-2
I SIGNIFICANT OBSERVATIONS ON THE ACCOUNTS OF CMPFO 2-3
ill NET DEFICIT OF CMPFO 3
IV ADDITIONAL CESS 3-4
Vv DIVERSION OF FUNDS FROM PROVIDENT FUND ACCOUNT TO
PENSION FUND ACCOUNT 4
vi NON ADHERENCE TO MINISTRY'S GUIDELINES FOR 5-6
INVESTMENT OF PROVIDENT FUND OF OWN EMPLOYEES
Vil NON REVIEW OF RATE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES 6-7
Vill EXCESS PAYMENT OF PENSION 7
IX. UNTRACED BALANCES OF ₹ 1.71 CRORE FOR MORE THAN SEVEN
YEARS 8
PART - Il
Observations/Recommendations 9-14
APPENDICES

+ Minutes of the 10" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) held on 27.12.2019.

“Al Minutes of the 13" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) held on 17.03.2020.

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOLAKIO aera PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri 1. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Shri P. Bhattacharya”

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

2 9 कर कण की YPN

pee Be eo
Ar we NS

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. 0. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
3. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj - Additional Director
4. 7. Sheetal Kapoor | - Committee Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from
Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on “Management of Funds” based on Chapter VI of the C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017
(Compliance Audit Observations, Union Government (Civil)-relating to the Ministry of
Coal).

2. The Civil Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 21 July, 2017.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report thereon. The Committee took evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO) on the
subject at their Sitting held on 27 December, 2019. The Committee considered and
adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 17 March 2020. The Minutes of the Sittings
are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- Il of the
Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Coal and CMPFO for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
t#March ,2020 Chairperson,

27Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART- I

1. INTRODUCTORY

4.1. Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO) is an autonomous body
which comes under the aegis of Ministry of Coal with the twin objective of providing
social security and to inculcate the spirit of savings. CMPFO was envisaged to provide
for the future of all eligible employees of coal industry. It was established under the
Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 to make provisions
for administering Provident Fund (PF) scheme, Pension Scheme and Deposit Linked
Insurance (DLI) scheme for the persons employed in coal companies and to provide
them with lump sum retirement benefits, monthly pension/family pension etc.

4.2 For CMPFO, Board of Trustees is the administrative agency for implementing the
schemes and consists of representatives of Central/State Government, employers and
employees. The Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner is the ex-officio member of
the Board and overall in-charge of the Organization. At the State level, the schemes are
implemented through 24 Regional Offices (RO) located in different states, headed by
Regional Commissioners. The Board of Trustees is entrusted with the task of appointing
an actuary every three years to review and value the Pension Fund every third year so
that, the rates of contribution payable under the Scheme or the scale of any benefits
admissible or the period for which such benefit may be allowed, may be amended if
warranted.

4.3. The scope of this audit was the scrutiny of the records of CMPFO from 2013-14
to 2015-16. It involved scrutiny of records maintained at Headquarters, Dhanbad and 13
ROs located at Jharkhand, West Bengal and Chhattisgarh which were test checked.
The Audit scrutiny and examination revealed in their Report No. 12 of 2017 (Chapter Vi)
that the funds of different CMPFO schemes were not effectively utilized leading to sub-
optimal achievement of organizational objectives thereby hampering the financial
interests of the beneficiaries. The Audit pinpointed that the non-implementation of
recommendations of the actuary led to acute deficit in the Pension Fund, incorrect


diversion of funds, incorrect payment of interests etc. Further, cases of untraced
balance of @ 1.71 crore for more than seven years, non-review of rate of administrative
charges for nearly five decades have been noted by the Committee.

1.4. The Public Accounts Committee examined this subject and the observations
contained in the Chapter VI of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 on “Management of Funds”
of Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO). The Committee took oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Coal on 27.12.2019 and also obtained
written information on various aspects of the said subject. Based on the oral evidences
and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in depth with due diliegnce
which is enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

i. Significant Observations on the Accounts of CMFFO Accounts of CMPFO

4.5. The Committee have found out that the Para No. 6.1.2.1 C&AG Report No. 12 of
2017 has clearly brought out that there has been serious irregularity in the appointment
of actuary together with non implementation of the recommendations of the actuarial
valuation. As per the latest available valuation report of Pension Fund, there was a net
deficit of ¥ 19698.58 crore as on 311 March, 2013. The actuarial report had opined that
if this trend of deficit was allowed to be continued for another 16 years, the balance of
the Fund would be eroded and those who contributed for the Pension Fund would not
receive any pension. The C&AG report strongly recommended enhancement of the rate
of contribution to 19.46 per cent of salary from the existing contribution rate of 4.91 per
cent (effective since 1998) for sustainability of the Pension Fund. No action has been
taken on this recommendation yet. The Audit further highlighted that in order to
overcome the deficit in the Pension Fund; CMPFO had to resort to irregular diversion of
fund from Provident Fund account.

1.6 Explaining the reason for the net deficit, Ministry of Coal in their written reply
stated as under :

“There is no actual deficit in Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization at the end
of 2018-19. The Pension Scheme which was formulated by Shri Bhudev
Chatarjee and came into existence in 4998 appears to be faulty since the defined
benefit was not in commensurate with defined contribution which led to actuarial


deficit just after 5 years of its implementation. To bridge the deficit and make the
scheme sustainable, reports of actuaries and the recommendations of the
Committee of Group of Officers were discussed in at least thirteen (13) Board of
Trustees (BoT) meetings between 2005-2015 but the recommendations were not
accepted due to resistance from Central trade union representatives in the BoT.
The present actuarial deficit in pension fund can be assessed by an actuary.
With the approval of BOT in its 172" Meeting held on 20.12.2019, the actuary
has been appointed with the mandate to submit its preliminary report at earliest.”

1.7. The Ministry further added,

“The Coal companies have been requested to voluntarily contribute Rs.10 per
tonne for welfare of their own ex-employees. It is not in a nature of cess. Coal
companies are free to accept the request or refuse. If accepted, this amount will
be treated as additional pension contribution and will be accounted in that
account.”

lll. Net Deficit of CMPFO
4.8 When the Committee desired that the Ministry furnish the real/net deficit of Coal

Mines Provident Fund Organization at the end of December, 2019 and the details in
respect of both Pension Fund Account and provident Fund Account, the Ministry in
response, stated as under:

“There is no net deficit in Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization at the end of
December 2019, only actuarial (notional) deficit exists. The interest allowed on
provident fund is based on the interest earned by the Corpus of Provident Fund
as such there is no deficit in Provident Fund. Pension is payable from the
contribution received during the year and any deficit in contribution is met by
utilizing the surplus invested in preceding years. Since inception the contribution
received upto the year 2005 was sufficient to meet the yearly pension output.
However, from 2005 onwards to meet the pension payment liability invested
amount was utilized till 2018. As the pension contribution revised with effect from
01.10.2017 a surplus of Rs.360.32 crores was noticed in 2018-19 due to receipt
of arrears. The actual/actuarial deficit/status in pension can be assessed only by
an Actuary for which M/s. K.A. Pandit has been assigned the job in January
2020.”

IV. Additional Cess
4.9 Further, the Committee noted from the written submission of the Ministry that a

welfare cess of Rs 10/- per tonne was levied on the coal companies as a means to set
off the deficit in the Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO). While clarifying
the basis and approval of the Cess so imposed, the Ministry submitted as under:


“The Board of Trustees (BoT) decided to request the Coal companies to
contribute this amount as a welfare measure, and neither has it been mandatorily
imposed least of it being a cess. For welfare of ex-employees of coal companies
(pensioner) the Sub Committee of BoT comprising of representatives from
Management as well as Union in its report recommended for raising of pension
contribution @Rs.10 per tonne of coal production. The matter was discussed in
172™ Meeting of BoT and BoT accepted the recommendation to request coal
companies for deposition of enhanced contribution. It is not at the behest of
CMPFO or Ministry of Coal but as per the discussion of management as well
union representatives that the recommendation of sub-committee was accepted
by the BoT.”

Vv. Diversion of Funds from Provident Fund Account to Pension Fund Account Account to Pension Fund Account

1.10 The mandate of Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme, 1948 lays down that the
amount standing in the PF account should not be expensed or diverted for any purpose
other than for payment of the sums standing credit to the members of the fund or their
nominees or heirs or legal representatives, in accordance with the provisions of the PF
Scheme. The audit highlighted glaring blunders in the financial proprietary of CMPFO
where in CMPFO had diverted % 3520.14 crore from Provident Fund (PF) account to
Pension Fund account during the window period of 2007-08 to 2014-15 so as to meet
the grave deficit reflected in the accounts of CMPFO. Not only this, Provident Fund
account maintained under aegis of CMPFO did not receive any interest and even
interest payment made out was much lower than the interest actually earned during
2010-11 and 2011-12.

When asked about the reasons for transfer of funds from Provident Fund (PF)
account to Pension Fund account and if the management of CMPFO had explored other
sources of funding, the Ministry through their written submission intimated that
contributions under both the schemes are remitted though a single instrument
supported by PS-5. Since contributions under both the schemes are received through a
single instrument, the same is also credited in a single account (Account No. |
maintained by CMPF).

4.11. The Ministry further submitted that there are no specific fund flow guidelines
contained in the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998. In the initial years, disbursement
was less than the contribution. Hence, all the payment for disbursement of pension was


made through Account-l and surplus, if any, determined after year end classification,
was sent for investment. This practice was continued even when disbursement became
more than the contribution in Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998. This excess
withdrawal from Account-| under Coal Mines Pension Scheme resulted in loan over
Provident Fund (P.F.) scheme which was determined at the time of compilation of
Annual Account for the respective year and laid down before the Parliament. The
Ministry further advocated that there was no financial irregularity in the diversion of fund
as sudden stoppage of pension due to deficit in the pension fund would have resulted in
industrial unrest as well as non-compliance of contractual obligation to ensure
uninterrupted pension payment as mandated in the scheme. As per the Ministry, it
would also have resulted in great personal hardship to pensioners. CMPFO had used
the fund available in Provident Fund as a temporary measure for committed pension
liabilities, as there was no other alternative available except for increasing the
contribution rate, which was under consideration of the Board of Trustees (BoT) of Coal
Mines Pension Scheme.

4.12 The Ministry further informed that the Sub-Committee constituted by the Board of
Trustees recommended to increase the contribution to 14 percent w.e-f. 41.10.2017 (7
percent each by the employer and employee) so as to suffice for future pensioners’
financial payouts. The recommendation was accepted and notified by GSR No. 540(E)
dated 08.06.2018 and thereafter was implemented by CMPFO for all its contributors.

vi. Non adherence to Ministry’s quidelines for investment of Frovicen! T= uidelines for investment of Provident fund of
own employees
4.13 The Committee note that the C&AG Para No. 6.1.2.3 of Report No. 12 of 2017
had highlighted serious violation of the prescribed pattern of investment of funds of
CMPFO, The Ministry of Finance (MoF), Department of Economic Affairs have
prescribed (August 2008) ceilings for investment of Non-Government Provident Funds,
Superannuation Funds and Gratuity Funds in Government Securities (55 per cent),
Debt Secuiities/Term Deposits (40 per cent), Money Market instruments (5 per cent),
shares of companies (15 per cent). It was also provided that at no time, investments in
any category would exceed 10 per cent of the prescribed limit. In serious contrast to the


ceilings prescribed, CMPFO invested the entire amount of General Provident Fund
(GPF) contribution of its own employees for the period under audit (2011-16) in short
term deposits of State Bank of India against the allowed 44 per cent of the total amount
of investment.

4.14 When the Committee desired to be apprised of the compelling circumstances of
the approving authority which led to such inappropriate investment, the Ministry
submitted that the approval of Board of Trustees (BoT) was not sought for investing the
entire corpus of Provident Fund contribution of CMPFO in short term deposits of SBI.
However, it was prevalent practice at that point of time to invest the entire corpus of PF
contribution of CMPFO in short term deposits in nationalized banks offering highest rate
of interest through negotiations. However, since 2014-15, the fund is invested through
Portfolio Managers.

1.15 The Committee when pin-pointedly asked the Ministry to report if the CMPFO
had devised any financial plan seeing the number of pensioners, dependents in the
near future, the Ministry informed that there are 5,22,398 pensioners as against
4,02,597 of active workers/employees. Besides unanimous acceptance of raising of
contribution, following further measures are under consideration for smooth running of

the pension scheme:-

4) Capping of maximum pension;
2) Extension of period for arriving average salary for fixation of pension, and
3) Appointment of Actuary to suggest further measures for smooth running of pension

scheme.

Vil. Non review of rate of administrative charges charges

4.16 The audit findings in Para 6.1.2.8 of the C&AG Rupert revealed that the rate of
administrative charges were last reviewed and fixed at 3 percent in 1981. It has been
almost five decades since Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO) have not
reviewed the rate of administrative charges. Further, audit scrutiny highlighted that the
Income and Expenditure Statements of the Administrative Fund of Coal Mines Provident


Fund Organization (CMPFO) had consistent surpluses of Rs. 238.37 crore, Rs. 357.63
crore and Rs. 266.19 crore at the end of the financial years 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15 respectively, after meeting all the regular expenditures related to administration
of Provident Fund. The surplus was available to CMPFO even after incurring irregular
expenditure on electricity charges (of Rs. 2.16 crore for electricity consumed by
employees of CMPFO during 2010-11 to 2014-15 in violation of the instructions issued
by Ministry of Coal as pointed out in para no. 4.1 of C&AG’s Civil Report No. 11 of
2016) and capital expenditure (of Rs. 0.88 crore for procurement of fixed assets during
2012-13 to 2014-15) which was not permissible as per CMPF scheme. Despite such
persistent surpluses, CMPFO did not review the rate of administrative charges
recovered during the last 35 years.

4.17 Giving the background and clarification on the issue of non-review of charges,
the Ministry submitted as under:

seeeee The matter was discussed in 170" Meeting of Board of trustees (BoT) and
BoT constituted a sub-committee to recommend suitable changes. As
recommended by sub-committee the matter will be referred to the new actuary
being appointed. Further necessary action is possible only after the receipt of the
report of actuary and the same is considered and accepted by BoT.”

Vill, Excess Payment of Pension

4.18 The Committee considered and found that there has been an instance of excess
disbursement of pension under Coal Mines Pension Scheme to the pensioners of
Godaharikhani Region under Hyderabad Regional Office. The bankers (IDBI) had
stated that such excess payment of 218.11 crore to 10,340 pensioners were made on
the data supplied by the Dhanbad office of CMPFO. When asked to explain such
irregularity, the Ministry stated in their background note that the IDBI bank was teplaced
by 14 nationalized banks. This, is no way, hides the inefficiency/carelessness on the
part of CMPFO and neither rectifies the irregularity; rather CMPFO should have been
keen enough to supply correct records of payable pension so that an amount of $18.11
crore would have not have gone astray. During oral evidence on 27" December, 2019,
the Ministry informed that an amount equal to हें 1.82 crore was yet to be recovered.


9... Untraced balances of 1.71 crore for more than seven years than seven years

4.19 Audit scrutiny of the bank accounts maintained at Headquarters of CMPFO,
Dhanbad detected a shortage of 21.71 crore [(%0.95 crore in Account No. Ill
(Administrative Account), 20.73 crore in Account No. V (GPF Account of the employees
of CMPFO) and 20.02 crore in Account No. VI (Pension Cess Gratuity Fund for
employees of CMPFO)]. The shortage of % 1.71 crore was reported way back in 2008;
more than a decade has lapsed since then and only % 0.29 crore has been traced so
far. An amount equal to 21.42 crore is yet untraced.


PART-II

Observations/Recommendations

1. Role of Nodal Ministry

The Committee note that Ministry of Coal has been apparently found
severely wanting in discharging its nodal administrative role which resulted in
financial mis-management by CMPFO, a statutory organization under the
Ministry’s administrative control. Though CMPFO has been accorded with
functional autonomy, the nodal administrative Ministry cannot shy away from its

: responsibility and accountability on the grounds of autonomy given to th
organization. During the Audit examination, it is found that the Ministry of Coal
has not taken due care of its main responsibility of being a watchdog for CMPFO
under its aegis. The Committee are aghast to note that it is only after C&AG
Report No. 12 of 2047 that brought out the financial irregularities, the issues of
financial impropriety by CMPFO came to the notice of the officials of Ministry of
Coal.

As per mandate, a senior level officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary
is the nominee of the Ministry to the Board of Trustees (BoT) but, it is astonishing
to note that even after due representation, the nodal Ministry has not properly
executed their responsibility and defined role. The Ministry cannot abdicate its
role of being the administrative body just by conveying that CMPFO has been
delegated with necessary powers. The Committee therefore exhort the Ministry to
ensure that the activities of CMPFO are overseen with due care so as to prevent
instances such as the unwarranted transfer of funds in CMPFO from PF account
to Pension Fund Account in the future. The Committee are of the considered
view that had the Ministry been vigilant enough in monitoring the activities of
CMPFO, particularly on account of the fact that the Ministry’s nominee is a apart
of BoT, the financial irregularities that came to the notice could have been

avoided. The Committee in this regard express the need on the part of the


10

Ministry of Coal to discharge the administrative and supervisory role of being a

nodal Ministry at all times with due diligence and sincerity.

2. Stringent Internal Audit

The Committee note that the internal audit of CMPFO did not detect and
point out the deficit recurring in the Pension Fund account. The system of
internal audit is a prima facie imperative wing within an organization tasked with
providing unbiased feedback, independent reviews of systems regarding
business operations and processes of CMPFO. The Committee are dismayed to

note that even internal audit could not early visualize/see and caution about the
mismanagement of funds at CMPFO. They are astonished to further notice that
even the internal audit could not bring to light the failure even following the
occurrence. The Committee strongly depreciate the apparent lackadaisical
attitude of the internal audit mechanism of the CMPFO and recommend that a
system of regular and intermittent reporting by the internal audit must invariably
be put in place and ensure that its recommendations are duly adopted and
followed so as to avoid instances of financial mishandling in the future. The
Committee are of the firm view that the unwarranted diversion of funds and the
initial untraced balance of = 1.71 crore are an evidence of weak internal control,

checks and also failure on the part of internal financial advisory system.

3. Element of Transparency — Single Instrument Single Instrument

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that contributions under
both the schemes viz. Provident Fund and Pension Fund, are remitted through a
single instrument supported by PS-5. As per Ministry of Coal’s submission, since
contributions under both the schemes are received through a single instrument,
the same is also credited in a single account (Account No. 1) maintained by

CMPEO. From this, it is obvious that as contributions are not bifurcated from the


qd

beginning, the transparency in maintenance of both accounts-Provident Fund
and Pension Fund could not be realized by reconciling the contribution made
separately in these accounts by the employers. Resultantly, diversion of funds
continued unabated. The Committee strongly feel that there is a need for
ensuring breakup of contributions into two separate Heads 50 that the funds are
channelized in Separate accounts thereby ensuring transparency. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that there is a need to relook into the
accounting systems and practices of CMPFO, whereby separate accounts are
maintained for Provident Fund and Pension Fund. This would, toa large extent,
contribute in avoiding any future mis-management and enable fool ‘proof and

transparent financial operations and activities in CMPFO,

4. Restructuring of Coal Mines Pension Scheme of Coal Mines Pension Scheme

The Committee are constrained to note from the written submission of the
Ministry that the Pension scheme, which was formulated by Shri Bhudev
Chatarjee, Actuary and came into existence in 1998, appears to be faulty, as the
actuarial deficit was reported just after 5 years of its implementation, The defined
benefit has not been commensurate with defined contribution which resulted in
actuarial deficit within 5 years of its launch. Initially, the return on investment of
Pension Funds, as per Government guidelines at the time of implementation of
CMPS, 1998 was above 12% and there was a surplus in Coal Mines Family
Pension Scheme. The amount of monthly pension Payable to an employee was
manageable with the earnings on investment. To bridge the deficit and make the
scheme sustainable, reports of actuaries and the recommendations of the
Committee of Group of Officers were discussed in at least thirteen (13) BoT
meetings between 2005-2015, but the recommendations were not accepted
ostensibly due to resistance from central trade union representatives in the BoT.
Furthermore, with Subsequent pay revisions and no changes in pension Scheme,
erosion in the Corpus of Pension Fund started, During the course of examination,
the Committee have noticed that, asa corrective remedial measure, the rate of
Contribution has been revised vide GSR No, 540 (5) dated 08.06.2018 to 14


42

percent (7 percent employee +7 percent employer) with effect from 01.10.2017 to
take care of the deficit between accrual and disbursal in the Pension Fund,

The Committee are of the considered Opinion that the Ministry, in
consultation with the management of CMPFO, should have made a detailed and
diligent analysis of the optimum quantum of funds required for sustainable
pension, taking into account the number of pensioners, number of active
workers, ratio of active workers to dependents in order to arrive at the feasibility
of the present structure of pension scheme in terms of contributions earmarked
and payments there-from. The Committee strongly express the need for
undertaking a review exercise of the existing Pension scheme. Itis imperative to
revamp the scheme so as to enable in payments being commensurate with the
contributions received. The Ministry in this regard is needed to guide CMPFO in
strengthening the fund through appropriate measures/amendments. Levying a
welfare Cess हैं 10 per tone, though voluntary as told by the Ministry, would not
help in resolving the issues in the long-run. The Committee are of the firm view
that fixation of any random percentage of contribution is no means to maintain
the health and spirit of CMPFO; rather it should be based on a well structured and
detailed actuarial analysis. Since the Coal Mines Provident Fund Organization
has a broader horizon to cater to in terms of pensions, family pension and
insurance, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to initiate the process of
restructuring the Coal Mines Pension Scheme without further delay, inter-alia,

taking into account the recommendations of the Actuary appointed on 20.12.2019.

5. Regular Scrutiny of Bank Account Scrutiny of Bank Account

During Audit scrutiny, it was found that there existed an untraced balance
shortage of हैं 1.71 crore in 2008 which temained undetected till 2016. The
Committee note that, out of = 1.7 crore, only 20.29 crore had been traced owing to
unavailability of bank statements. The Committee notice in this regard that there
has been no proper maintenance of bank records and statements. Had bank
statements been asked for and reconciled on regular basis, say, monthly or

quarterly, instances of such untraced balances would not have cropped up. The


13

Committee are dismayed to note that even pension was paid in excess to the tune
of %18.11 crore to the pensioners under Godavarikhani Region as per the data
supplied by CMPFO to the bankers (IDBI, in this case). As per Ministry’s written
submission, only a balance amount of % 1.82 crore (out of = 18.4 1 Crore) is likely
to be recovered within the next two years. The Committee are of the firm view
that the act of improper maintenance and non-reconciliation of bank statements
led to such excess payments and the act of replacing the banker (IDBI) with 14
nationalized banks has not really served ‘a meaningful purpose. Measures
towards maintenance of proper bank records and vigilant bank scrutiny
mechanism would not have waited for Audit’s Report to highlight such issues;
rather they should have been prompt enough to avoid or to rectify such financial
irregularities on time. The Committee recommend that the Ministry ensure that
an effective system of bank records and reconciliation impromptu be initiated at
CMPFO and the Committee be apprised of the status of untraced balances and

recovery of pension within 6 months of the presentation of this Report.

6. Reqular Appointment of Actuary Appointment of Actuar

The Committee note that as per the Coal Mines Pension Scheme (CMPS),
the Board of Trustees (BoT) at CMPFO is required to appoint an Actuary every
three years to review and value the Pension Fund, rates of contribution payable
under the scheme and the scale of benefits admissible. However, the Committee
are disappointed to note that since the introduction of CMPS in 1998, the actuarial
valuation of Pension fund has been done only four times in the years 2001, 2005,
2012 & 2013 with no fruitiul implementation of its recommendations ever. The
CMPS is a contributory Pension Fund wherein issues like periodic review of rates
of contribution Payable and valuation of Pension Fund and other issues are
imperative to run the Fund effectively & efficiently. In the absence of an actuarial
valuation, the very essence of a Pension Fund stands defeated and the interests
of beneficiaries remain unaddressed too. The Committee note with concern that
in order to bridge the deficit between defined benefit and defined contribution,

and to make the pension scheme more sustainable, reports of the Actuaries and


14

Group of Officers in past were placed before the BoT at least thirteen (13) times
but the recommendations of theses advisory bodies were never accepted by the
BoT. For instance, the draft actuarial report that had recommended enhancement
of the rate of contribution to 19.46 percent of salary from existing contribution
tate of 4.94 percent, did not see light of the day in terms of implementation, there
by usurping the avenues of balancing off the net deficit of = 19,698.58 crore ason
उबर March, 2043,

The Committee strongly recommend not only appointment of Actuary but
also desire that actuarial valuation should be done as mandated in CPMS (once’in
three years) so that future concerns are well taken care of and mounting deficit
can be corrected and set off at the initial juncture itself, The Committee also
recommend that the activities of CMPFO should be regularly watched by the
nodal Ministry, as Secretary, Ministry of Coal is the Chairman of BoT and other -
officers like JS and FA are the Members to the Board of Trustees (801).

ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
7 March. 2 Chairperson,

020 ८ ह
पितयाताताएडी: पाना 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee