116

ASSESSMENTS RELATING TO AGRICULTURAL
INCOME

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 49" Report (17 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No. 2346
ONE HUNDRED AND
SIXTEENTH

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ASSESSMENTS RELATING

AGRICULTURAL INCOME

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 49" Report (17%
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024/, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Page
No.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (i)
INTRODUCTION (ii)
CHAPTER I Report
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been

accepted by the Government

CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES
1. Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2023-24) on 06.02.2024
i. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 49" Report (17" Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

ONOaAKRWN

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien’

19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT

1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary

4. Shri Ashikho Alemo : Executive Officer
(i)

1 Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Sixteenth
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 487
Report (17" Lok Sabha) on ‘Assessments relating to Agricultural Income’
relating to the Ministry of Finance.

2. The Forty Ninth was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 05.04.2022. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken
Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on
06.02.2024. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the
Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part
Il of the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 49" Report (17" Lok Sabha)
is given at Appendix-il

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Eebruary, 2024 Chairperson

Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(ii)


REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Forty Ninth Report (17" Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Assessments relating to Agricultural Income" based on Chapter V of the
C&AG Report No. 9 of 2019 relating to the Ministry of Finance.

2. The 49" Report (177 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 5" April, 2022 contained 13 Observations and
Recommendations. The Committee take strong exception to the delay in
furnishing of Action Taken Notes and find that the same have been furnished in
respect of only 8 Observation/Recommendations by the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue that have been broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 3, 5, 7, 9, 10 and 13 Total: 06
Chapter - Il
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. 2 Total: 01

Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/ no replies*:

Para Nos. 1, 4*, 6, 8*, 11* & 12*
Total: 06
Chapter —-V

*Action taken Note on Recommendation Para No. 1, 4, 8, 11 & 12 has not been furnished by
the Ministry.


3. A detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed a number
of irregularities in the assessment of agricultural income like exemption of income
tax without verification of supporting documents, incorrect reflection of agricultural
income in ITD database, deficiencies in the status of verification of returns,
mistakes in the assessment of agricultural income etc. The Committee had
accordingly given the Observations/Recommendations in their Forty Ninth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance in respect of
8 of the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal
with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee made in the Original Report which either
need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance to furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in
Chapter | and V of the Report, positively within six months of the
presentation of the Report to the Parliament. The Committee further
desire that some kind of responsibility may be fixed against the officers
responsible for not furnishing the complete set of replies and also for the
delay in furnishing the same.

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

6. As per Audit, the observations of the Third Tax Administration Reforms
Commission Report (2014) inter-alia included that agricultural income of
non-agriculturists is being increasingly used as a conduit to avoid tax and
for laundering funds, resulting in leakage to the tune of crores of rupees in
revenue annually. The Committee wished to point out that agriculturists are
a heterogeneous category that includes small and marginal farmers as well
as corporate houses etc. Therefore, the Ministry should look at the
possibility of introducing different codes for farmers who have income only
from agricultural sources as against those who have income from
agriculture as well as non-agricultural sources. The Committee were of the
view that this will help in segregation of cases involving income solely from
agricultural sources from the other cases, and be of assistance in better
targeting and scrutiny of cases. Further, taking into account the fact of
increased financial inclusion due to opening of bank accounts under
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana, the Government may encourage digital
payments in the agriculture sector. The Ministry should also look into and
analyse the practices being followed in States such as Odisha where
agricultural produce is sold to co-operative societies and payment for the
same is deposited in the bank accounts of assessees, which enables easy
verification of the income earned.

7. The Ministry in their Action taken reply stated as under:


“It is pertinent to note here that agricultural income is exempt under
the Income-tax Act, 1961 (the Act"). Therefore, a person having only
agricultural income will have no taxable income under the Act. Under
the provisions of the Act, such a person, not being a company or a firm,
is not mandatorily required to furnish return of income as the taxable
income is below exemption limit. Further, in the ITR forms required to
be furnished by firms and companies, details of agricultural income, if
any, have to be entered in Schedule EI of the respective forms. The
relevant forms for firms and companies are quite exhaustive and
require the taxpayers to submit information about income under various
heads of income. In such a scenario it is easily ascertainable whether
they have income other than agricultural income.

In light of the above discussion, a separate code for farmers who
have only agricultural income and therefore, have income below the
exemption limit will not serve the purpose of creating a distinction that
could help determine potential cases of tax avoidance and money
laundering through agricultural activities.

Therefore, the above suggestion is not feasible. Finance (No.2)
Act, 2019 introduced Section 269SU in the Act to provide that every
person, carrying on business, shall, provide facility for accepting
payment through the prescribed electronic modes, in addition to the
facility for other electronic modes of payment, if any, being provided by
such person, if his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business
exceeds fifty crore rupees during the immediately preceding previous
year.

Further, section 269ST of the Act prohibits cash receipt of rupees
two lakh or more. In order to enforce restriction on cash transactions,
section 271 DA of the Act provides that if a person contravenes the
provisions of section 269ST, he shall be liable to pay penalty of a sum
equal to the amount of such receipt.

The above provisions are applicable to agricultural sector as well
and give major impetus to digital transactions. Therefore, the above
suggestion has already been implemented.”

8. While observing that agriculturists are a heterogeneous category and
include small and marginal farmers as also corporate houses etc, the
Committee had desired the Ministry to look at the possibility of
introducing different “codes” for farmers who have income only from
agricultural sources as against those who have income from
agriculture as well as non-agricultural sources to help in segregation


of cases involving income solely from agricultural sources from the
other cases, and be of assistance in better targeting and scrutiny of
cases. The Committee also recommended that the Government may
encourage digital payments in the agriculture sector and analyse the
practices being followed in States such as Odisha where agricultural
produce is sold to co-operative societies and payment for the same is
deposited in the bank accounts of assessees, which enables easy
verification of the income earned. The Committee note from the reply
of the Ministry that Section 269SU and 269ST of the Income Tax Act
that give major impetus to digital transactions are applicable to
agricultural sector. As regards the recommendation regarding the
possibility of introducing different “codes” for farmers, the Ministry
has stated that a separate code for farmers who have only
agricultural income and therefore, have income below the exemption
limit will not serve the purpose of creating a distinction that could
help determine potential cases of tax avoidance and money
laundering through agricultural activities. The Committee, however,
are of the opinion that adequate tax data pertaining to a particular
sector eventually benefits the Government in ensuring better
compliance and in planning and implementation of other welfare
schemes. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that introducing different “codes” for farmers who
have income only from agricultural sources who may have to file
income tax returns for other purposes etc. as against those who have
income from agriculture as well as non-agricultural sources will help
in better and targeted scrutiny.

(Recommendation Para No. 5)

The Committee were informed that as a corrective measure to ensure
appropriate documentation and verification, the Ministry had taken various
actions viz. details of exempt income to be furnished in the ITR has been
made more exhaustive from AY 2019-20 onwards; Faceless Assessment
Scheme 2019 and Team based assessment procedure where the
Assessment Unit can request verification by Verification Unit and seek
technical assistance from the Technical Unit introduced. The Ministry had
further stated that since the definition of Agricultural Income as per Section
2(1A) of the Act is wide, the facts regarding agricultural income may vary
from case to case. Considering the aspect of non-uniformity in cases, for
enhancing awareness of the AOs, the Department had been undertaking
various measures such as, imparting training by Direct Taxes Regional
Training Institutes (DTRTIs) and/ or Ministerial Staff Training Units
(MSTUs) across India. Further, various books have also been published


10.

11.

12.

viz. — 'Techniques of Investigation for assessment’, ‘Let Us Share’ etc.
containing specific instances of assessment cases and certain best
practices followed in various areas. According to the Ministry, all these
measures guide the Assessing Officers (AOs) in the field in examining the
veracity of agricultural income. The Committee desired that besides
measures like imparting training to the Assessing Officers and publishing
books, which act as a means of guidance, the Ministry should also
formulate SOPs to guide the Assessing Officers who are involved in the ~
process of examination of the veracity of agricultural income claimed for
exemption. The Committee further desired that the Ministry may make
available an on-line compendium of list of possible sources based on their
experience as well as records of Assessment Orders; and the Order
Sheets envisaged in the relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act of the
Manual of Office Procedure.

In response the Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated us under:

“As per Section 2(1A) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (the Act),
definition of agricultural income includes rent or revenue (Section 2(1A)
(a) of the Act), income derived from the building (Section 2(1A)(c) of the
Act) apart from the income from agriculture or sale of produce. The
definition as per Section 2(1A) of agricultural income is wide enough
and the facts regarding agricultural income may vary from case to case
which may not be adequately covered in SOP.

Regarding on-line compendium of list of possible sources based
on experience as well as records of assessment orders, it is stated that
various books published viz. ‘Techniques of Investigation for
assessment’, ‘Let Us Share’ etc. containing specific instances of
assessment cases and certain best practices followed in various areas,
are available in Knowledge portal at website irsofficersonline.gov.in.”

Audit, in their vetting comments have stated the following:

“Action taken by the Ministry for identifying inconsistency in
assessments pertaining to claim of exemption of agricultural income for
formulation of Standard Operating Procedure as recommended by
Honorable Public Accounts Committee may be intimated.”

The Committee in their Report had recommended for formulation

of SOPs to guide the Assessing Officers who are involved in the process

of

examination of the veracity of agricultural income claimed for

exemption. The Committee had further desired that the Ministry may
make available an on-line compendium of list of possible sources based


on their experience as well as records of Assessment Orders; and the
Order Sheets envisaged in the relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act
of the Manual of Office Procedure. In response, the Ministry have
submitted that a knowledge portal at website irsofficersonline.gov.in,
containing experience based instances of assessment cases, certain
best practices followed in various areas, books etc. has been made
available to Assessing Officers (AOs) for reference. To ensure veracity of
exemption claims without an element of discretion by the AOs, as well as
to maintain uniformity in the assessment process, particularly when the
definition of agricultural income is wide enough and the facts regarding
agricultural income may vary from case to case, it is imperative that a
standard procedure be evolved by the CBDT. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that comprehensive SOP may be
formulated encompassing the varied range of claims under agricultural
income.
(Recommendation Para No. 6)

13. |The Committee noted that as regards the action taken by the Ministry
towards implementation of the recommendation for 100 percent check of all
cases by Audit in all Commissionerates, where agricultural income claimed
was above Rs.10 lakh, the Ministry had inter-alia submitted that for AY 2020-
21, 21,55,368 taxpayers reported Agriculture Income in their return of income,
out of whom 59,707 taxpayers reported Agriculture Income exceeding Rs.10
lakh. In view of the significant number of the returns filed for a particular
assessment year, the number of cases selected for scrutiny was fine tuned
with a view to striking a balance between available resources and various
types of risk (which requires investigation) through Computer Aided Scrutiny
Selection (CASS), a centralized system for selection of cases of scrutiny
based on information in ITR, IT forms, TDS/TCS, data as reported by third
parties, data received through inter-departmental MoUs etc. Further, CASS
had been equipped with the aspect of identifying scenarios for selection of
cases of agricultural income above a threshold level.

The Chairman, CBDT, while tendering evidence before the Committee,
mentioned that 3379 cases were chosen out of the afore-mentioned total of
21,55,388 cases. The Committee were apprised that as against 100 percent
check of all cases in all Commissionerates, where agricultural income claimed
was above Rs. 10 lakh, the Ministry had devised its own mechanism for
picking up cases for scrutiny due to paucity of manpower to handle the same.
The Committee recommended that a system may be designed to examine the
3379 cases so picked with due promptitude and based on these assessments,
new scenarios may be included in the CASS for refining the process of
selection of cases for scrutiny. The Committee noted that the 3379 cases
chosen by CBDT includes cases of taxpayers reporting agricultural income
less than Rs. 10 lakh. The Committee were of the considered view that focus
of scrutiny should be on assessees reporting higher agricultural income. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry consider devising a


mechanism for categorization of cases of agricultural income in three slabs i.e.
above Rs. 10 lakh, Rs. 50 lakh and Rs.1 crore in CASS so as to better target
high risk cases in the aforementioned categories. Such a measure will also
facilitate scrutiny of different types of agriculturists with the limited resources
available with the Ministry/CBDT and enable in preventing possible leakage of
revenue.

14. In response the Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated us under:

“For every scrutiny assessment case, feedback is uploaded on
the ITBA portal by the AO capturing details like the reasons for
selection of the case, addition made in the case on different CASS
reasons etc. Every year this feedback is taken into account for refining
risk parameters for selection of cases for scrutiny.

The recommendation regarding categorization of cases of
agricultural income in different slabs in CASS to better target high risk
cases has been noted and will be put before the CASS Committee for
consideration.”

15. Noting that Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) had been
equipped with the aspect of identifying scenarios for selection of cases
of agricultural income above a threshold level, the Committee, in their
Report had recommended for devising a mechanism for categorization
of cases of agricultural income in three slabs i.e. above Rs. 10 lakh,
Rs.50 lakh and Rs.1 crore in CASS so as to better target high risk cases
in the aforementioned categories. In response, the Ministry have
submitted that the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee
would be placed before that CASS committee for consideration. The
Committee emphasize that an effective CASS system must enable
targeting the high risk cases of agricultural income in a better way. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard expeditiously but mandatorily
at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.


CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that, Section 143(3) of the Act dealing with
detailed scrutiny envisages that after hearing the evidence produced by the
assessee and such other evidence as the AO may require, and after taking
into account all relevant material gathered, the AO shall, by an Order in
writing, make an assessment of the total income of the assessee, and
determine the sum payable by him or refund of any amount due to him on the
basis of such assessment. Further, as per the Departmenta! Manual of Office
Procedure, the Minutes of a case posted for hearing by issuing a notice during
assessment proceedings under the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act
viz. Section 143(2) or 142(1) or 131 etc. must be entered with date in the
Order-Sheet. The entry should cover, inter alia, the names of the persons
attending the hearing on behalf of the assessee and their occupation,
documents produced, (specifying documents examined and returned and
documents filed), documents called for, issues discussed and re-posting, if
any. Documents produced by the assessee (except those to be returned) must
be filed in the Miscellaneous Record. Thus, detailed scrutiny as prescribed in
law involves not only a detailed examination of records but also the
maintenance of proper record of the documents etc. scrutinized in arriving at
the Assessment Order. Notwithstanding the procedure as laid down, as
observed by Audit, neither the Assessment Order nor the order-sheet in the
cases scrutinized indicate that adequate reliance has been placed on such
documents/data referred to above or any other documents. The Committee
desire that all efforts should be made to ensure compliance with the procedure
prescribed and necessary instructions issued to all Commissionerates for strict
compliance of the stipulations of the relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act
and the Departmental Manual of Office Procedure, during scrutiny.

[Para No. 3]

Action taken by the Ministry
Income Tax Department has implemented the 'Faceless Assessment
Scheme’ since 25.09.2020 except in International Taxation and Central
charges. National Faceless Assessment Centre (NaFAC) has been set up to
facilitate the conduct of Faceless Assessment proceedings in a centralized
manner.


In International taxation and Central charges, the assessments are
being conducted through e-proceedings facility in Income Tax Business
Application portal (ITBA).

The functionality for e-Proceedings is available for Departmental Users
in ITBA and for the taxpayers on e-Filing portal
(www. incometaxindiaefiling.gov.in).

For assessment proceedings in case of each assessee, order sheet is
generated automatically in electronic mode, both in ‘Faceless Assessment
Scheme’ and 'e proceedings’ facility. Notes of the Assessing Officer with
respect to any stage of the assessment proceedings are available
electronically. Notices/letters are issued to the assessee during proceedings
electronically through NaFAC or “e-proceedings facility’, as per the category of
the assessee. The reply along with attachments, if any of the assessee, is
accessible to the Departmental user in ITBA under 'Case History/ Notings’ of
the relevant proceedings. This is akin to the Electronic Folder with full details
of all exchanges between the Department and taxpayer in chronological order.
Whenever a case is scheduled for hearing by issuing a notice during
assessment proceedings under the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act
viz. Section 143(2) or 142(1) or 131. etc., the copy of the notice with
Document Identification Number (DIN) along with the date of issuance of the
notice are available in the order sheet of the case. The entry also covers, inter
alia, reply of the assessee, documents produced. if any, etc. In light of the
above system has been put in place for maintenance of proper record of
proceedings.

Vetting Comments of Audit

In view of the reply of the Ministry, Audit has no further comments to
offer.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee have been informed that as a corrective measure to
ensure appropriate documentation and verification, the Ministry has taken
various actions viz. details of exempt income to be furnished in the ITR has
been made more exhaustive from AY 2019720 onwards; Faceless
Assessment Scheme 2019 and Team based assessment procedure where the
Assessment Unit can request verification by Verification Unit and seek
technical assistance from the Technical Unit introduced. The Ministry have
further stated that since the definition of Agricultural Income as per Section
2(1A) of the Act is wide, the facts regarding agricultural income may vary from


case to case. Considering the aspect of non-uniformity in cases, for enhancing
awareness of the AOs, the Department has been undertaking various
measures such as, imparting training by Direct Taxes Regional Training
Institutes (DTRTIs) and/ or Ministerial Staff Training Units (MSTUs) across
India. Further, various books have also been published viz. — 'Techniques of
Investigation for assessment’, ‘Let Us Share' etc. containing specific instances
of assessment cases and certain best practices followed in various areas.
According to the Ministry, all these measures guide the Assessing Officers
(809) in the field in examining the veracity of agricultural income. The
Committee desire that besides measures like imparting training to the
Assessing Officers and publishing books, which act as a means of guidance,
the Ministry should also formulate SOPs to guide the Assessing Officers who
are involved in the process of examination of the veracity of agricultural
income claimed for exemption. The Committee further desire that the Ministry
may make available an on-line compendium of list of possible sources based
on their experience as well as records of Assessment Orders; and the Order
Sheets envisaged in the relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act of the
Manual of Office Procedure.

[Para No. 5]

Action taken by the Ministry

As per Section 2(1A) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (the Act), definition of
agricultural income includes rent or revenue (Section 2(1A)(a) of the Act),
income derived from the building (Section 2(1A)(c) of the Act) apart from the
income from agriculture or sale of produce. The definition as per Section 2(1A)
of agricultural income is wide enough and the facts regarding agricultural
income may vary from case to case which may not be adequately covered in
SOP.

Regarding on-line compendium of list of possible sources based on
experience as well as records of assessment orders, it is stated that various
books published viz. 'Techniques of Investigation for assessment’, 'Let Us
Share' etc. containing specific instances of assessment cases and certain best
practices followed in various areas, are available in 1 Knowledge portal at
website irsofficersonline.gov.in

Vetting Comments of Audit
Action taken by the ministry for identifying inconsistency in
assessments pertaining-to claim of exemption of agricultural income for
formulation of standard operating procedure as recommended by honorable
public accounts committee may be intimated.”


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee also note that a major chunk of agriculturists are
reluctant to file income tax returns due to practical difficulties which relate
inter-alia to lack of awareness, frequency of going to IT Office and connectivity
issues faced by them to travel to the Income Tax office etc. This has had the
effect of resulting in non-availability of crucial information pertaining to
agricultural production, land records etc. for the ITD database. There are also
apprehensions of farmers that inclusion of their personal information in the
Income Tax Database may disqualify them from accessing various welfare
schemes of the Government. The reluctance of farmers is indicative of lack of
trust and a negative perception regarding the Income Tax filing procedure. The
Committee opine that if data of agriculturists is included in ITD Database, it will
aid in not only widening the tax base of the country but also enable better
monitoring and detection of cases of money laundering by ITO. The
Committee, however, note that the process of filing returns through a website
may seem challenging to agriculturists in the rural hinter land especially due to
lack of awareness, digital divide and limitation of resources. The Committee
are thus, of the considered opinion that Ministry may make efforts towards
generating awareness regarding ITR filing procedures and also towards
bridging the trust deficit. The Committee desire that the Ministry may consider
the possibility of taking assistance of Panchayat Block level officers and NGOs
to address these issues and carry out trust building exercises and educational
seminars for small and marginal farmers to file and claim exemption on
agricultural income. To further simplify the process of filing returns and
address infrastructural issues faced by farmers such as lack of computer
devices and stable internet connection, the Ministry may take assistance from
Post Offices which have a significant penetration at Village level. The Ministry
may also see that refunds, if any, may be initiated with help of Adhaar Enabled
Payment System so that assessees claiming refunds get access to cash at
their own doorstep without having to bear the cost of transportation to the
Income Tax Office.

[Para No. 7]

Action taken by the Ministry

i. The Ministry regularly carries out various campaigns in different forms
of media along with taxpayer outreach activities to familiarise the people with
various provisions of Direct Taxes, Procedures and Due Dates provided under
the Income Tax Act,..1961. The basic purpose of the publicity campaigns
carried out is to create awareness in respect of various tax compliances
including return filing procedure and different deductions and exemptions
available to taxpayers.


The goal of widening the tax base is achieved by
educating/encouraging taxpayers to pay due taxes honestly and promptly. The
following communication and outreach campaigns and activities are carried
out-

a) Campaigns are carried out on TV, Radio and Print media in Hindi
and 10 Regional languages to spread awareness on important reform
measures in tax administration, due dates under Income-Tax Act 1961 for eg.
Advance Tax, Return Filing, TDS statement, Statement of Financial
Transaction (SFT) filing etc.

b) 430 Aaykar Seva Kendras (ASK) centres) are functioning all over
the country with "May | help you" desk for assisting the taxpayer including
filing of return of income.

०) The Department releases booklets/pamphlets in Hindi and
English on major reforms introduced in tax compliances. Some of the booklets
are on Form 26AS, Taxpayer Charter, e- filing, computation of income etc. The
pamphlets are placed in ASK centres across the country and are also
available in soft copy on Departmental website.

d) As citizens of all walks of life increasingly use social media.
these platforms are being actively used to spread awareness and do public
outreach. Still creatives, gifs, videos, animations are posted regularly as part
of various campaigns. Communication is done through social media handles
of the Department including Twitter, YouTube, Instagram and Facebook
wherein important circulars/information on Direct Taxes is regularly posted for
information of the people.

e) The Department in the recent past has also taken several
measures to reach out to the future taxpayers of the country through Board
games and Comic books aimed at developing tax literacy and tax culture
children and young adults.

f) The field formations of the Department under Pr. CCSIT carry
out several outreach programmes in their regions for different categories of
taxpayers to inform them on various procedures and due dates under the
Income Tax Act, 1961.

g) The Department has made a communication studio "Samvaad"
at Mayur Bhawan office, New Delhi where sessions with senior officers on
important taxation issues are recorded and thereafter uploaded on YouTube
and social media handles as a part of taxpayer outreach.

ii. A letter is being separately issued to all Pr.CCSIT requesting them that
taxpayer outreach programmes may be carried out in their regions to generate
awareness among taxpayers about computation of Income, ITR filing
procedures, dues dates, treatment of agriculture income in ITR for rate
purposes etc. They are also advised to conduct educational seminars for
section of taxpayers who in addition to income under other heads also have


agricultural income. These outreach programmes may explain in detail about
the ITR filing procedure and how to treat agricultural income in Income Tax
Return for tax rate purposes.

With respect to taking assistant of Panchayat Block level officers and
NGOs to address these issues and carry out trust building exercises and
educational seminars for small and marginal farmers to file and claim
exemption on agricultural income, it is being endeavored to conduct extensive
outreach programs to make existing and prospective taxpayers aware of
provisions of Income Tax Act, to educate them about necessity of paying taxes
and also to facilitate their queries and grievances on taxation issues,
Taxpayers Hubs have been proposed to be set up in tier 2 and tier 3 cities of 7
Pr. CCIT regions- Gorakhpur, Shillong, Bhagalpur, Vizag, Jhansi, Bhilwara
and Cuttack, where the presence of the Department is not as visible. The
Taxpayers' Hubs will be set up in seven cities, in a central atrium area with
comparatively higher footfall, during various dates in October November,
December, January and it will have one Information kiosk, one Grievance
Kiosk and one Educational kiosk for fostering awareness regarding various
initiatives and provisions of Income Tax Act to the taxpayers. It will also sought
to create a bond between the Department and the future taxpayers by
educating them about their rights and responsibilities.

Further, the Taxpayers Hubs have successfully been carried out in
Gorakhpur from 20th October to 22nd October, 2023 and in Jhansi from 2nd
November, 2023 to 47 November, 2023.

Exploring the possibility for Aadhar enabled payment system for
claiming refund: On perusal of the report, it is noticed that this
recommendation has been made so that assessees claiming refunds get
access to cash at their on door step without having to bear the cost of
transportation to the Income-tax office. In this regard, it is submitted that
refunds, if any are credited to bank accounts of the taxpayers as mentioned in
the ITR. Further, as per the policy of the department, no manual refund are to
be issued. It is pertinent to mention that the agriculturists are having bank
account as various government benefits such as Kisan Samman Nidhi is
credited to bank accounts only. Further, credits availed by the agriculturist
from cooperative society or banks are also routed through bank accounts only.
Therefore, for delivery of the cash to door-step will be responsibility of the
concerned bank as per the existing regulation and framework of scheme.


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee observe that of the 48 cases pointed out by Audit in ITD
database, 42 cases were auto-populated through AST and six cases were
entered manually. The Ministry stated that prior to Assessment Year (AY)
2016- 17, tax assessment and calculation were made as per the old system of
Income Tax Department. However, AY 2016-17 onwards, the Assessment
Orders are passed In the new software namely, Income Tax Business
Application (ITBA). In ITBA, the AO is required to follow a more detailed and
comprehensive approach while making addition sides allowing exemption
claims' to compute taxable income. Based on the additions/disallowances in
various schedules made by the AO, the software computes income in various
heads that have been amended and allows benefits of relevant deductions/
exemptions/ relief / adjustments and determines the taxable income and tax
thereon. Through this software, the data in the system reflects data of
agriculture income as determined in the assessment proceedings. Further, to
minimise interface with the assessee or his/her representative, the
assessment procedure has been digitized and the same is conducted through
e- assessment. Moreover, E Assessment Schemes 2019 has already been
implemented from A Y 2018-19 onwards. The Committee observe that due to
non-updating of database in the AST systems the agricultural income allowed
during assessment was not captured in the ITD database and there was a risk
of incorrect reporting of agricultural income and rebate allowed to the
assessee for MIS purposes. The Committee hope that the Income Tax
Business Application (ITBA) software is appropriately equipped to address
such concerns. The Committee desire that Ministry undertake a study to
ascertain the effectiveness of the ITBA so that legacy issues from AST
systems are not continued in any form in ITBA.

[Para No.9]
Action taken by the Ministry

The observations of the Committee are noted. It is confirmed that when
assessment proceedings are carried out in ITBA, the agricultural income as
determined during assessment proceedings, is the income that gets captured
in the system/database.

Observation/Recommendation
As regards ITBA, another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee

has been that Audit was not provided access to ITBA by the Ministry to enable
examination of the operational efficiency of this new system. The Committee


desire that access to relevant fields of TBA needs to be provided to Audit as it
will have the effect of helping the Ministry to further improve the system.
[Para No. 10]

Action taken by the Ministry

Regarding the access to the ITBA System, it is intimated that the "IT
Audit of ITBA" is already being carried out by the Director General of Audit
(Central Receipt), Delhi. There were certain technical challenges, which were
duly communicated to the audit team, due to which the direct access to the
production environment of ITBA could not be provisioned to the audit team.
However, a mechanism has been worked out through which the audit team
has the facility for running data queries of specific nature in ITBA production
environment.

Vetting Comments of Audit

IT Audit of Income Tax Business Application was heavily constrained as
assisted access to production environment in ITBA to the Audit Team from the
Office of DGA(CR) Delhi (ITD themselves ran the queries and provided the
results to the Delhi Audit Team after a gap ranging from one to six months)
and access to User Acceptance Testing (UAT) and UAT environment to the
Audit Team from the Office of PDA(Central) Bengaluru was not provided by
Income Tax Department despite all out efforts made by Audit at all levels.

Action taken by the Ministry on Audit Comments

All access, as technically possible, was extended to the audit team
during the IT audit of ITBA. In all, 45 Audit Requisitions (ARs) & 68 Audit
Queries (AQs) were raised during the audit and response to all these ARs &
AQs were duly furnished by ITBA. Further, 72 Half Margins were also issued
and replies to all of them were furnished to the audit team by ITBA. In addition
to the above, assisted access of User Acceptance Test (UAT) environment of
ITBA had also been provided to C&AG Audit Team during which Module-wise
UAT was accessed by the Audit Team. The audit team availed this access to
the UAT environment for over 5 months.

The audit team was also provided assisted access to the ITBA
production environment wherein data requisition requests (DQs) provided by
the audit team were converted into software queries by the ITBA Technical
team and data was extracted from the database using such software queries


and furnished to the audit team. These software queries framed by the
Technical team were also provided to the audit team for their reference, along
with the data extracted.

Observation/Recommendation

Audit noticed non-compliance to provisions of the Act in 20 cases which
involve granting incorrect exemption for income derived from agricultural land,
‘allowance’ of exemption incorrectly for partial agricultural income, permitting
excess ‘allowance’ of replantation expenditure/due to adoption of incorrect
export turnover, and granting exemption to non- agricultural income on
account of sale of fish, goats, dry grapes, milk etc. and illustrated nine such
cases. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that remedial action
has been initiated in respect of each of the 20 cases. As per Section 2(1A) of
the Income Tax Act, 1961, ‘agricultural income’ means (a) Any rent or revenue
derived from land which is situated in India and is used for agricultural
purposes; (b) Any income derived from such land by agricultural operations
including processing of agricultural produce so as to render it fit for market or
sale of such produce; (c) Any income attributable to a farm house subject to
fulfillment of conditions specified in the Act; and (d) Any income derived from
saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery. For instance, in Charge: Pr.CIT-1,
Pune, Maharashtra the AO allowed (December 2016) exemption of Rs. 117.21
lakh to the assessee for AY 2014-15 towards agricultural Income which
included the sale of dry grapes of Rs. 93.31 lakh and sale of milk of Rs. 0.37
lakh. As dry grapes (kismis) are an agro-based industrial product and milk is a
dairy product, the income there from could not be considered as income
derived from the agricultural land. The Apex Court held that the regularity of
the sale of milk was effected and the quantity of milk sold showed that what
the assessee carried on was a regular business of producing milk and selling it
as a commercial proposition. Not having ‘disallowed’ the claim resulted in
excess allowance of exemption of Rs. 93.68 lakh involving tax effect of
Rs.28.95 lakh. The Ministry have stated that since definition of Agricultural
Income ‘as per Section 2(1A) of the Act is wide, the facts regarding agricultural
income may vary from case to case. The Committee express the view in this
regard that such cases may be prevented if AOS are kept apprised of updated
‘case laws' pertaining to definition of Agricultural Income. The Committee
desire that issues relating to interpretation of definition of agricultural income
can be clarified to the AOS by regularly updating the ‘case laws' in the
compendium, as recommended so that AOs may get access to all updated
information necessary for assessment of agricultural income in a Single digital
compilation.

[Para No. 13]


Action taken by the Ministry

The department has taken following initiatives for having clear and
consistent views on legal issues and dissemination of knowledge on relevant
legal issues for the information of officers:-

1. Central Technical Committee:

The CBDT has formed a Central Technical Committee (CTC) as
another measure towards better litigation management. This is an institutional
mechanism in the Directorate of Income Tax (Legal & Research) to provide
clarity and consistency on contentious legal issues .and to formulate
departmental view. The Committee holds regular meetings to deliberate and
arrive at a consistent departmental view on contentious legal issues.

2. Audit & Judicial Corner

The Department has started Audit and Judicial (A&J) corner on the
official website of IRS officers (irsofficersonline.gov.in) where important case
laws are regularly uploaded to disseminate important judicial pronouncements
of various appellate authorities to department officers all over the country.

3. Instructions have also been issued to all Pr. CCSIT to place
favourable High Court orders on their local websites.


CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO

NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
THE GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

As per Audit, the observations of the Third Tax Administration Reforms
Commission Report (2014) inter-alia included that agricultural income of non-
agriculturists is being increasingly used as a conduit to avoid tax and for
laundering funds, resulting in leakage to the tune of crores of rupees in
revenue annually. The Committee wished to point out that agriculturists are a
heterogeneous category that includes small and marginal farmers as well as
corporate houses etc. Therefore, the Ministry should look at the possibility of
introducing different codes for farmers who have income only from agricultural
sources as against those who have income from agriculture as well as non-
agricultural sources. The Committee were of the view that this will help in
segregation of cases involving income solely from agricultural sources from
the other cases, and be of assistance in better targeting and scrutiny of cases.
Further, taking into account the fact of increased financial inclusion due to
opening of bank accounts under Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana, the
Government may encourage digital payments in the agriculture sector. The
Ministry should also look into and analyse the practices being followed in
States such as Odisha where agricultural produce is sold to co-operative
societies and payment for the same is deposited in the bank accounts of
assessees, which enables easy verification of the income earned.

[Para No.2]
Action taken by the Ministry

It is pertinent to note here that agricultural income is exempt under the
Income-tax Act, 1961 ("the Act"). Therefore, a person having only agricultural
income will have no taxable income under the Act. Under the provisions of the
Act, such a person, not being a company or a firm, is not mandatorily required
to furnish return of income as the taxable income is below exemption limit.
Further, in the ITR forms required to be furnished by firms and companies,
details of agricultural income, if any, have to be entered in Schedule El of the
respective forms. The relevant forms for firms and companies are quite
exhaustive and require the taxpayers to submit information about income
under various heads of income. In such a scenario it is easily ascertainable
whether they have income other than agricultural income.

In light of the above discussion, a separate code for farmers who have only
agricultural income and therefore, have income below the exemption limit will


not serve the purpose of creating a distinction that could help determine
potential cases of tax avoidance and money laundering through agricultural
activities.

Therefore, the above suggestion is not feasible. Finance (No.2) Act, 2019
introduced Section 269SU in the Act to provide that every person, carrying on
business, shall, provide facility for accepting payment through the prescribed
electronic modes, in addition to the facility for other electronic modes of
payment, if any, being provided by such person, if his total sales, turnover or
gross receipts in business exceeds fifty crore rupees during the immediately
preceding previous year.

Further, section 269ST of the Act prohibits cash receipt of rupees two lakh or
more. In order to enforce restriction on cash transactions, section 271 DA of
the Act provides that if a person contravenes the provisions of section 269ST,
he shall be liable to pay penalty of a sum equal to the amount of such receipt.

The above provisions are applicable to agricultural sector as well and give
major impetus to digital transactions. Therefore, the above suggestion has
already been implemented.


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that as regards the action taken by the Ministry
towards implementation of the recommendation for 100 percent check of all
cases by Audit in all Commissionerates, where agricultural income claimed is
above Rs.10 lakh, the Ministry has inter-alia submitted that for AY 2020-21,
21,55,368 taxpayers reported Agriculture Income in their return of income, out
of whom 59,707 taxpayers reported Agriculture Income exceeding Rs. 10 lakh.
In view of the fact that number of the returns filed for a particular assessment
year is significant, the number of cases selected for scrutiny is fine tuned with
a view to striking a balance between available resources and various types of
tisk (which requires investigation) through Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection
(CASS), which is a centralized system for selection of cases of scrutiny based
on information in ITR, IT forms, TDS/TCS, data as reported by third parties,
data received through inter-departmental MoUs etc. Further, CASS has been
equipped with the aspect of identifying scenarios for selection of cases of
agricultural income above a threshold level. The Chairman, CBDT, while
tendering evidence before the Committee, mentioned that 3379 cases were
chosen out of the afore-mentioned total of 21,55,388 cases. The Committee
have been apprised that as against 100 percent check of all cases in all
Commissionerates, where agricultural income claimed is above Rs. 10 lakh,
the Ministry has devised its own mechanism for picking up cases for scrutiny
due to paucity of manpower to handle the same. The Committee recommend
that a system may be designed to examine the 3379 cases so picked with due
promptitude and based on these assessments, new scenarios may be
included in the CASS for refining the process of selection of cases for scrutiny.
The Committee note that the 3379 cases chosen by CBDT includes cases of
taxpayers reporting agricultural income less than Rs. 10 lakh. The Committee
are of the considered view that focus of scrutiny should be on assessees
reporting higher agricultural income. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry consider devising a mechanism for categorization of cases of
agricultural income in three slabs i.e. above Rs. 10 lakh, Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. 1
crore in CASS so as to better target high risk cases in the aforementioned
categories. Such a measure will also facilitate scrutiny of different types of
agriculturists with the limited resources available with the Ministry/CBDT and
enable in preventing possible leakage of revenue.

[Para No. 6]


Action taken by the Ministry

For every scrutiny assessment case, feedback is uploaded on the ITBA
portal by the AO capturing details like the reasons for selection of the case,
addition made in the case on different CASS reasons etc. Every year this
feedback is taken into account for refining risk parameters for selection of
cases for scrutiny.

The recommendation regarding categorization of cases of agricultural
income in different slabs in CASS to better target high risk cases has been
noted and will be put before the CASS Committee for consideration.


(APPENDIX — ID
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

NEW DELHI;

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which
have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 3, 5, 7, 9,10 and 13
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not

desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:

Para No. 2

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 1*, 4*, 6, 8*, 11* & 12*

February, 2024

Magha, 1945 (Saka)

THEIR FORTY NINTH REPORT

13

Total: 06
Percentage — 46 %

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: 01
Percentage- 8%

Total: 06
Percentage -46 %

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Chairperson
Public Accounts Committee