       151 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF AYUSHMAN 
BHARAT -PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA 
YOJANA - UNION GOVERNMENT (CIVIL) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


PAC NO. 2381 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F I F T Y  F I R S T  
R E P O R T 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2023 -24)  
 
(S EV E NT EE NT H LO K S ABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
                                         
 
        P re sente d to Hon’ ble  S peak er, Lok  Sa bha  on: 29 .0 4. 202 4                                                                                  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:     
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
April, 2024 /Vaisakha, 1946 (Saka) 
  
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF AYUSHMAN 
BHARAT -PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA 
YOJANA - UNION GOVERNMENT (CIVIL) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. INTRODUCTORY 1 
II AYUSHMAN BHARAT-PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA YOJNA 1 
III BENEFICIARY IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION 1 
IV HOSPITAL EMPANELMENT AND MANAGEMENT 11 
V SYSTEM OF SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS OF EMPANELLED 
HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS (EHCP’S) 
15 
VI FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 18 
VII MONITORING AND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 30 
   
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  45-61 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) held on 
31st October, 2023. 
 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) held on 
17th January, 2024. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
  
                                                             
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 
2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
3 Till 21.03.2024 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri ThalikkottaiRajuthevar Baalu 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. ShriTiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Vacant2 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma                        -Joint Secretary 
2. Smt Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja3              -Director 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Shri Girdhari Lal                              -Deputy Secretary 
Dr. Faiz Ahmad                               -Under Secretary 
Shri. Prakhar Prakash Anand         -Assistant Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Fifty -first Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  “Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat -Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Arogya Yojana ” based on C&AG Report No. 11 of 2023, relating to the Mini stry of 
Health and Family Welfare. 
 
2.  The Report  of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid  in the 
Parliament on 8th August, 2023. 
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (2023 -2024), selected the aforesaid subject for 
detailed examination and took oral evidence s of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare  on the subject  on 31 st  October, 2023  and 17 th January, 
2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committ ee are appended to the Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the draft report on the subject vide digital circulation 
on 27th April 2024  and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the same and present it to 
the Hon'ble Speaker. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in  bold and form  Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
5.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for tendering evidence before them and furnishing 
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
 
6.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27 April, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 07 Vaisakha, 1946 (Saka)                        Public Accounts Committee 
  
 
(iii) 
 

PART - I 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
1. This Report of the Committee is based on C&AG Report No. 11 of 2023 on the 
subject, "Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat -Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana - 
Union Government (Civil)" . Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) selected the 
aforesaid C&AG Report for examination and report. The PAC (2023 -24) considered the 
subject fo r detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 00.00.2023. 
II. AYUSHMAN BHARAT-PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA YOJNA 
2. The Committee have learnt  that Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (AB-PMJAY) was launched on 23 September 2018 and it aims to provide health 
cover of ₹ five lakh per family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization to 
over 10.741 crore families from the poor and vulnerable section of the population, based 
on the deprivation and occupational criteria of the Socio Economic Caste Census 
(SECC), 2011. The objective is to improve affordability, accessibility, and quality of care 
for the poor and vulnerable  section of the population. The Scheme was launched for 
achieving a significant reduction in out -of-pocket expenditure due to health care costs 
and achieving reduction in proportion of households experiencing catastrophic health 
expenditures and consequent  impoverishment. The eligible beneficiaries are entitled 
under AB -PMJAY for cashless and paperless access to services at the empanelled 
hospitals. The Committee also noted that the PMJAY Scheme, an ambitious and well -
intentioned programme to provide health care access to most vulnerable sections in the 
country, has had a strong positive impact on the economically weaker sections of the 
society who need healthcare facilities. However, the implementation of the Scheme 
needs improvement in the light of the find ings made in the report. It is expected that the 
compliance to the observations and recommendations made in this Report will help in 
improving the implementation of the Scheme. 
III. BENEFICIARY IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION 
A. A. Coverage of Beneficiaries under PM-JAY 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
3. Audit findings in C& AG Report No. 11 of 2023 brought out  that as per NHA 
records, 7.87 crore beneficiary households were registered, constituting 73 per cent of 
the targeted households of 10.74 crore (November 2022). Out of this, 2.08 crore 
households had been identified from SECC -2011 database, as envisaged in  the 
Scheme guidelines. NHA conveyed to the Audit that Government of India (GoI) has 
approved (January 2022) the expansion of the beneficiary base to cover 12 crore 
families based on NFSA data. In the absence of adequate validation controls, errors 
were no ticed in beneficiary database i.e. invalid names, unrealistic date of birth, 
duplicate PMJAY IDs, unrealistic size of family members in a household etc. In 36 

cases, two registrations were made against 18 Aadhaar numbers and in Tamil Nadu, 
4761 registrations were made against seven Aadhaar numbers. Registration of multiple 
beneficiaries against same or invalid mobile number ranging from 11 to 7,49,820 
beneficiaries were noted in the Beneficiary Identification System (BIS). In Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh, dur ing the period 2018 to 2021, 16865 and 335 ineligible 
beneficiaries respectively were identified by the SHA after cleaning the SECC data. In 
six States/UTs, ineligible households were found registered as PMJAY beneficiaries 
and had availed the benefits of the Scheme. The expenditure on these ineligible 
beneficiaries ranged from ₹0.12 lakh in Chandigarh, to ₹22.44 crore in Tamil Nadu. In 
nine States/UTs, there were delays in processing of rejection cases. The delay ranged 
from one to 404 days. In seven State s/UTs, Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) cell was formed. In 12 States/UTs, IEC Cell was not formed whereas no 
information was available in the remaining States. IEC plan was prepared only in four 
States, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur and Rajasthan. In Maharashtra, 
although plan was prepared in 2020 -21, it was not implemented. In 14 States/UTs, 
expenditure on IEC activities ranged from 0 to 20.24 per cent of the allotted budget 
against the prescribed benchmark of 25 per cent. 
4. For the  identification of beneficiaries, when the Committee asked the Ministry 
about the mechanism that has been opted for identifying State -wise beneficiaries under 
the scheme, the Ministry stated as under: 
“Initially, 10.74 Crore beneficiary families under AB P M-JAY were targeted on the 
basis of the Socio -economic Caste Census (SECC) of 2011 which used 6 
deprivation and 11 occupational criteria across rural and urban areas respectively 
to identify the families. Further, in January 2022, the Cabinet of the Govern ment of 
India, revised the beneficiary base to 12 Crore families and decided to give 
flexibility to use other databases for verification of beneficiaries under Ayushman 
Bharat PM-JAY against such SECC beneficiaries who couldn't be identified and 
verified. Consequent to this approval, National Health Authority has issued 
guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of 
beneficiaries of similar socioeconomic profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries 
in place of unverified SE CC beneficiaries and additional families. As on date, all 
States/UTs except Bihar have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same 
has been ingested in the Beneficiary Identification System of NHA. The list of 
databases used by States is enclosed at Annexure-1.” 
5. As per Ministry’s ATNs, NHA has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable 
Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic profile 
as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries. On being asked to provide the details  about the 
same, the Ministry responded as below: 
“In order to ensure that eligible beneficiaries get covered under the scheme and in 
compliance of the decision of the Cabinet of Govt of India, NHA has issued 
guidelines. for providing flexibility to States /UTs to use non -SECC beneficiary 
family database with similar socio -economic profiles to identify leftover (unverified) 
SECC families. Also, States/UTs were asked to provide beneficiary database for 

additional families in line with the Cabinet decision for  expansion of beneficiary 
base to 12 crore. The copy of the guidelines issued is at Annexure 2.” 
 
 
6. When the Committee desired to know from the Ministry about the multiple 
databases those are being used by them while ensuring verification of such SECC 
beneficiaries who couldn’t be identified and verified under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan 
Mantri - Jan Arogya (PM-JAY), the Ministry replied as under: 
“All States/UTs except Bihar have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same 
has been ingested in the Beneficiary Identification System of NHA.  
 
States which have not been able to identify eligible beneficiaries as per SECC 
database, have chosen vario us digitized Aadhaar seeded databases such as 
Antyodaya Anna Yojna, Ration Cards, state specific scheme databases etc. The 
list of databases provided by States is at Annexure 1.” 
 
7. In light of multiple databases being used for verification, when the Mini stry was 
asked as to how are they ensuring veracity of data in the Beneficiary Identification 
System of NHA, they stated as under: 
“In order to ensure the veracity of the data in Beneficiary Identification System 
(BIS) NHA has adopted a 3-pronged strategy which is as follows:  
1. National Health Authority has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable 
Aadhaar seeded digitized dat abases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic 
profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries.  
2. Aadhaar based De -duplication of the beneficiary databases have been 
undertaken at the time of ingestion.  
3. Aadhaar based e-KYC has been mandated for all beneficiaries.” 
8. Considering that PM -JAY envisaged (March 2018) coverage of about 10.74 
Crore beneficiary households based on the deprivation and occupational criteria of the 
Socio-Economic Caste Census, 2011 (SECC) for rural and urban areas respectivel y, 
when the Committee asked about details, respectively of the deprivation and 
occupational criteria used therein for rural and urban areas to incorporate beneficiaries 
in the scheme, the Ministry stated as under: 
“At the time of launching of the Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY, it was decided to cover 
a total of 10.52 crore families eligible as per 6 deprivation and 11 occupational 
criteria across rural and urban areas respectively. Further, 22 lakhs left over RSBY 
families were also included. Together, they consti tuted the bottom 40% of India’s 
population as per 2011 census.  
 
The detailed list of eligibility criteria used for SECC 2011 is enclosed at Annexure -
3.” 
 
 
 

B. Process for Beneficiary Identification 
9. As per Ministry's ATNs, information related to deprivation and occupational 
criteria was not required to be captured during beneficiary verification process for 
beneficiaries identified through non -SECC database. When asked to clarify about this 
position, the Ministry replied as below: 
“The responsibility of identifying beneficiaries lies with the States. It is to be noted 
that this exercise is only possible to be done by the State machinery. States have 
shared the beneficiary database after exercising due -diligence as per the 
guidelines ( Annexure 2).  
 
As these databases now have Aadhaar, hence Aadhaar eKYC ensures that only 
entitled beneficiaries avail the services under the scheme.” 
 
10. When asked as to how would the Ministry  ensure parity among the beneficiaries 
of the scheme in the absence of uniform criteria for deprivation and occupation, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
“In order to ensure that eligible beneficiaries get covered under the scheme and in 
line with the decisio n of the Cabinet of Govt of India, NHA has issued guidelines 
wherein flexibility has been provided to States/UTs to use non -SECC beneficiary 
family database with similar socio-economic profiles in place of leftover (unverified) 
SECC families. States/UTs we re asked to provide beneficiary database for 
additional families in line with the Cabinet decision for revised beneficiary base of 
12 crore families. Accordingly, all States/UTs except Bihar have shared databases 
of beneficiaries and the same has been inge sted in the Beneficiary Identification 
System of NHA. States have shared the beneficiary database after due -diligence 
and consideration.” 
 
11. As per Ministry's ATNs, National Health Authority has issued guidelines to use 
suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic 
profile as that of eligibl e SECC beneficiaries. When the Committee wanted to be  
provided with the details in this regard, the Ministry stated as below: 
“The guidelines issued by NHA are at Annexure 2 and  the data bases provided by 
States is at Annexure 1.” 
 
12. When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the data 
remains error free and accessible to all states, the Ministry stated as below: 
“In order to ensure the veracity of the data in BIS, NHA has adopted a 3 -pronged 
strategy. These are as follows:  
1. National Health Authority has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable 
Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic 
profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries.  
2. Aadhaar based De -duplication of the beneficiary databases have been 
undertaken at the time of ingestion.  

3. Aadhaar based e -KYC has been mandated for all beneficiaries. This ensures 
final level of deduplication of beneficiaries in the database.  
 
The database ingested in the BIS is available for card creation through NHA’s BIS 
platform for all stakeholders including beneficiaries themselves.” 
 
13. When enquired about the estimated timeline for enabling unified view of the 
scheme wit h the clear demarcation of State and PM -JAY beneficiaries,  the Ministry 
mentioned in its reply that: 
“NHA has launched Aapke Dwar Ayushman 3.0 to expedite Ayushman Card 
creation. Also, Ayushman Bhava campaign has been launched with the target to 
achieve saturation. Further, Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY is a flagship scheme under 
Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra. Ayushman card creation is an on -spot service under 
VBSY.  
As a result of the concerted efforts, more than 30 cr Ayushman Cards have been 
created. NHA along w ith SHAs are striving to saturate Ayushman cards for all 
eligible beneficiaries. Post this card creation activities, demarcation of PM-JAY and 
State-scheme beneficiaries can be undertaken.” 
 
14. In regard to the measures being taken to ensure that benefici aries can avail 
services seamlessly across India irrespective of their residential/migration status, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
“All States/UTs except Bihar have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same 
has been ingested in the BIS of NHA. In case a beneficiary whose name is already 
in BIS database seeks to avail treatment in any empaneled hospital across India, 
he can avail services post Aadhaar eKYC.” 
 
C. Process of Registration 
15. When the Committee asked what other criteria are used to establi sh the veracity 
of the beneficiaries' credentials in the absence of match score, the Ministry stated that: 
“NHA has rolled -out new BIS across India with major improvements in the 
beneficiary identification process.  
 
The beneficiary verification process is  completely transparent and faceless. When 
an operator undertakes a beneficiary verification which includes Aadhaar e -KYC, 
the system pulls beneficiary details from Aadhaar database. The details pulled are 
then compared with beneficiary details available in the source database.  
 
In order to ensure instant approval of Ayushman card request, auto -approval 
system has been enabled in the Beneficiary Identification system. System 
generates a match score based on matching details of Aadhaar data with those 
available in the source database.  
 
Further, all such requests which are not auto -approved are examined and 
processed manually through a faceless system.” 
 

16. Apprising the Committee about the steps been taken to fine tune the match score 
mechanism and the related details thereof, the Ministry in reply mentioned as under: 
“NHA has rolled -out new BIS across India with major improvements in the 
beneficiary identification process. 2. Replacement of SECC database by Aadhaar 
seeded database has improved the system of beneficiary  identification. The match 
score in the new Beneficiary Identification System has been uniformly 
implemented. Further, where the match score falls below a certain threshold, 
records are pushed for manual processing.” 
 
17. When asked as to what steps, if any, are being  taken to accommodate migratory 
populations in the match score mechanism, the Ministry replied as under: 
“NHA has rolled -out new BIS across India with major improvements in the 
beneficiary identification process. Replacement of SECC database by Aadhaar 
seeded database has improved the system of beneficiary identification. The match 
score in the new Beneficiary Identification System has been uniformly 
implemented. Further, where the match score falls below a certain threshold, 
records are pushed for manual p rocessing. The above process applies to all 
categories of beneficiaries including migrants.” 
 
D. Registration under process for approval  
18. ATN provided by the Ministry mentioned that 30 -minute TAT was prescribed for 
circumstances where cards were created by the PMAMs in the hospitals and the then 
existing contract with the ISAs for processing of requests for cards was limited to those 
created in the hospitals by the PMAMs. Therefore, the cards created through campaign 
were not processed during the defined TAT. When asked to give details of steps taken 
to process these cards created through campaigns, the Ministry stated that: 
“As on date more than 30 crore Ayushman Cards have been created. The 
ingestion of Aadhaar seeded digitized data has significa ntly improved the 
beneficiary identification process by enabling precise match in the beneficiary 
details with the Aadhaar e-KYC. In the new BIS, records are auto approved based 
on the match score thus significantly reducing the requirement of manual approval. 
In order to expedite Ayushman card creation process during the card drive, SHAs 
have been facilitated to onboard additional agencies. Further, the card pendency 
status with SHAs is being regularly monitored.” 
 
 
19. On being enquired whether the contract has since been modified to include cards 
created through campaign for processing within 30 -minute TAT, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
 
“Ayushman card creation process has been streamlined as follows:  
 
a) The ingestion of Aadhaar seeded digitized data h as significantly improved the 
beneficiary identification process by enabling precise match in the beneficiary 
details with the Aadhaar e -KYC.In the new BIS, records are auto approved based 
on the match score thus significantly reducing the requirement of manual approval. 
In order to expedite Ayushman card creation process during the card drive, SHAs 

have been facilitated to onboard additional agencies. Further, the card pendency 
status with SHAs is being regularly monitored.  
 
b) The TAT of 30 minutes for c ard approval applies to cards created in hospital by 
PMAMs only. For the campaign mode card creation TAT doesn’t require to be 
modified in view of the aforementioned streamlined process.” 
 
 
20. Ministry in their ATN has mentioned that due to prolonged suspension of internet 
services in Jammu and Kashmir, the beneficiary records could not be processed for 
verification. When the Committee asked about the steps been taken by the Ministry to 
assist verification of cards in remote areas and areas with little penetration of internet 
services, the Ministry in reply, stated as under :  
 
“NHA has developed a light mobile application viz. ‘Ayushman App’ for facilitating 
door-step Ayushman Card creation. D ue to concerted efforts of NHA and SHAs, 
Ayushman card creation has significantly improved in remote areas such as UT of 
J&K, Ladakh and other hill States. State wise details of Ayushman cards created 
are attached at Annexure-4.  
 
In order to ensure that n o beneficiary is denied treatment due to non -availability of 
internet in remote location, NHA has allowed pre -authorization upto three days of 
hospital admission in private hospitals and five days in public hospitals.” 
 
21. In regard to the parameters being included to monitor Performance of card 
approval agencies, the Ministry, in reply, stated as follows: 
 
“All the Ayushman Card request related processing undertaken by card approval 
agencies are monitored at both the State and National level. These ca rd approval 
agencies are monitored through qualitative and quantitative servicelevel 
agreements (SLAs) related to card processing. Some of the SLAs are as follows:  
 
• Ayushman card request processing within TAT  
• Approval of incorrect beneficiary identification records  
• Rejection of genuine beneficiary card request.” 
 
E. Quality of data in BIS database 
22. When asked about the limitations faced by the Ministry in SECC database, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
“The limitations with SECC database were as follows: Decade old data: The SECC 
was undertaken in 2011 and some revisions were done till 2014. Therefore, the 
data was 8-10 years old. The ground realities had changed during this period, and 
many families have moved in and out of the defined occupation al and deprivation 
criteria. Further, a lot of people listed in database would have died since 2011 and 
the family structure would have also changed in case of many families. 
Non-Aadhaar Database: One of the major limitations with SECC database is lack 
of Aadhaar seeding. Lack of Aadhaar seeding diminishes the certainty in 
beneficiary identity. 
 

Missing details: Many crucial fields such as name, father’s name, village etc. are 
missing in case of many individuals. This resulted in difficulty in locating the 
beneficiaries and thus Ayushman card creation couldn’t gain momentum.” 
  
23. On being enquired as how is the Ministry ensuring uniqueness of beneficiary in 
cards that have already been registered,  the Ministry replied as under: 
“The uniqueness of the beneficiary in the BIS database is maintained by unique 
Aadhaar token associated with each beneficiary.  
 
Before November 2022, to avail the treatment, the identifiers were State code 
followed by PM -JAY ID which ensured the uniquenes s of each beneficiary in the 
system. However, to rule out any ambiguity, NHA has rolled out a new BIS, 
wherein every beneficiary is issued a unique PM -JAY ID at national level. Fresh 
PM-JAY IDs have been issued and communicated wherever beneficiaries from 
two different States had overlapping PM-JAY ID.” 
 
24. On being asked whether the Ministry have considered that adding members to 
family but not deleting the same due to death or marriage may lead to increased family 
sizes and whether steps been taken to re move the name of females from their maiden 
families for the purpose of Ayushman card verification, the Ministry stated that : 
“AB PM-JAY is a scheme which is based on family floater system. There is no cap 
on the family size in terms of no. of family membe rs. Ayushman Bharat is an 
entitlement-based scheme, and therefore, a person once included in the database 
remains eligible unless found ineligible otherwise. 4. Whenever State refreshes 
beneficiary database by mapping with any dynamic database, then modifi ed family 
structure is captured and ingested into the system.” 
 
25. When asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry to assist 
verification of names of females post marriage, the Ministry, in reply, stated  as below: 
“NHA has rolled -out new BIS across India with major improvements in the 
beneficiary identification process. In addition, the flexibility to use Aadhaar -seeded 
digitized databases for verification of beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat PM -
JAY against such SECC beneficiaries who couldn 't be identified and verified. has 
significantly improved the beneficiary identification process. In the new BIS, 
records are auto approved based on the match score thus significantly reducing 
the requirement of manual approval. Further, wherever a card cr eation request is 
not auto-approved due to mismatch in e -KYC details with the details in the source 
database, such records are examined and processed manually through a faceless 
system.” 
 
F. Ineligible households possessing PM-JAY cards and availing treatment 
26. The Committee have found that a s per Ministry's ATNs, currently, there are 
twelve States in the country who are providing free healthcare cover to all residents of 
the States. When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent inclusion of  

ineligible beneficiaries in  PM-JAY scheme from such states, the Ministry furnished their 
reply as under: 
“As on date, 11 States have adopted universal Health Coverage.  
NHA has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized 
databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic profile as that of eligible 
SECC beneficiaries in place of unverified SECC beneficiaries and additional 
families. 
Accordingly, States/UTs (except Bihar) have after duediligence chosen various 
digitized Aadhaar seeded databases such as Antyodaya Anna Yojna, Ration Card, 
etc. and the same has been ingested in the BIS.” 
 
27. Also as per Ministry ATNs, NHA has written to all the states to provide Aadhaar 
seeded database of all its government employees and pensioners so that de-duplication 
exercise can be done with the database. When asked as to how is the Ministry 
monitoring the de-duplication exercise, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“As on date, data de -duplication exercise has been undertaken across the c ountry 
and it is being ensured that no duplicate records exist. The database provided by 
the States are Aadhaar seeded, thus enabling de-duplication exercise.  
Regarding removing Govt. employees and pensioners, NHA has written to States 
to either undertake  de-duplication exercise themselves or share the database of 
employees and pensioners. This exercise is aimed to be completed at the 
earliest.” 
 
28. When asked about the estimated timeline of completion of de -duplication 
exercise in the states, the Ministry stated as below: 
“As on date, data de -duplication exercise has been undertaken across the country 
and it is being ensured that no duplicate records exist. The database provided by 
the States are Aadhaar seeded, thus enabling de-duplication exercise.  
 
Regarding removing Govt. employees and pensioners, NHA has written to States 
to either undertake de -duplication exercise themselves or share the database of 
employees and pensioners. This exercise is aimed to be completed at the 
earliest.” 
 
G. Delay in processing of rejection of beneficiaries 
29. As per Ministry's ATN, a 24 hours TAT was prescribed for circumstances where 
cards were created by the PMAMs in the hospitals and since the cards created through 
campaign mode resulted in huge accumulation of such requests, there was non -
adherence to standard turn-around time. When asked about the steps taken in advance 
by the Ministry to handle such huge number of requests, the Ministry stated as below: 

“In January 2022, the Cabinet of Government of India decided t o give flexibility to 
States/UTs to use non -SECC beneficiary family database with similar socio -
economic profiles to identify leftover (unauthenticated) SECC families. The 
decision has significantly improved the beneficiary identification process.  
 
In the  new BIS, records are auto approved based on the match score thus 
significantly reducing the requirement of manual approval.  
 
In order to expedite Ayushman card creation process during the card drive, SHAs 
have been facilitated to onboard additional agenc ies. Further, the card pendency 
status at SHAs is being regularly monitored.  
 
As on date, more than 30 crore Ayushman cards have been created where 6 -7 
lakh Ayushman card requests (e-KYC) are received on daily basis.” 
 
30. When asked about the roles and function that they were entrusted with and 
whether they were also onboarded for verification and If so, what are the reasons for 
accumulation of huge number of requests, the Ministry stated in their reply that: 
“To expedite Ayuhsman card creation, NHA empa nelled 6 card creation agencies. 
The card creation agencies were entrusted with the task of searching for the 
beneficiary in the database, undertake eKYC and card printing and delivery. As 
these agencies undertake the beneficiary authentication process, the responsibility 
for Ayushman card processing can’t be given to these agencies. Considering the 
increase in card creation request, NHA empaneled card approval agencies and the 
States were asked to engage them as per their requirement. This was done to 
ensure timely processing of card creation requests. 8. The card processing 
agencies kept increasing the number of resources engaged in the processing of 
records based on the requirement.” 
 
H. Creating awareness about PM -JAY (non -implementation of IEC plan) & 
Printing of booklets/pamphlets 
31. In regard to the steps taken by the Ministry to promote the scheme through local 
languages and through media such as radio, television and skits/nukkad nataks, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
“AB PM -JAY has a comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread 
awareness and empower beneficiaries for their rights and entitlements more 
prominently in rural areas. This includes intensive advertisement over traditional 
media platforms. NHA has shar ed model IEC materials including leaflets, flyers, 
pamphlets, banners etc with the States/UTs. States/UTs customize these contents 
with respect to their regional language. NHA has been telecasting PM -JAY related 
information on Doordarshan, DD News, Sansad TV, private news channels etc. 
Further, radio campaigns have been launched on AIR and private FM channels. 
Regular print advertisements are published. Other media channels like auto -
branding, announcements at railway stations, mass -messaging, outdoor branding, 
etc. have been undertaken. In radio, TVC and print -advertisement content in the 
local languages are used. Further, NHA has shared branding materials with SHA 
for use in local languages. Nukkad Nataks have been organised during events and 
fairs like II TF. States have organised many local events like run for Ayushman 

Bharat, painting and slogan writing competition etc. Further, many Ayushman 
Samvads have been organised with different stakeholders for reaching out to 
them.” 
 
32. When asked whether any sys tematic plan been formulated by the Ministry to 
include Rally, ASHA, PMC Health Care workers etc or the IEC plan has been entrusted 
to states, the Ministry stated that: 
“NHA and SHAs are extensively engaging ASHAs and other FLWs including 
Jeevika Didi, Panchayati Raj assistants, Gram Rozgar employees etc for reaching 
out to last mile. They have been engaged since the start of the scheme 
implementation.  
 
ASHAs and other FLWs have been extensively engaged in the Ayushman Card 
creation process. It may be note d that these ASHAs/FLWs are being incentivized 
by paying Rs 5 for each successful e-KYC related to Ayushman card creation.  
 
NHA has issued IEC guideline (Copy attached at Annexure5). NHA website also 
hosts different IEC materials like Pamphlets, Hoardings , Banners etc which are 
customized and used by the States.” 
 
33. On  a query as to whether the ministry tried to replicate successful IEC 
campaigns of states where positive impact of IEC activities has been observed, the 
Ministry in reply mentioned as under: 
“Based on the experience of the States, NHA has compiled a best practices 
booklet wherein various initiatives including IEC campaigns which have shown 
remarkable success have been included. This has been further shared with all 
States/UTs as well as oth er stakeholders for possible replication. The recent best 
practices booklet is attached at Annexure-6.” 
 
34. On being asked whether the flyers/pamphlets been published in local languages, 
the Ministry replied as under: 
“NHA has shared model IEC materials i ncluding leaflets, flyers, pamphlets, 
banners etc with the States/UTs. States/UTs customize these contents as per local 
requirement including changes in the language.” 
     
II. HOSPITAL EMPANELMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
A. Criteria regarding support system and infrastructure 
35. Ministry in their ATN has stated that each state has its own clinical establishment 
act which governs the registration and operation of healthcare services in that state 
therefore the requirement and eligibility of registration also diff ers from state to state. 
When asked about all the empanelled hospitals meeting criteria establis hed by their 
respective states and h ow is  the Ministry ensuring the same,  the Ministry, in reply, 
stated  that: 
“NHA has developed guidelines for empanelment of hospitals under AB PM -JAY. 
However, as public health is a State subject, SHAs have been provided flexibility 

regarding the empanelment criteria due to varying situation of demand and supply, 
and unique geographical situations in different States.  
 
It is submitted that public hospitals with inpatient services are deemed empanelled. 
Moreover, many hospitals already running under State schemes were subsumed 
under AB PM -JAY. Hence, Hospitals under those schemes were empanelled on 
an "as is" basis.  
 
SHAs are also expected to ensure that there are enough hospitals empanelled 
under the scheme so that eligible beneficiaries are provided free treatment without 
hassle. SHAs have been entrusted with the responsibility of managing 
engagement with the hospitals. The empanelment details are uploaded on the 
Hospital Empanelment Module (HEM) either by the hospitals themselves or 
through backend. NHA is going to shortly launch an improved version of HEM 
which would mandate pe riodical visit of hospitals by SHA and District 
Implementation Unit (DIU) officials and uploading the visit report. Further, hospitals 
will also be required to upload a periodic self -certification in this regard. NHA also 
sends a joint -inspection team to t he field to inspect the empaneled hospitals. 
Further, in 2022, NHA decided to set -up uniform DIUs across States. Accordingly, 
NHA issued guidelines to States for establishment and strengthening of uniform 
DIUs across all the districts. These DIUs have been  entrusted with the task of 
inspecting the hospitals and ensure quality in service delivery.” 
 
 
36.  As per the Ministry’s ATN, the data cleansing activity with regard to availability of 
healthcare services in public hospital has been initiated. When asked  about the status 
of this exercise and state-wise details of the same, the Ministry in reply, stated as under:  
 
“NHA has issued guidelines to set up and operationalise District Implementation 
Unit (DIU). The officials engaged under DIU are entrusted with the task of 
periodically visiting empanelled hospitals for quality inspection. Based on the 
report of DIU officials, hospitals are directed to take remedial action and failing to 
do so, they are de -empaneled. As on date, DIUs have been setup in 666 distric ts 
across the country. The state -wise details are enclosed at Annexure7. All 
concerned SHAs have been directed to ensure data verification and cleansing 
subsequently.  
 
NHA is going to shortly launch an improved version of HEM which would mandate 
periodical visit of hospitals by SHA and District Implementation Unit (DIU) officials 
and upload the visit report. Further, hospitals will also be required to upload a 
periodic self-certification in this regard.” 
 
B. Awareness Generation and Facilitation for Empanelment of EHCP 
 
37. When asked whether reasons have been ascertained for low availability of 
EHCPs, the Ministry, in  reply, stated  as follows: 
 
“As on 31st December 2023, a total of 27,209 hospitals including 11,865 private 
hospitals have been empanelled across the country in order to provide healthcare 
services to the scheme beneficiaries. However, in order to further improve access 
to healthcare  service especially in deficit regions, continuous efforts are being 
made by NHA and SHAs. SHAs are entrusted with the responsibility of hospital 

empanelment, who evaluate the need of empaneling more hospitals based on 
demand and supply of services in the region. Further, prospective hospitals also 
need to fulfill the certain minimum criteria for empanelment. NHA has been 
continuously rationalizing the health benefit package cost and monitoring timely 
settlement of claims to encourage other hospitals to get  empaneled under the 
scheme.” 
 
38. Ministry in their ATN has mentioned that a team of 60 resources from NHA - 
visited 224 hospitals across States to understand challenge in empanelment and 
participation. When asked to share the details, the Ministry stated as under: 
“60 officials from NHA visited 224 hospitals in 30 districts across 10 States viz. 
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  
 
The visit was undertaken to identify the key issues at the service provider level and 
to take corrective measures. Both public hospitals and private hospitals including 
in-active hospitals and recently empanelled hospitals were covered during the visit.  
 
During the visit, the officials evaluated the hospitals on basis of multiple 
parameters such as hospital infrastructure, display of IEC materials including 
deployment of hospital kiosk, seamless delivery of quality healthcare services 
beneficiaries, presen ce of dedicated PMAMs in the hospitals, feedback from 
hospital on NHA’s IT system (BIS, TMS & HEM), etc.” 
  
39. When asked to provide state -wise challenges faced by hospitals which are 
resulting in low availability EHCPs and whether all states represented in the 224 
hospitals visited  Please, the Ministry replied as under: 
“60 officials from NHA visited 30 districts across 10 States viz. Assam, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh. Key actionables identified during the visit are as follows:  
• Training on IT platform  
• Adoption of latest Health Benefit Package (HBP 2022) in some States  
• Timely settlement of claims  
 
Further, the State-wise key suggestions/observations is as follows:  
Gujarat:  
• Timely settlement of claims  
• Issues in claim settlement of portability cases.  
• Incentive distribution to motivate health staff in public hospitals  
Maharashtra:  
• Training on IT platform for portability.  
• Incentive distribution to motivate health staff in public hospitals  
Rajasthan: 
• Issues in implementation of portability services  
Karnataka:  
• Training on IT platform.” 
 
 

C. Physical verification not conducted by District Empanelment Committee 
40. On the query as to why physical verification was not made mandatory for 
empanelment of hospitals, the Ministry replied that : 
“Under AB PM -JAY, public hospitals are deemed empanelled under the scheme. 
Therefore, empanelment of public hospital does not requ ire any physical 
verification.  
 
Regarding private hospitals, requirement of field visit was relaxed by the SHAs 
during Covid 19 pandemic. During this period, many public hospitals were 
designated as "covid only" facilities and therefore there was an urgen t requirement 
of private hospitals for providing non -covid treatment. This facility to empanel 
private hospitals was available only for that period. Otherwise, it is mandatory for 
DEC to undertake mandatory field visit before empanelling any private hospit als 
and States are complying with this protocol. Moreover, many hospitals already 
running under State schemes were subsumed under AB PMJAY. Hence, Hospitals 
empanelled under these schemes were empanelled under PM -JAY on an "as is" 
basis. NHA has issued gui delines to setup and operationalise District 
Implementation Unit (DIU). The officials engaged under DIU are entrusted with the 
task to periodically visit empanelled hospitals for quality inspection. Based on the 
report of DIU personnel, hospitals are direc ted to take remedial action and failing 
to do so, they can be de -empanelled. Further, NHA is going to shortly launch an 
improved version of HEM which would mandate periodical visit of hospitals by 
SHA and District Implementation Unit (DIU) officials and up loading the visit report. 
Hospitals will also be required to upload a periodic self-certification in this regard.” 
 
41. Asked about the composition of District Empanelment Committee and how often 
are they expected to visit Hospitals for physical verificati on for their empanelment, the 
Ministry, in reply, stated  as below: 
“The recommended structure of DEC, as per Hospital Empanelment Guideline of 
NHA is as follows:  
1. Chief Medical Officer of the district.  
2. District Program Coordinator - SHA.  
3. In case of Insurance model, Insurance company representative.  
 
SHA may require the Insurance Company to provide a medical representative to 
assist the DEC in its activities. DEC is required to undertake physical verification of 
private facilities at the time of  empanelment. The district team engages with the 
hospitals on a day to day basis and provides necessary support so that free and 
quality treatment to eligible beneficiaries may be provided. Also, the District team 
is entrusted with the task of capacity bui lding, quality inspection, beneficiary 
facilitation etc.” 
 
 
 
 

III. SYSTEM OF SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS OF EMPANELLED HEALTHCARE 
PROVIDERS (EHCP’S) 
42. When asked as to what reasons have been proffered by the States and UTs that 
have not shared database of beneficiaries of state specific schemes for ingestion into 
the Beneficiary Identification System of NHA, the Ministry furnished their reply as under: 
“All States except Bihar have shared Aadhaar -seeded digitized data for ingestion 
into the beneficiary iden tification system (BIS) of NHA and the same has been 
ingested into the system.” 
43. On being enquired whether there has been any case of overlapping of 
beneficiaries of PM -JAY with State specific schemes and If so, what measures have 
been taken by the Mini stry to resolve the issue, the Ministry furnished their reply as 
under: 
“All States except Bihar have shared Aadhaar -seeded digitized data for ingestion 
into the beneficiary identification system (BIS) of NHA and the same has been 
ingested into the system.  NHA has launched Aapke Dwar Ayushman 3.0 to 
expedite Ayushman Card creation. Also, Ayushman Bhava campaign has been 
launched with the target to achieve saturation. Further, Ayushman Bharat PM -JAY 
is a flagship scheme under Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra. Ayu shman card creation 
is an on-spot service under VBSY. As a result of the concerted efforts, more than 
30 cr Ayushman Cards have been created. NHA along with SHAs are striving to 
saturate Ayushman card for all eligible beneficiaries. Post this card creation  
activities, demarcation of PM -JAY and State -scheme beneficiaries can be 
undertaken.” 
 
44. About the present status of settlement of pending claims, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
 
“On a daily basis 45,000 -50,000 claims are submitted across 33 States/UTs 
implementing AB PM-JAY. As a result of rigorous monitoring of claims pending in 
the States, the number of pending claims has reduced to 37.5 lakh claims (as of 
31st December 2023) from about 47 lakhs in April 2023.  
 
Claim Settlement within TAT is being monitored at highest priority.” 
 
45. On being asked about the average time taken for settlement of both intra State 
claims and portability claims, the Ministry stated as below: 
“NHA ha s prescribed for a turn -around-time (TAT) of 15 days for claims 
settlement. Timely settlement of claims under PMJAY depends on 2 factors viz. 
availability of funds and trained human resources. Therefore, the average claim 
payment TAT varies from State to State.” 
 

46. Enquired about the rationale behind keeping the turnaround time for settlement 
of 30 days for portability claims and whether the Ministry and NHA have explored the 
possibility of reducing the turnaround time to 15 days for portability claims as  well, the 
Ministry stated as below: 
“With the launch of new Transaction Management System (TMS), the turnaround time 
(TAT) for both intra-state and portability claims will be 15 days.” 
 
47. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry and NHA to a chieve 
complete bank integration and digitize all claim transactions to ensure prompt 
settlement of claims, the Ministry replied as under: 
“The Transaction Management System (TMS) used for claims settlement has 
provision for bank -integration. All States ba rring few have successfully integrated 
with bank payment gateway. In the new version of TMS, bank payment gateway 
integration will be mandatory. The new version of TMS has been launched in 
Chandigarh.” 
 
48. Data analysis revealed that 39.57 lakh claims (in  both API and TMS tables) took 
more than the specified 12 hours for approval of preauthorization. When asked about 
the steps taken to ensure timely approval of pre -authorization, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“To expedite pre - authorization approval process, the following initiatives have 
been undertaken:  
 
1. In the latest Health Benefit packages i.e., HBP 2022, in case of 645 procedures 
out of total 1,949 procedures which are primarily emergency and lifesaving 
procedures, auto-approval of pre-auth request have been enabled.  
 
2. In handling emergency cases, preauthorization may not be required for 
lifesaving or limb -saving operative procedures, but formal intimation must be 
provided within 24 hours of admission, and in case of technical delays, 
preauthorization codes can be obt ained over the phone from the Insurance 
Company/Trust. Emergency cases are given priority for review, and there is a 
provision for raising the request for pre -auth within 3 days for private and 5 days 
for public hospitals in cases of technical system issues for treatment.  
 
3. For approval of pre-auth, the working hour is defined based on case load. It has 
been seen that majority pre -authorisations are requested during this time period. 
The current working hours are defined in the system as 11:00 AM to 06:0 0 PM. 
The approval is automatically triggered if the pre -authorisation request has not 
been responded to within six hours as per the approved calculation of period.  
 
4. NHA is working on increase in the number of procedures for machine -based 
pre-authorisation by introducing AI/ML in the system  
 
5. The new TMS launched has been designed to ensure TAT of 6 hrs for each pre-
auth request.” 
 
 

Treatment of a beneficiary shown as ‘died’ during earlier claim/treatment 
49.  In regard to a query  whether any comprehensive investigation been initiated as to 
how preauthorization initiation, claim submission and final claim approval by ISA/SHA 
for beneficiaries already shown as died during treatment earlier, was done and how is 
the Ministry ensuring that such occurrences do not recur, the Ministry stated that: 
“NHA has submitted in the action taken report to C&AG that claims have been 
raised by the hospital with respect to treatment provided before the death of the 
patient. Further, following points are submitted: 
 
1. Under AB PM -JAY, hospitals are allowed to initiate requests for pre -
authorization upto three days post the date of admission in case of private 
hospitals and 5 days post the date of admission in case of public hospitals. This 
feature is enabled to avoid  denial of treatment in case of limited connectivity, 
emergency situations, etc. Thus, date of death can be earlier than date of pre -auth 
but should not be later than date of admission. Out of 3,903 cases, in 3,567 cases 
treatment recorded on TMS was provi ded to the beneficiary during the course of 
hospitalisation, however, Pre -auth was initiated later i.e., date of admission is 
earlier than date of death. Hence, it is can be said that treatment was not provided 
after the death of beneficiary.  
2. 2,031 cas es out of 3,903 cases highlighted by audit (More than 50% cases 
reported by audit), pertains to public hospitals, which don't have any incentive to 
book cases fraudulently.  
3. The status of leftover 336 cases out of 3,903, where date of admission is later  
than date of death, following explanation is given, based on the analysis of data:  
 a. 226 cases had reported death of neonate who were taking treatment on 
Mother's card. Thus, the original card holder who is mother can still take treatment 
on the same card. Under AB PM-JAY, children up to 5 years of age avail treatment 
on the Ayushman Card of their parents. Accordingly, Ayushman Card can 
simultaneously be used for children and either of parents in two different hospitals. 
 b. There are 92 cases where cla im was submitted post treatment given before 
death with all document and hence processed after due diligence and the same is 
recorded on the system. 
 c. In 8 cases, death of one of the twin neonates was reported whereas both were 
taking treatment on Parents card.  
 d. 5 cases where PPE kit for covid cases were booked after the death of patient. 
 e. 3 cases where death of a parent took place while the neonate continued taking 
treatment against the parent’s card no.  
 f. 1 case where no death was recorded on the beneficiary card.  
 g. 1 case of dialysis of Rs. 2200 is suspected to be fraudulent. Recovery has 
been made in that case. Details of Claims are attached at Annexure – 8 
 
As an important check in the system, NHA has mandated Mortality report to be 
filled and submitted by the hospital on claim submission for death cases.  
 
NHA has deployed the new version of TMS in Chandigarh and soon it will be 
launched across the country. While designing TMS 2.0 it has been ensured that all 
validations are in place. Fur ther, where pre -auth is being requested related to a 
patient who has died during treatment reasons thereof will have to be recorded.” 
 
 

IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
50. PMJAY is completely funded by the Government and costs are shared between 
Central and State  Governments. The ratio for all States, except North -Eastern States 
and the three Himalayan States and Union Territories with legislature, is 60:40, with the 
Centre’s share being 60 per cent and the State’s, 40 per cent. For North -Eastern States 
and the th ree Himalayan States/UT (viz. Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand), the ratio is 90:10, with the Centre’s share being 90 per cent and the 
State’s, 10 per cent. For Union Territories without legislatures, the Central Government 
may provide up to 100 per cent on a case-to case basis. 
A. Release and Utilization of Grants 
 Grants released to Chhattisgarh in three different bank accounts: 
51. Audit noted that NHA released grants of ₹ 280.20 crore, ₹ 217.60 crore and ₹ 
112.62 crore in three differen t bank accounts to Chhattisgarh during 2018 -21, in 
contravention of the guidelines which stipulate opening of two separate designated 
‘Escrow Accounts’ by the SHA, for receiving Scheme implementation grant and 
administrative grant. On being asked about the  reasons were attributed by the state of 
Chhattisgarh in th is regard and w hat safeguards in the guidelines were incorporated to 
avoid convergence of the state scheme with the national scheme and w hat action has 
been taken by NHA to ensure uniform complianc e of the guidelines across the country, 
the Ministry stated as under: 
“Reply regarding funds released in three bank accounts of Chhattisgarh:  
The scheme guideline allows for two bank accounts at a time, one for 
implementation purpose and one for administration purpose and the State has 
opened different sets of accounts at different times.  
Chhattisgarh State was first implementing AB PM -JAY in hybrid mode. At that 
time, State scheme was not converged with AB PM -JAY. Subsequently, State has 
migrated to trust mode. Further, it has converged the State scheme DKBSSY. 
Therefore, it had opened multiple bank account at different period of scheme 
implementation. Currently, after migration to Trust Mode, there is single escrow 
account operated from 01-08-2021 for AB PM-JAY, which is integrated with TMS. 
In case of PM -JAY, funds are released to the hospitals directly through online 
integration between TMS and the bank account. Sometimes, some banks fail to 
complete the bank integration. In few other cases, th e services provided by the 
banks are not satisfactory and therefore, SHAs change bank account.  
These bank accounts have been changed post approval from the Competent 
Authority at State level. The changes in the bank account are as per the existi ng 
guideline in this regard. Funds are released to bank accounts only after successful 
integration with PFMS.  
Replying regarding convergence of State scheme with PM-JAY:  

Currently, Ayushman Bharat PM -JAY is being implemented across the country in 
convergence with State schemes. The Cabinet of the Govt. of India allowed the 
implementation of PM-JAY in convergence with the State schemes in such States 
where already a similar health assurance scheme was existing.  
Further, the Cabinet also allowed such States to use t heir respective beneficiary 
databases subject to mapping of those databases with SECC database. The 
underlying understanding behind this decision was that the beneficiary database 
used by the States will be subsuming all the eligible beneficiaries as per t he SECC 
database. Thus, by design, it was assumed that there will be an overlap between 
database of PM -JAY with State specific schemes beneficiary database and the 
same shall be addressed by mapping of beneficiaries.  
Previously, the mapping of the beneficiaries from the States specific database with 
the SECC database couldn't be undertaken as there was no common identifier 
between these databases. However, in January 2022, the Cabinet of Government 
of India decided to give flexibility to use other database s for verification of 
beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat PM -JAY against such SECC beneficiaries 
who couldn't be identified and verified.  
In light of the Cabinet approval for use of non -SECC databases for beneficiary 
verification, National Health Authorit y issued guidelines to States/UTs to use 
suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -
economic profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries. Accordingly, all States/UTs 
except Bihar have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same has been 
ingested in the Beneficiary Identification System of NHA.  
NHA has launched Aapke Dwar Ayushman 3.0 to expedite Ayushman Card 
creation. Also, Ayushman Bhava campaign has been launched with the target to 
achieve saturation. Further, Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY is a flagship scheme under 
Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra. Ayushman card creation is an on -spot service under 
the above . 
As a result of the concerted efforts, more than 30 cr Ayushman Cards have been 
created. NHA along with SHAs are stri ving to saturate Ayushman card for all 
eligible beneficiaries. Post this card creation activities, demarcation of PM-JAY and 
State-scheme beneficiaries can be undertaken.” 
B. Non-maintenance of separate escrow account for PM-JAY 
 
52. Despite the fact that PMJAY guidelines prescribe designated escrow account for 
operation of the scheme, when the Ministry were enquired as to why separate escrow 
account for PMJAY and State spons ored scheme were not maintained and w hat 
corrective measure h as since been taken to ensure that specific accounts be 
maintained, they responded as below: 
 
“Many States, including States referred by Audit are implementing AB PM -JAY in 
convergence with State schemes with a larger beneficiary base. At the time of 

launch of scheme, the Cabinet note allowed such States to continue with their 
beneficiary base, however, it was expected that such States will map their 
beneficiary base with SECC. In absence of any common identifier between SECC 
database and State scheme beneficiary database, the mapping exercise could 
never be undertaken. States were released funds on a prorata basis as actual 
utilization related to eligible SECC beneficiaries couldn't be ascertained. 
Therefore, a common bank account was maintained.  
 
  In light of the Cabinet approval for use of non -SECC databases for 
beneficiary verification, National Health Authority has issued guidelines to 
States/UTs to use suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of 
similar socio-economic profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries. Accordingly, 
all States except Bihar have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same has 
been ingested in the Beneficiary Identification System of NHA.  
 
  NHA has launched Aapke Dwar Ayushman 3.0 to expedite Ayu shman 
Card creation. Also, Ayushman Bhava campaign has been launched with the 
target to achieve saturation. Further, Ayushman Bharat PM -JAY is a flagship 
scheme under Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra. Ayushman card creation is an on -spot 
service under VBSY.  
 
  As a result of the concerted efforts, more than 30 cr Ayushman Cards 
have been created. NHA along with SHAs are striving to saturate Ayushman card 
for all eligible beneficiaries. Post this card creation activities, demarcation of PM -
JAY and State -scheme b eneficiaries can be undertaken. Subsequent to which 
separate bank accounts for PM -JAY and State schemes will be operated. 
Currently, claims of converged scheme are settled through a common bank 
account.” 
 
C. Release of grant without ensuring release of upfront share by SHAs 
 
53. In view of the NHA reply that in the initial year of the scheme, funds were 
released upfront to ensure early implementation of the scheme, when asked what 
specific actions were taken by the authority to adjust the f unds in the future instalments, 
the Ministry responded as below: 
 
“In the first year of scheme implementation, funds were released to States to 
ensure that scheme implementation is started. Setting up SHA, creating budget 
head and getting the funds released from State Fina nce department would have 
taken time. Scheme implementation couldn't have been withheld. This one -time 
exemption was provided only to ensure that scheme implementation is started on 
time and beneficiaries are provided treatment under the scheme. Therefore,  the 
funds were released to the States without upfront release by SHAs. However, in 
subsequent releases State share was duly adjusted against all such funds 
released.” 
 

D. Excess release of grant by NHA 
 
54. On being enquired about the reasons for excess release of grant of 10.86 crore 
to Mizoram, the Ministry replied as mentioned below: 
 
“There was neither any excess release nor violation of any guideline. The fund 
release for Mizoram for FY 2018-19 can be explained as follows: 
State was implementing scheme in insurance mode. The discovered premium was 
Rs. 1,396. NHA’s liability was limited to 90% of Rs 1052 i.e., Rs 946.8/ - In the 
State, 1,94,859 beneficiaries were supported by NHA. Thus, central contribution 
for 1,94,859 beneficiaries @ Rs. 946.8/ - per family would be Rs. 18,44,92,501/ -. 
For NHA to release Rs. 18,44,92,501, State should have released Rs. 
2,04,99,167. However, State released Rs. 2,72,01,898. The corresponding central 
share would have been Rs. 24,48,17,082. NHA released Rs 18,44,92,501 to t he 
State in three tranches of 45:45:10. 4. Any additional liability over and above Rs 
1052 was borne by the State.” 
 
E. Excess release of Rs. 8.37 crore to Andhra Pradesh 
 
55. When asked to clarify whether the release of excess grant to Andhra Pradesh 
was in contravention of the provisions of the guidelines, the Ministry replied that as 
under: 
 
“The audit observation is limited to the fact that Rs. 8.37 crore was paid as part of 
first tranche though it should have been paid in next tranche as per NHA's fund  
release guideline. It is not a case of excess release beyond the budgetary 
allocation. The total funds released to the State is as per the allocated budget for 
that FY. 
  The release was calculated based on the claims submission trend. Rs. 
182.92 Cr was d ecided based on 50% of expected claims. The guideline was 
made by NHA and CEO, NHA was the competent authority to make exception. 
The release was duly approved by CEO, NHA and reason was recorded on the 
file. Further, there was no violation of GFR.” 
 
F. Blockage of fund under RSBY – Rs. 96.63 crore 
 
56. When the Ministry was asked to explain w hether NHA approached MoHFW for 
necessary action including adjustment of funds as RSBY  related affair, the Ministry 
responded as below: 
 
“MoHFW is the custodian of RSBY related matters And NHA has intimated 
MoHFW in this regard. Further, MoHFW has written to the State of Jharkhand vide 
letter no. S.12012/64/2015-RSBY dated 08.01.2024.” 
 
G. Injudicious release of Rs. 3.76 crore to Puducherry and Punjab 
 

57. PMJAY Guidelines provide that State/UT shall release its share upfront, 
depending upon category of State/UT along with its administrative expense share into 
the separate designated escrow account of SHA opened by the States/UTs for 
implementation of the Sc heme. The Central Government shall then release its share of 
grant-in-aid into the designated Escrow Accounts of the SHA of respective State/UT.  
 
 Audit noted that:  
 i. NHA released grants amounting to ₹ 1.52 crore (₹ 0.31 crore in October 2018 
and ₹ 1.2 1 crore in March 2019) to SHA Puducherry before the commencement of the 
Scheme in the UT of Puducherry i.e. July 2019. 
  ii. Similarly, NHA released ₹ 2.24 crore to SHA Punjab in March 2019 before the 
commencement of the Scheme in the State i.e. August 2019.  
The above resulted in avoidable parking of grants in the two State/UT for a period 
ranging from five months to nine months. NHA accepted the audit observation and 
stated (August 2022 and September 2022) that in the initial year, funds were released 
to States/UTs on urgent basis to kick start the Scheme implementation. However, in the 
subsequent years, funds have been released only after following the due process. 
 
58. When enquired to provide comments on the aforesaid audit observation and  
Whether the grants released by the Central Government before the commencement of 
the Scheme in the States have since been adjusted in the subseq uent grants-in-aid, the 
Ministry illustrated as below: 
 
“With regards to audit observation regarding release of Rs. 3.76 cr to Puducherry 
and Punjab, following points are submitted: 
The funds were released to States only after signing MoU. States required this 
fund to set -up offices, hire contractual resources, undertake IEC activity, engage 
with other stakeholders etc. 
The time gap between on-boarding of State and launch of scheme in the State can 
be explained from the fact that launch of scheme requires many activities to be 
undertaken like on boarding of insurance company, engaging ISA, empanelling 
hospitals etc. Therefore, f unds released to States were part of scheme 
implementation. 
Immediately after the launch of PM -JAY, these funds were adjusted against the 
overall central share payable to the State/UT.” 
 
H. Diversion of grant by SHAs 
 
59. PMJAY guidelines for release for administrative expenses stipulate that grant 
released for administrative expenses is to be utilized by SHA only for the specific 
purpose of incurring administrative expenses towards implementation of PMJAY. Audit 
noted that seven SHAs, Dadra Nagar Haveli a nd Daman Diu, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand diverted the grant of ₹ 
50.61 crore from one head to another head i.e. administrative grant to implementation 
and vice -versa and to State health scheme.  NHA, while a dmitting the facts, replied 

(August 2022) that due to insufficient amount of grant and delay in receipt of grants by 
SHAs the grants were diverted from one head to another. 
 
60. Upon being enquired to specify whether diversion of grant by SHAs from one 
head to another head i.e. administrative grant to implementation and viceversa was 
permissible as per the guidelines, the Ministry offered their reply as mentioned below: 
 
“Diversion of funds across the heads is not permissible. States have been clearly 
asked to avoid this. However, initially few states/UTs out of necessity and 
ignorance about the processes have undertaken this activity. However, when this 
was highlighted to the State, the funds were transferred back into the intended 
account. The State specific input received is put up as follows: 
 
Himachal Pradesh: The SHA had intimated NHA vide letter dated 28.09.2020 
regarding utilization of funds for administrative purpose out of Implementation GIA 
from previous grants while submitting the request for next  GIA. The copy of which 
has already been shared with audit.  
 
Nagaland: This amount has been replenished after the release of corresponding 
State share on 13/06/2019 (Annexure 5- Bank statement and Sanction letter). This 
was used for payment of premium to Insurance company in order to initiate 
payment of claims under PM-JAY.  
 
Uttarakhand: At the initiation of the scheme no grant was received in 
Administration A/c for administrative  expenditure. Due to this, the urgent 
administrative expenditure was incurre d from Implementation Escrow A/c. The 
amount which was used from Implementation A/c towards administrative 
expenditure was transferred back to the Implementation Escrow A/c.  
 
Tamil Nadu: Initially fund for both premium cost of Rs.293.32 crores and 
administrative cost of Rs.11.66 crores totalling Rs.304.98 crores had been 
released to the SB account no 500101011996448, City Union Bank, Teynampet, 
Chennai of TNHSP. Separate escrow accounts had been opened subsequently. 
Out of this amount, a sum of Rs.261.80 c rores (including interest) have been 
remitted to Tamil Nadu Government account as per Govt. Letter No.165/BG -
II/2019, Finance (BG -II) Department, dated 05.06.2019. This fund was used for 
implementation of the scheme.  
 
Gujarat: The transferred amount has b een deposited back to PM -JAY account in 
that year only.” 
 
 
 
61. On being further asked as to w hat led to delay in receipt of  grants by SHAs, they 
replied as below: 
 

“Under AB PM -JAY, central share is released to States/UTs based on actual 
utilization subject to 60%/ 90%/ 100% of the ceiling amount which is currently Rs. 
1052 per family per year. Any additional expenditure over and above the defined 
central ceiling amount has to be borne by the respective State Government. 
Further, the central share is released based on the upfront release of State share. 
Sometimes there is delay in receipt of State share due to various administrative 
reasons in the State” 
 
I. Grants lying unspent with SHAs 
 
62. PMJAY guidelines on utilization of Grant -in-Aid for administrative expenses 
provide that under no circumstances should the Grant -in-Aid be left unspent. Audit 
noted unspent balances amounting to ₹ 98.98 crore, ₹ 128.13 crore and ₹ 139.67 crore 
at the close of 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020 -21 respectively rangin g from 16 to 100 per 
cent lying with 20 SHAs40, thereby resulting in underutilization of administrative grants.  
NHA, while admitting the facts, replied (August 2022) that in the absence of any 
estimation and plan, release of grants at the fag end of the fi nancial year and outbreak 
of COVID, the administrative grants could not be utilised. In this context, audit is of the 
view that the scheme is in its fourth year of implementation. However, the administrative 
grants have persistently remained unspent since inception of the scheme. NHA is to 
ensure that administrative grants should not remain unspent. 
 
63. In the line of further enquiry, when the Ministry was asked whether there is  a 
mechanism devised by SHAs to estimate the requirement of administrative gran ts and 
to ensure full utilization of  the same within a given period and w hat action has been 
taken by NHA to ensure that administrative grants sh ould not remain unspent by SHAs, 
they replied as below: 
 
“In the initial year of scheme implementation, since t here was no estimation 
available regarding the utilization of funds in different States/UTs, sometimes extra 
(with respect to utilization capacity of the States) funds got released to the State. In 
subsequent years, funds were released based on the last year trend, topped up 
with expected year on year increase. Further, funds are released in tranches to 
ensure that States utilize the funds released in previous tranche before seeking 
additional funds.” 
 
J. Non-remittance of Interest 
 
64. PMJAY guidelines stipulate that in case any interest is earned due to funds lying 
unspent in the account designated for receiving the Grant -In-Aid for administrative 
expenses, the Central Government shall have the first right of claim on such interest 
earned and the interes t shall be transferred back to the NHA.  Ten SHAs in Andaman 
and Nicobar Island, Bihar, Chandigarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand did not remit interest of 
₹ 22.17 crore earned by them on unspe nt grants to NHA.  NHA, while accepting the 
facts, stated (August 2022) that it has issued instructions to all States to deposit the 

interest earned on central share provided. Those States who have not complied with, 
will be asked to strictly comply this wi thin the given time period. Those States/UTs who 
have spent the interest earned will be asked to return the amount. 
 
65. When the Committee enquired w hether the interest earned by Ten SHAs on 
unspent grants with them have since been remitted to NHA and fur nish details in this 
regard indicating inter alia the timeline, if any fixed for remittance of interest, the Ministry 
responded as under: 
 
“A&N Island, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, J&K have deposited back the interest 
amount as per GFR. Currently, funds are not released to States/UTs unless they 
give a certificate that interest if any earned has been deposited in the CFI. The 
details of interest remitted back are as follows:  
1. A&N Island: Deposited Rs 1,26 Lakh  
2. Bihar: Deposited Rs 9.88 Cr  
3. Chandigarh: Will be deposited by end of month  
4. Jammu and Kashmir: Deposited Rs 11 Lakh  
5. Jharkhand: No Interest has been earned in the GIAimplementation account as 
the account is a current account. However, State will be remitting interest earned 
in GIA-admin account post calculation  
6. Madhya Pradesh: Deposited Rs 4,35 Cr  
7. Puducherry: Deposited Rs 6,42 Lakh  
8. Rajasthan: Deposited Rs 2,99 Cr  
9. Tamil Nadu: Deposited Rs 5.52 Crore  
10. Uttarakhand: No Interest has been earned as the account is a current account.  
 
Further, funds are not released to the States without submission of audi ted 
financial statement” 
 
K. Non-refund of premium by Insurance Companies 
 
66. PMJAY Guidelines provide that the Insurer will be required to refund premium if 
they fail to reach the claim ratio specified in comparison with the premium paid 
(excluding GST &  Other taxes/Duties) in the full period of the insurance policy.  Audit 
noted that refund of premium of ₹ 700.10 crore was recoverable from the insurance 
companies in six States/UTs viz. Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya and Tamil N adu. Out of this, partial recovery of only ₹ 241.91 crore in three 
States/UTs, Jammu and Kashmir (₹ 16.85 crore), Maharashtra (₹ 193.55 crore) and 
Meghalaya (₹ 31.51 crore) had been made and remaining amount of ₹ 458.19 crore for 
the period from 2018 -19 till June 2022 was still recoverable from Insurance Companies 
(ICs) in all six States/UTs.  NHA replied (August 2022) that it will seek final settlement 
statement from all States/UTs, implementing the Scheme in insurance/mixed mode. 
 
67. Further, when the Com mittee asked the Ministry as to w hat is the current status 
with regard to receipt of final settlement statement from all States/UTs, implementing 
the Scheme in Insurance/mixed mode and asked to state whether the remaining 

amount of Rs. 458.19 crore for the  period from 2018 -19 till June 2022 has since been 
recovered from Insurance Companies (ICs) of all six States/UTs, the Ministry replied as 
below: 
 
“Refund has been received by Ladakh, J&K, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Meghalaya 
and Tamil Nadu with respect to that  period. The refunded amount has been 
adjusted suitably against subsequent fund release.  
 
States where refund has been realized by the State after final settlement with the 
insurance company, same has been intimated to NHA and is being adjusted 
against the funds released. 
 
Refund is received as per the contractual provisions between SHA and insurance 
company. Generally, such settlement takes place at the end of total contract 
period i.e., if the insurance company has entered into a contract with the SHA fo r 
three years, in that case, refund will be calculated at the end of three years. 
 
Most of the contract signed by insurance company is for three years. Further, such 
settlement is done after all genuine claims are settled by the insurance company. 
The audit was done for the period ending on 31st March 2021, by then three years 
had not completed for most of the States/UTs implementing the scheme using 
insurance mode. 
 
NHA is taking steps to ensure that SHAs reconcile all releases to insurance 
companies in a time bound manner. State specific replies received from the States 
are as follows:  
 
Meghalaya : The non -refund of premium by Insurance Company, was caused on 
account of one time adjusted of the cost of additional kits for registration during 
registration drive in 2019 as a one-time claim amount. This measure has impacted 
the claim ratio which resulted in an increase in the administrative expenses by ₹ 
3,85,45,718/- (Rupees Three Crores Eighty -Five Lakhs Forty -Five Thousand 
Seven Hundred Eighteen Only) and therefore led to partial recovery of refund of 
premium. Necessary corrective actions have been undertaken, through letter no: 
DHS/MHIS/CAGFin/32/2023/1307 dated 02.11.2023 that was sent to the 
Insurance Company and email of refund confirmation and the refu nd was received 
by the State Nodal Agency, Megha Health Insurance Scheme. 
 
Jammu and Kashmir: SHA Jammu and Kashmir has recovered all the amount of 
premium paid in excess of the due and there is no amount pending on this 
account. 
 
Gujarat : The claim reconciliation is completed and the Insurance company has 
refunded a premium of Rs. 9,16,66,413/- and Rs.54,46,25,915/- during the policy 1 
& 2 (2018-19 and 2019-20).  
 

Total refunded amount is 63,62,92,328/-  
 
Ladakh: Refund has been r eceived by Bajaj Alliance and same funds have been 
utilized.  
 
Maharashtra: SHAS office received total amount of Rs.264,40,48,324/ - from 
United India Insurance Company Ltd (UIICH) for policy period 01/04/2020 to 
31/03/2021. (Rs. 193,55,95,228/- received on 04/02/2022 and Rs. 70,84,53,096/ - 
received on 04/08/2022). According to the National Health Authority GoI, O.M. 
dated 04/03/2021 this office calculated the refund on premium for beneficiary 
8363664 amount of Rs. 59,74,16,520/ - was paid vide challan TRN no. 
1803230011010 on 27.03.2023 towards interest vid challan TRN no. 
2903230033876 on 27.03.2023.” 
 
 
L. Non-refund of Rs. 31.28 crore by West Bengal due to non -implementation 
 of PMJAY 
 
68. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed (July 2018) between  NHA 
and Government of West Bengal for the implementation of the PMJAY. NHA released 
(17 September 2018) central share of ₹ 193.34 crore (₹ 176.56 crore and ₹ 16.78 crore 
on account of grant -in-aid and administrative expenses respectively).  Government of 
West Bengal communicated (January 2019) to the NHA its decision to withdraw from 
the Scheme. NHA asked (February 2019) the State Government to refund the grant -in-
aid amount along with any interest amount earned by them. 
 
69. When the Ministry was asked by the Committee as to w hy was the remaining 
amount of Rs. 31.28 crore not refunded by the State Government of West Bengal and 
whether the same has since been recovered, they explained as under: 
 
“The State Government has implemented the scheme till Jan 2019.  During this 
period, hospitalizations worth Rs. 17.09 Cr was authorized. Further, SHA engaged 
ISA for settlement of the claims. Further, State Govt. set up SHA and other 
paraphernalia for running the scheme. After adjusting all this amount SHA 
refunded all the amount but Rs. 31.28 Cr. Therefore, the account has been duly 
settled. A communication has been issued to the State of West Bengal to submit 
information in this regard. Their reply is awaited.” 
 
 
 
 
M. Release of grants to SHAs without obtaining audited statements of 
 accounts 
 
70. As per sanction letter issued to SHAs while releasing the grants, SHAs are 
required to furnish to the NHA an annual Utilization Certificate along with audited 

Statement of Accounts in respect of Grants -in-aid received during various quarters in 
Form 12-C, as per GFR 2017 which shall furnish that the Grants-in-aid has been utilized 
for the purpose for which it was sanctioned to the SHA by NHA. The utilization 
certificate shal l be signed by CEO, SHA along with Head of Accounts/Finance 
Department. By accepting UCs without audited Statements of Accounts and UCs 
without signature of the competent authority, it wasn’t clear as to how NHA ensured that 
grant was utilized for the purp ose it was released. NHA, while accepting the audit 
observation, stated (August 2022) that it has been constantly pursuing with the 
States/UTs to share the audited Financial Statement.  Audit also noted that six SHAs, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madh ya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand furnished inflated UCs amounting to ₹ 38.24 crore to NHA.  NHA replied 
that SHAs furnished UCs as per the actual expenses incurred during the year and not 
as per financial year. NHA’s reply is to be read wit h Rule 238 (2) of GFR which provides 
that subsequent grant shall be released only after Utilization Certificate in respect of 
grants of preceding financial year is submitted to the Ministry/Department concerned. 
 
71. Further when asked to specify whether N HA ascertained the veracity of the 
Utilization Certificates furnished by SHAs before release of subsequent gran ts, the 
Ministry replied that: 
 
“States have been asked to furnish audited financial statement along with UC for 
release of the funds. All the pe nding UCs are being requisitioned whenever funds 
are being released to State/UT. 
 
State specific inputs as received from respective SHA is put up as below: 
 
Himachal Pradesh: SHA, HP has provided UCs as per actual utilization, the details 
are given below: During the financial year 2018 -19 & 2019 -20, the UCs were not 
demanded as per financial year, hence, it has been submitted as per expenditure 
done in the mid of 2019 not as on 31.03.2018 & 31.03.2019. The SHA has 
submitted correct UCs as per amount spent f or the purpose. It is also intimated 
that NHA is in receipt of audited statement from State. 
 
Uttarakhand: The Utilization certificates for the F.Y. 2020 -21 are sent to NHA as 
per Form 12 -C duly signed by the CEO. The amount utilized shown in the 
certificate is as per the actual expenses incurred during the year. 
 
Tamil Nadu: Utilization certificate sent vide ref. no. 3624/TNHSP/INS/2019 dated 
21.07.2020 (2018-19, 2019-20), 22.07.2021(2020-21), 14.06.2022(2021-22).  
 
Jammu and Kashmir: Books of accounts are  being maintained as per by -laws of 
State Health Agency, UT of Jammu and Kashmir. Regarding the conduct of audit 
by Chartered Accountant/ Any other Qualified Person/ Agency, it is intimated that 
the matter regarding hiring of Chartered Accountant was figured at Agenda No 7 in 
the fourth governing council meeting held on 08 -11- 2021 under the chairmanship 
of Chief Secretary J&K, at Civil Secretariat Srinagar/ Jammu wherein the proposal 

for hiring of Charted Accountant was approved and it was directed that al l 
Accounts shall be audited in a time bound manner. Further as per Rule 238 (2) of 
GFR,2017 in respect of recurring Grants, Ministry or Department concerned 
should release any amount sanctioned for the subsequent financial year only after 
Utilization Certificate in respect of Grants of preceding financial year is submitted. 
Release of Grants -in-aid in excess of seventy -five per cent of the total amount 
sanctioned for the subsequent financial year shall be done only after utilization 
certificate and the annu al audited statement relating to Grants -in-aid released in 
the preceding year are submitted to the satisfaction of the Ministry/Department 
concerned. Reports submitted by the internal Audit parties of the Ministry or 
Department and Inspection Reports recei ved from Indian Audit and Accounts 
Department and the performance reports if any received for the third and fourth 
quarter in the year should also be looked into while sanctioning further Grants. As 
appointment of Auditor is concerned, the Institution or O rganization shall get its 
accounts audited from Chartered Accountants of its own as per Rule 236 (3) of 
GFR, 2017. Hiring of C.A. is under process. The Audited Book of Account will be 
shown to the next Audit party. 
 
Madhya Pradesh: SHA in the financial year has sent UC to NHA having an excess 
amount to the tune of 1.08 crores, this is only a clerical error, wherein the amount 
had been miscalculated & written in UC. The demand raised by SHA to NHA are 
based on funds received from State Government, i.e., 150%  of the amount 
received from State Government is asked from NHA, to which the UC is formed 
just as part of annexure. Moreover, as on date there is a huge amount pending 
from NHA, hence it can be concluded that even if the amount of GOI balance has 
been computed incorrect because of clerical error, yet SHA is in no possession of 
excess funds from NHA.” 
 
N. Non-implementation of PFMS 
 
72. Expenditure reforms implemented by the Government include introduction of 
sunset clauses in all public expenditure program mes so that unproductive legacy 
expenditures can be brought to an end; introduction of Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS) for tracking expenditure flows to its objectives; reorganisation of 
development schemes leading to rationalisation, and merger and dropping of schemes 
so as to ensure efficient management of public expenditure.  Both NHA and SHAs are 
registered on PFMS for receiving grants -in-aid from Ministry and NHA respectively, 
whereas hospitals (sub level implementing agency) were not registered on PFMS. In the 
absence of PFMS, NHA has been accepting manual UCs furnished by SHAs, which are 
based on amounts released by SHAs to hospitals and implementing agencies. NHA 
replied (August 2022) that it releases Central share of funds using PFMS to the  SHA’s 
account. However, funds to the hospitals are released to hospital against the claims 
submitted by them through TMS which is integrated with the bank for smooth and 
paperless transfer of funds. For every transaction, a unique UTR no. is generated whi ch 
ensures money released to hospitals are duly accounted for. Every amount released to 
States using TMS can be duly tracked and monitored. However, NHA’s reply is silent 

about accepting manual UCs from SHAs despite the latter being registered on PFMS. 
NHA is to ensure receipt of UCs from SHAs through PFMS. Further, due to lack of clear 
mapping of PMJAY beneficiaries and beneficiaries of state specific schemes, there was 
no clarity on how states segregated these claims into state specific schemes and 
PMJAY for submission of UCs. 
 
73. Upon being enquired as to w hy has NHA been accepting manual UCs furnished 
by SHAs despite the latter being registered on PFMS  and what action has been taken 
by NHA to ensure receip t of UCs from SHAs through PFMS, the Ministry responded as 
below: 
 
“Both NHA and SHAs are registered on PFMS for receiving grants -in-aid from 
Ministry and NHA respectively, whereas hospitals (sub level implementing agency) 
were not registered on PFMS. In the absence of PFMS, NHA has been accepting 
manual UCs furnished by SHAs, which are based on amounts released by SHAs 
to hospitals and implementing agencies through TMS. 
 
The Cabinet of Government of India has mandated the release of funds under PM-
JAY through escrow account. Accordingly, implementation of AB PM -JAY has 
been exempted from SNA account.  
 
Funds are released to the hospitals using TMS bank integration. There i s 4 stage 
process of fund release to hospital against the claims submitted by them. The TMS 
is integrated with the bank for smooth and paperless transfer of funds. For every 
transaction, a unique UTR no. is generated which ensures monies released to 
hospitals are duly accounted for. Every amount released by States using TMS can 
be duly tracked and monitored.” 
 
V. MONITORING AND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
 Non-Formation of District Implementating Units (DIUS): 
  
74. The Audit noted that non -formation of the DIUs in some states poses constraints 
in the proper implementation of PMJAY . On being asked about the reasons for non -
formation of District Implementing Units (DIUs) in contravention of PMJAY Capacity 
Building Guidelines which stipulate the constitution of Dist rict Implementation Units 
(DIUs) in each District for functional coordination of Scheme activities at the District 
level, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“In the beginning years of the scheme, the focus of States was to establish a 
functional SHA, as it was a completely new set -up. However, as on date, most of 
the States have functional DIUs. Smaller States or UTs find it more convenient to 
have a strong centralised team rather than a spread out district level team.  
 
Further, it may be noted that in the recent guidelines issued by NHA regarding DIU 
formation, exemption has been provided to States/UTs with less than 1 lakh 

beneficiary base. This is expected to streamline the formation of DIUs in the 
States/UTs. Currently, DIUs have been  formed in 666 districts across the 33 
States/UTs.”  
 
75. On being asked to explain the non -constitution of DIUs and whether Guidelines 
specify monitoring of the Scheme implementation by any other authority, the Ministry in 
their written reply stated as under: 
 
“Smaller States/UTs have been exempted from the DIUs formation and the 
guidelines provide for district nodal person to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities of DIUs.” 
 
Shortfall of Human Resources in SHAs and DIUs: 
 
76. The Audit found that there was shortfall of human resources deployed in SHA in 
various states. When asked to furnish the details of the four agencies empanelled by 
NHA which can be used by the States for hiring of human resources and also to give 
the response of the States thereto, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
 
“The details of the 4 agencies are as follows:  
1. M/S BVG India Ltd  
2. M/s D G Nakrani  
3. M/s M J Solanki  
4. M/s Service Master Clean Ltd.  
 
States have increased the deployment of human -resources at SHA and district 
level. Many States have engaged human resources through implementation 
support agencies (ISAs).” 
 
Formation of State Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) and District 
Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRS) 
  
77. The Audit revealed that th e non-formation of SGRC and DGRC, at SHA and DIU 
level may result in ineffective grievance redressal. On being enquired about the 
guidelines regarding constitution and composition of State Grievance Redressal 
Committees (SGRC) and whether all the States ha ve since constituted the SGRCs with 
required representation of members and manpower, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under: 
 
“As per the present guideline for grievance redressal issued by NHA (enclosed at 
Annexure -9), the SGRC meeting shoul d be conducted every month on a specific 
day on regular basis. The State can decide a particular date/day based on the 
convenience and availability of the members of the committee’. However, this 
guideline is indicative in nature and States have the flexib ility to conduct SGRC 
meetings as and when required. Further, it is submitted that many States couldn’t 

hold regular meetings during 2020 and 2021 due to COVID 19 pandemic. All 
States/UTs except Ladakh and Lakshadweep have constituted SGRC. Ladakh has 
initiated the process of SGRC formation. It may be noted that SGRC is primarily an 
appellate body for grievance redressal, which means only such appeal against the 
already settled grievances are to be redressed by SGRC. Therefore, SGRC 
doesn’t require to be convened every month.” 
 
78. On being asked how it is ensured that the records of the formation and function 
of SGRCs are being maintained by the States, the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under: 
 
“States inform NHA regarding the formation of SGRC.  Further, in the new CGRMS 
portal (to be shortly launched), details of DGRC and SGRC officials along with 
details of their functioning have to be uploaded on the portal. Currently, SGRC 
proceedings are uploaded on the existing CGRMS portal as part of griev ance 
redressal process.” 
 
79. When enquired about the difficulties being experienced in constituting the 
DGRCs in these districts of the States of Chhattisgarh and Manipur and the reasons 
cited for delay in constitution of DGRC by the State of Jharkhand, t he Ministry in their 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“DGRCs have been constituted in all districts other than 3 newly formed districts of 
Khairaghar, Gandai and Chhuikhadan. Old DGRCs are working for these newly 
formed districts. DGRCs have been constitute d in all districts of Manipur. SHA, 
Jharkhand has informed that DGRC has been constituted in the State. Further, 
SHA has informed that the initially State was focusing on ensuring delivery of 
healthcare services to the beneficiaries by strengthening implem entation structure 
at SHA level.” 
 
80. When asked, in the absence of DGRCs, who was monitoring Scheme 
implementation in the UT/State, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“Grievances were handled centrally at SHA level in cases where DGRC was not 
constituted.  
 
Further, CMO/CMHO monitors the implementation of scheme at district level. 
Different parameters of scheme implementation are also monitored by District 
Collectors. SHAs also take the support of NHM officials at district level for sch eme 
implementation as they are health department functionaries.” 
 
Shortfall in conducting meetings by DGRC and SGRC: 
  
81. The Audit noted that failure to hold meetings and less than the prescribed 
number of meetings of SGRC and DGRC in some states can adversely effect 
monitoring of the redreassal. On being asked about the reasons for having no meeting 

of SGRC and DGRC at all as highlighted above by Audit, the number of meetings 
prescribed for SGRC and DGRC as per the guidelines and whether NHA has issued 
any instructions to hold prescribed number of meetings under the guidelines, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“As per the guideline for grievance redressal issued by NHA, the DGRC and 
SGRC meeting should be conducted every month on a specific day on regular 
basis. The state can decide a particular date/day based on the convenience and 
availability of the members o f the committee. However, this guideline is indicative 
in nature and States have the flexibility to conduct SGRC meetings as and when 
required. Further, it is submitted that many States couldn’t hold regular meetings 
during 2020 and 2021 due to COVID 19 pandemic.  
 
It may kindly be noted that DGRC and SGRC are primarily an appellate body for 
grievance redressal, which means only appeal against the already settled 
grievances are to be handled by SGRC. Therefore, DGRC/SGRC doesn’t require 
to be convened every month.” 
 
Redressal of grievance/appeals at NHA level and  
Grievances Redressal of States/UTs: 
 
82. The Audit revealed that out of 37903 grievances, only 9.80 percent of the 
complaints were redressed with turn -around-time of 15 days.  The Audit also noted that 
SHA Chhatisgarh had not redressed any of the 40 grievances received. On being asked 
about the turn -around time for redressal of grievances and appeals as per guidelines 
issued by the NHA,  reasons as to why 87.33% of complaints and 53.38% of appeals 
received took more than turn -around time for redressal,  current status as to whether 
the 1085 complaints as pointed by Audit have since been redressed, reasons 
ascertained from SHA Chhattisgarh for falling to redress any grievance, whether the 
Ministry too k up the matter of non -production of data related to the redressal of the 
grievances within the Turn Around Time (TAT) and beyond TAT with the States/UTs 
and whether NHA raised this issue with SHA, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
 
“The grievances registered on CPGRAMS portal have to be redressed within 30 
days. However, grievances received on CGRMS portal have to be redressed 
within 15 days. In the initial year of implementation, structures were being set -up 
and the primary focus was on  ensuring delivery of healthcare services. As the 
scheme matured, quality and quantitative aspects of grievance redressal has 
significantly improved. All grievances highlighted by audit have been appropriately 
redressed.  
 
In the current FY, out of 1,38,27 3 grievances received, 1,34,123 have been 
closed. Around 400 -500 grievances are received everyday. Thus, a pendency of 
about 4,000 grievances are well within the TAT. In FY 23 -24, 94% grievances 
have been closed with defined TAT of 15 days. Chhattisgarh ha ve redressed 

grievances registered with respect to scheme implementation. As on 12th Jan 
2024 only 2 grievances are pending for redressal in the State.  
 
Pending grievance details are shared with SHAs everyday. Further, regular 
meetings are held with SHA o fficials regarding qualitative and quantitative aspects 
of grievance redressal.” 
 
Formation of Anti Fraud Cell and other Committees at the State level: 
 
83. The Audit noted that Anti -Fraud Cell in four states, Claim Revenue Committee in 
eight States/UTs an d Mortality and Morbidity Review Committee in eleven States/UTs 
were not formed. When enquired about the steps taken by NHA to impress upon States 
to form the Anti -Fraud Cell/ Review Committees at the earliest, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“NHA has issued guidelines for the constitution of various committees to 
strengthen scheme implementation at various levels.  
 
National Health Authority has set up a National Anti -Fraud Unit (NAFU) as the 
Anti-Fraud Cell at National and State  level with the primary responsibility of 
prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under PM JAY. In 
addition, all States/UTs except Lakshadweep have set up State Anti -Fraud Units 
(SAFUs) at the State level to instrumentalize anti-fraud and abuse control activities 
at the ground level.  
 
Further, in the claim adjudication guideline issued by NHA in October 2020, there 
is no requirement of setting up Claims Review Committee. However, many States 
have set up medical committees for certain types o f claims adjudicated by Claim 
Executive (CEX) / Claim Processing Doctor (CPD).” 
 
 
Non-conducting of Anti-Fraud awareness activities: 
  
84. The Audit revealed that three states namely Bihar, Chandigarh and Uttar 
Pradesh did not plan/conduct anti -fraud activities and documentary evidence were not 
made available in any of the selected districts of Himachal Pradesh. On being asked 
about the details regarding awareness campaign initiated by these States to combat 
any fraudulent activity and whether any enquiry w as instituted to ascertain the reason 
for the same by SHA/NHA, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“SHAs have been requested to ensure that empanelled hospitals put up display 
material highlighting the details of services which are offere d to the beneficiaries 
as part of AB PM-JAY.  
 
Hospitals have been mandated to deploy a uniformly designed kiosk in the 
prominent place in the hospital to facilitate free treatment to the beneficiaries. 

Further, all the IEC campaigns prominently highlights  tollfree number 14555 and 
encourages beneficiaries to reach out to PM -JAY helpline system in case of any 
query or grievance.  
 
Furthermore, NHA and SHAs conduct regular and frequent beneficiary awareness 
activities through print media, social media, call centre, grievance and feedback 
mechanisms as well as on ground activities like camps etc. These are targeted to 
empower the beneficiaries regarding fraud/abuse and fraud reporting channels. 
Innovative measures have been taken for improving beneficiary awar eness 
regarding fraud/abuse, such as:  
 
a. SMS is being sent to beneficiary whenever a claim is booked in the name of 
beneficiary both at the time of Pre -authorisation and when the claim is raised, to 
validate if the treatment has actually been availed by the beneficiary (BIS anti -
fraud measures).  
 
b. Feedback is taken from beneficiaries both at time of discharge and through call 
centres of the respective States regarding quality of care received, charging of 
money (if any) or any other negative feedback.  
 
State specific inputs are as follows:  
 
Chandigarh: Chandigarh has been sharing Anti -Fraud related guidelines on 
regular intervals with Public and Private EHCPs.  
 
Himachal Pradesh: The Pradhan Mantri Arogya Mitras have been specially trained 
for spreadi ng anti -fraud awareness amongst the beneficiaries getting treatment. 
Also, signboards indicating anti -fraud measures have been placed in the hospitals 
and other prominent public places. The awareness is also generated during the 
Gram Sabha meeting at village level.  
 
Bihar: SHA Bihar has undertaken the following Anti-Fraud awareness activities:  
 
1. The State Call Center number 104 is continuously publicized in all 
advertisements given in newspapers, radio, television, and cinema halls for further 
information and complaints.  
2. Detailed advertisements have been published in newspapers regarding th e 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the state.  
3. General advisories related to Anti -Fraud awareness were published on 31st 
March 2020, 28th August 2020, and 07th April 2022.  
4. Special posters with all the necessary information for filing 
complaints/grievances related to the scheme are being put up in all the empaneled 
hospitals.  
 

Uttar Pradesh: SACHIS, since the inception of the policy, has been vigilant 
towards anti-fraud activities and has taken various measures to build awareness 
amongst the hospitals:  
 
1. Regular periodic beneficiary feedback to understand their experience of PMJAY 
and determine if the actual beneficiary has received treatment, and if any money 
was charged by the hospitals. Additionally, monitoring any coordination between 
hospitals and agents. A large -scale dipstick study was conducted on patient 
experience by SHA Uttar Pradesh.  
2. Shared the list of triggers based on which the empanelled healthcare providers 
will be monitored.  
3. Beneficiary feedback, specifically with ICU patien ts, to understand if the 
beneficiary was admitted to the ICU or general ward, to keep a check on the 
misuse of packages.  
4. Continuous data analysis to understand misuse/abuse of packages and, based 
on the trends, keeping the hospitals on the watchlist.  
5. Regular webinars with Private and Public empanelled providers where errors 
and misuse of packages have been observed and showcased to avoid mistakes. 
6. Do's and Dont's shared with the hospitals on Claim processing. 
7. Capacity building of Implementation support agencies and medical auditors. 
 
Review of audits conducted on the field and taking necessary action and conduct 
State empanelment committee meetings every month for quick action.” 
 
Non- adoption of Whistle Blower Policy: 
  
85. The Audit noted tha t due to the non -adoption of the policy, the stakeholder 
involved in the scheme were deprived of the mechanism for complaining regarding 
cases of corruption, medical and non -medical frauds etc. When asked why Whistle 
Blower Policy was not adopted by these States and how the complainants were 
safeguarded from the probable threat on disclosure of any allegation of corruption, 
medical and non -medical fraud, etc. against any stakeholder involved with the 
implementation of PMJAY, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
 
“NHA acknowledges Whistle blower policy as an important instrument to establish 
transparency in the PM -JAY ecosystem by creating a framework wherein any 
mala-fide by the officials implementing the scheme can be reported and examined 
without any pressure or fear of retribution. 
 
Accordingly, NHA has requested all States/UTs to deploy Whistle Blower Policy. 2 
States i.e Bihar and Tamil Nadu out of 7 States noted in the Audit have already 
adopted the Whistle blower policy. The SHA Madhya  Pradesh is following MP 
Govt Whistle blower policy. 
 

In absence of PM -JAY specific whistleblower policy in some States, grievances / 
complaints related to corruption/disclosures are forwarded to the administrative 
head of the health department. It is pertinent to note that no complaints regarding 
the threat to the complainant has been received by NHA.” 
 
Shortfall in conduct of medical and other/social audit by ISA and SHA: 
  
86. The Audit noted that NHA had not properly monitored the various types of audit 
conducted by the ISA/SHA in States. On being asked to furnish details on the reasons 
explained by the States for not carrying out or conducting less numbers of social audits, 
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“As of now, social audits have not been mandated under AB PM -JAY. However, 
regarding medical audits following points are submitted:  
1. Initially, human resources in the States were not adequate, hence in itially 
the number of audits were not as mandated. However, NHA has been 
monitoring the same and has been nudging the States to do audits as 
mandated. NHA had issued advisory note no. 21 dated 18.03.2021 to the 
states/UTs regarding highlighting important i ssues pertaining to fraud control 
like timely action on suspect entities, dedicated SAFU personnel, ensuring 
safety of field audit team, compliance with biometric verification, sharing of 
relevant information by hospitals etc.  
 
2. During the Covid Pandemi c, SHAs were engaged in Covid management 
activities, making it challenging to achieve the specified auditing targets. The 
high number of Covid cases in the State over the last two years impacted 
direct beneficiary audits and hospital audits from the SHA si de. Following the 
decrease in Covid cases, States were able to resume the audits.  
 
3. NHA-NAFU has been regularly conducting capacity building sessions on 
Medical and Mortality audits for the SHAs/SAFUs/CPDs to improve their skill 
sets in conducting the audits.  
 
4. Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Punjab, and Kerala have increased their 
audits respectively in the last financial year.  
 
5. NHA has already empanelled two agencies for Desk Medical Audits and 
eight agencies for Field investigation to support th e States who are lacking in 
adequate human resources to conduct the audits. NHA has issued advisory 
note no. 23 dated 09.11.2021 to the states/UTs regarding highlighting anti -
fraud updates and compliance requirements. It also states for the provision of 
empanelment of medical audit and field investigation agencies, 
implementation of Comprehensive Audit Module, use of FACTS and RADAR, 
Self-service BI, Casual dismissal of suspicious cases, SMS to treating doctor, 
Capacity Building Session for CPDs etc. As per  the advisory notes, the 
States can now utilize the services of the empanelled agencies as per their 

needs to achieve the mandated number of audits and other related activities. 
Apart from above, regular communications including monthly status report 
are shared with the States.  
 
State-wise replies received from respective SHAs are as follows:  
 
DNH & DD: Medical Audit committee has been formed and audits will be 
conducted shortly.  
 
Himachal Pradesh: The Medical Audit is conducted by the ISA in HP as per 
agreement. However, the process was affected due to COVID -19 Pandemic w.e.f. 
February, 2020 onwards. MMRC, CRC and HVPC have not been formed 
separately as all the cases approved by ISA are further checked and processed by 
SHA Medical Officer before releasing payments by ACO/SHA. 
 
Meghalaya: The details of the various types of Audits conducted by SNA, 
Meghalaya are indicated as below: 
 
 
 
Nagaland: During the initial policy period, the focus of the scheme was on 
increasing card generation and encouraging the hospitals to initiate uptake of the 
scheme. There was improvement in conducting audits by putting the mechanism in 
place however, the COVID-19 pandemic including conversion of most of the public 
EHCPs (District Hospitals and CHCs) into COVID Hospitals and COVID Care 
Centres affected the audits. The performance of audits has significantly improved 
in 2021-22.  
 
Puducherry: Beneficiary Aud it and Desk Audit were undertaken but in less 
numbers. Medical Audits were not done due to Covid – 19 pandemic and shortage 
of staff in various posts in SHA.  


 
Uttarakhand: In the initial phase of the Scheme, mandatory audits as per specified 
numbers were not completed. Moreover, there was the pandemic of COVID19 due 
to which the audits were not completed in time. But medical audits were conducted 
resulting in de-empanelment of 21hospitals due to irregularities found in claims. A 
recovery of approx. Rs 1.0 Crore was done in such cases.  
 
Tripura: Due to unavailability of medical / clinical manpower, audits could not be 
carried out by SHA Tripura. SHA had attempted to engage suitable manpower in 
these positions through a written test -viva in 2018, but no suit able candidates 
could be found. Thereafter, the issue of manpower engagement has been put up 
to the Executive Committee and Governing Body of THPS (the Society under 
which PM-JAY is being implemented in Tripura) for approval and has been sent to 
State Fina nce Department for concurrence. Also, SHA had requested CMOs to 
nominate suitable State Health Service doctors to act as auditors, but could not 
meet with success citing shortage of sufficient number of government medical 
officers.  
 
Punjab: The details of the audit in the State of Punjab are as follows: 
 

 
 
This has reference to the table 7.3, point 9 regarding 100 percent claims audit. In 
this regard, it is submitted that once the Claim Adjudication Division was 
established, 100 percent CPD rejected cases  were reviewed and action was also 
taken for invalidly rejected cases by IC.  
 
Ladakh: As per Schedule 12 (Key performance Indicators) of the Insurance 
Contract between UT Ladakh and Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company, 
quarterly report was to be submitted. 
The insurer has submitted quarterly report on Medical Audit, Claim audit, 
beneficiary audit, pre-authorization audit and death audit.  
 
Chandigarh: This para was dropped for this State. Please refer to the report 
submitted by the audit team that conducted the audit.  


 
Manipur: With reference to Para 7.13 on shortfalls in conducting of Medical and 
Other/Social audit by ISA and SHA, SHA, Manipur would like to submit that it is 
due to shortage of staff. SHA, Manipur is planning to hire firms for conduct of audit 
on their behalf. Further, ISA Project Head stated that ISA had conducted Hospital 
audit during 2019 -20 and other types of audits could not be conducted due to 
COVID and assured to furnish relevant documents.  
 
Jammu and Kashmir: SHA, J&K has dedic ated Claim Review Committee & 
Mortality and Morbidity Committee constituted vide No. SHA -SAFU/1/2022-05-
State Health Agency, PMJAY, JK. Audits are being carried out on a regular basis.  
 
Haryana: The details of the audit in the State are as follows: 
 
 
 


 
 
The Processing of claims at SHA, Haryana is being done by the team of in -house 
doctors comprising of regular doctors of Haryana government. Most of them are 
MBBS with postgraduation. 
 
Madhya Pradesh: ISA and SHA, MP have tried to comply with NHA guideline s for 
target audits but due to shortage of manpower during covid, 100% targets could 
not be achieved. SHA has empaneled an Audit agency and deployed more 
manpower from government sector to strengthen Audit process and comply with 
100% targets. 
 
Kerala: SHA , Kerala following the same guidelines issued by NHA for medical 
audit i.e., 5% of total case hospitalized by TPA and 2% direct audits by SHA. 
Regarding death audit, 100% audit completed by TPA. After SHA takeover, TPA 
audited each empanelled hospital once  in a year. 10% of the Beneficiary Audit 
(during hospitalization) and 5% audit of approved claims also completed by TPA. 
 
SHA was busy with covid management activities and was not in a position to 
achieve the targets specified for auditing. For the last tw o years, covid cases were 
high in the State and this affected the direct beneficiary audit and hospital audits 
from SHA side. Now SHA has streamlined the auditing system and is expecting to 
achieve the auditing goals set by NHA. 
 


Recovery to be made from defaulting hospitals: 
  
87. The Audit revealed that in NHA, out of Rs.17.28 crore on account of penalty 
imposed on 184 defaulting hospitals pertaining to 13 states, recovery of only Rs.4.96 
crore had been effected. On being asked to explain reasons for pend ing penalty 
amounting to Rs. 12.32 crore from 100 hospitals in nine States/UTs and action taken to 
recover the penalty amount and the current status with regard to levy of penalties 
amounting to Rs. 20.93 crore and Rs. 39.66 lakh respectively on Insurer fo r non -
performance of various activities in SHAs Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, the ministry in 
their written reply stated as under: 
 
NHA has been constantly engaging with States to recover penalty amount levied 
against the defaulting hospitals. It is pertinen t to note that in many cases, though 
the SHA raises the recovery, the actual recovery cannot be materialized as the 
hospital has started litigation against the order of State.  
 
The State wise details of recovery made from the hospitals are as follows:  
 
Madhya Pradesh: SHA has already taken up the issue & has recovered and duly 
paid the amount wherever required to the beneficiary. SHA -MP would like to bring 
into consideration the fact that all the recoveries pertaining to the previous financial 
year have b een made. Penalty recovery is a contentious process so far this 
financial year have recovered INR 18 Cr.  
 
Gujarat: Out of total penalty levied, Rs.72,88,411/- against hospitals Rs. 8,37,760/- 
has been recovered.  
 
Nagaland: As per SHA directives, a fraud amount of Rs. 13,464/ - was recovered 
by IC/TPA on 04/10/21.  
 
Chhattisgarh: State is following NHA anti -fraud guidelines. A total of Rs. 138.75 
lakh recovery raised and Rs. 131.12 lakh recovery received.  
 
Haryana: Recovery of approx. Rs. 55,83,645/ - has been received from 13 
defaulting hospitals.  
 
Jammu and Kashmir: SHA Jammu and Kashmir has already submitted the 
recovery imposed on the defaulting hospitals has been affected and no recovery is 
pending. 
 
Punjab: As already replied to audit, it is reiterated that penalty amounting Rs 
14,47,506 is pending to be recovered from only one hospital i.e. Dr Amrit Paul 
Goyal Mansa Medicity, Mansa. Hospital stands suspended from the ABMMSBY 
scheme. The matter is under consideration with the Appellate Committee. 
 
 

Karnataka: 
 
Jharkhand: SHA Jharkhand has informed that it successfully made recovery of Rs. 
1,94,98,649/- in case of 2,404 cases against Rs. 2,06,91,822/-. 
 
Jammu & Kashmir: Audit team has mentioned that refund of pre mium of ₹ 17.80 
crore was recoverable from the insurance company from Jammu and Kashmir. Out 
of this, recovery of ₹ 16.85 crore in Jammu and Kashmir had been made and 
remaining amount of ₹ 0.95 crore for the period 2018 -21 was pending from 
Insurance Company. SHA J&K closed the first policy (1st December 2018 - 30th 
November 2019) with the Insurance Company on the following figures: • Policy 
Period Start Date: 12-01-2018 
Policy Period End Date: 30-11-2019 
Total Family: 6,13,648 
Total Premium: Rs. 47,55,77,200 
Number of Paid claims: 47,885 
Total Incurred Claim amount:Rs.25,00,42,456 
Claims Loss Ratio (%): 52.576628 
Admin. Expenses @12%: Rs.5,70,69,264 
Refund Amount: Rs.16,84,65,480  
 
Ladakh: Refund has been received by Bajaj Alliance and same funds have been 
utilized. 
 
Non-rotation of Pradhan Mantri Arogya Mitra (PMAM): 
  
88. The Audit noted that guidelines pertaining to rotation of PMAM were not being 
followed in States. When asked about the guidelines with regard to rotation of PMAM 
and reason for not follow ing the same in the States, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under: 
 
“Anti-fraud guidelines issued by NHA stated that ‘to avoid collusion, if possible, the 
SHA should try and rotate Pradhan Mantri Arogya Mitras every 3 -6 months 
preferably within the same city / town.’  
 


However, operationally it has been found to be challenging to rotate PMAM in 
public hospitals. It is pertinent to note that PMAMs are engaged by respective hospitals 
themselves. In public hospitals, they are either part of regul ar hospital staff or they are 
hired on contractual basis for the hospital. Recently, NHA has introduced the concept of 
Beneficiary Facilitation Agency (BFA), which has been mandated to provide PMAMs in 
public hospitals. In private hospitals, PMAMs are appo inted by respective hospitals, and 
therefore, they cannot be rotated and deputed to some other hospitals. However, some 
States like Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra where PMAMs are engaged through ISAs, 
rotate PMAMs to the extent possible.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
 
             The Committee note from audit observation that Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Aarogya Yojana envisaged (March 2018) coverage of about 10.74  crore 
beneficiary households,  based on the deprivation and occupational criteria of the 
Socio-Economic Caste Census, 2011 (SECC) for rural and urban areas 
respectively. However, the Committee during their course of examination of the 
subject found that there have been inadequacies in the  process of  identification 
and verification of beneficiaries under the Scheme. The Committee further note 
that as per National Health Authority (NHA) records, 7.87 crore beneficiary 
households were registered, constitutin g 73 per cent of the targeted households 
of 10.74 crore (November 2022). Out of this, 2.08 crore households had been 
identified from SECC-2011 database, as envisaged in the Scheme guidelines. The 
Committee further note that Government of India (GoI) has approved the 
expansion of the beneficiary base to cover 12 crore families based on National 
Food Security Act data. In this regard, the Ministry have stated that the NHA has 
issued guidelines to States/UTs to use sui table Aadhaar seeded digitized 
databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -economic profile as that of eligible 
SECC beneficiaries. Here,  the Committee would not hesitate to state that they are 
of the view that the Ministry  should find ways and measures to ensure that 
issues of up -dation of coverage of beneficiaries is not compromised in any way 
and, therefore,  recommend that in order to oversee the process of coverage of 
eligible beneficiaries based on authentic database, an independent body should 
be se t up. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry and States/UTs 
should devise a suitable mechanism for identifying State-wise beneficiaries under 
the Scheme in a time -bound manner. With a view to achieve the targeted number 
of beneficiaries under the S cheme, the Committee recommend that the NHA 
should issue directions to SHAs to set up a designated IEC cell to promote 
awareness about the scheme and maximize its reach and  impact. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the concrete action taken in the matter at the earliest.  
 
2. Streamlining of Ineligible households possessing PMJAY Cards 
 
         The Committee note from audit observation that a delay in removing 
ineligible beneficiaries led to ineligible individuals receiving benefits from the 
Scheme and resulted in excess premium payments to insurance companies. The 
Committee further observe from audit finding that delays in registration requests 
for long periods have resulted in denial of benefit  to the potential beneficiaries . 
The Ministry in their submission have stated that NHA has written to all the states 
to provide Aadhaar seeded database of  all beneficiaries including Government 
employees/pensioners so that de -duplication exercise can be undertaken. The 
Committee are not oblivious of the fact that NHA replied that it is developing an 

SOP for adherence by the States to ensure that any SECC 20 11 beneficiary family 
found ineligible as per AB-PMJAY criteria can be removed from the list of eligible 
individuals/families. The Committee are of the view that  validation checks should 
be inbuilt in the process to avoid invalid entries and increase the a ccuracy and 
reliability of the data.  In this sequel,  t he Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should ensure that registration process is streamlined to avoid delay in 
registration beyond the prescribed time.  The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the status in this matter. 
 
3. Hospital Empanelment and Management 
 
The Committee note from audit observation that in 12 States/UTs minimum 
criteria of empanelment was not met by some of the EHCPs due to deficiencies 
such as medical equipment being out of order, lack of basic infrastructure such 
as IPD Beds, Operation Thea tres, ICU care with ventilator support systems, 
Pharmacy, Dialysis Unit, Blood banks, Round -the clock Ambulance Services etc. 
The Committee also observe that the availability of EHCPs is very low in terms of 
per lakh population in various States /UTs, thou gh the State Government was to 
ensure that maximum number of eligible Hospitals participate in the PM -JAY. The 
Ministry in their ATN have stated that each S tate has its own Clinical 
Establishment A ct which governs the registration and operation of he althcare 
services in that state. T herefore, the requirement and eligibility of registration 
also differs from state to state. The Ministry also stated that data cleansing 
activity with regard to availability of healthcare services in public hospital has 
been initiated. The Committee are of the view that physical verification process 
should be mandatory for the empanelment of hospitals so that only those 
hospitals can be empanelled that fulfill requisite criteria. The Committee are also 
of the view that in o rder to build an effective and accountable network of health 
service providers as per quality standard, NHA/SHA/DIU (District Implementing 
Unit) should encourage more private hospitals to join the Scheme in all the 
Districts. Gleaning and sifting through t hese facts, t he Committee recommend 
that investment in public hospitals should be enhanced to improve and upgrade 
the quality of the existing health facilities in accordance with prescribed criteria. 
The Committee also recommend that monitoring of EHCPs th rough phy sical 
inspections and necessary/requisite audits are essentially carried out so that 
timely action is initiated against the errant EHCPs. The Committee also 
recommend that regular field visits be undertaken  by NHA/SHA so that 
challenges/shortcomings in  service delivery are identified  and suitably handled 
enabling achievement of the purpose of the scheme in letter and spirit. 
 
4. SYSTEM OF SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS OF EMPANELLED HEALTHCARE 
PROVIDERS (EHCP’S) 
 
 The Committee note that PMJAY provides cashless and paperless services 
for beneficiaries at the point of service. After providing treatment/investigations, 
Empanelled Health Care Providers (EHCPs) upload all the claim related 

documents in the Transaction M anagement System (TMS) and submit the claims 
to State Health Authority/Agency (SHA)/Insurance Company. Thereafter, the 
SHA/Insurance Company scrutinizes the claims and makes payments to EHCPs. 
The Committee further observe that apart from TMS, six States r eferred as 
Brownfield States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, which were implementing their own 
schemes, use their own IT Platform to process the claims and data of claims 
settlement in respect of th ese States are subsequently fed into TMS through an 
Application Programming Interface (API). The Committee find that in some cases, 
transactions through API did not capture PMJAY Id of beneficiaries and with no 
segregation of PMJAY beneficiaries in such ca ses, there is a possibility of 
overlap of PMJAY with State specific schemes. In response, the Ministry have 
stated that in January 2022, the Cabinet of Government of lndia decided to give 
flexibility to use other databases for verification of beneficiaries  under Ayushman 
Bharat PM-JAY against such SECC beneficiaries who could not be identified and 
verified and National Health Authority has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use 
suitable Aadhaar seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio -
economic profile as that of eligible SECC beneficiaries. Accordingly, all 
States/UTs, except Bihar, have shared databases of beneficiaries and the same 
has been ingested in the Beneficiary ldentification System of NHA. While 
stressing on the importance of in tegration of State specific database to capture 
PMJAY Id of beneficiaries to address the overlapping issue, both at the Central as 
well as State health portal, the Committee feel that reasons for not sharing 
Aadhaar-seeded digitized data for ingestion into  the beneficiary identification 
system (BIS) of NHA by the State of Bihar, should also be ascertained and the 
Committee be apprised thereof. The Committee , here also  recommend that the 
Ministry impress upon the State Government of Bihar to share Aadhaar -seeded 
digitized data for ingestion into the beneficiary data of NHA.  
 
5. SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS 
 
The Committee note that NHA had kept turnaround time of 15 days for intra 
state claims and 30 days for the portability claims. However, for reasons like non -
release of States' share of funds on time, lack of trained human resources, non -
performance of Impl ementing Support Agency (ISA)/Third Party Administrator 
(TPA), pendency at the hospital end for reply of claim related query, errors/delay 
in the reporting of claims settlement data, some States paying hospitals offline, 
lack of bank integration etc. there has been delay in claim settlement. In response 
the Ministry have stated that as a result of rigorous monitoring of pending claims 
in the States, the number of pending claims has been reduced to 37.5 lakh claims 
as of 31 st December, 2023. NHA have also st arted training and certification 
program for claim adjudicators and a User Management Portal (UMP) has been 
launched to monitor the availability and participation of different stakeholders in 
the claim settlement. NHA has also introduced Beneficiary Facili tation Agency 
(BFA), which deploys trained PMAMs in public hospitals to streamline 
implementation of AB PM-JAY including timely submission of claims and replying 

to query etc. The Committee, while hoping that the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry would ens ure reduction in turnaround time, desire to be apprised of the 
actual impact of measures taken by the Ministry on the time taken to process the 
claims. 
 
6. DIGITIZATION OF CLAIM TRANSACTIONS 
 
 The Committee note that to achieve complete bank integration and 
digitization of all claim transactions and ensure prompt settlement of claims, the 
Ministry and NHA have stated that the Transaction Management System (TMS) for 
claims settlement has the prov ision for bank -integration. The Ministry have 
apprised the Committee that all States, barring few, have integrated with bank 
payment gateway. The Ministry have also stated that in the new version of TMS, 
bank payment gateway integration will be made mandat ory. Further, NHA has 
deployed the new version of TMS in Chandigarh and soon it will be launched 
across the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of 
bank payment gateway integration with regard to other States/UTs.  
 
7. TMS 2.0 
 
The Committee also note that patients earlier shown as ‘died’ in TMS 
continued to avail treatment under the Scheme. Data analysis of mortality cases 
in TMS revealed that 88,760 patients died during treatment specified under the 
Scheme. A total of 2,14,923 claims shown as paid in the system, related to fresh 
treatment in respect of these patients. Similarly, as reported in the desk audit 
report, audit noted that the TMS was not only allowing initiation of pre -
authorization request for beneficiaries already s hown as dead in the system but 
was also allowing all other entries such as admission date, surgery date and 
discharge dates. As regards the audit observation regarding treatment of 
beneficiary shown as ‘died’ during earlier claim/ treatment, the Ministry h ave inter 
alia stated that while designing TMS 2.0 it has been ensured that all validations 
are in place. Further, the Committee have been informed that where pre -
authorization is being requested in regard to  a patient who has died during 
treatment, reasons thereof will have to be recorded. The Committee while hoping 
that the new version of TMS will address the concern appropriately,  desire to be 
apprised of the status of correction  of 2,14,923 claims  that  were shown as paid 
in the system related to fresh treatment in respect of 88,760 patients while they 
died during treatment specified under the Scheme.  Further, since audit is only a 
test check, the Committee recommend that a thorough checking of claims of  
patients who died during treatment may be made to ensure the accuracy of the 
those claims. 
 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
 
8. RELEASE AND UTILIZATION OF GRANTS AND SEPARATE ESCROW 
ACCOUNTS 
 
The Committee note from the Audit Findings that NHA released grants to 
States, particularly Chhattisgarh, in contravention of PMJAY guidelines, which 
stipulate the opening of two designated escrow accounts for receiving scheme 
implementation and administrative grants. Multiple States, including 
Chhattisgarh, Punjab, and Uttarakhand, were found not to have maintained 
separate escrow accounts for PMJAY and their respective State-sponsored 
schemes, indicating a lack of uniform compliance with PMJAY guidelines. The 
Committee note from that Ministry’s reply  that due to the lack of a common 
identifier between the SECC database and state scheme beneficiary databases, 
the mapping exercise couldn't be carried out effectively. Consequently, funds 
were disbursed to states on a pro -rata basis, as the actual utilizati on related to 
eligible SECC beneficiaries couldn't be determined. Hence, a common bank 
account was maintained in those states. In the opinion of the Committee, absence 
of designated escrow accounts impedes effective tracking and monitoring of fund 
flow and utilization, raising concerns about transparency and accountability in 
the implementation process . The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry 
to vigorously pursue with the State Health Authorities the matter of  establishing  
separate escrow accounts for PMJAY and State-sponsored schemes, as 
mandated by the guidelines. The Committee  also recommend the  Ministry to  
ensure strict adherence to PMJAY guidelines across all States to prevent 
recurrence of instances where grants are disbursed into multiple bank accounts, 
in violation of prescribed norms by conducting regular audits and imposing 
penalties for non -compliance. With a view to ensuring that designated escrow 
accounts are maintained and funds are u tilized efficiently and transparently, t he 
Committee also recommend that the Implementing agencies establish robust 
monitoring mechanism. 
 
9. RELEASE OF GRANT WITHOUT ENSURING RELEASE OF UPFRONT 
SHARE BY SHAs 
 
PMJAY guidelines provide that the State/UT shall release its share upfront, 
depending upon category of State/UT into the designated escrow account of SHA 
for implementation of the scheme. Thereafter, NHA shall release its share to SHA. 
Audit noted that NHA  released grant amounting to ₹ 185.60 crore to eight SHAs 
during 2018 -19 without ensuring release of upfront shares by the respective 
States. The Ministry justified the release of funds in the initial year of scheme 
implementation to expedite the rollout o f PMJAY. The Committee, while opining 
that financial procedures should be scrupulously adhere d to, also  desire to be 
apprised of the details of adjustments made in subsequent instalments to ensure 
proper allocation and utilization of funds according to the  financial obligations of 
the States. 

10. EXCESS RELEASE OF GRANT BY NHA 
 
The Committee take note of the instances where NHA released excess 
implementation grants to States in violation  of the prescribed guidelines . The 
Committee are not convinced with the NHA's justification fo r the excess release 
of grants as t he release of funds in contra vention of guidelines undermine  the 
integrity of financial management and calls into question the NHAs commitment 
to compliance. In light of the above, the Committee in no uncertain words 
recommend that NHA must ensure that implementation grants to States are 
released strictly in tune with PMJAY guidelines and any exceptions must be 
justified based on clear and transparent criteria  and with prior authorisation from 
the competent authority . While emphasising the need for r egular audits and 
reviews to identify any instances of excess grant release, the Committee also 
recommend that fund release guidelines be revisited to ensure uniformity  in the 
criteria for releasing grants to States and take corrective action as necessary  
thereby enabling effective governance/implementation of the scheme. 
 
11. During examination of the subject, t he Committee also noticed from audit 
observation instances where NHA released grants to State/UT Health Agencies 
(SHAs) before the commencement of the PMJAY scheme which resulted in 
parking of funds for several months without setting any timeline for utilisation  of 
the same. The Committee , in this regard bear clear opinion that releasing fu nds 
before commencement of the S cheme is not only indicative of the fact that no 
financial prudence was exercised by NHA nor  any concrete preventive measure 
taken to address  the potential risk of mis -utilization or misallocation of funds by 
the SHAs, as there may not have been immediate use or accountability for the 
funds during the pre -launch period. While the Ministry/NHA accepted the audit 
observation and explained the rationale behind the pre-commencement release of 
funds, there is no explicit confirmation of when these funds were adjusted in 
subsequent grants -in-aid. In light of the fact that d elayed adjustment may also 
have implications for budgetary planning and financial accountability, the 
Committee recommend that any funds released before the commencement of the 
Scheme be adjusted promptly  in subsequent grants -in-aid to ensure proper 
budgetary planning and financial accountability. 
 
12. The Committee note instances where several State/UT Health Agencies 
(SHAs) have diverted grants from one head to another head, such as from 
“administrative grant ” to “implementation” and vice versa, in contravention of 
PMJAY guidelines citing reasons such as necessity, ignorance, or urgency . The 
Committee also note from the Audit findings about significant unspent balances 
of administrative grants with several SHAs. This underutilization raises questions 
about effective financial planning and resource alloc ation by SHAs. Taking 
exception to the disregard for financial regulations regarding the utilization of 
grant-in-aid for administrative expenses and also underutilization of a substantial 
amount over multiple fiscal years, t he Committee recommend that NHA take 
appropriate action against those responsible for diverting funds across different 

heads. The Committee further desire that SHAs should also take necessary 
initiatives to develop robust estimation and planning mechanisms to accurately 
assess the requirement of administrative grants and ensure their full utilization 
within the designated period which may involve conducting comprehensive 
financial assessments and setting clear targets for fund utilization.  
 
13. NON-REFUND OF PREMIUM BY INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
The Committee learn that Guidelines related to release of premium provide 
that the Insurer will be required to refund premium if they fail to reach the claim 
ratio specified in comparison with the premium paid (excluding GST & Other 
taxes/Duties) in the full period of insurance po licy period. The Committee note 
from the Audit findings, the failure of insurance companies to meet the claim ratio 
specified in comparison with the premium paid which led to a substantial amount 
of refund of premium being recoverable. Out of the total ref und of ₹700.10 crore 
recoverable from insurance companies in six States/UTs ., only ₹241.91 crore has 
been partially recovered, leaving ₹458.19 crore outstanding for the period from 
2018-19 till June 2022. While refunds have been received by some States/UTs , the 
process has been  hindered by delays in final settlement statements and 
reconciliation of claims  in the others States/ UTs . Keeping in view  the fact that 
some States/UTs have successfully recovered the excess premiums, others are 
still grappling with  the issue, t he Committee  recommend that the Ministry take 
immediate steps to streamline the refund mechanism  thereby ensuring that 
insurance companies promptly refund excess premiums in cases of failure to 
meet claim ratios, as per contractual obligations . With a view to expedite the 
recovery of outstanding amounts and enforce timely settlement between SHAs 
and insurance companies , the Committee also desire that clear timelines for 
settlement and reconciliation processes and imposing penalties for non -
compliance be set for greater accountability in the refund process.  It goes 
without saying here, that the Ministry should ensure that States/UTs maintain 
detailed records of premium refunds and provide regular updates to the National 
Health Authority (NHA) for monitoring purposes  so that delays in premium 
refunds at the time of reconciliation processes may be averted.  
 
14. RELEASE OF GRANTS TO SHAS WITHOUT OBTAINING AUDITED 
STATEMENTS OF ACCOUNTS 
 
 The Committee observe instances of non -compliance with financial 
reporting standards by State Health Agencies (SHAs) whereby SHAs have 
submitted Utilization Certificates (UCs) amounting to ₹4,115.35 crore without 
audited Statements of Accounts, and in some cases, UCs were submitted without 
the signature of the competent authority. The Committee feel that accepting UCs 
without audited Statements of Accounts and proper authorization raises question 
over the accuracy and reliability of the financi al informatio n provided by SHAs . 
The Committee also notice instances of inflated UCs submitted by SHAs, 
amounting to ₹38.24 crore suggesting potential irregularities in the reporting of 

expenditures. In view of the aforesaid serious  financial irregularity  issue, the 
Committee recommend the NHA to strengthen its oversight and verification 
processes to enforce strict compliance with financial reporting standards, 
requiring SHAs to submit audited Statements of Accounts along with Utilization 
Certificates. The Committee als o desire NHA to issue SoPs for the  SHAs to 
ensure that UCs are signed by the competent authority and audited to ensure the 
accuracy of the reported expenditures. To ascertain  accurate reporting of 
expenditures and transparency and accountability in the utilization of grants  by 
SHAs ,  the Committee further desire  that instances of inflated Utilization 
Certificates submitted by SHAs be investigated by conducting forensic audits so 
that discrepancies  may be identified and  parties concerned  held accountable 
for any misreporting or misallocation of funds.  
 
15. NON-IMPLEMENTATION OF PFMS 
 
The Committee note that despite clear government directives that releases 
for Central Sector schemes should be made only through Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS), manual Utilization Certificates (UCs) are being 
accepted by the NHA from State Healt h Agencies (SHAs). While both NHA and 
SHAs are registered on PFMS for receiving grants -in-aid, hospitals, as sub -level 
implementing agencies, are not registered on PFMS. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the said lack of integration poses challenges in  tracking and 
monitoring expenditure flows and ensuring transparency and accountability in 
fund utilization. The Committee also feel that due to absence of clear mapping of 
beneficiaries between the PMJAY and state -specific schemes , accuracy and 
segregation of claims submitted for Utilization Certificates  cannot be ensured . 
The Committee, therefore recommend the NHA to strictly enforce compliance 
with government directives mandating the use of PFMS for all financial 
transactions rela ted to Central Sector schemes for  submission of UCs and 
manual UCs should no longer be accepted. Besides making efforts to integrate 
hospitals, as sub -level implementing agencies, into the PFMS to facilitate 
seamless tracking and monitoring of expenditure flows, t he Committee further 
advise NHA to work closely with SHAs to ensure proper mapping of beneficiaries 
between PMJAY and state-specific schemes.  
 
16. The Committee note from audit observation that in five States/UTs, District 
Implementing Units (DIUs) had not been formed by SHA and in Tripura, DIUs have 
only been constituted in five Districts. The Committee further note that there is 
shortage of manpower and inadequacy of infrastructure in SHAs and DIUs in 22 
States/UTs. Taking note of the above mentioned facts, the Committee recommend 
that SHAs should ensure that District Implementing Units are formed in every 
District with adequate manpower and infrastructure for smooth functioning of 
scheme. 
 
17. The Committee also take note from audit observat ion that in three 
states/UTs, there was delay in constituting the SGRCs while in two states DGRCs 

were not constituted.  It was also noted that in a few States, no meeting of SGRCs 
and DGRCs was held.  The Committed are not convinced with  the argument 
forwarded by the Ministry through the written reply that DGRC and SGRC are 
primarily appellate bodies for grievance redressal and  are not requi red to be 
convened every month. The Committee while opining that non-formation of State 
Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) and District Grievance Redressal 
Committee (DGRC), at SHA and DIU level  would definitely  lead to ineffective 
redressal of grievances,  recommend that the DGRC/ SGRC may be constituted in 
all States expeditiously and a system may put in place where they meet regularly 
to address the grievances in a timely manner.  It is important to bring out here 
that DGRC/ SGRC must also invariably  identify  recurring/peculiar  issues for 
their ultimate resolution and, therefore,  enabling  improvements in the Scheme. 
18. The C ommittee note from audit obse rvation that seven States/UTs, i.e. 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Punj ab, 
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have  not adopted the Whistle Blower Policy. The 
Committee feel that d ue to non -adoption of Whistle Blower Policy, the 
stakeholders involved in the scheme are deprived of the mechanism for 
complaining against cases of corruption,  medical and non -medical frauds. The 
Committee, hence, recommend the Ministry to ask SHAs to implement the Whistle 
Blower Policy in these seven states in a time defined manner under intimation to 
the Committee. 
 
19. The Committee further  take note  of the audit observation regarding 
shortfall in conduct of medical and other/social audit by ISA and SHA and are not 
satisfied with the reply of the NHA that targets specified for auditing could not be 
achieved b ecause SHAs were busy with COVID  management. The Committee , 
therefore, vehemently  recommend that auditing goals set by NHA should be 
achieved in a specific time frame and they be apprised of the same. 
 
20 The Committee are disappointed to note that the PMJAY Scheme has not 
been implemented effectively and was hindered by numerous issues in 
Beneficiary Identification and Registration; Hospital Empanelment and 
Management; Monitoring and Grievance Redressal; financial management; and 
insurance settlement claims in various States. The Committee opine that with a 
large population that h as no regular healthcare access or focus on health 
education it is imperative to make efforts to enable a better distribution and 
ensure quality of care in empanelled hospitals. The Committee feel that the 
criteria for inclusion in the Scheme may be revisi ted to consider including people 
(individuals) who are not eligible to avail benefits of this scheme but do not have 
means to afford regular health care and need support from the Government. The 
Committee while noting that there is a shortage of healthcare  professionals in 
rural healthcare centers desire that the issue may be addressed to improve the 
doctor-patient ratio in rural areas. The Committee while noting that the Ayushman 
scheme covers only inpatient illness and healthcare expenses around the perio d 
are apprehensive that this may entail more expenses and decreased outcomes. 

 The Committee desire to be apprised of the impact of PMJAY on the reduction of 
actual out of pocket expenses. The Committee are of the considered view that the 
focus on preventi on and early diagnosis of various diseases and OPD treatment 
will not only help reduce the cost of healthcare substantially but also help 
increase productivity and the overall health of the nation. Further, the adoption of 
standard treatment guidelines is needed to support hospitals and implementing 
agencies in better claim management. The oversight of agencies through 
enforcement of contracts and implementing fair and timely reimbursement 
mechanisms are essential to achieve the aim of improving affordabili ty, 
accessibility, and quality of care for the poor and vulnerable section of the 
population. Further, as a significant portion of beneficiaries are unaware of this 
programme, effort of advertising it over television, radio, and social media and 
dissemination of information through ASHA workers will go a long way in 
improving participation. The Committee also desire to be apprised of initiatives 
undertaken in this regard. 
 
**********                      
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27 April, 2024                               Chairperson, 
 07 Vaisakha, 1946 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
 