14

THE ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS
PROGRAMME (AIBP}

MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (DEPARTMENT OF WATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA
» REJUVENATION)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

FOURTEENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2195

FOURTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

THE ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS
PROGRAMME (AIBP)

MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (DEPARTMENT OF WATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA
REJUVENATION)

सत्यमेव जबते

Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on: 23.03.2020
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 744 AL 0R0
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: /9:.

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2020 /Chaitra, 1942 (Saka)


Vi

CONTENTS

REPORT
PART-1
CHAPTER - |: INTRODUCTORY

CHAPTER - II: INCLUSION OF PROJECTS UNDER AIBP

CHAPTER ॥: DILUTION IN THE FOCUS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE -

PROGRAMME - CASE OF RONGAI VALLEY PROJECT
CHAPTER - IV: INEFFICIENT FISCAL MANAGEMENT OF AIBP.

“CHAPTER V: DEFICIENCIES IN WORK MANAGEMENT AND UNDUE

BENEFITS TO CONTRACTORS
CHAPTER VI: INEFFICIENT MONITORING OF THE SCHEME

PART -॥
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
APPENDICES

Minutes of the Third sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2019-20)
held on 20-09-2019.
Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2019-

20) held on 23-03-2020.

PAGES.

17

21
27

33

37-40


Ce ND AR WN

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-2021)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
5

hri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant
Vacant



=s eo 27 NIN DH YN

ब्रा 2.

20.
21.
22.

की पर ७-5

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

ARGOS

Se 2a

(2.०1१- 20%

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

hri Subhash Chandra Baheria
hri Sudheer Gupta

mt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

S

$

Ss

Ss

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri P. Bhattacharya’

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G."Chandrasekhar —- Joint Secretary
Shri M.L.K Raja - Director

Shri U. C. Bhardwaj - Additional Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi : Deputy Secretary

” Elected w.e.f, 10 February, 2020 iri lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from
Rajya Sabha on OS August, 2019.


INTRODUCTION

4, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) having been aulhorised by
the Committee, do present this Fourteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)' based on C&AG Report No. 22 of
2018 related to the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation).

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was
laid on the Table of the House on 8" January, 2019.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Jal, Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation) on the subject at their sitting held on 20" September, 2019. Accordingly, a
Draft Report was prepared and placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2019-20)
for their consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their
sitting held on 24" March, 2020. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

4, For facility of reference and convenience, the’ Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part: ॥ of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information
to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

परत 2 ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
Chaitra, 1942 (Saka) Chairperson

Public Accounts Committee


1

REPORT
PART- I
CHAPTER - |

1. INTRODUCTORY

1. The Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (8187) was launched during
1996-97 as a Central Assistance (CA) programme for accelerating the implementation
of large projects which were beyond the resource capability of the States and
completion of other irrigation projects which were at an advanced stage but were
delayed due to resource constraints faced by State Governments. Initially, the primary
goal of AIBP was to speed up completion of Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI)
projects. The coverage under AIBP was gradually expanded over the years to include
drotight prone area of KBK districts of Odisha and Minor Irrigation (MI) scheme of
special category States (SCS); Extension, Renovation, Modernisation. (ERM) projects
and MI schemes of special Areas (drought prone areas, tribal areas, desert areas,
Flood prone areas) of non-SCS. Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources,
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is responsible for framing policy guidelines
for implementation while State Governments are primarily associated with planning and
implementation of irrigation projects and schemes.

2. The C&AG undertook a performance audit of the AIBP and in its Report No. 22 of
2018, the C&AG came down particularly hard on the lackadaisical implementation of
AIBP. The Performance audit of AIBP revealed several deficiencies in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of the programme. Projects and schemes were included
under AIBP in violation of the programme guidelines, resulting in irregular release of =
3718.71 crore. Deficiencies in preparation and processing of detailed project reports
(DPRs) such as inadequate surveys, inaccurate assessment of water availability,
Irrigation Potential (IP) and Command Area, lack of activity wise construction plans, etc.
and incorrect calculation of Cost Benefit Ratio of the projects led to modifications in
design and scope of work and revision in cost estimates after commencement of work,
also adversely affecting the schedule of implementation of the projects.

3. The executive summary of the audit report pointed out that financial management
of AIBP was inefficient, as there were cases of non/short release of funds, delays in
release of funds at various levels, releases at the fag end of the financial year and non-
adjustment of unspent balances of funds in the subsequent releases. Utilisation
Certificates for funds amounting to हैं 2187.40 crores that constituted 37% of the total
Central. Assistance received by the State Agencies, were not submitted to the Ministry in
time. Other financial irregularities such as diversion of funds, instances of short/non-
realisation of revenues, tardy implementation of projects under AIBP, deficiencies in
work management such as delays in award of work, splitting of works, undue benefits to
contractors etc. and lax monitoring by Central and State Agencies were noted in the
audit report.

4, The Public Accounts Committee had been reviewing the implementation of the
"Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme" and aspects relating to critical issues


2

relating to AIBP for its non-performance. During the 45" Lok Sabha, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-2011) in their 347 Report on AIBP offered constructive
recommendations. The present report is both a review of the implementation of AIBP
hitherto and a candid progress report of the implementation of the recommendations of
PAC in their earlier reports.

5. During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee took
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Jal Shakti, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation and also interacted with representatives of C&AG over its Report No. 20
of 2018. Apart from oral testimony of the witnesses, the Committee obtained
background documents from the Ministry of Jal Shakti, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation which were examined and where further clarifications were needed, post
evidence clarification/replies thereto were also obtained from the Ministry.

6. The Committee's examination of the subject, "Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme" inter-alia include (i) inclusion of projects under the scheme (ii) dilution in
the focus and objectives of the programme (iii) inefficient fiscal management of the
AIBP (iv) delay in implementation of AIBP resulting in time and cost overrun (v)
deficiencies in work management and undue benefits to contractors and (vi) inefficient
and lax monitoring both by Centre and States. The views of the Ministry and related
aspects have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs in Part - | of this Report,
whereas the observations/Recommendations have been included in Part - ॥ of the
Report.


3
CHAPTER - II
INCLUSION OF PROJECTS UNDER AIBP

7. Irrigation is a State subject and the role of the Government of India (GOI) in this
sector primarily focuses on overall planning, policy formulation, co-ordination and
guidance. The irrigation requirements of the country are met through various modes of
irrigation including Major, Medium Irrigation (MMI) projects and Minor Irrigation (MI)
schemes. The Accelerated irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) was launched during
1996-97 as a Central Assistance Programme for accelerating the implementation of
large projects which were beyond the resource capability of the States and completion
of other irrigation projects which were at an advanced state but were delayed due to
resource constraints faced by State Governments. However, the scope of the
programme was, thereafter, expanded from time to time to cover MI schemes in Special
Category States (North Eastern States and Hilly States) and in specified aréas of other
States.

8. From October 2013 onwards, additional emphasis was placed on pari-passu
implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works for increasing utilisation
of irrigation Potential (IP). During 2015-16, AIBP was made one of the four components
of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) with focus on faster completion of
on-going MM! projects including National Projects. MI Schemes were made a part of the
separate component of PMKSY- Har Khet Ko Pani.

9. The Committee specifically wanted to know the eligibility criterion and norms for
inclusion of Projects and schemes under AIBP. To this query, the Ministry of Jal Shakti
in their written reply submitted as under:-
“Major and Medium Irrigation Projects (A) having investment clearance of
Planning Commission, (B) are in advanced stage of construction and can be
completed in the next four financial years can be considered for inclusion.
Components of the Projects not receiving any other form of financial assistance
can also be considered for inclusion. New Project’ could also be included under
AIBP on completion of an ongoing Project on one to one basis’ (hereafter called
as 1:1 criteria) except for Projects benefiting (a) drought-prone areas (DPAP
areas) & Desert Prone Area(DDP areas); (b) tribal 18983; (c) States with lower
Irrigation development as compared to national average; and (d) districts
identified under the PM's package for agrarian distress district. All the Projects
have to fulfill condition as at (A) and (B) above including the Projects proposed
by relaxation of 1:1 criteria.
The advanced stage of construction would imply that:
* At least 50% of latest approved estimated Project cost has already been
incurred and पु

“a Project which is ongoing but not yet included in AIBP
+ a Project will be said to be benefitting a tribal area, if the area benefitted is within
scheduled area under schedule V of the Constitution of India.


4

+ At least 50% of physical progress of essential works* of the Project has taken
place; and

The proposal of the State for inclusion of Project under AIBP must be supported
by a credible construction schedule indicating the works already executed and
works to be executed along with their costs.

While processing the release proposal for central assistance under AIBP, work
component commensurate to work related to land under possession viz-a-viz
annual progress of work will be considered.

The construction planning of the Projects would be such that the AIBP works for
creation of Irrigation potential and the Command Area Development (CAD) works
for utilization of Irrigation potential are taken up simultaneously in case of new
Projects. However, in case of Projects already included in AIBP prior to April
2013 and receiving central assistance:

i. lf CAD works are already taken up, then construction planning for CAD works
to be reviewed and modified by Project authorities such that CAD works are
completed within six months to one year of the completion of works under AIBP.
ii. If CAD works are not started, then, taking up the CAD works with the target to
complete parri passu (with a maximum of one year relaxation) so as to complete
with the works under AIBP.

Extension/Renovation and Modernization Projects (ERM): The Major/Medium
ERM Projects (a) having investment clearance of Planning Commission (b)
Projects already completed and commissioned at least 10 years earlier from the
proposed year of inclusion in AIBP, ie., for current year Projects completed
before 2002-03 will qualify for inclusion. Inclusion may be permitted in the
States/Projects: हु

(i) Which have agreed to reform in water sector i.e. to implement Micro Irrigation
in at least 10% of command area.

OR
(ii) Which have enacted Participatory Irrigation Management legislation and
active working of Water User Association to maintain the system and collecting

water cess.
OR
(iii) Where new potential is also envisaged along with restoration of lost potential.
है OR

(iv) CAD works have been completed or taken up and likely to be completed.

All the ERM Projects have to fulfill condition as at (a) and (b) above at the time of
inclusion in AIBP.

Apart from the above, for inclusion of an ERM Project in AIBP, the criteria of
advanced stage of construction as at 1.1.1 above should also be satisfied. The
stipulation given at para 1.1.3 above regarding CAD will also to be followed by
ERM Projects.

+ Essential works on- head works, earth works for canal, Land Acquisition R&R activities
for reservoir area for enabling adequate storage to cover the command area being
proposed now, finalization of designs and availability of construction drawings matching
with completion of work as per award of work. हु


10.

5

During 2016-17, 99 ongoing projects under PMKSY-AIBP were prioritized for
completion in phases and funding arrangement for the same for both Central
Assistance (CA) and State share were made through NABARD under Long Term
Irrigation Fund (LTIF). As per presently approved scheme, there is no scope for
inclusion of any new scheme".

When the Committee asked about the major source of funding of the Accelerated

Irrigation Benefits Programme and the checks and balances on the funding and
expenditure under AIBP, the Ministry of Jal Shakti in their written reply submitted as
under:-

11.

“Earlier CA was provided through budgetary resources. However, at present,
Central Assistance to AIBP projects is being funded through borrowing under
Long term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) from NABARD. Further, State Share component
of AIBP Project are being funded by State Govt. through their own budget or
borrowing under LTIF from NABARD as per year wise requirements. State Share
is being provided to States at the rate of 6% per annum so as to make it
attractive for the States and encourage them to raise requisite State Share for
early completion of the Projects. The interest cost above 6% is being borne by
the Central Govt. Checks .and Balances. As mentioned at para 4 of AIBP
guidelines, 2013, State Governments are to provide Utilisation Certificates in
respect of total expenditure (State share + Central Share) incurred on 31st
March of the Financial Year of the funding."

Giving further details regarding the monitoring of the funds thus released, the

Ministry in their written reply elaborated as under:-

12.

"The Utilization Certificate is issued by the Chief Engineer of the Project and
countersigned by Secretary (Water Resources/irrigation) of the State
Government. The Utilization Certificate contains physical achievement of
Irrigation Potential and financial progress/expenditure as agreed to in the MoU
on year to year basis.

The States are required to submit audited Statements of expenditure incurred
within nine months of the completion of the financial year. Concurrent evaluation
of the Project by State Government is required to be taken up by the concerned
State Govt. at the end of each Financial Year during the period of funding.

All major and-medium Projects where funds have been released in the previous
year are monitored once in a year by concerned field office of CWC. The CWC
(HQ) monitors inter-State Projects.

However, after prioritization of 99 projects during 2016-17, third party monitoring
is also being carried out through Project Monitoring Unit (PMU)".

To the query about the frequent revision of norms for inclusion in AIBP, the

Ministry of Jal Shakti in their written reply furnished as under:-

"The guidelines of AIBP have been revised from time to time as per the emerging
needs, requirement of widening of the scope for special consideration of the
regions lagging behind in development such as north-eastern States, hilly States,


6

drought prone and tribal areas, KBK districts of Odisha, States with lower
irrigation development as compared to national average and districts identified
under PM package for agrarian distress in the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala etc. Further, AIBP Guidelines were modified
from time to time to simplify the procedure. The modifications made in guidelines
in respect of inclusion of projects from time to time are given below:-

The criteria for inclusion of a Project since inception of AIBP at various Revision
stages are as follows:

Year

Basic Criteria for selection of the projects as per Guidelines

1996-97

(a) Irrigation and Multipurpose projects costing more than Rs.1000
crore where substantial progress has been made and, which are
beyond the resources capabilities of the States; (b) Major and
Medium irrigation projects, excluding the category in (a) above,
which are in advanced stage of completion, where with just a little
additional resources the project could be completed so that
farmers could get the benefit of assured water supply to 1,00,000
ha.; and (c) Project s should have investment clearance of
Planning Commission.

1997-98

A-General (i) Eligible Projects covered under the
programme during previous years will get preference over
new projects proposed for inclusion during current year.
(ii) To avoid thin spreading of resources the states will be
advised to concentrate only on few promising projects.

(iii) Only those projects will be considered which have the
Investment Clearance from the Planning Commission.

(iv) The Projects which are already receiving assistance
from domestic agencies such as NABARD shall not be
eligible for assistance under the programme. However, the
components of such projects which are not covered under
such assistance may be considered for inclusion under the
programme.

(v) On large projects, assistance will be given for their
phased completion so that benefits could start flowing early
with comparatively smaller investments.

(vi) Minor Irrigation Projects are not eligible for assistance
under AIBP.

(vii) Projects benefitting tribal/ drought prone areas would
be given due preference, provided they’ are otherwise
eligible. i

(viii) Priority will be given to inter-state projects. All party
states will be eligible for assistance under the programme
individually.

ix) Projects with larger irrigated area per unit of additional



7

! ० cr. Criteria : Projects or components thereof,
costing Rs.500 crores or more on which substantial
investment have been made. However, Projects on which
more than 50% of the estimated expenditure has already
been incurred shall get higher priority. Other cases only if
funds are available after meeting the demands of priority
_Projects.

(xi) Advanced Stage: Projects which are in advance stage
of completion and could be completed in the next four
agricultural seasons i.e. in a period of about two years
irrespective of total estimated cost. :

1999-2000

General (i) Only major/medium irrigation projects which are in
advanced stage of construction will be considered for inclusion
under the programme. However, Irrigation Projects benefitting
KBK districts of Orissa in initial stages of construction will be
included. (ii) Eligible Projects covered under the programme
during previous years will get preference over new projects
Proposed for inclusion during current year.
(iil) To avoid thin spreading of resources the states will be
advised to concentrate only on few Promising projects. (iv)
Only those projects will be considered which have the
Investment Clearance from the Planning Commission. (v)
The Projects which are already receiving assistance from
domestic agencies such as NABARD will not be eligible for
assistance under the programme. However, the
components of such projects which are not covered under
such assistance may be considered for inclusion under the
programme.

(vi) On large projects, assistance will be given for their
phased completion so that benefits could start flowing early
with comparatively smaller investments.

(vii) Minor Irrigation Projects are not eligible for assistance
under AIBP. However, Minor surface Irrigation Schemes
(both new as well as ongoing) of States of North East, Hilly
States (H.P., Sikkim & J&K) and draught prone KBK
districts of Orissa which are approved by State (TAC) will
be eligible under the programme.

(viii) Projects benefitting tribal/ draught prone areas would
be given due preference provided they are otherwise
eligible. ह

(ix) Priority will be given to inter-state projects. All. party
States will be eligible for assistance under the programme

individually. (x) Projects with larger irrig 20 Projects with larger irrigated area-per unit of



8

additional investment will be preferred. CLASSIFICATION
OF PROJECTS Following two categories of projects will be
eligible for assistance:-

(i) Projects or components thereof costing Rs.500 crores or
more on which substantial investment have been made.
However, projects on which more than 50% of the
estimated expenditure has already been incurred shall get
higher priority. Other cases only if funds are available after
meeting the demands of priority projects. (ii) Projects which
are in advance stage of completion and could be completed
in the next four agricultural seasons i.e, in a period of about
two years irrespective of total estimated cost.

2001-2002

(i) Only major/medium irrigation projects which are in
advanced stage of construction and Surface Minor Irrigation
scheme in special category States will be considered for
inclusion under the programme. However, Major/ medium
Irrigation Projects benefitting KBK districts of Orissa in initial
stages of construction will be included.

(i) Eligible Projects covered under the programme during
previous years will get preference over new projects
proposed for inclusion during current year.

(ii) To avoid thin spreading of resources, the States have
to concentrate only on few promising projects.

(iv) Only those major/ medium projects will be considered
which have the Investment Clearance from the Planning
Commission.

(v) The Projects which are already receiving assistance
from external/ domestic agencies such as NABARD will not
be eligible for Central Loan Assistance (CLA) under the
programme. However, the components of such projects
which ‘are not covered under such assistance may be
considered for inclusion under the programme.

(vi) On large projects, assistance will be given for their
phased completion so that benefits could start flowing early
with comparatively smaller investments.

(vii) Projects een tribal/ draught prone areas would
be given due preference provided they are otherwise
eligible.

(viii) Priority will be given to inter-state projects. All party
states will be eligible for assistance under the programme
individually.

ix) Projects with larger irrigated area per unit of additional



9

investment will be preferred. B Classification of Projects
Following categories of projects will be eligible for
assistance:- (i) Approved projects or components thereof
costing Rs.500 crores or more on which substantial
investment has been made. However, projects on which
more than 50% of the estimated expenditure has already
been incurred shall get higher priority. Other cases will be
considered only if funds are available after meeting. the
demands of priority projects.

(ii) Approved Projects which are in advance stage of
completion and could be completed in the next four
agricultural seasons i.e. in. a period of about two years
irrespective of total estimated cost

(iti) Minor Irrigation Projects in General Category States are
not eligible for CLA under AIBP. However, Minor Surface
Irrigation Schemes (both new as well as on going) of States
of North-East, Hilly States (H.P., Sikkim, J&K and
Uttaranchal) and drought prone KBK districts of Orissa
which are approved by State TAC will be eligible under the
programme. However, the State Government should
submit only those proposals where the individual schemes
are benefitting irrigation potential of at least 2019, And
group of schemes (within a radius of 5 kms.) benefitting
total ultimate irrigation potential of at least 50 ha. The
proposed MI schemes should have benefit cost ratio of
more than 1 and the development cost of these schemes
per ha, Should not exceed Rs.1 laks. FAST TRACK
PROGRAMME: (i) Only the approved major & Medium
irrigation projects which can be completed in one year (two
working seasons) will be included under this programme. (ii)
The projects will be fully funded by the Centre by providing
100% loan. State Governments should however, confirm
full budget outlay in State Plan. (iii) Establishment
expenditure of the projects getting CLA under Fast Track
Programme has to be entirely borne by the States. (iv) The
releases will be made in 2 installments of 50% each. (v) The
progress of works will be closely monitored by the Central
Water Commission with special reference to quality control
and the release of second installment will be based on the
recommendation of the CWC. (vi) State Government will
give a memorandum of understanding between the Ministry
of Water Resources, Government of India and the
concerned State Government.

2004

(i) Only major/medium irrigation projects which are in advanced
stage of construction and could be completed in the next 6-8

working seasons i.e. in about 3-4 years will be considered for


10

ce under the Programme. However, Major/ Medium
Irrigation Projects benefitting KBK districts of Orissa in initial
stages of construction will be included. . State govts. Will be
required to enter into a MoU (annexure-l) for each individual
project under the programme with MOWR indicating balance cost,
balance potential, year-wise phasing of expenditure and
agreement to complete the project in 6-8 seasons with target of
completion date. (ii) To avoid thin spreading of resources, the
States have to concentrate only on few promising projects.
Eligible projects covered under the programme during previous
years will get preference over new projects proposed for inclusion
during current year. Inclusion of new proposals will be done only
against completed projects. (iii) Only those major! medium projects
will be considered which have the Investment Clearance from the
Planning Commission. (iv) The Projects which are already
receiving assistance from external/ domestic agencies such as
NABARD will not be eligible for Central Loan Assistance (CLA)
under the programme. However, the components of such projects
which are not covered under such assistance may be considered
for inclusion under the programme. MoU on the lines indicated in
item (A)i) will be required in this case also. (v) On large projects,
assistance will be given for their phased completion so that
benefits could start flowing. early with comparatively smaller
investments. However, projects on which more than 50% of the
estimated expenditure has already been incurred shall get higher
priority. Other cases will be considered only if funds are available
after meeting the demands of priority projects. (vi) Projects
benefitting tribal’ draught prone areas would be given due
preference provided they are otherwise eligible.

(vii) Priority will be given to inter-state projects. All party states will
be eligible for assistance under the programme individually.

(ix) Projects with larger — area per unit of additional
investment will be preferred.

D. Special Provision for Fast Track Programme: (i) Only the
approved major & Medium irrigation projects which can be
completed in three working seasons will be included in under Fast
Track. (ii) The projects will be fully funded by the Centre by
providing 70% loan and 30% grant for non-Special Category
States and 90% grant and 10% loan for Special Category States.
State Governments should however, confirm full budget outlay in
State Plan. (iii) Establishment expenditure of the projects getting
CLA under Fast Track Programme has to be entirely borne by the
States. (iv) The releases will be made in 2 installments of 50%
each. (v) The progress of works will be closely monitored by the
Central Water Commission with special reference to quality control

and the release of second installment_will be based on the



i

recommendation of the CWC. (vi) State Government will give a
memorandum of understanding between the Ministry of Water
Resources, Government of India and the concerned State
Government.

2005

4. Only approved major and medium irrigation projects i.e.
projects which have been accorded investment approval by the
Planning Commission, which are in an advanced stage of
construction and can be completed in the next four (4) financial
years and which are not receiving any other form of assistance
(NABARD, external aid, etc. )can be considered for inclusion in the
programme. . Components of projects not receiving other
assistance can also be included: under the programme. To avoid
thin spreading of resources, State Governments will have to
concentrate only ona few promising projects.

2. Only on completion of one project under the programme,
inclusion of another project will be considered. However, Fast
Track Projects. and pre Fifth and Fifth Plan projects can be
included under this programme without this stipulation. 3. For the
KBK districts of Orissa, projects even in the initial stage of
construction can be included.

4. The following categories of projects will get priority for inclusion
in the programme?

(i) projects benefitting tribal/ drought prone areas (ii) inter State
projects (All party States will be eligible individually for assistance).
(iii) Projects with ‘larger irrigated area per unit of additional
investment.

5. For large projects, assistance will be given for their phased
completion so that additional benefits can start flowing early.
Projects on which more than 50% of the estimated cost has been
incurred will be given priority

6. Extension, Renovation, Modernisation (ERM) projects can be
included subject to following conditions: (a) Can be permitted in
States which have no major or medium projects to pose under
AIBP and have thus not been availing AIBP. (b) can be permitted:
(i) in States which have agreed to reform in water sector i.e. step
up water rates to enable meeting full O&M cost over 5 years. (So
far only Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pardesh, Rajasthan,
Orissa and Jharkhand have signed MoU).

OR (ii) in States which eerie enacted Participatory Irrigation
Management legislation. OR (iii) for ERM
projects where new potential is also envisaged with water saved
and not merely restoration of lost potential. To ensure that funds
do not flow only to ERM projects, not more than 10% of aggregate
annual allocation under AIBP will be for ERM and 90% will thus be
for completion of major and medium projects.



12

7. State Governments will be required to enter into a MoU with the
MoWR for each individual project under the programme indicating
balance cost, balance potential, year-wise phasing of expenditure
and balance potential and agreement to complete the project in 4
financial years with target completion date.

2006

4. Major, medium and Extension, Renovation & Modernization
(ERM) irrigation projects (a) having investment clearance of
Planning Commission(b) are in advanced stage of construction
and can be completed in the next four financial year (c) are not
receiving any other form of financial assistance can be considered
for inclusion in the programme. Components of the projects not
receiving any other form of financial assistance can also be
considered for inclusion in the prorgramme. The eligibility criteria
as per prevailing guidelines for selection of ERM project will
continue. New project could be included in programme only on
completion of an ongoing project under AIBP on one to one basis
Except FOR projects benefitting (a) drought-prone areas, (b) tribal
areas: (c) states with lower irrigation development as compared to
national average; and (d) districts identified under the PM's
package for agrarian distress districts. 2. Surface minor irrigation
(Ml) schemes (Both new as well as ongoing) of states of North-
East, Hilly States (Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Jammu and
Kashmir and Uttaranchal) and drought prone KBK districts of
Orissa which are approved by State TAC/ State Planning
Department will be eligible for assistance under the programme
provided that (i) individual schemes are benefiting irrigation
potential of at least 20 ha. and group of schemes (within a radius
of 5 km) benefiting total ultimate irrigation potential of at least 50
ha. (iii) proposed MI schemes have benefit cost ratio of more than
1 and (iv) the development cost of these schemes per ha. Is less
than Rs.1.00 lakh. For Non-special category states, only those
minor irrigation schemes with potential more than 50 hectare
which serve tribal areas and drought prone areas could be
included under AIBP. The schemes to be taken up will be decided
in consultation with Planning Commission.

2013

4.1 Ongoing Major and Medium Projects: Major and medium
irrigation projects (a) having investment clearance: of Planning
Commission(b) are in advanced stage of construction and can be
completed in the next four financial year can be considered for
inclusion. . Components of the projects not receiving any other
form of financial assistance can also be considered for inclusion.
New project could also be included under AIBP on completion of
an ongoing project on one to one basis (hereafter called as 1:1
criteria) except for projects benefiting (a) drought-prone areas
(DPAP areas) & Desert Prone Area (DDP areas); (b) tribal areas,

०) States with lower irrigation development_as compared to



13

a average; and (d) districts identified under the PM's
package for agrarian distress districts. All the projects have to
fulfill conditions as at (a) and (b) above including the projects
proposed by relaxation 1:1 criteria.

1.1.1. The advanced stage of construction would imply that at least
50% of latest approved estimated project cost already incurred
and at least 50% of physical progress of essential works of the
project has taken place; and the proposal of the State for inclusion
of project under AIBP must be supported by a credible
construction schedule indicating the works already executed and
works to be executed along with their costs.

1.1.2 While processing the release proposal for central assistance
under AIBP work component commensurate to work related to
land under possession viz-a-viz annual progress of work will be
considered. .

1.1.3 The construction planning of the projects would be such that
the AIBP works for creation of irrigation potential and the
Gommand Area Development (CAD) works for utilization of
irrigation potential are taken up simultaneously in case of new
projects. However, in case of projects already included in AIBP
prior to April 2013 and receiving central assistance. i. If CAD
works already taken up, then construction planning for. CAD works
to be reviewed and modified by project authorities such that CAD
works are completed within six’ months to one year of the
completion of works under AIBP. ii. If CAD works are not started,
then taking up the CAD works with the target to complete parri
passu (with a maximum of one year relaxation) so as to complete
with the works under AIBP. 1.2 Extension/ Renovation and
Modernisation Projects (ERM): The Major/ Medium ERM Projects
(a) having investment clearance of Planning Commission (b)
Projects already completed and commissioned at least 10 years
earlier from the proposed year of inclusion in AIBP, i.e. for current
year projects completed before 2002-03 will qualify for inclusion.
Inclusion may be permitted in the states/ projects: (i) Which have
agreed to reform in water sector i.e. the implement Micro Irrigation
in at least 10% of command area. OR (ii) Which have
enacted participatory Irrigation Management legislation and active
working of Water User Association to maintain the system and
collecting water cess, OR (iii) Where new potential is
also envisaged along with restoration of lost potential.
OR (iv) CAD works have been completed or taken up and likely to
be completed. All the ERM projects have to fulfill condition as at
(a) and (b) above at the time of inclusion in AIBP. Apart from the
above, inclusion of an ERM project in AIBP, the criteria of
advanced stage of construction as at 1.1.1 above should also be
satisfied. The stipulation given at para 1.1.3 above regarding CAD

will also_to be followed by ERM _ projects. 1.3 Surface Minor


14

(Both new as well as ongoing) of Special category States - North-
Eastern Statés, Hilly States (Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and
Kashmir and Uttaranchal) and drought prone undivided Koraput,
Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) districts of Odisha which are
approved by State TAC will be eligible for assistance under the
programme provided that (i) individual schemes having culturable
Command Area (CCA) of 10 hectare and cluster of Mi schemes
within radius of SKM having CCA of 20 hectare (ii) proposed MI
schemes have benefit cost ratio of more than 1 and (iii) the
development cost per hectare of CCA of individual scheme is less
than Rs.2.5 lakh. For Non-special category states, the individual
surface minor irrigation schemes having CCA of 20 hectare and
cluster of MI schemes within radius of 5 KM having total CCA of
50 hectare benefitting tribal areas, drought prone areas, desert
prone areas and Left Wing Extremists Affected area will be eligible
for assistance under AIBP.

43. The C&AG in its Report No. 4 of 2010-11 had highlighted that frequent
modifications in AIBP guidelines (1997, 1999, 2005 and 2006) showed lack of clarity in
the focus, approach and objectives of AIBP. Audit examination has revealed that the
guidelines have been frequently modified from time to time viz., in 2013 2015 and
2016

14 When asked to furnish the response to the Audit observations that nine (9) ERM
Projects were included under AIBP during 2005-12 in violation of conditions stipulated in
AIBP Guidelines, the Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of River Development & Ganga
Rejuvenation in their written reply furnished the guidelines of 2005 for inclusion of ERM
projects as under:- .
"Extension, Renovation, Modernisation (ERM) projects can be included subject to
following conditions:
(a) Can be permitted in States which have no major or medium projects to pose
under AIBP and have thus not been availing AIBP.
9) can be permitted
(i) in States which have agreed to reform in water sector i.e. step up water
rates to enable meeting full O&M cost over 5 years. (So far only Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa and Jharkhand have
signed MoU).
OR
(ii) in States which have enacted Participatory Irrigation Management
legislation.
OR
(iii) for ERM projects where new potential is also envisaged with water saved ;
and not merely restoration of lost potential


15

To ensure that funds do not flow only to ERM projects, not more than 10% of
aggregate annual allocation under AIBP will be for ERM and 90% will thus be for
completion of major and medium projects.

In AIBP Guidelines of 2006 it is mentioned that the eligibility criteria as per
prevailing guidelines of 2005 for selection of ERM project will continue. New
project could be included in programme only on completion of an ongoing project
under AIBP on one to one basis except for projects benefitting (a) drought-prone
areas; (b) tribal areas: (c) states with lower irrigation development as compared
to national average; and (d) districts identified under the PM's package for
agrarian distress districts.

Status for ERM Projects mentioned in Audit Report

(i) Chitoorpuzha (Kerala) : This ERM Project was included under AIBP during
2009- 10 as per para 6B of AIBP guidelines 2005 as it envisaged to create new
irrigation potential. This project was under PM's package and is free from one to
one stipulation for its inclusion under AIBP as per AIBP guideline of 2006.

(ii) Restoration-Bhimasamudra Tank (Karnataka) :- The scheme is includéd
under AIBP during 2009-10 as per para 6B of AIBP guidelines 2005 as it
envisaged to create new irrigation potential of 2530 ha. This project was under
PM's package and is free from one to one stipulation for its inclusion under AIBP
as per AIBP guideline of 2006.

(ili) Modernization of Dadi Canal (J&K) :- The project was included under AIBP
during 2006-2007 against the completed scheme of modernization of Zaigir
canal. The project was included for cumulative creation of 4650.13 ha of
Irrigation Potential against created irrigation potential of 2573.36 ha.

(iv) Modernization of Ahji canal (J&K):- The project was included under AIBP
against the completed project Igo-Phey Irrigation Project in District Leh. The
scheme was included under AIBP in 2007-08 for creation of 8315.90 ha of
Irrigation Potential against created irrigation potential of 6896.12 ha.

(v) Kandi canal (J&K) : It was mentioned as ERM project in report of C&AG.
However, it is a medium project and not an ERM. This project envisages for
providing ultimate irrigation potential of 3229 ha. This project is included in AIBP
as this benefit drought prone area.

(vi) Restoration and Modernization of Main Ravi Canal (J&K): This Project is
included in AIBP during 2011-12 as per 6B (i) of AIBP guidelines 2005 and
AIBP guideline 2006. This scheme has been included against the Mav Khul
Project which has since been completed under AIBP. As the Government of J&K
had passed J&K Water Resources (Regulation and Management ) Act 2010
initiating reforms in the irrigation sector .

(vil) Modernization of Lachura Dam (U.P.) :- The scheme is included under AIBP
during 2005-06 as per para 68 of AIBP guidelines 2005 as it create new
irrigation potential of 61016 ha.

(viii), Restoration of Sarda Sahyak Canal System (U.P.):- The scheme is included
undér AIBP during 2009-10 as per para 6B of AIBP guidelines 2005 as it create
new irrigation potential of 7.9 Lakh Ha. (IX) Hardoi (UP): Union cabinet in it’s
meeting held on 16-11-2006 has approved inclusion of this scheme.”


16

15. Audit in their report has noted that 30 MMI projects that were included in AIBP
were in violation of the norms and criteria prescribed in the guidelines. In one instance,
Audit has noted that nine ERM projects with a total sanctioned cost of है 1016.02 crore
were included under AIBP during 2005-12 in violation of conditions stipulated in AIBP
guidelines. Audit has further noted that an amount of ¢ 239.46 crores had been released
against these nine ERM projects. Ministry's explanation (February 2018) that the
guidelines allow inclusion of ERMs where new potential is envisaged is not tenable as
for inclusion in AIBP, the primary requirement that the State should not have any
ongoing MMI project is to be met first.


7

CHAPTER III

DILUTION IN THE FOCUS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAMME - CASE OF
RONGAI VALLEY PROJECT

16. As per CWC Guidelines for submission, appraisal and clearance of irrigation and
multipurpose projects, DPRs submitted by State governments are subjected to techno-
economic scrutiny by CWC, which has to complete the appraisal within a maximum time
of 38 weeks. Further, block-wise information of Command Area is also required to be
furnished for each project.

17. The Public Accounts Committee in its 68” Report during 157" Lok Sabha

recommended that DPRs must be insisted on for all minor irrigation projects as in the
case of minor and medium projects, and concept: papers on simple project proposals
should not be treated as sufficient. AIBP guidelines also require that MI schemes should
be Technically appraised by State TAC on the basis of DPRs and after their approval,
submitted to the Ministry for inclusion under AIBP. Audit has further noted that in the
case of 14 sampled MMI projects pertaining to seven States including three Priority 4
projects with overall sanctioned cost of = 10,550.91 crore, DPRs were not made
available to audit.

18. When asked to elaborate the activities mandatorily required to be carried out by
State Governments for preparing a detailed project Report (DPR), the Ministry of Jal
Shakti, Department of River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in their written
reply stated that according to the guidelines for preparation of DPRs of Irrigation &
Multi-purpose Projects 2010, the State Governments/Project Authorities are required to
study/carry out the following activities before preparation of DPRs. Study for:- Overall
planning of the project, Allocation of water among co-basin states/ neighboring
countries allocated by any agreement or tribunal decision, etc. Surveys for:- River,
Reservoir, Head Works, Canals, Canal structures, Power house, Tunnels, Command
areas, Land acquisitions & Resettlement of project affected persons etc. and
Construction material survey to assess the availability of suitable construction material
for the project. Investigations:- Geological investigations for assessment of suitability of
site reservoirs, dam etc.,Seismic Investigations and Foundation investigations for dam,
barrage/weir/head-regulator, power house, etc. Technical aspects:~ Hydrological studies
for assessment of water availability; Design of Civil Structures; Irrigation Planning;
Power Potential Studies, if applicable; Construction planning/Scheduling; Cost
Estimates and BC Ratio Environmental & other aspects; Ecological aspects; Soil
conservation aspects. These activities are enumerated in detail as Check-list in the
MoWR “Guidelines for Preparation of DPR of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects 2010"
and are enclosed as Annexure 10. It is pertinent to mention here that CWC “Guidelines
for Submission, Appraisal and Acceptance of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects 2017"
also prescribe certain Check-lists for Pre-feasibility Report/PPR/Concept Note and DPR ©
which are enclosed as Annexure 11 and Annexure 12 respectively and are self
explanatory. It may also be noted that in the recently developed e-PAMS (i.e. web
enabled Project Appraisal Management System), these Check-lists are provided at


18

appropriate places in a simple and user-friendly manner for the information and
guidance of the project authorities.

19. Responding to the audit observation of deficiencies in preparation and
processing of detailed project Reports (DPRs) such as inadequate surveys, inaccurate
assessment of water availability, Irrigation Potential (IP) and Command Area, Lack of
activity wise construction plan etc. and incorrect calculation of benefit cost ratio of the
projects, the Ministry in their background note had furnished as under:
"Water being a State subject, planning, survey and investigations and
preparation of DPR of the water resources projects is done by the States from its
resources as per their priorities. In order to supplement the efforts, Department of
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD &
GR) provides financial assistance to State Governments to encourage
sustainable development and efficient management of water resources through
various schemes. The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Irrigation & Multipurpose
Projects is to be prepared by the State Government/Project Authority as per the
"Guidelines for Preparation of Detailed Project Reports of Irrigation &
Multipurpose Projects" issued by MoWR, RD & GR for techno-economic
acceptance. State Government has to obtain concurrence from State Finance
Department for the finalized cost. The DPR of the project is, thereafter examined
and recommended for acceptance by Advisory Committee of MoWR, RD & GR.
The overall planning, hydrology, irrigation planning, inter-state matters, Benefit
cost Ration and design parameters of project are examined in CWC and while
appraising CWC ensure that the data used for preparation of DPRs are updated,
reliable, accurate and based on proper survey and investigation work as per
Guidelines. B.C. ration is finally firmed up by CWC and due procedure is followed
by CWC as per Guidelines for Preparation of Detailed Project Reports of
Irrigation & Multipurpose Projects issued by MoWR, RD & GR. Sometimes
changes in design or layout are necessitated due to geological surprises during
the construction, LA & RR issues etc. Further, sometimes revision in design &
Scope of project is necessitated by the concerned State Governments due to
their own requirement and priorities. Further, as the project progresses, some
changes in CCA/Command area generally happen to meet the aspirations of
people along the route of canals/distribution network. Sometimes depending
upon requirements, some areas are dropped and some are added keeping
overall command area around same."

20. Asked to furnish the reasons for continuous violation of the CWC guidelines on
submission of DPRs, despite the same being reported in previous 68" PAC report of
45" Lok Sabha, the Ministry in their written reply stated that for appraisal of proposal of
irrigation and multipurpose Projects, two stage process ie. examination of PFR and
DPR is being followed. Once PFR is approved, then only detailed project reports are
prepared and submitted for approval. In accordance with Guidelines for Submission,
Appraisal and Acceptance of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects 2017, a consultative
procéss is being followed wherein State Govt. prepares DPRs in consultation with
specialized Directorates of CWC. Project authority interacts with specialized
directorates of CWC for advice on specific issues like hydrology, irrigation planning,


19

inter-State matters, civil design, cost estimation, etc. The consultative process followed
in preparation of DPR ensures that there are no major deviations from the CWC
Guidelines in the DPR thus prepared. Techno-economic appraisal of DPRs submitted
by State Govt./Project authority is being done by CWC through its specialized
Directorates dealing with technical and cost/economic aspects and other concerned
central departments like CSMRS, CGWB, CEA, DoWR,RD & WR etc. If deficiencies
are found during the process of examination of OPR, the same are conveyed to the
project authority/state govt. for needful compliance. On finalisation of cost estimate of
the project, Benefit Cost Ratio (B.C.R.) is worked out as per standard procedure
specified under the Guidelines of CWC/MoWR. After all the aspects are examined and
accepted, Statutory Clearances are obtained from concerned ministry and state finance
concurrence is obtained from State Finance Department for finalized cost. Thereafter, a
note for Advisory Committee is Prepared and after approval of the same from Member
(WP&P), it is circulated to members of Advisory Committee (composition of Advisory
Committee is given in Annexure 13. Meeting of the Advisory Committee is convened
and the note is put up for its consideration. The Committee after satisfying itself
regarding techno-economic suitability of the project makes decision on the acceptance
of the project.

21. During the course of oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the reasons
for DPRs not being made available to the Audit, to the tune of sanctioned cost of =
10,550.31 crore. The representative of the Ministry deposed, "So, to the question, why it
was not made available either by the State Government or by our people, we will
certainly give an explanation. But whatever statement | have made is that without DPR,
we do not sanction the projects. In case of minor irrigation projects, what we do is that
we do not have a DPR for individual project. The minor irrigation projects are those
projects which one less than 2000 hectares. So, usually, in the present scheme also,
what we are doing, we take a cluster of projects actually, and even those cluster of
projects are not sanctioned without the DPR.

22. On this, the Committee during the oral evidence pointed out that the case of
valley project in Meghalaya with sanctioned cost of है 16.30 crore, which was included
without DPR. Replying during the course of evidence, the representative of the Ministry
of Jal Shakti stated:
“Sir, | think there. are two or three instances which have been mentioned in the
report. We are examining them. The DPRs were not readily available when
actually this audit was conducted. So, they have written on it that the DPRs were
not available or it has been without DPR. TAC clearances note and other things
are there. They have been documented since 15-20 years and they are
available. They are never prepared without the basis. We are looking into and we
are trying to trace those DPRs wherever they are."

23. To a query, whether there has been a revision in the format of DPRs over the
years, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:-
“Deviations from formats prescribed for DPRs may not necessarily amount to
violations as long as mandatory information is available in the DPR. However,
deficiencies in DPRs, in general, may lead to delay in the process of appraisal.”


24,

20

Probed about the wastage of public money to the tune of approximately हैं 17

crore in the case of DPR of Rongai Valley, the Ministry had in their written reply
submitted as under:

25.

“Rongai Valley Irrigation Project, Meghalaya, a medium irrigation project was
considered acceptable by the Advisory Committee on Irrigation, Flood Control
and Multi-purpose Projects in its 44th Meeting held on 22.09.1989 for an
estimated cost of Rs. 16.30 Cr. The project was stated to be the first irrigation
project to be taken up by the State of Meghalaya. On perusal of the Agenda Note
of the said meeting of the Advisory Committee Annexure 14, it is observed that
all the relevant details which are normally required for establishing techno-
economic viability of a project were presented to the Committee in respect of
Rongai Valley Project.”

Posed with the query on the proposal to reduce the time taken in examination and

approval of DPRs, the Ministry has submitted as under:-

“In accordance with Guidelines for submission, appraisal and acceptance of
Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects 2017, CWC follows consultative process
wherein State Govt. prepares DPRs in consultation with specialized Directorates
of CWC. Project authority interacts with specialized directorates of CWC for
advice on specific issues like hydrology, irrigation planning, inter-State matters,
civil design, cost estimation, etc. The consultative process followed in preparation
of DPR ensures that deficiencies in the DPR thus prepared are minimized and
the time required in appraisal gets reduced. For appraisal of proposal of Irrigation
& multipurpose projects, two stage process (PFR & DPR) is being followed. Once
PFR is approved, then only detailed project report is prepared and submitted for
approval. This makes DPRs sound and feasible project proposals. CWC has
recently developed e-PAMS, web enabled Project Appraisal Management
System, in which State Govt/project authority submits the PFRs/DPRs online
and all communications regarding observation/comments of specialized
directorates of CWC related to appraisal and reply/compliance thereof by project
authority are made online which reduces delays in communication while making
the process of appraisal efficient, user-friendly, convenient and accountable.”


21
CHAPTER - IV

INEFFICIENT FISCAL MANAGEMENT OF AIBP
A. BENEFIT COST RATIO

26. The Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) is the ratio of annual additional benefit on account
of irrigation to the annual cost of providing those benefits. The calculations of BCR are
incorporated in the DPRs, as it is an essential requirement for determining the economic
feasibility of an irrigation project. As per guidelines for preparation of. DPRs of irrigation
and multipurpose projects, the minimum BCR for approval of such projects in Draught
Prone Areas was one and in together areas it was 1.5.

27. PAC in its: 68" Report during Fifteenth Lok Sabha recommended that Ministry
must ensure that the BCRs for all projects are properly worked out, based on validated
and verifiable data and assumptions relating costs, revenue and cropping patterns etc.

28. Responding to the Audit observation of inefficient fiscal management, the Ministry
in their background note submitted as under:-:

"() CA release for the project in particular year depends upon various: factors
which includes actual Budget Provision kept by the State Govt., shortfall in
expenditure of previous year, Utilization Certificate, total expenditure incurred in
the Project, Budget available with the ministry, etc. For release of CA, the State
has to submit the CA proposals complete in all respect. CA could be release only
for these projects which qualify as per guidelines of release and availability of
budget.

(ii) Further, if there is shortfall in expenditure of the previous year, State has to
first meet this shortfall by making expenditure equal to or greater than this
shortfall in the next following year(s), only then state becomes eligible for the CA
for that particular project. Up to 2012, CA was released by MoF on proposals sent
by this ministry. Many times, MoF released CA against proposals recommended
in March of a previous financial year during the next financial year i.e. in April
which could result in some mismatch in releases for a particular year.

(ili) First instalment during a year is released as advance based upon budgetary
allocation by the States. Sometimes budget is reduced by States during later
stage resulting in lesser State share expenditure.

(iv) Regarding the comment about releases at the fag end of the financial year, it
is to mention that the execution of the project is linked ta the working season
available with the authorities. sometimes, shortfall in expenditure is covered by
states only during working season of Sept.-Dec., resulting into first installment
proposals during fag end of year. Further, Proposals sometimes have
shortcomings like certificates, audit Certificates, etc. as per guidelines which may
delay release of CA till compliance is made by the States.”

29. Asked to furnish the reasons for not adopting uniform parameters for calculation
of Benefit Cost Ratio, the Ministry in its written reply submitted as under:-
“For’ calculation of 80 Ratio, Process and procedure followed by
CWC/DoWR,RD& GR is standard and uniform as is evident from the relevant -


22

information in the “Guidelines for Preparation of DPR of Irrigation and
Multipurpose Projects 2010. The format for calculation of the B.C. ratio prescribed
under the Guidelines is enclosed as Annexure 19 and few sample B.C. ratio
calculations have also been included under the Guidelines. The B.C. Ratio,
Financial return statements and Internal Rate of Return for the. Irrigation
component of the project are to be prepared as per sub-para 21.2 of "Guidelines
for Preparation of DPR of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects 2010". The various
inputs required for assessment of annual cost and annual benefits for the purpose
of BC Ratio are project specific like parameters related to soil characteristics,
agro-climatic conditions, cropping pattern, crop productivity, etc. and are provided
by the concerned State Governments. The norms as per the guidelines are
uniformly considered while appraising the BC Ratio. Here it may, however, be
mentioned that some input parameters may vary on case to case basis, viz. cost
of land development depends up on the quantum of OFD works involved (norms
for the same available at the time), annual benefit on pre and post project based
on the data provided by the project authorities in consultation with their State
Agriculture Department, annual operation & maintenance cost depends on the
norms available at the time (taken as per the norms recommended by the
Finance Commission at that time) of assessing the BC Ratio etc."

B. CENTRAL ASSISTANCE RELEASES UNDER AIBP

30. Asked to furnish the mechanism for accurate assessment of techno-economic

feasibility to minimise mid-course corrections at later stages of the projects and avoid

cost-escalation liabilities, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:-
“For appraisal of proposal of Irrigation & multipurpose projects, two stage process
(PFR & DPR) are being followed. Once PFR is approved, then only DPR is
prepared and submitted for approval. This makes DPRs sound and feasible
project proposals. DPR preparation by the Project Authority has to be undertaken
in a consultative mode with CWC which reduces deficiencies in the DPR before
its submission to CWC. CWC has recently developed e-PAMS, web enabled
Project Appraisal Management System, in which State Govt/project authority
submits the PFRs/DPRs online and all communications regarding
observation/comments of specialized directorates of CWC related to appraisal
and reply/compliance thereof by project authority are made online which reduces
delays in communication while making the process of appraisal efficient, user-
friendly, convenient and accountable. However, the escalation of cost of the
projects depends upon various factors and many of these factors may not be
entirely under control of implementing authorities such as revision of land
acquisition act, rehabilitation & resettlement issues, changes in design due to
geological surprises encountered while execution, delay in execution, need to
cater to additional area as per local demand etc. "

31. Responding to a question on reasons for shortfall in release of State share of
funds and unspent balances remaining idle for long periods of time, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:-

"Release of State Share in particular year depends upon various factors which
includes actual Budget Provision kept by the State Govt., shortfall in expenditure


23

of previous year, etc. There could be shortfall in expenditure by state owing to
several reasons which leads to unspent balances. However, these are to be
made good by the States in subsequent year before further release of CA.
Further, working season is limited in respect of Water Resources projects due to
Monsoon and requirements of Rabi and Kharif season. Therefore, some funds
may remain unutilized which are normally required to be utilized during first
quarter of next financial year which is also a working season and is also utilized
for payment for which works done during last quarter of previous year. Further,
Central Assistance is released after Utilization Certificate is submitted by State for
the CA already released.",

32. As per AIBP guidelines, CA is to be released to States in two instalments based
on release of State's share and utilization of funds released earlier. Audit noticed that
non/short release of CA was due to shortcomings in proposals submitted by State, delay
and non-submission of utilisation Certtificates and audited Statements of expenditure,
‘slow progress with regard to expenditure on projects and inability to ensure evenness in
expenditure. .

33. Justifying the enhancement of budget allocation in AIBP, the Ministry in their

written reply submitted as under:-
"Till 2016-17, after the launch of the AIBP scheme the Central Assistance to the
projects under AIBP) was provided from the budgetary provisions of this Ministry
and State share as per availability of resources with the States. There were
usually mismatch between the budget available with the Gol and the matching
State Share provided by the State. The shortfall in the availability of budget at
Central/State level was one of major cause of concern and the arrangement was
reviewed during 2016-17. A committee under Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister
(WR), Chhattisgarh was constituted to review the irrigation projects under PMKSY
and suggest measures for their speedy implementation. Out of 149 ongoing AIBP:
projects at that time, 99 prioritized projects were identified in consultation with
States for their completion by Dec., 2019 and funding arrangement, both for
Central Assistance and State share for these projects has been made through
NABARD, During 2016-17, Long Term Irrigation Fund ( LTIF) has been created
by Ministry of Finance and CA as well as state share are being released by
NABARD through LTIF. To overcome the delay in getting funds, arrangement
have been made for States to take loan from NABARD for their matching State
share for the 99 prioritized projects identified for completion in a mission mode.
Number of States has started availing NABARD loan for State Share under
PMKSY since 2016-17. Therefore, now there is no constraint in release of
requisite CA to the projects.”

34. Ministry (February 2018) accepted the observation and stated that non/short
release of CA was due to submission of incomplete proposals by the States, shortfall in
State's expenditure in the previous year and ceiling on expenditure in the last quarter of
the Financial year. |

35. AIBP guidelines provide for timely submission of proposals by the States for
release of CA and timely release of CA thereafter by the Central Government so that


24

funds become available in the same Financial Year (FY). PAC had, in the context. of
C&AG Report No. 4 of 2010-11, also recommended timely release of funds by the
Ministry to States.

36. GFR (209) (6) (ix) (6) inter-alia stipulates that guarantees would not divert
funds/grants received by them. Sanctions issued by the Ministry also stipulate that
grants should be utilised only on the programme and expenditure in deviation of
approved guidelines is not permissible. Audit noted in their test check, several instances
of diversion of funds amounting to = 1578.55 crore in 13 States.

37. Asked to furnish the mechanism available with the Ministry to check instances of
diversion of funds by the State agencies, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as
under:-
"Monitoring of the projects is being carried out by CWC regularly. Further, third
party monitoring is also being conducted. The status of expenditure is reflected in
the Monitoring Reports. Further, CA is released once UCs are submitted by State
Govt. for the previous released CA.”

38. Toa query on reasons for late release of funds, the Ministry has submitted as
under:-
"CA release for the project in particular year depends upon various factors which
includes actual Budget provision kept by the State Govt., shortfall in expenditure
of previous year, Utilization Certificate, total expenditure incurred in the Project,
Budget available with the ministry, etc. For release of CA, the State has to submit
the CA proposals complete in all respect. CA could be released only for those
projects which qualify as per guidelines for the release and availability of budget.
(ii) Further, if there is shortfall in expenditure of the previous year, State has to
“first meet this shortfall by making expenditure equal to or greater than this
shortfall in the next following year(s), only then State becomes eligible for the CA
for that particular project. Up to 2012,CA was released by MoF on proposals sent
by this ministry. Many times, MoF released CA against proposals recommended
in March of a previous financial year during the next financial year ive. in April
which could result in some mismatch in releases for a particular year. (ili) First
installment during a year is released as advance based upon budgetary allocation
by the States. Sometimes, budget is reduced by a State during later stage
resulting in lesser State share expenditure: (iv) Execution of the project is linked
to the working season available with the authorities. Sometimes, shortfall in
expenditure is covered by states only during working season of Sept-Dec.,
resulting into first installment proposals being submitted during fag end of year.
Further, proposals. sometimes have shortcomings like non submission of
utilization certificates, audit certificates, etc. as per guidelines, which may delay
release of CA till compliance is made by the States.”

39.  Elaborating on the steps taken to identify the reasons for short/non-release of
funds, the Ministry in their written reply further stated as under:

“(i) CA release for the project in particular year depends ‘upon various factors which
includes actual Budget Provision kept by the State Govt., shortfall in expenditure of
previous year, Utilization Certificate, total expenditure incurred in the Project,


25,

Budget available with the Ministry, etc. For release of CA, the State has to submit
the CA proposals complete in all respect. CA could be released only for these
Projects which qualify as per guidelines of release and availability of budget. (ii)
Further, if there is shortfall in expenditure of the previous year, State has to first
meet this shortfall by making expenditure equal to or greater than this shortfall in
the next following year(s), only then State becomes eligible for the CA for that
particular project. Up to 2012,CA was released by MoF on proposals sent by this
ministry. Many times, MoF released CA against proposals recommended in March
of a previous financial year during the next financial year i.e. in April which could
result in some mismatch in releases for a particular year. (iii) First installment
during a year is released as advance based upon budgetary allocation by the
States. Sometimes budget is reduced by States during later stage resulting in
lesser State share expenditure. (iv) States are pursued for submission of CA
Proposals at the earliest through CWC Field Offices.”

40. Posed with the query on diversion of funds, the Ministry in their written reply

stated as under:
"(1) An online Management Information System (MIS) has been developed for
monitoring of the projects getting Central Assistance. The nodal officers from the
projects update the physical and financial progress of the projects regularly in the
MIS. (2) Monitoring of the projects is also being carried out by CWC regularly.
Further, third party monitoring is also being conducted. (3) Before any further
release of CA to the project the UC is obtained as per AIBP guidelines.”

41. Audit has noted that 85 per AIBP guidelines, failure to complete a project on time
would result in the grants being treated as loans that would later be recovered from the
State Government. In its audit, the C&AG found that the Ministry had failed to invoke this
Provision for 105 projects facing delays ranging from one year to 18 years. As per the
guidelines, if State Governments fail to comply with the agreed target date for
completion, the grant component released will be treated a loan and recovered as per
usual terms of recovery of Central Assistance. Asked to furnish the reasons for failure to
invoke this provision as stipulated under AIBP guidelines, the Ministry in their written
reply submitted as under:-
“Execution of irrigation and multipurpose projects is very challenging task and
number of problems are encountered at the time of execution. Completion of
some irrigation projects is delayed due to various reasons including inter-State
issues, land acquisition, R&R issues, delay in clearances from other departments
like Railway/Highway, geological surprises in the foundations, climatic conditions
etc. Further, contractual issues and court cases also hamper the progress.
Further, non-availability of funds with Centre and State Govt. during a particular
year also affect the progress. Irrigation and multipurpose projects provides
appreciable socio-economic benefits besides the envisaged quantifiable
irrigation/creation of irrigation potential. However, the projects face various
hurdles, such as Land Acquisition, RR, Court cases, contractual matters which
are of complex nature. Therefore, CA is released from time to time keeping in
view of such constraints. For reasons beyond the control of the State or when due
justification has been given, extension is being given by the competent authority.”


42.

26

Audit has noted that scrutiny of records relating to AIBP projects and schemes

revealed cases of fraudulent and suspected fraudulent payments in four States
amounting to हैं 7.58 crore. In response to the query. whether Ministry has taken any
action to identify and penalised the officials responsible for such fraudulent and
suspected fraudulent activities, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:-

43.

"AIBP project are planned, executed and maintained by the State Governments
themselves and such matters mentioned in para 3.11 of C&AG report are dealt
by them. Audit report has been sent to states, Further information given by
states is as under:

Assam

Dhansiri Irrigation Project

The nomenclature .of the. estimate was proposed as Construction of C.C lining
and improvement of B3M Canal from ch. 16997.00 m to ch. 17210.00 m near
Gated Spillway at ch. 16760.00 गा, Though ‘the provision of CC lining was
included in the estimate but instead of CC Lining, the work of repairing and
restoration of B3M canal on the downstream of the proposed Gated Spillway at
ch. 16760.00 m was executed against the estimate, which was essential. After
completion of construction of Gated Spillway, irrigation water will flow through the
B3M Canal to the downstream of the canal system. So the expenditure of Rs.
28.68 lakh was not unfruitful. हैं
Karnataka

Upper Tunga Project :

4. The departmental enquiry has been conducted by the Deputy commissioner,
Haveri against Sri H.V. Halabhavi in charge, Shirastedar and disciplinary action
has been initiated by DC, Haveri vide order letter no: DC/HAV/16016/46/2016/
HAV / ESTO1/ dt:25/11/2016. Also a case was filed against Sri H.V. Halabhavi
and culprits before the civil court Ranebennur. Now the case is pending in the
court waiting judgment. However Rs.50.61 lakh has been recovered and the
balance Rs.47.23 lakh is yet to be recovered. 2. The investigation regarding
irregularities in payment of compensation in the office of SLAO, UTP,
Ranebennur has been conducted by CAO KNNL (Admin), Dharwad and
recommended to suspend 03 number of officials vide letter dated:19/09/2013.
Accordingly, the same was communicated to DPAR through WRD unofficial note
dt:21/09/2013 and 10/10/2013. As per WRD recommendation, the DPAR
suspended 03 officials vide GO dt: 28/10/2013. Further, all the records pertaining
to this case are handed over to CID authorities by WRD Vigilance Cell on
dt:03/01/2015 as per GO dt:18/10/2014. The report of CID authorities is still
awaited.”

The Ministry has further submitted that utilisation certificate is issued by Chief

Engineer of the Project and countersigned by Secretary (Water Resources/Irrigation) of
the State Government. Further funds are released after getting utilisation certificate.


27

CHAPTER V

DEFICIENCIES IN WORK MANAGEMENT AND UNDUE BENEFITS TO
CONTRACTORS

44. As the ultimate objective of AIBP, was to ensure availability of water to farmers,
the projects and schemes included in AIBP also had defined deliverables in terms of
creation and utilisation of the Irrigation Potential (IP).

As per AIBP guidelines, the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed
between the Ministry and the State Government for each project sets targets for creation
of IP and for utilisation of the IP created for the projec/scheme.

45. Effective monitoring of the implementation of the scheme could only result in
realising the true Irrigation Potential of a project under the scheme.

46. Asked whether regular meetings between the Ministry, CWC and the State
Departments are being held to identify bottlenecks for completing the delayed projects,
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:-

“Regular meetings between the Ministry of Jal Shakti erstwhile Ministry of Water
Resources ,RD&GR (MoWR,RD&GR), CWC.and the State Departments are held
from time to time to identify bottlenecks for completing the delayed Projects.
Extensive Review of PMKSY under implementation is done at all Levels, for
completion of these works as early as possible."

The Ministry in their written replies further furnished the outcome of the said
meetings as under:

"1) 26 priortised projects of Maharashtra which were at stand still since many
years due to various reasons picked up the pace and 9 projects were completed
by June, 2019.

2) 3 prioritized Projects of UP were also at standstill since long. All of them picked
pace within one year from the approval of scheme during 2016.

3) Several issues related to Railway crossings/ Highways crossings were taken
up with concerned authorities and sorted out.

4) Within 3 years, 40 projects were completed and in addition 22 more projects
have now achieved progress of 90% or more.”


28

47. Asked specifically the reasons for delay in implementation of Projects, the
Government in their written reply stated that Irrigation Potential get delayed due to
various reasons including land acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of the
project affected population, clearance from the Ministry of Environment & Forest,
litigation on the projects in the courts, geological surprises in the foundations, issues of
Railway/National Highway. crossings/utilities paucity of funds for release of state share,
delay in approval activities at state level, non-release of the funds to projects on time by
the State Govt. etc. हि

48, Adherence to Public works Manual, Government instructions, extant orders and
contract agreements provide the framework for governing rights and obligations of
contracting parties and ensuring accountability in public work management. The
stipulated terms and conditions regulate the release of advance and payments to the
contractors. Adequate safeguards in the form of penal provisions aid in promoting
economy and efficiency in works. In 29 MMI projects of 16 States and 22 MI schemes of
three States, audit noticed that there were cases of grant of undue benefits to the
contractors amounting to % 303.36 crore by violating the terms and conditions of the
agreements. Broadly, the undue benefits to contractors were due to termination of
contracts without invoking risk and cost clause under the contract (% 137.12 crore), non-
levy of liquidated damages (% 90.07 crore), non recovery of advances (% 42.86 crore)
and excess payments to contractors (₹ 33.31 crore). The undue benefits to the
contractors were indicative of lack of compliance with the conditions of the contracts,
thereby affecting transparency, fairness and accountability in use of government funds.

49. Responding the cases of undue benefits to contractors, the Ministry in their
written reply. submitted that:

“AIBP projects are executed by the State Governments. All contract matters were
handled by State Govts. Audit report has been sent to States. Information
provided by some of states is as under: Jharkhand Subarnarekha Multipurpose
Action has already been taken against the net demand of Rs. 188.27 lakh the
Security has been forfeited and for recovery of balance amount (Rs. 169.61 lakh)
action is being taken as per departmental guidelines. Gujarat Sardar Sarovar
Project (Table 4.21 : Undue benefits to the contractor ) The work of constructing
SDBM service road on Limbdi and Vallabhipur Branch Canals was awarded to
Ms S.8.Patelon 24.01.2017 with time limit of 6 months to complete the work.
Agency carried out work of Rs. 39.57 Crore out of Rs. 93.80 Crore in stipulated
time limit upto 23.07.2017 i.e. 42%, The work could not be completed due to (i)
Early onset of monsoon-2017. (ii) Hindrances due to local interferences. (iii)
excess/extra works inclusion and (iv) Construction drawing for parapet wall as
per inspection note of Superintending Engineer dated 04.03.2017 to be adopted
as per site situation. As per the tender clause-56, the Executive Engineer (E/C)
scrutinized the reasons for delay in completion of work and: found that the
reasons not attributable to the agency. The proposal for extension of time limit is
also submitted for the recommendation of the committee. Hence liquidated
damage is not recovered, however the Engineer-in-charge has deducted Rs.
700000/- for pending approval of time limit extension. The reasons are on record
and narrated in the proposal. The extension of time limit is approved by the


29

competent authority of SSNNL as the reasons for extension are not attributed to
Nigam. Jharkhand Subarnarekha Multipurpose, Gumani, Sonua, Surangi and
Panchkhero Project As per clause 49 of condition of contract & clause 29 of
contract data maximum 10% of initial contract price would be deducted for delay
in completion of work. In accordance with the rule the department has already
accessed it & deducted 10% of work value from each Running bills to reach the
same so that the work may progress in full swing in the interest of work. On the
other hand department found some genuine & unavoidable reason for delay in
completion of work, such as land acquisitions, Naxal activities, mineral shortage,
accordingly EOT is granted by competent authorities. At the time of the Final bill
the dept. either deducts 10% percent of the whole agreement value or EOT is
being granted, if reason for delay is satisfactory. Karnataka Upper tunga Project -
As per the condition of the contract, penalty of half per cent per week on the
estimated cost of the work was levyable for the delay in completion of the work
subject to a maximum of 7.5 per cent of the estimated cost of the work provided
further that in event of the contractor making up the short fall in progress within
the stipulated or extended period of completion, the penalty so recovered may be
refunded on the application in writing by the contractor. » The details of 16 works
under Upper Tunga project are enumerated as below : + Name of work: Providing
CC lining in Km 72.00 of UTP Main Canal: «The work of providing in CC lining in
Km 72.00 of UTP Main Canal was entrusted to Sri Sunil G. Badde Class-I
Contractor vide agreement No.18/2012-13 dt:19.10.2012. Mark out has given on
14.12.2012. (After stoppage of water in UTP main canal) with a stipulated date of
completion 13.04.2014 as per terms and conditions of contract. But the work
could not’be completed within the stipulated date due to lot of obstruction by
farmers and non-availability of sufficient sand for executing the works. + In view of
the above genuine reasons, the Chief Engineer vide letter .No.2604
Dt.:22.08.2016 approved the first time extension from 14.04.2013 to 31.12.2014
with a penalty of Rs.25/- per day and second time extension vide letter No.1075
dt:14.06.2016 from 01.01.2015 to 03.02.2016 with a penalty of Rs. 10/- per day. +
Name of work: Balance earth work excavation formation of embankment, lining
including construction of CD works in Km 85 of UTP main canal: * The above
work was entrusted to Sri C.A.Biradar, Class-l contractor vide agreement
No.2/2014-15 dt:21.05.2014, with a stipulated date of completion 20.09.214 as
per terms & conditions of contract. But the work could not be completed within
the stipulated date because the water allowed in the main canal last week of
June 2014 to 30.11.2014 and due to lot of obstruction by the local farmers.
Hence in view of the above reasons, the Chief Engineer videltr. No.2566
dt:22.08.2015 approved the 1st time extension from 21.09.2014 to 30.08.2015
with penalty of Rs.15.00/- per day. Even with the 1st time extension, the work
could not be executed because of obstruction of farmers and hence in view of
this Chief Engineer videltr. No.6732 dt:22.03.2016 approved the 210 time
extension from 31.08.2015 to 24.02.2016 with a penalty of Rs.10/- per day. +
Name of work: Providing CC lining in Km 68 of UTP main canal: « The work of
providing CC lining in Km 68 of UTP main canal was entrusted to M/s’ KVR
Constructions, Class-l contractor vide agreement No.3/2012-13 Dt:08.06.2012,
with a stipulated date of completion 07.10.2012 as per terms & conditions of


30

contract. But the work could not be completed within the stipulated date because
the water allowed in the main canal and due to lot of obstruction by farmers and
non-availability of sufficient sand for executing the works. Hence, in view of the
above reasons, the Chief Engineer videltr. No.3523 Dt:23.10.2014 approved the
1st time extension from 08.10.2012 to 10.06.2014 with a penalty of Rs.15.00/-
per day. * Name of work: Providing cement concrete lining in Km 14 to 15 of UTP
main canal: « The estimate for the work providing laying CC lining from Ch.14000
to 15000 m in 15th Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by CE, UTP Zone,
Shivamogga vide CER No.737/2012-13 dt:28.02.2013 for Rs.250.00 lakhs. The
above work was entrusted to Sri M.R.Krishna Naik, KNNL Category-3 contractor,
Bengaluru on tender basis vide agreement No.5/2013-14 dt:22.07.2013 for
Rs.238.60 lakhs with a tender period of 03 months. The contractor commenced
the work on 22.07.2013. As per tender condition the completion date of work is
21.10.2013. After obtaining the approval to the extended period from the
competent authority, the work was completed on 47.08.2015. * Name of work:
Providing cement concrete lining in Km 10 to 11 of UTP main canal: * The
estimate for the work providing laying CC lining from Ch.10000 to 11000 m in
44th Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by CE, UTP Zone, Shivamogga vide CER
No.736/2012-13 dt:01.07.2013 for Rs.218.00 lakhs. The above work was
entrusted to Sri D.S.Math, KNNL Category-3 contractor, Bijapura on tender basis
vide agreement No.21/2013-14 dt:10.02.2014 for Rs.186.325 lakhs with a tender
duration of 09 months. The contractor commenced the work on 10.02.2014. As
per tender condition the completion date of work is 09.10.2014. After obtaining
the approval to the extended period from the competent authority, the work was
completed on 11.04.2016. * Name of work: Providing cement concrete lining in
Km 16 to 17 of UTP main canal: * The estimate for the work providing laying cc
lining from Ch.16000 to 17000 m in 17th Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by
CE, UTP Zone, Shivamogga vide CER No.739/2012-13 dt:22.02.2013 for
Rs.210.00 lakhs. The above work was entrusted to Sri EshwarappaT.Gogi,
KNNL Category contractor, Shorapur on tender basis vide agreement No.6/2013-
14 dt-22.07.2013 for Rs.213.21 lakhs with a tender duration of 03 months. The
contractor commenced the work on 22.07.2013. As per tender condition the
completion date of work is 21.10.2013. After obtaining the approval to the
extended period from the competent authority, the work was completed on
06.07.2015: + Name of work: Construction of cross regulator cum escape @
Ch.8.280 Km of UTP main canal: + The estimate for the work construction of
cross regulator cum escape @ Ch.8.280 Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by
CE, UTP Zone, Shivamogga vide CER No.504/201314 dt:30.01.2014 for
Rs.499,.50 lakhs. The above work was entrusted to Sri V.S.Rathod, KNNL
Category-2 contractor on tender basis vide agreement No.32/201213
dt:04.03.2014 for Rs.335.92 lakhs with a tender period of 06 months. The
contractor commenced the work on 04.03.2014. As per tender condition the
completion date of work.is 03.09.2014. After obtaining the approval to the
extended period from the competent authority, the work was completed on
03.02.2015. + Name of work: Providing cement concrete lining in Km 11 to 12 of
UTP main canal: * The estimate for the work providing laying CC lining from
Ch.11000 to 12000 m in 12th Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by CE, UTP


31

Zone, Shivamogga vide CER No.37/2012-13 dt:01.07.2013 for Rs.230,00 lakhs.
The above work was entrusted to M/s. KVR Constructions, KNNL Category-3
contractor, Malebennur on tender basis vide agreement No.16/2013-14
dt:02.01.2014 for Rs.201.614 lakhs with a tender period of 09 months. The
contractor commenced the work on 02.01.2014. As per tender condition the
completion date of work is 01.09.2014. After obtaining the approval to the
extended period from the competent authority, the work was completed on
11.04.2016. » Name of work: Providing cement concrete lining in Km 18 to 19 of
UTP main canal: + The estimate for the work providing laying CC lining from
Ch,18000 to 19000 m in 19th Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by CE, UTP
Zone, Shivamogga vide CER No.30/2013-14 dt:29.06.2013 for Rs.243.00 lakhs.
The above work was entrusted to Sri D.S.Math, KNNL Category-3 contractor,
Bijapur on tender basis vide agreement No.22/2013-14 dt:10.02.2014 for
Rs.208.35 lakhs with a tender period of 09 months. The contractor commenced
the work on 10.02.2014. As per tender condition the completion date of work is
09.11.2014. After obtaining the approval to the extended period from the
competent authority, the work was completed on 02.05.2016. + Name of work:
Providing cement concrete lining in Km 20 to 321.065 of UTP main canal: * The
estimate for the work providing laying CC lining from Ch.20000 to 21000 + 65 m
m in 21st Km of UTP canal was sanctioned by CE, UTP Zone, Shivamogga vide
CER No.32/2013-14 dt: 29.06.2013 for Rs.237.50 lakhs. The above work was
entrusted to Sri D.S.Math, KNNL Category-3 contractor, Bijapur on tender basis
vide agreement No.24/2013-14 dt: 10.02.2014 for Rs.203.86 lakhs with a tender
period of 09 months. The contractor commenced the work on 10.02.2014. As per
tender condition the completion date of work is 09.11.2014. After obtaining the
approval to the extended period from the competent authority, the work was
completed on 02.05.2016. » Earthwork excavation, formation of embankment CC
fining with Mechanical paver including construction of CD works in Km 203 to 207
Km of UTP Main Canal. * The work was delayed due to land acquisition
problems. The farmers and land owners were obstructing the work. As the
reasons were not attributable to contractor, time extension was accorded without
penalty. + Earthwork excavation, formation of embankment CC lining with
Mechanical paver including construction of CD works in Km 217 to 222 Km of
UTP Main Canal. + The farmers were not ready to give the land immediately.
They were agitating for land compensation and to take the crops and obstructing
to do the work. Farmers were demanding for award amount. As the reasons were
not attributable to contractor, time extension was accorded without penalty. *
Earthwork excavation, formation of embankment CC lining with Mechanical paver
including construction of CD works from Km 0.00 to 1.260 of Minor-4, 0.00 to
1.400 Km of Minor-5, Km 0.00 to 0.860 Km of Minor-6 of Dy.No.5 off taking @
Ch.211.035 of UTP Main Canal. * The farmers were not ready to part their lands
and in turn demanding for land compensation. In the meantime new land
acquisition Act was introduced from 01.01.2014 and the implementation of the
said act further delayed the land acquisition process. As the reasons were not
attributable to contractor, time extension was accorded without penalty
Earthwork excavation, formation of embankment CC lining with Mechanical paver
including construction of CD.works in Km 208 to 212 of UTP Main Canal. * The


32

work was delayed due to land acquisition problems. The farmers and land
owners were obstructing the work. As the reasons were not attributable to
contractor, time extension was accorded without penalty. + The delay in
completing the above work is due to the following reasons; Due to slips occurred
in the canal sides for which additional work of back filling and removal of slipped
muck was carried out by obtaining approval from the competent authority. Due to
water let out in the canal for irrigation purpose in the following dates (a)
29.07.2014 to 30.11.2014 (b) 01.07.2015 to 17.08.2015. Delayed due to non-
availability of sand and metal. Due to above reasons the work was delayed for
which time extension was approved by levying the nominal penalty from the
contractor with a condition that contractor should not claim extra rates for the
work cartied out in the extended period. * As per clause 2(d) of PWG-65 of
agreement, the penalty to be levied should not exceed 7.5% of estimated cost of
entire work as shown in tender. If the delay is attributable to the contractor, the
penalty levied may be refunded to him if he completes the work within the
extended period on the request of the contractor. + But here the work delayed
due to the reasons as explained above are not attributable to the contractor.
Even though department recovered a nominal penalty. Considering the above

- facts, which are common to all works at serial no. 1 to 12 and time extension,
accorded without penalty for the works at serial no 13 to 16, the issue on
Termination of contractors, without invoking Risk and cost:clause given under
table Gujarat Sardar Sarovar Project (Non recovery of Advances) The railway
line of Central Government pertaining to western rly division is crossing the
canal. These crossing has to be constructed by the railway department as
depositary work. The railway department demands the advance for the same
before inviting the tenders as per their procedure for taking up the work. Now the
tenders are invited by the Railway authorities and work will be taken up as the
earliest possible. The MPW advance will be adjusted. Looking to this, it is
requested to settle the para. The material is not either pure Soft Rock or Hard
Rock for which rate can be fixed and disposed of but consists of mixture of rock
and earth. The only alternative is to separate rock from the earth which is
expensive and hence not feasible. SSNNL would prefer to keep this as spoil
bank. But possibility of auction on “as is where is" basis is being M.P. MI Scheme
Barkheds Chhajju Tank- Useful material obtained from excavation during
Construction of Berkheda Ghajju Tank, Chutefall, Bridge, Base Culvert, Diverted
Road and Spil Channel was used in casing of Dam and rest being sandy soil &
found unsuitable for Dam construction was kept in spoil banks. Contractor was
paid for complete item as quoted in the agreement Quantity of Utilizable
excavated material was deducted from total executed work. Hence no excess
payment has been done. As far as utilization of excavated material is concerned
it is confined to suitability of material obtained from excavation. After visual
examination, utilizable excavated material received from approach and spill
channel was used in construction of Dam and un-useful material was kept in
spoil banks. However, the details being obtained from Chief Engineer, Chambal-
Betwa Basin, WRD, Bhopal. Case is pending in the tribunal. After decision of the
case from tribunal. The cost will be recovered from contractor hence it is
requested to drop the para.”


33
CHAPTER VI
INEFFICIENT MONITORING OF THE SCHEME

50. — Asked whether Irrigation Potential utilisation data is posted and updated on the
website of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), the Ministry has
submitted as under:-

"MIS system has been put in place for indicating physical and financial progress
of each of prioritized project under PMKSY-AIBP. Irrigation Potential Creation is
one of parameters which is monitored through MIS. Further, for finding utilization,
cropped area assessment is being done through BISAG every year. Details of
total cropped area (IPU) during the year in respect of 99 priortised project is as

under:
| Total Cropped area in (Lakh Hectare’
[2010 [1 [| 40.58
(207. ३ अ ८ ;॥।| 7 : [4427 t~‘“—s~s™SCSCSY
[2018 t~“s™S™S™S™SCOCCCCCC:CY 8 [4574 t—~‘CsSSSCSY

51, The Ministry has further stated that nodal officers from State and CWC have been

nominated for updation ‘of data in MIS to ensure uniformity/accuracy.

52. During the course of oral evidence of the Ministry on 20.09.2019, the
representative of. the Ministry stated that Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space
Applications and Geoinformatics (BISAG) was assigned the work of remote sensing to
assess Irrigation Potential. They in their written response, further elaborated that BISAG
is not charging any fee for cropped area assessment. Assignment to BISAG was given
through Ministry of Information and Electronics (MITE), Govt. of India. They take up work
from within overall allocation to them. Further, no other organisation was assigned the
work of remote sensing in this regard. 99 Prioirtized PMKSY-AIBP Projects (and 7
phases) are being assessed by Bhaskaracharya Institute for space Applications (BISAG)
for crop area assessment.

53. Asked about the variation in results of IP from remote sensing vis-a-vis manual

findings, the Ministry in their written reply stated that:-
“The Irrigation Potential Created upto June 2018 in 99 PMKSY Projects is 53.45
Lakh Hectare and Cropped Area of these 99 PMKSY Projects assessed by
BAISAG through remote sensing in 2018 is 45.74 Lakh Hectare. There are
various reason for variance. The remote sensing technique is used for identifying
cropped area in large scale based upon the availability of satellite imagery during
the cropping season. If there is a good resolution, the cropped area can be
mapped with greater accuracy and in case of poor resolution due to different
reasons such as bad weather etc the cropped area mapped may have less
accuracy. Further, the cropped area fluctuate based on the availability of irrigation
water/rainfall/groundwater.”


54.

34

To a query for adopting uniformity in calculation of IP, the Ministry has stated as

under:

“Broadly, Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) may be defined as the gross area that
can be irrigated from a project in a design year for the projected cropping pattern
and assumed water allowance on its full development. The gross irrigated area
will be aggregate of the areas irrigated in different crop seasons, the areas under
two seasonal and perennial crops being counted only once in the year. With”
regards to the query, it is to mention that the. area which can potentially be
irrigated depends on the physical resources like land, soil and water, combined
with the irrigation water requirements as determined by the climate and cropping
pattern. However, environmental and socio-economic constraints also have to be
taken into consideration in order to guarantee a sustainable use of the irrigated
area. Assessment of the irrigation potential, based on soil and water resources,
can only be done by simultaneously assessing the irrigation water requirements,
which in turn depend on the cropping pattern and climate (rainfall and potential
evapotranspiration). Further, the field data required while planning the cropping
pattern of a project are:

(a) Existing / proposed irrigation facilities in the proposed project command area.
(b) Existing cropping pattern: Existing area under rain fed cultivation Area under
each crop Net increase in irrigation facilities due to project. .

(c) The Soil surveys,

(d) Proposed cropping pattern, and

The crop water demand calculation depends upon various climatological
parameters like temperature, sunshine, humidity, wind speed, latitude, rainfall
etc. There are various methods for estimating the crop water requirements.
However, Modified Penman Method is considered suitable (as per the Technical
Series (2) , 1984, Ministry of Irrigation). Recently, the crop water demand is also
calculated by using the CROPWAT 8.0 software, which uses Penman-Monteith
method, It may be noted that the aforementioned field data is provided to CWC
by.the Project Authorities/State Government (as the case may be). e.g: the
climatological data for the command area is submitted to CWC by the project
authorities after procuring the same from IMD/State Meterological Dept, etc, the
existing and proposed cropping pattern are submitted to CWC after getting the
same approved from the Director, State Agriculture Department as it will vary
from place to place in accordance with the geographical, socio-economic and
environmental factors. For e.g. if we take the example of Himachal Pradesh, the
area in the vicinity of district Shimla is appropriate for orchard plantation, low and
middle regions are suitable for vegetable production and we go for paddy crop in
a level terrain as flood irrigation is required for the crop and clayey soil is suitable
for it. MoWR: has framed the “Guidelines for Preparation of Detailed Project
Reports of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects, 2010". The irrigation potential of
a project may be determined broadly based on these guidelines. However, there
may not be a standardized methodology to find out the irrigation potential for all
the projects, as the same varies from project to project. For e.g.: In plain areas
like Gangetic plains, Indus plains and desert regions, where land is generally not
a constraint, water availability determines the irrigation potential of a project.
Whereas, in hilly areas, where land for cultivation is limited, water availability is


55.

35

generally not a constraint. CCA, along with the water availability determines the
irrigation potential with the given cropping pattern."

While further asked about standard methodology to reconcile the field reports and

remote sensing IP, the Ministry in their written reply stated that:-

56.

“The remote sensing technique is used for identifying cropped area in large scale
based upon the availability of satellite imagery during the cropping season with
higher resolution imageries the cropped area could be demarcated clearly and
also canal network could be identified correctly. If there is a good resolution the
cropped area can be mapped with greater accuracy and in case of poor resolution
due to different reasons such as bad weather etc the cropped area mapped would
be lesser than actual despite of greater water storage and availability of water in
canal. The cropped area will fluctuate based on the availability of irrigation
water/rainfall/groundwater. The remote sensing method provides the data for
potential utilisation. While the Ultimate irrigation potential is the maximum
achievable potential under given hydrological conditions.”

Public Accounts Committee (68" Report on AIBP during 45" Lok Sabha)

recommended to the Ministry to oversee and ensure that all the State Governments
enact laws on participatory irrigation management and constitution of Water Users’
Associations (WUAs) for the effective implementation of the AIBP projects. As per AIBP
Guidelines, Water User Associations were to be formed for post construction
maintenance of assets created under the MI schemes.

57.

Asked to furnish the major impediments in forming Water User's Association, the

Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:

"Major impediments in Water Users' Association are: (i) Lack of legal backup
and policy changes in some States to take up Participatory Irrigation
Management (PIM) especially with respect. to empowerment of ‘WUAs for
operation and maintenance, collection of water charges, lack of clarity of
legislation and implementation of legislation for empowerment of the WUAs in
States were PIM has been enacted (ii) System deficiency in irrigation scheme
like deterioration of structures, canals, due to seepage and erosion of banks,
siltations which hinder farmers to take over the system management (iii)
Uncertainty over water availability, as the farmers will be reluctant to take on the
responsibility of managing the system unless water is really made available. (iv)
Lack of the capacity building of the member of the WUAs for various technical
and financial issues.

Ministry's dealing with the impediments:

(i) Pursue the State Governments for enacting and implementing PIM Acts.
(i)Strengthening financial resources of WUAs to make them viable.

(ii) Training of project officials in operationalising the concept in field. Exposure
visits where such initiatives have already been experienced especially in
externally aided projects or small scale initiatives under NGOs.

(ii) Training of WUAs and orientation on their role in repair and maintenance,
collection of water charges etc so as to help them perform their duties
accordingly.


58.

36

The ongoing Scheme has an in-built component directed at strengthening of
such activities. The financial assistance under non-structural intervention
includes / covers (a) one time functional grant to registered WUAs (b) one time
infrastructural grant to the registered WUAs (c) trainings, demonstrations etc. (d)
hand holding support for strengthening of Participatory Irrigation Management
(PIM) including formation of WUAs through select Social Facilitator.

Exposure of implementing agencies to the practices in different States are also
done in a limited way through Project Implementation Review Committee
(PIRC).”

The Ministry further noted as follows:

“In April 1987, the Ministry of Water Resources had issued guidelines for farmers’
participation under Command Area Development& Water Management
(CADWM) programme. Recognizing the need for sound legal framework for PIM
in the country, during 1998, the Ministry brought out and circulated a model act to
be adopted by the States legislatures for enacting new irrigation acts/amending
existing irrigation acts. The legal framework provides for creation of farmers’
organizations at different levels of irrigation systems. In accordance with the
model Act, 17 States namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Goa,
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have
enacted exclusive legislation for involvement of farmers in irrigation management
at different levels ie. Water Users’ Association (WUAs) covering a cluster of
outlets or a minor, distributary committee and project committee. Thus at present
there are 17 States who has either enacted new act or modified their existing act
to fulfill the objective of the PIM. Other States are being pursued to enact a bill to
take care the objective of the PIM. As per the guidelines of CADWM Programme
issued in January, 2017, there is a provision of one time functional grant @ 1200
per ha. to be given to Water Users Associations(WUAs), which will be shared in
the ration of 45:45:10 among centre, State and the beneficiaries. There is also a
provision of infrastructure of Rs. 3 lakh per Water Users’ Associations which will
be shared in the ratio of 75:25 between Central Government and State
Government, in case of 8 North Eastern States including Sikkim and 3 Himalayan
States, whereas the ratio will be 60:40 for the remaining States. The guidelines,
in order to bring greater emphasis for PIM, has identified the CADWM works as
Structural & Non- Structural interventions with clear demarcation of funds
available for PIM related works under non- structural interventions. Further, the
completion of CADWM Project has been linked with taking over of the control
and management of irrigation system by the respective WUAs.

Ministry of Jal Shakti has also proposed a new Incentivization Scheme for
Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) for taking up CADWM works with substantial
focus on Participatory Irrigation Management — in balance Culturable Command
Area (CCA) of 80 lakh hectares under 317 completed irrigation projects spread
over 24 States. The Scheme is under process for Government level approval.”


37

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

INCLUSION OF PROJECTS INCLUSION OF PROJECTS UNDER 81872

The Committee note that the criteria for inclusion of a project since
inception of AIBP has undergone frequent revisions in the years 1997-98,
1999-2000, 2001-2002, 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2013. The Committee also note
that AIBP eligibility criteria. and norms have undergone numerous
amendments since the inception of AIBP. While minor modifications in an
ongoing scheme after considerable time may apparently be considered
reasonable, such frequent changes in the guidelines for inclusion of
projects under AIBP displays a discontinuity in the original plan of things.
The Committee note that despite being launched with best intentions, the
AIBP Scheme has not made much progress till date and the issue of
irrigation in India is still largely left to the vagaries of monsoon. Part of the
problem is owing to frequent re-fixing of the goal post. The Committee
desire that Ministry undertake an exercise to assess the requirement of a
comprehensive revision of the guidelines taking all the State Governments
and other stakeholders into confidence and come up with considered
norms and criteria for inclusion of timelines, which may also include all
possibilities of changes and interventional circumstances to obviate the
necessity of frequent revision and eliminate chances of violation of
guidelines, and frame solid guidelines which may withstand the test of time.
The Committee also desire that resolute and concrete action be taken to
scrupulously and rigorously adhere to the guidelines and timelines thus
framed.

DILUTION IN THE FOCUS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE aN IN THE FOCUS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAMME - CASE
OF RONGAI VALLEY PROJECT हु

The Committee observe that AIBP's performance so far is far from the level
it is desired and the reasons that could be attributed to range from
inordinate delay in preparing detailed project reports (DPRs) to blatant
wastage of public money as is evident:in the case of Rongai Valley project.
The Committee recommend that all shortfalls and deficiencies in
preparation and processing of DPRs such as delays, inadequate surveys,
inaccurate assessment of water availability, incorrect IP, inaccurate
assessment of Command Area, reduction in Command Area, Lack of
activity wise construction plans and inadequate provision of cross drainage
works in distribution systems be immediately attended to and redressed.
The Committee note that the Ministry is unable to advance any plausible
reason for inclusion of Rongai Valley project with.a sanctioned cost of %
17.30 crore under AIBP without preparing a DPR. The Committee further
recommend that action must be taken against those directly or indirectly
responsible for wastage of public money, especially in cases ‘such as
Rongai Valley Project, under intimation to the PAC. The Committee further


38

note that Detailed Project Reports of the 14 sampled MMI projects with
overall sanctioned cost of = 10,550.91 crore have not been made available to
the Audit. The Committee feel that much of the projects could not see the
light of the day because of denial of access to detailed project reports to
Audit. They, therefore, recommend that effort may be made to trace and
place the same before the Audit, during their regular audit. The Committee
further feel that the Ministry should be more open to Audit and recommend
that a further audit of these MMI projects amounting to approximately =
40,000 crore would be a learning experience and opportunity for the
Ministry to further improve its functioning.

The Committee note that the CWC has developed e-PAMS system to
fastrack the Project Appraisal Management System. The Committee hope
that this will lead to reducing the delays, conducting accurate surveys and
assessment, and recommend that timelines given in the e-PAMS system be
strictly adhered to and that timelines may also be given wherever lacking.
They further desire that the new system be incorporated with all
quantifiable and objective data to the extent possible.

INEFFICIENT FISCAL MANAGEMENT OF AIBP AIBP

The Committee note that as per guidelines for preparation of detailed
project reports of irrigation and multipurpose projects, the minimum Benefit
Cost Ratio for approval of such projects in Draught Prone Areas was one (1)
and in other areas it was 1.5. The Committee further note the previous PAC
‘observation in regard to properly working out Benefit Cost Ratio for all
projects. While there is a standard and uniform process prescribed for
calculation of Benefit Cost Ratio, the reality is that CWC and project
authorities are not adopting uniform parameters for calculation of BCR. The
Committee cannot but agree with the audit summation that Benefit Cost
Ratio is the key for assessing economic viability of a project and emphasize
that adopting a uniform parameter for calculation of Benefit Cost Ratio will
ensure that Ministry is able to judge the outcome of the project more
effectively.

The Committee observe that though the calculations of BCR are a pre-
requisite in the DPRs, for determining the economic viability of the project,
the inefficient fiscal management by the government has resulted in cost
and time overrun in several projects under AIBP. The Committee are
convinced that if sincere efforts are made in right earnestness, the
Government can prudently manage implementation of the projects.

The Committee further draw attention to the glaring irregularities observed
by Audit with regard to fictitious and fraudulent expenditure by the
Government that has been left largely un-responded to by the Government
in their reply. The Committee also note the failure of the Government to
obtain the response from the State Government of Uttar Pradesh on the
suspected irregular expenditure of 1.47 crores and the failure of the


39

Government to recover a suspected irregular payment of: 2.63 crore in
case of Karnataka Government. The Committee recommend the Ministry to
pursue such cases vigorously and to its logical end.

The Committee recommend that Ministry should ensure that State
Government's proposal should take into account all aspects of potential
delays and also that the Ministry should not deter from invoking provisions
for converting grants into loans, especially in cases of extreme delays
beyond a reasonable period of time. The Committee express their dismay
over short realisation of revenue and note that the reply of the Government
is silent over instances noticed in case of short realisation of revenue by
the Audit. The Committee recommend that the Government should take
appropriate measure to realise all such short revenue and take strict action
against the defaulting parties.

DEFICIENCIES IN WORK MANAGEMENT

The Committee note the various deficiencies in Management of work
pointed out by Audit, like splitting of works to bypass approval at higher
levels as per GFR, incorrect phasing of project, sub-standard execution,
etc. The Committee desire that the Ministry advise State Governments to
ensure appropriate checks in management of works and fix accountability
for any deficiency. Furthermore, the Committee desire that the Ministry put
in place a mechanism to monitor the due diligence of State Governments in
adhering to such advice.

UNDUE BENEFITS TO CONTRACTORS

The Committee note the Audit observations on accrual of undue benefits to
contractors and find that some % 303.36 crore is involved in cases of undue
benefits to Contractors, which are due to termination of contracts without
invoking the risk and cost clause under the contract. The Committee also
note the various reasons advanced by the Government, non-levy of
liquidated damages, non recovery of advances and excess payments to
contractors across various States, ranging from early onset of monsoon,
hindrances due to local interference, mineral shortage and naxal activities.
The Committee feel that individual cases be probed extensively and such
misuse of public money be checked immediately. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Government may form a separate cell to examine all such
cases of undue benefits to contractors, beginning with excess payments
made and strive to recover the publi¢ money spent unfruitfully. The
Committee also recommend that all efforts should be made to plug such
loopholes,


40

INEFFICIENT MONITORING OF THE SCHEME

10. The Committee feel that more effective use of satellite imageries from NRSC
with effective reconciliation from field reports will go a long way in
effectively monitoring the Irrigation Potential and therefore, desire that the
Ministry should take all possible steps to effectively reduce the variations
between satellite imageries and field verifications to the extent possible, by
working with the remote sensing authorities.

The Committee further recommend that all possible support be
extended to strengthen participatory irrigation management through Water
Users Associations. The Committee recommend that increasing
participatory model of Water use will effectively tackle the issue of irrigation
ills, provided the scheme of AIBP is strongly coordinated with users and
their needs. The Committee feel that Water Users in local areas are well
acquainted with local issues. and the solutions emanating from their
feedback should be seriously considered for inclusion under various
«schemes of the Government. While the Committee note that various
impediments have been noted by the Ministry in the formation of Water
Users Association, they also note the efforts by the Ministry in dealing with
those impediments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry

_increase their efforts to facilitate the formation of Water Users Association
in each State/UT of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
23 March, 2020 Chairperson

3 Chaitra,1942 (Sak a
1 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Joe


ay

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 20" SEPTEMBER, 2019. 2019-20) HELD ON 20'" SEPTEMBER, 2019.

The Committee met on Friday from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. on 20" September,
2019 in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T.R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Ajay (Teni) Misra

SN DAR wD

5
Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
11. Dr. Satya Pat Singh

12. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

13. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
14. Shri Naresh Gujral

15. Shri C.M. Ramesh

16. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri Abhijit Bhattacharya - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma - Director

Shri Paolienlal Haokip : - Additional Director


2

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA '

1. Ms. Anita Pattanayak - DAI (RC)
2.  ShriS.K. Jha - Director General (O/o DGA SD)
3. Shri Sandeep Lall - Principal Director (PC & Scientific)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI
(DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND
GANGA REJUVENATION)

N 9 छा F ODN SB

Shri Upendra Prasad Singh Secretary (DOWR, RD & GR)

Shri S. K. Haldar Member, WP&P, CWC

Shri Jagmohan Gupta JS & FA, 00४४२, RD & GR

Shri K. Vohra Commissioner, SPR, DoWR, RD & GR
Dr. B.R.K Pillai Commissioner, CAD, DoOWR, RD & GR
Dr. Samir Chatterjee Chief Engineer, PMO, CWC

Shri Atul Jain Chief Engineer, PAO, CWC

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee, convened to have a briefing by the Audit Officers and
the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti on the subject “Accelerated Irrigation
Benefits Programme" based on the C&AG's Report No. 22 of 2018.

3. The Chairperson then, asked the Dy. C&AG to brief the Committee on the
shortcomings pointed out and suggestions made by the Audit on the Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme.

4. Some Members raised certain clarificatory queries regarding the non-availability
of documents to C&AG for audit and the number of projects/schemes taken up for
audit. हे

5. The Dy. C&AG clarified that the C&AG has taken up nearly 60 percent of the
MMI projects for Audit scrutiny and presented audit findings through a power point
presentation for benefit of Members.

6. The Chairperson, thereafter opined that the Committee should go ahead and
listen to the Audit as well as Ministry of Jal Shakti on several aspects of the
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits programme. He, then, asked the Dy. C&AG to give a
brief account of the Audit findings/observations on the subject matter.


re

S

3
7. After few minutes of briefing by Audit officers on the subject, the representative
of Ministry of Jal Shakti and Central Water Commission were called in and the
Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting: Impressing upon the witnesses to treat the
proceedings of the Committee as confidential, the Chairperson asked the Secretary,
Ministry of Jal Shakti to brief the Committee on various aspects of the Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme.
8. Accordingly, Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti gave a power-point presentation
highlighting inter-alia the mandate of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme;
Irrigation being State subject; the Major and Medium Schemes (MMI) projects and
Minor Irrigation (MI) Schemes; the Projects/Schemes and cost; the key Audit findings
and response of the Ministry thereto. Some of the Members pointed to the absence of
the Chairman, Central Water Commission during the meeting. Chairperson, PAC
assured that the matter will be looked into.
9. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee asked specific questions
mainly about the Detailed Projécts Reports, the state wise distribution of Projects and
schemes taken up under AIBP, the cost and time overrun, the diversion and parking of
funds, the monitoring by the CWC, violation of GFR and accountability of officers
involved, undue benefits to contractors and conversion of loans to grants under the
AIBP.
10. The Members were of the unanimous view that despite C&AG's observations
on the subject and PAC's subsequent recommendations to the Ministry in its 68th
Report, not much was done in this area due to which many irregularities and delays
persisted. They again stressed upon the need to fix accountability and for taking
punitive action against those found responsible for irregularities.
11. As a number of queries remained unanswered, the Chairperson asked the
Ministry to furnish written replies to all the queries raised by the Members during the
discussion within 30 days. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the
Ministry of Jal Shakti and representatives of Central Water Commission for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing valuable information on the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.


TN



a

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENT!

CONFIDENTIAL

(2019-20) HELD ON 3 Se SILIING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2019-20) HELD ON 23 MARCH, 2020, HELD ON 23 MARCH, 2020.

Chairperson's Chamber, Parliam

The Committee sat from 1330 hrs. to 1400 hrs. on 23 March, 2020 in Room No. 51,

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T.R. Baalu

hi: Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

n

Shri Ajay (शा) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satyapal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Bhupender Yadav |

ent House, New Delhi.

Chairperson’


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2... Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri Venkatesh Mohan - Secretary
2. Ms. Mahua Pal हु - Additional Secretary
3... K. Srinivasan - Additional Secretary

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcome the Members and Officers of the Office
of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of the
Members on the following draft reports: _

a. “Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme” based on C&AG Report No. 22 of
2018; and

XX XX XX XX y

3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any
modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of factual
verification done by Audit.

The Committee then adjourned.

As

wag

oe


wigs