109

REVENUE LOSS TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT
TRUST (JNPT)

MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2330

HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

REVENUE LOSS TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
PORT TRUST (JNPT)

MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


COMPO:

Sr ANAND

मिल

11.
12.
13.

15.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

ही ४ ०.:-०

COUNTS COMMITTEE

TION OF THE PUBLIC AC
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’ Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

"Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray,
MP on 18.08.2023.


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) )
INTRODUCTION (vil)
PART-1
REPORT
PART —Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

|

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
31.10.2023.

॥*.

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
05-02-2024.

*Not appended to the Report



INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Hundred and Ninth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “REVENUE LOSS TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT
TRUST (JNPT)” based on para 19.1, C&AG’s Report No. 4 of 2018 (Performance
Audit) relating to the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 04-04-2018.

3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways on 31-10-2023. The Committee
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05-02-2024. The Minutes
of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-ll of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART-I
INTRODUCTORY

The Committee learnt that the CAG in their audit report of Jawaharlal
Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) identified a significant revenue loss resulting from
the award of an adjacent berth to the same entity operating the existing
berth at a lower revenue share without adequately safeguarding the
financial interests of JNPT. The diversion of traffic from the existing berth to
the new one led to a revenue loss of 254.72 crore over the period 2015-17.
The audit revealed that the adjacent berth awarded to M/s Nhava Sheva
(India) Gateway Terminal Pvt. Ltd (NSIGT), a wholly-owned subsidiary of
M/s DP World Pvt. Ltd, lacked proper scrutiny during the bidding process.
The concession agreement with NSIGT, signed in June 2013, specified a
lower revenue share of 28.09% compared to the existing terminal, Nhava
Sheva International Container Terminal Pvt. Ltd. (NSICT), which paid a
higher royalty of 79.92% to JNPT. Audit raised the concern about the
commissioning of the new terminal before completion, with a
supplementary agreement allowing partial operations in April 2015. Despite
these concerns, NSIGT continued operations, leading to a decline in traffic
at NSICT and a subsequent loss of revenue for JNPT. The audit also
highlighted the inadequate safeguards in agreements to prevent vessel
diversion between NSICT and NSIGT. NSIGT's refusal to accept a penalty
clause for vessel transfer and the inclusion of a clause with no actionable
effect in the supplementary agreement further contributed to the revenue
loss. Despite management's justifications, the audit found the response of
the Port Trust Management untenable. The lack of an increase in traffic as
envisaged by JNPT, the acknowledgment of difficulties in revenue
accounting since 2007, and the existence of significant disparities in royalty
and revenue share rates underscored the failure to safeguard JNPT's
financial interests. The overall impact was a loss of 254.72 crore to JNPT
due to the diversion of traffic from the existing NSICT terminal to the new
NSIGT terminal. The Ministry was issued the audit report in November
2017.

2 Page


2. The Committee took up para 19.1 titled “Revenue Loss to Jawaharlal
Nehru Port Trust (JNPT)’ based on Report No. 4 of 2018 for detailed
examination and the representatives from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping
and Waterways tendered evidence before the Committee in addition to the
written submissions and documents relating to the subject under
examination. The major findings are detailed in the ensuing paragraphs.

3. To a query as to why was M/s Nhava Sheva (India) Gateway
Terminal Pvt Ltd (NSIGT) awarded a concession agreement to develop
and operate a container berth of 330 m north of and adjoining the existing
NSICT terminal while it was only an extension of the existing berth of
NSICT terminal, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: -

“TheBoardinitsmeetingheldon15"March2007haddiscussed&delibe
rated the report of consultant along with the various options for
sharing of the length of berth between JNPA and NSICT and
alternative option to go for BOT Project as a standalone container
Terminal. After detailed discussion, it was approved by the Board
that the JNPA should proceed with standalone container terminal
of BOT basis as recommended by the consultant through
competitive bidding to maintain the transparency instead of giving
on nomination basis and also to follow Government guidelines of
Private Investment through BOT. Accordingly, global bids were
invited. Hence action taken was in interest of JNPA to utilize the
optimum available water front to earn the revenue to the Port.”

4. As regards the need for extension in the first instance, the Ministry in
a written reply stated as under:-

“There was a tremendous growth envisaged in the container
traffic and hence after the Techo-Economical feasibility study, it
was decided to extend the existing container terminal by 330
metre as a standalone container terminal to make use of optimum
available water front of the port and to meet demand from trade.”

5. Asked about any financial constraints that may have been faced

in completion of the project within the given time frame, the Ministry
replied in the negative.

Bl Pace


6. To a query as to why only one bid was received for the new
terminal JNPT and the steps taken to ensure a competitive bidding
process in future, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: -

“The global bids were invited for development of standalone
container terminal on PPP mode based on its feasibility studies
and in the first round (May2008), JNPA received eight RFQ bids.
Out of the eight bids received, only two bids qualified. Due to the
poor response, JNPA was directed by Ministry of Ports, Shipping
and Waterways (MoPSW) to discharge the tender and invite fresh

bids with increased capacity from 0.6 million TEUs to 0.8 million
TEUs

Accordingly, second round of global bids were re invited in
November 2009with capacity of 0.8 million TEUs as increased by
MoPSW. In response to second round, JNPA received 8 RFQs
out of which five were short listed. Out of five, one bidder was not
granted security clearance. Under monopoly guidelines of GOI
another bidder was not considered based on court verdict. Out of
the balance three bidders, only one RFP was received on 4h
October 2012.

The Port has followed the transparent and prescribed procedure
of 501 to invite the bids and even after reinviting the bids and
having more participation in RFQ(1* Stage), JNPA could receive
only one bid.

Subsequently JNPA is following prescribed guidelines of GOI for
PPP Projects giving more publicity in newspaper during invitation
of tenders to invite more bids”.

7. When asked whether the Ministry and JNPT had taken into account
the findings of the Techno-Economic Feasibility Report while awarding
the contract to NSIGT, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“The Techno-Economic Feasibility Report was considered and
also shared with potential bidders during RFQ process. As
pointed out by Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) that the
Techno-Economic Feasibility Report (February 2007) for
developing the stand-alone 330 m container berth had pointed

a Page


out that “in the event of NSICT operating both berths, it would be
difficult to separately account for revenues earned from them
which could have implications on assessment of revenue sharing
with JNPT,” it is stated that the Board after due deliberation in
March 2007 arrived at the decision to go through global tender to
award the project instead of nomination basis in order to maintain
transparency. Since global tender based on Model concession
agreement issued by Ministry of Shipping was invited, the
condition to deter diversion of vessel from NSICT to NSIGT
cannot be included during the tendering process and the
concession agreement so as to bring all the prospective bidders
at par. The global tender was prepared on the basis of model
documents issued by the Government taking into consideration
the global market but not only the existing terminal operators.
Thus, JNPA invited global tenders to bring all the world’s
interested bidders at one platform without any conditions”.

8. When asked whether any provisions were put in place to ensure
that revenue collection from both terminals, namely NSICT and NSIGT
was done separately, the Ministry in a written reply stated:-

“NSICT and NSIGT have separate Concession.”

9. Toa specific query regarding the rationale behind acceding to two
different revenue sharing agreements with NSICT and NSIGT, even
though both terminals were adjacent to each other and are wholly
owned by one company, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“The initial agreement with NSICT was based on prevailing
guidelines of Government of India and model document which is
based on royalty model. Subsequently, the guidelines have been
modified by GOI and NSIGT terminal was bidded out based on
prevailing guidelines of Government of India during that time
based on revenue share model. At present, the latest guidelines
of Government of India are based on royalty basis. Thus the
tenders are invited based on prevailing guidelines of GOI from
time to time”.

10. The Committee wanted to know about the logic behind the change in
the policy and the level at which it was initiated and at what level the

5|[Page


decision was taken. In this regard, the Representative of the Ministry

responded as under:-
"It was not a short period that royalty was changed to revenue
share. It was almost ten years during which the royalty was
changed to revenue share. Now, this is because of the response of
the system. Originally when it was royalty, the PPPs were not
performing optimally because the royalty continued, but they were
not able to make the payments to the ports. So, there were lot of
litigations."

11.While responding to a question regarding revenue loss on account
of reference given to the same entity for award of bid for contiguous
terminal, the representative of the Ministry during the course of
evidence responded by stating as under.

“Sir, revenue loss part cannot be concluded because revenue
loss would have been, had that system been there at that time.
What is said is that some of the traffic was shifted from NSICT to
NSIGT so that they could avoid the royalty model and get the
revenue share model. The answer to that is that by that time,
between 1997 and 2016, there were two more private terminals,
including our own JNPCT, where the rates were much lower.
When we say that this whole business is dealt with by the
shipping lines, which container they will go to, this company
definitely cannot decide. When we talk about the whole
ecosystem whether NSIGT got better cranes, whether there was
better efficiency and better moves, that is a fact. In fact, they
were higher in grade. Then also, they went there. This is a
regulated thing where TAMP was the authority which was
regulating these tariffs. Since the tariff guidelines also changed
two to three times, the whole arithmetic changed accordingly.
Now, if we start comparing that arithmetic, in that sense, in a lot
of terminals, | have made much more surplus than this”.

12. Regarding the major issues highlighted by Audit in the Audit para,
the representatives of the Ministry during the course of evidence stated
as under:-

“Sir, there are two big points to this. The first point raised by Audit
was that the second terminal, which is a 330 meters terminal or
6[7:


berth, has been given on a certain revenue sharing basis. Had it
been given on the original royalty principle basis, we would have
got more money. That is the first big point. It is true that both the
terminals that have gone to two subsidiaries of the same private
entities, that is, DP World. However, for our purposes, these are
two are legal entities. One is Nhava Sheva International Container
Terminal (NSICT)and the other is Nhava Sheva India Gateway
Terminal (NSIGT).Legally speaking, it was a global tender with full
RFP, RFQ, all the permissions taken from the Ministry, from the
board and from the competent authority. This new legal entity
NSIGT participated in that. The question, why it paid lesser to us is
directly related to why the royalty principle was not in force at that
time. It was due to policy change. Originally that policy was there in
1999, and this is 2016 when it was given. Now, again the
dispensation has changed. We have again gone back to royalty
principle. But first there was the royalty principle, then it came like
revenue share principle. So, to the point that this loss is notional or
not, the fact is that the dispensation had changed. It had to be done
on a revenue share basis only, and it could not have been done on
royalty principle”.

13. While clarifying the Ministry’s position regarding the rationale behind
offering the job at an adjacent contiguous terminal to the same entity and
resultant revenue loss, representative of the Ministry, during the course of
the evidence stated as under:-

“There are two things — whether it can be called a revenue loss and
whether it can be called as offering it to a single person. Regarding
the first issue, it was not offered to a single person. We went
through the full global tender process. After that, they won this bid”.

14. The representative of the Ministry further elaborated as under:-

“Sir, revenue loss part cannot be concluded because revenue loss
would have been, had that system been there at that time. What is
said is that some of the traffic was shifted from NSICT to NSIGT so
that they could avoid the royalty model and get the revenue share
model. The answer to that is that by that time, between 1997 and
2016, there were two more private terminals, including our own
JNPCT, where the rates were much lower. When we say that this
whole business is dealt with by the shipping lines, which container
they will go to, this company definitely cannot decide. When we talk

T[ Page


about the whole ecosystem whether NSIGT got better cranes,
whether there was better efficiency and better moves, that is a fact.
In fact, they were higher in grade. Then also, they went there. This
is a regulated thing where TAMP was the authority which was
regulating these tariffs. Since the tariff guidelines also changed two
to three times, the whole arithmetic changed accordingly. Now, if
we start comparing that arithmetic, in that sense, in a lot of
terminals, | have made much more surplus than this”.

15. When asked as to why was the concession agreement for operating
the new 330 m terminal not given to the already existing NSICT under
similar parameters on revenue sharing, the Ministry in a written reply
informed as under:-

“There is no provision in the concession agreement with existing
terminal NSICT for giving extended length of 330 meter on
nomination basis. Hence it was decided by JNPA Board to go for
tendering process based on the existent rules and prevailing
guidelines to have transparency”.

16. On a query as to why did JNPT allow NSIGT to commence partial
operations in the terminal, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:-

“AdecisionwastakenbytheBoardaftercompletionofprojectfacilitiesre
quired for handling vessels with safety and security and it is in the
interest of Port and to cater for EXIM trade. There was no
financial loss/revenue leakage for JNPA in the matter, on the
contrary the revenue generation for Port had started early on the
container handling operation. It is pertinent to note that NSIGT
handled cargo to the tune of 1.54 lakhs during the period from 1st
March 2016 to 30th June 2016 i.e. during partial commissioning
of the project facilities as a special arrangement to cater for EXIM
trade which is observed to be minimal as compared to total traffic
to be handled during entire concession period. There was also
Government directives to implement the project in time bound
manner under the monitoring system of Ministry ie. RFD.
Therefore, JNPA decided to allow commercial operation after
completion of the project facilities. It is clarified that as per the
Article 9.2 (d) the revenue share is payable by the concessionaire
from the date of commercial operation. The para 9.2 (d) of
Concession Agreement states that payment shall commence in
Bl Pace


the month in which concessionaire to provide any project facilities
andservicesandshallbeirrespectiveofthedateofcommercialoperatio
n.Itmaybeseenfromtheabovefactsthataftercompletionoftheportfacil
ities,theconcessionaire had requested for commencement of
operation of the facilities. The question of not allowing operation
does not arise as the concessionaire was ready to pay revenue
as per the provision of the article 9 of the Concession Agreement.
Accordingly ,jthe matter was discussed and deliberated in the
Board and it was decided by the Board to allow new terminal for
the commissioning of the project to cater for the EXIM trade
which will be beneficial to JNPA for getting early revenue and
accordingly, supplementary agreement was signed between
JNPA and concessionaire with the approval of the Board”.

17. When asked about the reasons given by NSIGT for commencing
operations at the partially commissioned terminal without a formal
agreement, the Ministry in a written reply informed as under:-

“NSIGT had given the reason of catering to the EXIM trade for
early commissioning of operation”.

18. In regard to the ground on which the NSIGT did not agree to the
additional clause incorporated in the supplementary agreement
(November 2015) formulated to address the apprehension of Chairman,
JNPT, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“Post bidding conditions were not accepted by NSIGT as the
global tenders were invited for a standalone container terminal
taking into consideration all potential bidders from the world”.

19. To a query as to why the agreements, (concession agreement
(June2013) and supplementary agreement (November 2015) with
NSIGT not made keeping in mind the interest of JNPT, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as under:

“Supplementary agreement is for shorter period and it was valitill
actual date of commercial operation ie. 1% July 2016.
Concession Agreement and Supplementary agreement are made
as per tender conditions and such additional conditions cannot be
incorporated thereafter.

9|7०8९


Further, shifting of shipping service from NSICT to NSIGT do not
takes place solely as per the decision of DP World. The choice of
a terminal by a shipping line is based on a series of factors which
provide a trade of between operation and financial factors. In
JNPA, a shipping line had a choice for berthing at four terminals.
Each of these terminals has their own set of tariff as approved by
TAMP. The tariff rates at NSIGT are the highest much higher
than the NSICT. Therefore, a shipping line will not shift to NSIGT
from NSICT without adequate operational reasons. NSIGT being
the newest terminal equipped with latest technology gave highest
productivity. Hence, we cannot assume that vessels were
diverted from NSICT to NSIGT”.

20. While elaborating the efforts made by JNPT to restrict diversion of
vessels from NSICT to NSIGT, the Ministry in a written reply informed :-

“In the parlance of International Shipping, it is the shipping line
which decides the terminal of call and not a terminal which can
decide the “Terminal of call” for a shipping line. It can be seen
that the shipping line had option of moving to GTI or JNPCT if it
had to move away from NSICT as both these terminals offered
lesser rates. As per the concession agreement signed by JNPA
with all terminal operators, there is no restriction on shifting of
window vessels from one terminal to another including shifting of
window from any of the JNPA terminal to some other port. The
JNPA regularly interacts with the Shipping lines and there have
been no complaints from any line that they were forced to shift
their vessel from NSICT to NSIGT. Considering the dynamics of
shipping trade, one terminal cannot influence the decision of the
Shipping line to divert from one terminal to another’.

21. When asked about the efforts made by JNPT to restrict the diversion
of vessels from NSICT to NSIGT and whether any assessment of the
loss of revenue due to the diversion of traffic from NSICT to NSIGT
been conducted by JNPT as of October 31, 2023, the representative of
the Ministry of ports. shipping and Waterways stated as under:

"Sir, our stated stand and | am stating it again is that diversion
from one terminal to the other cannot happen because of a
terminal operator. is decided by the shipping line is decided by

1O[ Pace


the shipping line. When it enters the port, my Marine
Department takes over. So, it is not some arbitrary thing of
saying that you can put one vessel here and one vessel there.
It is a full-fledged system."

22. When asked whether JNPT had made any assessment of the loss
of revenue due to the diversion of traffic from NSICT to NSIGT, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“There is no loss to JNPA. Infact, revenue was earned by JNPA’”.

23. Regardingthelegalopinionthatincorporationoftheclauseinthesupplem
entaryagreementwouldhavenoactionableeffectforJNPT,andtherationaleb
ehindincorporatingtheclause, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:-

“Diversion of traffic is not in the hands of terminal but shipping
line. However, to have some control and manage traffic at other
terminals smoothly by having proper co-ordination of traffic
movement, the clause of “the concessionaire shall berth the
vessel only at the request of the customer and not shift any
vessel in any arbitrary manner. The Concessioning authority will
be kept informed of any change in the terminal for vessel
berthing.” Was incorporated in the Supplementary agreement”.

24. As regards the steps taken by the Ministry and JNPT to ensure
strict compliance of the clause, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:-

“Periodic meetings were undertaken with Shipping lines and their
associations to discuss any issues faced by them where the
matter of diversion of traffic by terminals was never reported by
any shipping line or their associations”.

25. When asked as to what measures were taken by the Ministry and
JNPT to ensure that the operators at the port do not in any way exert
influence on the customers of their berth preference, the Ministry
submitted:

“Periodic meetings are organized with Shipping lines and their
associationswheretheyareaskedtosetuptheagendaforthemeeting.N
131 | 7 6 5 ९


oneoftheshippinglines or their associations have even submitted a
complaint of any influence exerted by any terminal operator to
divert traffic to a particular terminal till date”.

26. To a query as to whether JNPT was exploring suitable ways to
safeguard the financial interest of the port by bridging the significant
disparity in royalty from NSICT Terminal and revenue share from NSIGT
terminal, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

“The request of NSICT for brining parity in royalty and revenue
share is being analysed through conciliation process.”

12 |? 5 ४ ६


PART-II
Observations/ Recommendations

1. The Committee are concerned to note the findings of the audit
report on Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), particularly with regard
to the award of the concession agreement to M/s Nhava Sheva (India)
Gateway Terminal Pvt Ltd (NSIGT) for the development and operation
of a container berth. The limited response in the bidding process
raises concerns about the competitiveness of JNPT's tendering
procedures. In the light of this fact, the Committee recommend a
thorough review to be undertaken by the Ministry in regard to the
tendering framework to enhance competitiveness, preferably through
market studies, stakeholder engagement, and the incorporation of
industry best practices.

2. The Committee while acknowledging the Ministry and JNPT's
responses, observe that Audit has reported about significant revenue
loss as result of diversion of traffic between the existing NSICT and
the new NSIGT terminal. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
may direct JNPT to establish clear and enforceable measures to
prevent diversions, including stringent penalties or deterrent clauses
in the concession agreements. The Committee further desire that
regular monitoring and internal audits may be undertaken to ensure
compliance with these measures, thereby safeguarding the financial
interests of JNPT.

3. The Committee note that there are two different revenue sharing
agreements within NSICT and NSIGT. They also note that these
terminals are adjacent to each other and wholly owned by one
company. From the replies of the Ministry, the Committee note that
the initial agreement with NSICT was based on royalty model,
whereas agreement with NSIGT was based on the revenue sharing
model. The Committee find that there were discrepancies in revenue-
sharing agreements between NSICT and NSIGT, both wholly-owned

13 [Passe


subsidiaries of DP World Pvt. Ltd. The Committee, in tandem,
recommend a review of JNPT's approach to concession agreements
and extensions to existing terminals to ensure consistency in
revenue-sharing models. This may involve revisiting existing
agreements and developing a transparent and uniform framework for
future concessions while expanding on existing guidelines and
incorporating industry best practices in vogue. The Committee, here,
also emphasize upon the need to prioritize the financial interests of
the Port in these endeavors.

4. The Committee note from the Audit observation that the flow of
traffic has been diverted from NSICT to NSIGT. However, they also
note that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have claimed
that the diversion cannot happen because of the terminal operator.
The same is decided by the shipping line and the Marine Department.
The Committee also observe in this regard that the statistics clearly
demonstrate the repercussions of the frequently changing rate regime
at India's major ports, wherein the benefits arising from new tariff
structures do not flow to existing operators, but rather benefit those
who come subsequently.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

HRRRKKEREK

W| Page