87

IRREGULARITIES IN RECEIPT AND UTILISATION
OF COMPENSATION; GROSSLY IRREGULAR AND
MANIPULATED AWARD AND EXECUTION OF
WORK RELATING TO THE RENOVATION OF THE
BASEMENT AT INDIA HOUSE, LONDON, LEADING
TO UNDUE BENEFITS BEING EXTENDED TO THE
CONTRACTOR

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2317

EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IRREGULARITIES IN RECEIPT AND UTILISATION OF
COMPENSATION; GROSSLY IRREGULAR AND MANIPULATED
AWARD AND EXECUTION OF WORK RELATING TO THE

RENOVATION OF THE BASEMENT AT INDIA HOUSE, LONDON,
LEADING TO UNDUE BENEFITS BEING EXTENDED TO THE
CONTRACTOR

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

सत्यमेव जचते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (v)
NTRODUCTION (vi)
REPORT

7 _ BEI Oo व

‘| INTRODUCTION 1
| “PARA 5.3 : IRREGULARITIES IN = 2

OF COMPENSATION

AWARD AND EXECUTION OF WORK RELATING TO THE
RENOVATION OF THE BASEMENT AT INDIA HOUSE,
LONDON, LEADING TO UNDUE BENEFITS BEING EXTENDED
TO THE CONTRACTOR

राजा
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS |
oo APPENDICES

(2022-23) held on 10-02-2023.

"| Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee |

| Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of Public Accounts Committee;

(2023-24) held on 17-01-2024.

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy ofthe Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

90 >४ 9 एा # ० ०

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22, Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

4. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.c.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sckhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

4. — Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

6 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

7 Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

8... Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9... Dr. Satya Pal Singh

10. Shri Brijendra Singh

11, Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

14... Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh

20. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
21. 9. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

* Shri V. Vijaisai Reddy was clected as Member of Public Accounts Committee ७.०. 13.12.2022.
v


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty - seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of compensation” and "Grossly
irregular and manipulated award and execution of work relating to the renovation of the
basement at India House, London, leading to undue benefits being extended to the
Contractor" based on Para Nos. 5.3 & 5.4 of C&AG Report number 2 of 2021 relating to
the Ministry of External Affairs

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in Rajya Sabha
on 11 August 2021 and in Lok Sabha on 29 November 2021.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of External Affairs at their sitting held on 10.02.2023. The Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) obtained detailed information in connection with the examination
of the subject. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held
on 17 January, 2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the
Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-ll of the
Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of External Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vi)


REPORT
Part-I
Introduction

The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and
report Paras 5.3 and 5.4 of Comptroller and Auditor General of India's (C&AG's) Report
No. 2 of 2021 on the subjects “Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of compensation”
and “Grossly irregular and manipulated award and execution of work relating to the
renovation of the basement at India House, London, leading to undue benefits being
extended to the Contractor" respectively. These paras pertain to the Ministry of External
Affairs.

2. C&AG Report 2 of 2021 detailed various significant findings of the compliance
audit of financial transactions under civil grants relating to Civil Ministries/Departments
of the Union Government. In Para 5.3 of the aforesaid Report, Audit has pointed out that
the High Commission of India irregularly engaged a private party, authorising it to: (i)
receive and retain government receipts of = 78.41 lakh in its private bank account and
(ii) disburse a substantial part of the receipts towards the Mission’s own expenditure.

3. In Para 5.4, Audit found that the High Commission of India, London undertook
work relating to renovation of the basement at the India House, at a cost of GBP (Great
British Pound) 744,971 (approx.% 6.63 crore), without prior approval from the Ministry of
External Affairs. The initial award of the work was to an ineligible company through an
irregular and manipulated tendering process which was followed by award of extra work
without tendering to the same company, thereby extending undue benefit to it. Further,
additional work was awarded based on fraudulent quotations, to an associated ineligible
company, incorporated immediately prior to the award of work and dissolved after
receipt of payments.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of External Affairs on the aforementioned paras at their sitting held on
10 February 2023. On the basis of oral evidence and written information obtained on
various aspects of the two paras under consideration, the Committee made in-depth
examination of the subject as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

A. Para 5.3 : Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of compensation

5. The Committee understand from the Audit findings that the High Commission of
India, London (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Mission’) took a decision to accept
compensation of GBP 90,000 from a property Developer without the approval of the
Ministry and without any documented justification for the amount accepted. It also
irregularly authorised a private party to receive and retain government receipts by way
of the compensation paid by the Developer amounting to = 78.41 lakh in its private bank

1


account with no record of how and by whom was this decision made. Further, in
violation of rules, the Mission allowed use of these receipts directly to incur expenditure.
In addition, actions and decisions taken by Mission functionaries were not adequately
documented to obscure these gross irregularities and the Ministry was systematically
kept in the dark in the matter. The issue has been further detailed in the following
paragraphs.

6. “The Nehru Centre” (TNC) and some other properties are owned by High
Commission of India, London (Mission) in London. The property adjoining to these was
being redeveloped by a developer, M/s Caudwell Properties Limited. The prevalent
building laws of the UK required the Developer to notify the Mission (6 April 2016), as
the owner of the said properties, of their plan to carry out redevelopment in the adjacent
area. The Mission also appointed a Surveyor to safeguard its interest in view of the
redevelopment on the suggestion of the Developer.

7. The Mission (on behalf of Union of India) signed a licence agreement with the
Developer on 19 December 2016 giving certain rights to the Developer with respect to
11015 adjacent property, which in turn agreed to execute works for the Mission to
minimise noise and dust pollution arising from the redevelopment work. The work to be
executed by the Developer included provision of secondary glazing and installation of
ree-standing cooling systems in the Mission's adjacent properties located at 8, South
Audley Street ie. The Nehru Centre and 51, Hill Street i.e. High Commission of India
House. The Mission also signed a contract on 21 December 2016 with the Developer
or setting up an escrow account (An escrow account is a temporary vault/account of
money held by a trusted third party on behalf of two transacting parties that are bound
by a contract) for GBP 150,000 as security to be invoked if the GBP 90,000 (based on
Return on Equity(RoE) of = 87.12 in December 2017). In this respect, the Developer did
not discharge its obligations and no records of the approval of the Ministry were found
by Audit regarding the agreements which were approved by the then DHC/Acting HC.

8. The Developer was not able to carry out secondary glazing at The Nehru Centre
as required ‘Listed Building Consent’ from the local Council was not forthcoming and
also did not carry out the work of providing cooling systems in lieu of which he agreed to
pay compensation to the Union of India through the Mission. The Mission accepted
GBP 90,000 as compensation from the Developer wherein the compensation was to be
in "an ex-gratia payment” through M/s Bajaj and Sons Limited working in conjuction Mr.
Christopher Chaplin.

9. The Committee understand from the audit observations that there was no
documentation available in the records of the Mission about how the compensation
amount had been worked out and the correctness and adequacy of the compensation
agreed to by the Mission could not be ascertained. Further, there was no record of
approval of the Ministry sought or the level at which the compensation of GBP 90,000

2


was agreed upon. It was pointed that the acceptance of compensation was conveyed by
the then First Secretary (P&M) of the Mission by e-mail which had also been endorsed
to the then Director, TNC and the Head of Chancery (HOC) of the Mission.

10. An Inquiry Committee (IC) was constituted by the Mission to look into issues
relating to receipt of compensation which corroborated the audit observations. The
Inquiry Committee found that there was neither any record available indicating as to
who took the decision in the Mission to receive the compensation in a private account,
nor evidence of any reference being made or approval being sought from the Ministry
for the arrangement for receiving and holding the compensation by a private entity.

11. | The Audit findings highlight that there was no reference to M/s Bajaj and Sons in
the earlier communications of the Mission with Developer on compensation, but was
later authorised to receive the payment. The said Inquiry Committee reported that M/s
Bajaj and Sons Limited were hired to negotiate matters with the Developer (July 2017)
on the recommendation of the then First Secretary (P&M) and with the approval of the
then DHC, which in turn, hired Mr Christopher Chaplin for liaising. Additionally the
Mission could not provide any reference of approval being sought by the Mission from
the Ministry for the hiring of these agencies.

12. Audit also noted that in gross violation of rules by the Mission in receiving
government receipts in a private bank account, M/s Bajaj and Sons Limited deducted
fees of GBP 6,000 (₹ 5.50 lakh) and GBP 9,700 (₹ 9.56 lakh) in March and November
2018 respectively, though the firm was engaged on an understanding that it would not
charge any fees, from the compensation it had received.

13. The Mission allowed M/s Bajaj and Sons to retain the compensation, received
from the Developer in its account, instead of crediting the same into the Government
account, in violation of Rule 6(1) of the Central Receipts and Payments (R&P) Rules,
1983. The aforementioned rule mandates that ‘all moneys received by or tendered to
Government officers on account of revenues or receipts or dues of the Government
shall, without undue delay, be paid in full into the accredited bank for inclusion in
Government Account’. Further, the Mission had no details of the actual amount received
from the Developer by M/s Bajaj and Sons. The Inquiry Committee also observed in its
report that no record was found about the reasons for parking the receipts of the
Government in a private account and about the person who took the decision.
Government money thus irregularly remained outside Government accounts for a period
of more than 19 months.

14. As per Rule 6(1) of the Central Receipts and Payments (R&P) Rules, 1983,

moneys received as Government receipts ‘shall not be utilised to meet departmental

expenditure’, except under specified circumstances, ‘nor otherwise kept apart from the

accounts of the Government’. The then acting DHC approved in August 2018 the

utilisation of the compensation, received in the account by M/s Bajaj and Sons, for
3


meeting expenditure on installation of a boiler at TNC which was in violation of the
extant rules. It was found that this work was awarded to an agency based on a limited
tender for a price of GBP 79,879.8113 (% 72.28 lakh) without seeking the approval of
the Ministry. It was found that the details of such arrangement to the new incumbents
who joined the Mission later, became known when payment of the last installment got
delayed. The balance payment of GBP 19,550 for installation of the boiler was made by
he Mission from its accounts on 30 January 2019, while M/s Bajaj and Sons Ltd
remitted the balance amount held by them in their account, of GBP 14,390 to the
Mission on 15 April 2019 which was finally accounted in June 2019.

15. The Ministry was made aware of the matter in October 2019 and based on inputs
rom the Mission, intimated that the help of the hired Consultant (M/s Bajaj and Sons)
was taken to negotiate the compensation who then received the compensation in their
account; that the compensation amount was adequate and that the compensation was
used for infrastructure development of TNC as it was in lieu of secondary glazing of
TNC. However, the Ministry also informed that the matter was being examined but the
jack of documentation on the manner of appointment of the Consultants and their terms
of engagement, the irregular parking and retention of Government receipts in a private
account and the wrongful and unauthorised utilisation of Government receipts to meet
expenditure was evident. The Mission also submitted proposal to the Ministry for ex-
post facto regularisation of the expenditure which was found to be pending.

16. As the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is responsible for handling Indian
Missions abroad, the Committee asked the Ministry details of the manner in which the
Ministry exercises administrative and financial control over its Missions in other
countries. The Ministry in their written submission stated that Periodic inspections of
Indian Missions/Posts abroad are carried out by MEA teams and a Performance
Evaluation and Monitoring System - PEMS 3.0 has been rolled out for monitoring of
Missions/Posts operations, results of which feed into periodic inspections of the
Missions/Posts. Regular Audits of Indian Missions/Posts are also carried out, generally
on annual basis, by C&AG Audit Teams. Internal Audit of the Monthly Cash Accounts of
Indian Missions/Posts abroad are carried out by the Office of Pr. Chief Controller of
Accounts, MEA as per approved Annual Audit Plan.

17. | MEA further explained that the Missions/Posts abroad are required to strictly
adhere to the following rules & regulations covering various administrative and financial
aspects:

(i) IFS (PLCA) Rules - These contain provisions/rules & regulations concerning the
Indian Foreign Service, including Missions/Posts abroad.

(ii) General Financial Rules 2017 — These rules and orders of GOI are required to be
followed by Missions/Posts abroad while dealing with matters involving public finances.


(iii) CCS Conduct Rules - As Central Government Employees, the members of Indian
Missions/Posts abroad are also bound by the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules.

(iv) Delegated Financial Powers of HOMs/HOPs: The Government of India’s
Representatives Abroad (HOMs/HOPs) have been delegated financial powers in order
to streamline the functioning of Missions/Posts by reducing their dependence on the
Ministry for their day-to-day operations. All construction/renovation projects involving
cost estimates exceeding the delegated financial powers of HOMs/HOPs require prior
approval of the Ministry.

18. MEA informed the Committee in their written replies that the Missions/Posts’
accounts/payments are recorded in real time basis in the Integrated Mission Accounting
System IMAS V.2.0. Regarding administrative control on matters relating to property
redevelopment or construction projects, the Ministry has formalized model tender
document and standard agreement template for engagement of Architect consultants.
Besides this, it is in the process of establishing professional Project and Contract
Management Unit in-house, which inter-alia would on real time basis monitor, identify
potential defects in the process, contract management, procurement processes etc. in
all renovation and construction projects abroad. An online dashboard system has also
been envisaged to be developed which will have real time details of all projects of the
Ministry in India and abroad and aid in strengthening control systems and real time
monitoring of project execution.

19. The Committee during the course of oral evidence enquired from the Ministry
regarding the administrative arrangement through which it maintains a check on the
activities of its Missions outside India and asked for its comments on the issues
highlighted by the Audit. The reply of the Ministry has been reproduced as follows:

"The Ministry prima facie recognises that there has been some laxity in the
Ministry's mechanism in the Mission in this specific instance as well as defects in
the tendering process. There is also an element of ignorance of rules with regard
to receipt of the money outside the Consolidated Fund of India. In this Context,
the Ministry sent an enquiry committee headed by senior officer comprising the
division which deals with the construction processes, the finance division which
looks after the financial proprieties and, most importantly, the vigilance division.

..Currently, the consequent enquiry and vigilance process is undergoing. "

20. The Committee desired to know the reasons for the failure of the Mission to
forfeit the security amount of GBP 1,50,000 when the Service Provider did not
discharge its obligation under the license agreement. The Ministry furnished the
following in their written replies:


“In the absence of official records elucidating reasons for receiving compensation
in private party account, investigation & vigilance team could not ascertain
thought process or reasons for such an approach by the Mission. "

21. |The Committee further asked the Ministry the reasons for allowing M/s Bajaj and
Sons, a private party, to receive and retain government receipts amounting to® 78.41
lakh even though there was no reference to the same in earlier communications. The
Ministry furnished the following in response to this in their written replies:

"In the absence of official records elucidating reasons for receiving compensation
in private party account, investigation & vigilance team could not ascertain
thought process or reasons for such an approach by the Mission. "

22. The
Mission to

Committee observed that an inquiry Committee was constituted by the
look into the issues relating to receipt of compensation. The Committee

desired to know the findings of the inquiry Committee and what follow up action had
been taken on the findings of the Inquiry Committee's report. The Ministry submitted the
following in their written replies:

"The findings of the Inquiry Committee set up by the Mission (via report dated
22.08.2019) are as follows:

a)

५)

From the records, it is not clear who took the decision to accept the
compensation from M/s Caudwell Properties. It is apparent that then
Director (TNC), then HOC and then SS (P&M) were aware of receipt of that
compensation.

There are sufficient records which suggest that Shri Sunil Kumar, the then
HOC was well aware of the receipt of GBP 90,000 by the Mission and hiring
of various consultants for negotiation.

The estimate prepared by Ms. Amanda, M/s Caudwell suggested a
compensation of GBP 70,000 for secondary glazing and A/C fittings at 8
Audley Street, however, the Mission received higher amount than the
estimate.

There is no record available with the Mission indicating about who took the
decision regarding accepting the compensation amount in a private account
and the reasons for the same. However, an email asking for GBP 90,000
was initiated by Shri Jagjit Singh, SS (P&M) the then SS(P&M) with Shri S.
Gotru, the then Director (TNC) and Shri Sunil Kumar, the then FS (HOC) in
cc.

The contract for installation of new boiler system was awarded to M/s TSS
Facility without following due tendering process, but through limited tender.

6


Thereafter, a physical inspection of the Mission was taken up in August 2021 by
an inspection team from Headquarters and disciplinary proceedings were
initiated against the erring officers. The proceedings are under progress right
now. The final decision will be taken in consultation with UPSC."

23. |The Committee also wanted to know from the Ministry if any vigilance inquiry had
been ordered in the matter, to which the Ministry gave the following reply:

“An Inspection Team was sent to London to investigate into the circumstances of
the case and on the basis of their findings Disciplinary/Vigilance proceedings
have been initiated against the erring officers. These proceedings are currently
underway and final decision will be taken in consultation with UPSC."

24, The Committee during oral evidence desired to know the time period that was
taken for inquiry since the incident was reported to which the following reply was given
by the Ministry:

"As the hon. Members have asked the timeline for the inspection committee and
the report, the inspection team visited London in August 2021. It had submitted
its Report in September, 2021. The decision was taken by the disciplinary
authority in January, 2022. The charge sheet was served to the officer in
January, 2022 itself. The charge sheet was issued on the same date to all the
Officers."

B. Para 5.4 : Grossly irregular and manipulated award and execution of work
relating to the renovation of the basement at India House, London, leading to
undue benefits being extended to the Contractor

25. Rule 139 of General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017 read with Para 17 of
Central Public Works Department (CPWD) Works Manual, 2014 states open bids
should be called for all works above value of % five lakh which must be well advertised
in the press/website. GFRs also do not allow splitting of a work or procurement, to avoid
requirement of approval of a higher authority or for open bidding. Additionally, as per the
orders of the Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry), the delegated financial powers of the
High Commission of India (Mission) for undertaking repair & maintenance works with
respect to the Chancery premises, Embassy Residence and DCM’s residence taken
together, was limited to USD 2 lakh (approx. GBP 150,000) per annum. The Ministry
orders also state that Missions and Posts are not expected to undertake renovation
works for properties abroad which is beyond their delegated financial powers, and
where expenditure is debitable to the capital budget without prior approval of MEA.

26. The Audit findings highlighted that to increase overall security of the Indian
Mission premises in London, the Mission decided to relocate all the Consular services
operating from the basement of the India House to the ground floor and shift entry for

visitors from the main entrance to the basement. This decision entailed conversion of
7


the basement into a reception area involving partial demolition of existing structures,
and renovation and refurbishment of the area as also modifications in the ground floor
for relocated consular and visa sections. These works involved substantial revamping
and renovation of the premises and went beyond just repair & maintenance. These
were of a capital nature as it led to upgrade and increase in the asset value of the
premises. Examination by the Committee of gross irregularities and violations of rules at
all stages covering approval, tendering and execution of the works relating to renovation
of the Consular Service area and related works at HCI, London, revealed via the Audit
scrutiny has been detailed in succeeding paragraphs.

27. Notwithstanding the orders of the Ministry's orders as mentioned above wherein
Ministry's approval was required at all stages, the Mission did not obtain approvals from
the Ministry and even the financial powers delegated to the Mission for undertaking
repair & maintenance works were exceeded. Further, the Mission disguised the real
nature of the works by classifying the entire expenditure on the works as ‘minor works’
and ‘office expenses’ instead of as ‘capital works’, which was a violation of Rule 84 of
the GFR, 2017.

28. The Audit findings revealed that the Property & Maintenance wing of the Mission
initially prepared a Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for executing the abovementioned works
but the Mission, thereafter, abandoned the tender process without assigning any
reasons. Instead, in blatant violation of rules, it allocated a part of the work viz., “shifting
of consular wing” and “demolition work” (April to June 2017) to a single company (M/s
Zon Associates Ltd.) by splitting the said part work into seven piecemeal orders. It was
- observed that invoices for all the works were submitted within a four-day period and
processed on the same day. Subsequently, the Mission issued a NIT in August 2017 for
“Renovation of the Basement Area” covering renovation of the reception area,
renovation of toilets, electric works and internal works corresponding to one part of the
originally conceived renovation project which was taken up at a bid cost of GBP
129,800 (% 1.07 crore). Five months later i.e., in January 2018, the Mission issued
another NIT for “Design and furnishing of the consular service area”, which was again a
part of the original project scope, and awarded this work at a cost GBP 345480 (₹ 3.14
crore).

29. The Mission took up “additional works” in August/September 2018 valuing GBP
107,694 (% 99.06 lakh), by splitting the total work into 19 piecemeal orders. The Audit
findings reveal that the Mission resorted to indiscriminate sub division of work with the
intention of evading seeking approval of higher authorities/Ministry and avoiding open
bidding.

30. The first part of the project i.e. “shifting of consular wing” and “demolition work”,
was split into seven works which were awarded during April-June 2017, to one company
i.e., M/s Zon Associates Ltd on quotation basis in two cases and on nomination basis in

8


the rest. The company was not eligible as it was not registered with the Government of
UK for the business of construction activities and thus, not authorised to carry out any
construction and related activities. The other companies submitting quotations were
also associates of M/s Zon Associates Ltd.

31. In the case of the work “Renovation of the Basement Area” tendered in August
2017, six companies bid for the work; of which, bids of three companies were accepted.
The work was awarded to the L1 bidder M/s Zon Associates Ltd, at a cost of GBP
129,800 (= 1.07 crore) excluding VAT even though it was ab initio ineligible for being
considered for the work. Additionally, the three of the six original bidders whose bids
were not accepted, were associated with the final L-1 bidder. The Inquiry Committee
subsequently formed by the Mission, also found that most of the bidders were not
technically eligible for the award of work.

32. In the case of tender for the work “Design and furnishing of the consular service
area”, as per records, three bidders participated in the bidding process, with M/s Zon
Associates Ltd. being shown as the L1 bidder. The work was awarded to M/s Zon
Associates Ltd. by way of two separate contracts, aggregating GBP 345480 including
VAT (₹ 3.14 crore). It was found that bidding in this case had been totally manipulated.
Out of the three bidding companies, one company (M/s Kensington International
Development Ltd.) had been dissolved in 2014 itself which showed that the bid made on
its behalf was fraudulent. Further, the remaining two companies i.e., M/s Zon
Associates Ltd. and M/s RH Renew Homes Ltd, were associated with the same person,
who had acknowledged them as being ‘sister’ companies. It was noted that in case of
other works in the Mission, invoicing of M/s RH Renew Homes Ltd, itself was being
done in the name of M/s Zon Associates Ltd, and both companies shared the same
bank account. The Audit findings reveal that the work was effectively awarded on the
basis of a single bid.

33. In the case of “additional works” taken up in August-September 2018, works
were awarded on nomination or quotation basis, to M/s Orient Design and Build which
had been set up by the same person, who was associated with M/s Zon Associates Ltd.
as its Director and as a person with significant control. The company also had the same
registered address as M/s Zon Associates Ltd. The company was also ineligible for the
said work as it was not registered with the Government of UK for the business of
construction activities. It was further observed that all the companies that had
apparently participated in the quotation process (i.e., M/s Zon Associates Ltd, M/s RH
Renew Homes Ltd, M/s Orient Design and Build Ltd and M/s Glades Construction Ltd)
were associated with the same person. M/s Orient & Design Build Ltd. had submitted
quotations for the additional works in May 2018, even though it had come into existence
only on 27 July 2018, indicating that the quotations submitted in its name were
fraudulent. This reveals that the Mission had entertained a sham company which was


set up only to bag these works on behalf of another contractor which had been
entrusted almost all the works in relation to the renovation project.

34. The Committee understand from the audit findings and as detailed above that
there was blatant subversion of the tendering process to influence outcomes in the
favour of a Contractor in all the works undertaken. Despite a delay of 10 weeks
(minimum) in completion of the work, the Mission did not recover liquidated damages
amounting to GBP 7,78834 (₹ 6.85 lakh) from the company. Audit Findings show that
despite the work of “Renovation of Toilets” and “Supply and Installation of Air
Conditioning Units” being included within the scope of awarded work, the Mission made
additional payments to the company for demolition of old toilets (GBP 5,940 in
September 2017) and for supply and installation of air conditioning units (GBP 23,450,
during October-November 2017) and allowed undue benefit to the contractor and made
an excess payment (% 25.01 lakh) to that extent. It was also found that the Mission
belatedly (1 December 2017) decided to undertake wooden flooring in the basement
area instead of carpeting included in the original scope of internal works. This new item
of work was also entrusted to M/s Zon Associates at an additional cost of GBP 36,288
( 31.24 lakh), but the cost of carpeting included in the contract price was not deducted
from the payments finally made to the Contractor. It was found that the Contractor was
allowed undue benefit on this account.

35. Further, the Committee find that during the period October-November 2017, the
Mission awarded additional works relating to construction of cloak room, removing BT
connection wall and demolition of existing counters to M/s Zon Associates at a cost of
GBP 16,780 on nomination/quotation basis. In addition, on account of a decision
(November 2017) to use the basement for large gatherings, works relating to supply &
installation of acoustic fans were awarded on quotation basis to M/s Zon Associates
(installation of duct sand fans at a cost of GBP 5400) and M/s H&C Aircon Ltd (supply of
Acoustic Fans at a cost of GBP 6,000). Additionally, the payment to M/s H&C Aircon Ltd
was made into the same bank account used for receiving payments by M/s Zon
Associates.

36. The Mission awarded (May-June 2018) five additional items of work, at a cost of
GBP 16,680 (₹ 15.08 lakh), to M/s Zon Associates Ltd without any tendering. Of these,
four items related to furnishing the old HCI Commissariat that had been converted into
an “Officers Mess”. The belated addition to the scope of the project and award of the
additional work without tendering, was irregular and resulted in a particular Contractor
being favoured.

37. In the case of the additional works taken up in August-September 2018, it was
noticed that the Contractor M/s Orient Design and Build, obtained these works,
completed the same and submitted invoices, all within a span of 15 days from its
incorporation. Soon after (21 February 2019), the process of dissolution of the company

10


was initiated. Further, the Mission paid the company GBP 17,929 (₹ 16.49 lakh) towards
VAT, even though the company was not in possession of VAT registration from the UK
Government. Thus, post-tender additions and alterations were made in the scope of the
works on multiple occasions without any tendering. This combined with non imposition
of LD, failure to make adjustments in contract price following substitution of carpeting
and double payment for some items of work, amounted to granting undue favours to the
Contractor.

38. The Committee during its examination found that the Ministry in its action taken
reply (25 November 2019), has stated that the matter was being examined by the
Mission wherein the Mission, informed (February 2020) Audit that based on its findings
an Inquiry Committee had been setup which had forwarded a report after investigation
to the Ministry for appropriate action. The report of the Inquiry Committee highlights
that:

(i) despite the renovation work being well beyond the delegated powers of the Mission,
no approval from the Ministry was obtained. Instead, to accommodate the project within
the delegated powers of the Mission, and to circumvent GFR/relevant rules, officials
resorted to “piece-mealing” the project;

(ii) there was a nexus between the then HoC, a local staff of the Mission and the
Contractor (owner of M/s Zon Associates Ltd.);

(iii) the tender process was rigged to favour the Contractor's companies;

(iv) the work was split into several sub-works in such a way that all such sub-works
were below ‘ five lakh to avoid open bidding;

(v) the companies that participated in the quotation/bid process were either linked to
the same person or were non-existent companies; and

(vi) several works were awarded on nomination basis without any justification thereby
blatantly violating GFRs.

39. The Mission undertook renovation works costing GBP 744,971 (approx.% 6.63
crore) without authority and due approvals, and resorted to irregular splitting of works to
evade approvals from higher authority and open bidding. It adopted a grossly
manipulated process for award of works to the same person, and made post facto
additions and alteration in the scope of work which led to undue benefits being
extended to Contractors. Such blatant subversion of rules and processes indicates
supervisory failure and possible collusion between Mission officials and the agencies.

40. The observation of Audit that the Mission resorted to indiscriminate sub division
of work with the intention of evading seeking approval of higher authorities/Ministries
and avoiding open bidding, also indicates that the process of approval from the Ministry
as well as tendering might be cumbersome and complex. In view of this, the Committee
desired to be apprised if the Ministry contemplated any action to simplify existing

11


procedures so that Missions are not forced to resort to such evasive practices. The
Ministry submitted as under in their written replies:

"The standardization of tender documents/agreements templates as well as
transmission of detailed guidelines to Missions/Posts regarding the tendering
process etc. has considerably shortened the processing time in the Ministry. The
delegated financial powers of the HOMs/HOPs were also enhanced recently (in
April 2020), so that fewer proposals were required to be referred to Ministry for
approval.”

41. The Mission undertook work relating to renovation without prior approval from the
Ministry, that too well beyond the delegated power of the Mission; awarded the work to
an ineligible company; resorted to multiple splitting and issue of piece-meal orders; and
violated the terms and conditions of tenders, etc. The Committee asked the Ministry if it
had taken any action to ensure that such lapses/irregularities do not recur in
Missions/Posts, to which the Ministry gave the following reply:

"Detailed updated instructions and guidelines are regularly being transmitted to
Missions/Posts regarding the tendering process etc. in respect of
construction/renovation projects abroad. Ministry is in process of establishing
online dashboard on boarding all major construction & renovations projects for
real-time monitoring, addressing queries, challenges, taking remedial measures
etc. Further, a Contract cum project management unit is also being established for
aiding Missions/Posts in contract & project management."

42. The Committee also enquired if the Ministry had investigated the reasons for
failure of the oversight mechanism. The Ministry gave the following reply:

"Yes. An Inspection Team comprising of members from Vigilance Unit, GEM
Division and Finance Division was sent to London to investigate in August 2021
and in March 2023. Disciplinary proceedings against the erring officers have been
initiated."

43. The Committee asked the Ministry if it had taken suitable action against the
officers responsible for the irregularities/lapses to which they replied:

"Disciplinary proceedings against the erring officers’ are underway and final
decision would be taken in consultation with UPSC."

44, The Committee enquired from the Ministry if it had taken action on the findings of
the Mission's Inquiry report, to which the Ministry gave the following reply:

"Yes. An Inspection Team comprising of members from Vigilance Unit, GEM
Division and Finance Division was sent to London to investigate in August 2021

12


and in March 2023. Disciplinary proceedings against the erring officers have
been initiated.”

45. The Committee desired to know if the process of awarding the tender had been
violative of the rules. If so, the Committee asked the Ministry if the responsibility had
been fixed and on whom. The Ministry responded with the following in their written
submission:

"A vigilance cum inquiry team was constituted and deputed to London in August
2021, to investigate circumstances & reasons for conduct of officials in deviation
to extant Rules & due process. The inquiry report has been submitted and
vigilance proceedings in the matter are underway in consultation with UPSC."

46. The Committee was informed by the Audit that a minor penalty has been fixed
against the officers vide the inquiry conducted by the Ministry. In view of this, the
Committee desired to know during the oral evidence from the Ministry whether the
chargesheet was issued under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Service (Classification,
Control & Appeal) Rules to which the Ministry stated as follows. (Rule 16 of the CCS
(CCA) Rules deals with the minor penalty and Rule 14 deals with the major penalty.)

"It was reissued under Rule 16. "

47. The Committee during oral evidence expressed that the file of investigation may
be called and seen and enquired on reasons for putting only a minor penalty under rule
16. The reply of the Ministry has been stated as under:

"...major penalty is normally pursued when there is conclusive mala fide intent
established with evidence. "

and the Ministry during the oral evidence further stated that :
“ Sir, no mala fide intent could be found.”

48. While taking oral evidence, the Committee desired to know from the Ministry the
steps it has taken to rectify the situation and avoid repetition of such kind of lapses, the
Secretary of the Ministry replied as follows:

"..in December 2021, we have issued very clear instructions to all the Missions
that no additional works or variations are to be undertaken without the Ministry's
prior approval. Secondly, | have taken it upon myself to chair the Ministry's own
audit committee, rather than it to be chaired by the Additional Secretary dealing
with these matters. Then, a circular for the abnormally high rate of the lump sum
contracts etc. was issued in June 2022. Our Establishment Division is also
putting up a dashboard now whereby we know of it in every mission that is due
for renewal of annual maintenance contracts of any kind, well in time, in
advance. Right now, the process is very Mission-specific. ...We, of course, try to
13


reconcile the gaps between the GFR provisions and the local regulations that
might prevail. ...the team, which came back after the detailed inquiry, could not
establish evidence of the mala fide. That is why the provisions were invoked of
the Rule 16."

49. The Committee pointed to the review in 2014 that raised a number of deficiencies
with respect of the property management system by the Ministry. The Committee
desired to know what steps were taken thereafter to plug these gaps and to ensure that
these deficiencies were corrected. The Ministry submitted as under in their written
replies:

“Detailed updated instructions and guidelines are regularly being transmitted to
Missions/Posts regarding the tendering process etc. in respect of
construction/renovation projects abroad. Ministry is in process of establishing
online dashboard on boarding all major construction & renovations projects for
real-time monitoring, addressing queries, challenges, taking remedial measures
etc. Further, a Contract cum project management unit is also being established
for aiding Missions/Posts in contract & project management."

50. The Committee enquired from the Ministry on the number of such other incidents
that internal audit had flagged in the last five years. The Committee also desired to
know the actions taken on those examinations conducted by internal audit wherein any
action had been flagged as major or minor and whether anyone was charge sheeted.
The Committee desired to know the punishments that were provided in such matters
and whether these were systematic or isolated instances. The Ministry replied with the
following in their written replies:

“The internal audit has not flagged any specific case to Ministry. This case has
been flagged by the external Audit (C&AG). Such cases are only isolated
instances and are taken seriously by Ministry. A perusal of last 10 years of C&AG
Audit Report would reveal an average of 4-5 observations have been made,
essentially on issues of contract management and fees consideration in consular
passport & visa services. Ministry has 206 Missions/Posts spread in different
geographical regions of the world. Ministry through its Performance Evaluation
and Monitoring System has not found any systemic vulnerability in its
administrative and financial controls and processes."

51. The Committee asked the Ministry regarding the action taken by it if something is
brought to the notice by Internal audit and the parameters based on which such action
is initiated. The Ministry during the oral evidence provided the following reply:

“ ...all four kinds of steps are taken. In some cases, after the internal audit points
out an objection, ex-post facto regularizations are done wherever the expenditure
is of a nature where the process correction is needed. Wherever admonishment

14


is needed, that is done. Wherever action is to be taken, Memo has to be given,
explanation has to be sought, that is done. Wherever that translates into
systemic correction, then that circular is issued."

15


Part-II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee

The Committee note that in the two paras pertaining to High Commission of
India, London, gross irregularities in receipt and utilization of compensation as
well as award and execution of work by the Commission have been found by
Audit. In Para 5.3 of the C&AG Report no. 2 of 2021, the Committee note that the
High Commission of India irregularly engaged a private party, authorising it to
receive and retain government receipts of = 78.41 lakh in its private bank account
and disburse a substantial part of the receipts towards the Mission’s own

expenditure.

In Para 5.4, the Committee observe that the High Commission of India,
London undertook work relating to renovation of the basement at the India
House, at a cost of GBP (British Pound) 744,971 (approx.% 6.63 crore at that time),
without prior approval from the Ministry of External Affairs. The initial award of
the work was to an ineligible company through an irregular and manipulated
tendering process which was followed by award of extra work to the same
company without tendering, thereby extending undue benefit to it. Further,
additional work was awarded based on fraudulent quotations, to an associated
ineligible company, which was incorporated immediately prior to the award of

work and dissolved following receipt of payments.

Based on in-depth examination of the subjects, the Committee have
recorded their observations and recommendations on issues highlighted in both

paras that merit consideration, in the succeeding paragraphs.

Criminal case/ major penalty

1. The Committee note Audit’s findings that the Mission took a decision to
accept compensation of GBP 90,000 from a property Developer without the
approval of the Ministry and without any documented justification for the amount
accepted. It also irregularly authorized a private party to receive and retain
government receipts by way of the compensation paid by the Developer

amounting to Rs. 78.41 lakh in its private bank account. Further, in violation of

16


rules, the Mission allowed use of these receipts directly to incur expenditure. In
addition, actions and decisions taken by Mission functionaries were not
adequately documented to obscure these gross irregularities and the Ministry

was systematically kept in the dark in the matter.

In the other case, the Mission undertook renovation works costing GBP 744,971
(approx. Rs. 6.63 crore) without authority and due approvals, and resorted to
irregular splitting of works to evade approvals from higher authority and open
bidding. It adopted a grossly manipulated process for award of works to the same
person, and made post facto additions and alteration in the scope of work which

led to undue benefits being extended to Contractors.

The Ministry’s response on the matter that no mala fide intent could be
established with evidence is intriguing. Evidently there has been an open
violation of rules and processes which is also indicative of supervisory failure
and possible collusion between Mission officials and the agencies. Further, the
Inquiry Committee that was formed by the Ministry also concurred with Audit’s
findings. Considering the facts of the matter in entirety, a far more stringent
action should have been initiated and taken in the matter, whereas the Ministry

merely restricted it to disciplinary proceedings. The Committee, therefore desire

that action be taken for initiating criminal proceedings against those involved in
such irregularities and the Committee be apprised thereof.

Mandatory Training on GFR, 2017 and other relevant Government Rules and
regulations

2. The Committee find that both the cases examined reveal that there has
been blatant violation and disregard of administrative & financial rules by the
Commission. The Ministry, in its reply has stated that it has formalized the model
tender document and standard agreement template for engagement of Architect
Consultants for matters of property redevelopment or construction projects. Yet,
the Committee find it surprising to note the obvious lack of documentation on the
manner of appointment of Consultants and the irregular parking/retention of
Government receipts in a private account. The Committee are aghast to note the
v7


statement of the representatives of the Ministry that there was an element of lack
of understanding of rules with regard to maintenance and utilisation of the money
received outside the Consolidated Fund of India. Concerning the second
instance, the Committee note from the audit findings that not only was there
irregular piece-mealing of the expenditures and manipulation of the tendering
process, but the Mission also engaged with a ‘fly-by-night’ company that was set
up solely to secure these works for another contractor to whom nearly all of the
renovation project's work had been entrusted. As being unaware of rules cannot
be used as an excuse for violating the statutory stipulations, the Committee
recommend _that_henceforth, training may mandatorily 98 given_on General
Financial Rules, 2017 and other relevant rules and requlations such as the Central
Receipts and Payments Rules, 1983; CCS Conduct Rules; Delegated Financial
Powers of HOMs/HOPs etc. to all Officials concerned who are posted in the
Missions so as to obviate recurrence of such irregularities.

Revamping and strengthening of the Internal Audit Mechanism

3. The Committee, in their earlier reports (307 and 617 Reports (167 LS) and
112™ Report (167 LS) and 177 Report (177 LS)) have continuously emphasized
on the need for a strong and robust internal audit mechanism within the Ministry
of External Affairs to audit its Missions abroad. However, the Committee are
extremely disappointed to note that the response of the Ministry has been very
casual. In the instant cases, the Ministry found out about such irregularities after
Audit highlighted them. Apart from this, the Ministry's response, which states that
‘the internal audit set up has not brought any particular cases to the Ministry's
attention is a matter of concern to the Committee. It appears from the Ministry's
response that they are oblivious of the state of affairs of the Missions, given that
the Audit has pointed to a widespread prevalence of such irregularities in almost
all Missions. Furthermore, the deplorable state of affairs continuing in the
Ministry's monitoring is revealed by the Ministry's statement that its performance
evaluation and monitoring system has not discovered any systemic vulnerability
in its administrative and financial controls and processes among its 206
Missions/Posts spread throughout the world. Had Audit not pointed out the

18


irregularities, the Ministry would have remained unaware of such acts of
embezzlement being carried out right openly. The Committee are of the

considered view that the extant internal audit mechanism within the Ministry/
Missions needs to be urgently revamped and strengthened. The Committee while
noting from the reply of the Ministry that Internal Audit of the Monthly Cash

Accounts of Indian Missions/Posts abroad are carried out by the Office of Pr.
Chief Controller of Accounts, MEA as per approved Annual Audit Plan desire that
the mandate/ terms of reference of internal audit be extended to include

transaction and compliance audit and specific timelines for taking action on the

observations of internal audit may also be prescribed.

Measures being taken for monitoring of projects and functioning of Missions.
4. The Committee observe that the instant cases have revealed a severe short

coming in the monitoring of Missions by the Ministry. Despite the efforts of the
Ministry to simplify the procedural complexity by standardization of
documents/templates and detailed guidelines, the Committee are of the view that
the irregularities pointed out here which reveal open subversion of rules and
processes are indicative of persistent failure in Monitoring by the Ministry. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that a Performance Evaluation and
Monitoring System - PEMS 3.0 has been rolled out for monitoring of
Missions/Posts operations, results of which are made part of periodic inspections
of the Missions/Posts. The Committee also note that Ministry is in process of
establishing an online dashboard on boarding all major construction &
renovations projects for real-time monitoring, addressing queries, challenges,
taking remedial measures etc. Further, a Contract cum project management unit
is also being established for aiding Missions/Posts in contract & project
management. The Committee expect the Ministry to appropriately accommodate
in the proposed system necessary measures for avoiding lapses such 35 the
ones pointed out by Audit. The Committee desire that the aforesaid dashboard
and project management_unit_may be established on priority within 3 strict
timeframe, the impact of the measures taken may be assessed and the Committee
be apprised thereof.

19


Comprehensive check in all Missions of India

5. The Committee note that Audit through these two paras highlighted
instances which came to their notice in the course of test audit for the period. The
Committee have also in their reports presented earlier, recommended conducting
a review of functioning of all the missions so to ensure adherence to stipulated
rules and guidelines. The Ministry has also recognized that there has been laxity
in the mechanism for monitoring activities in the Missions. The Committee are of
the view that the irregularities highlighted by Audit point towards prevalence of
systemic lapses and subversion of rules in the Missions. As the nature of these
irregularities is very serious and has grave ramifications in terms of misuse of
money of the public exchequer, the Committee recommend that a special audit of
the Missions may be carried out_and_ appropriate action may be taken against
defaulters on the basis of findings of such an audit, and the Committee may be
apprised thereof.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson

17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

आस

20