NON - UTILISATION OF SOLAR THERMAL
POWER PLANT

Ministry of New and Renewable Energy

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

SIXTY- FIRST REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

61


PAC NO. 2290

SIXTY- FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON - UTILISATION OF SOLAR THERMAL

POWER PLANT

Ministry of New and Renewable Energy

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2023 /Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE | OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22)

INTRODUCTION

REPORT
PART-1

Introduction

Development of dedicated workforce to run the plant

1७

Taking over of Plant from IIT, Bombay before getting the performance
appraised by the RD PAC

Action for Sale of 1 MWe Solar Power under the Project

Delay in making the Solar Thermal Plant functional

Action initiated by MMRE/NISE/IIT, Bombay to make the plant
functional

Vil

Status of operation of the Solar Thermal Power Plant

Vill

Midway corrections by MNRE/NISE to improve the efficiency of the
Plant to develop a National Training facility

(a) Action taken by the NISE to make the Plant functional

(b) Use of Plant for training purpose

(c) Training courses being provided in National Training Facility

(d) Persons benefited from the Training Facility

(e) Establishing of three more Solar Thermal Power Plants

(f) Steps taken for revival of Plant by IIT Jodhpur

(g) Steps taken towards achieving the target of 500 GW energy by 2030

7-12

PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

13-22

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the sittings of the Sub-committee | (Civil) of Public Accounts
Committee (2021-22) held on 21.02.2022 and 03.03.2022

Minutes of the 17" sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held
on 03.08.2022 and 03.04.2023

Not appended to cyclostyled copy of the Report.

a



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

ON>

(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das - Director

Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

* Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy elected w.e.f. 13.12.2022.

vv)


COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I (CIVIL) OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

Chairperson - Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Convenor - Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Members - Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Sudheer Gupta
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

W)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this 617 Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on “Non-utilization of Solar Thermal Power Plant”.

2. The Sub-committee | (Civil) was constituted by the Public Accounts
Committee (2021-22) (17"" Lok Sabha) to examine the subject “Non-utilization of
Solar Thermal Power Plant” in detail. The Sub-committee | took up the subject for
detailed examination and report thereon.

3. The Sub-committee | (Civil) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) took
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
on “Non-utilization of Solar Thermal Power Plant” and examined the subject at
their sittings held on 21.02.2022 & 03.03.2022. Due to paucity of time, the draft
Report on the subject could not be finalized. Thereafter, the subject was carried
forward to next PAC (2022-23). The Main Committee further took the oral evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry concerned on 03.08.2022. The draft Report
was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) during
their sitting held on 28 March 2023. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Sub-
committee/Main Committee form Appendices to the Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- II of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank Sub-committee | (Civil) for taking oral evidences of the
concerned Ministry and obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and by the Office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
03 March, 2023 _ Chairperson,
13 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


1
REPORT

PARTI
| INTRODUCTION

The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) sanctioned (September
2009) a Research and Development (R&D) project titled ‘Development of a
Megawatt-scale Solar Thermal Power Testing, Simulation and Research Facility’ to
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. The project was expected to facilitate
development of 1 MWe grid interactive solar thermal power plant. National Institute
of Solar Energy (NISE) was required to enter into a Power Purchase Agreement
(PPA) with Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam (DHBVN) for sale of solar power.
The project was sanctioned for a duration of five years i.e. up to September 2014
and was further extended upto March 2015. An amount of 246.72 crore had been
released by MNRE for the project. The plant was formally handed over by IIT to
NISE with effect from 7 March 2015 and had generated 9Mwh of electricity up to 31
August 2015.
2. The Plant was operated up to August 2015 by human resources employed
on contract basis by NISE. Thereafter, the contract was not extended for want of
funds. As a result, the plant stopped functioning from September 2015. As of
February 2016, a total expenditure of = 46.36 crore had been incurred on the
project. IIT refunded (June 2016) the unspent balance (with interest) amounting to
¥37.10 lakh to MNRE. The project completion report submitted by IIT was reviewed
(June 2016) by the R&D Project Appraisal Committee (RDPAC) of MNRE. The
committee expressed satisfaction with the progress and achievement of the project
but observed that the plant was not functional and that it should be handed over to
NISE in operational condition. The committee also suggested that Pls should
present the performance of the plant over an extended period of time and give their
recommendations to facilitate the design of future solar thermal power plants. The
committee concluded that the project completion report could not be accepted till it
was revised based on its observations and till the plant was formally handed over to
NISE in proper running condition. The observations of the Committee were
communicated to IIT in July 2017. However, no further action was taken on the
project and the plant remained non-functional.

3. This Report is based on Para 9.1 of the: C&AG Report No. 2 of 2018 on the
subject “Non-utilisation of Solar Thermal Power Plant’.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the subject for detailed
examination and Report. For this purpose a Sub-committee was constituted to
examine the subject in detail. The Sub-committee obtained background materials
and written replies from the MNRE. They had a briefing by the officers of the C&AG
of India on the subject on 211 February, 2022. The Sub-Committee also took oral
evidence of the representatives of MNRE on 3% March, 2022. Due to paucity of
time, Report on the subject was not drafted and the subject was carried forward to
PAC (2022-23). The main Committee (2022-23) again took the oral evidence of the
representatives of MNRE on 37 August, 2022 on the said subject. Based on these
oral and written depositions by MNRE, the main Committee further examined the
subject in detail.

Audit findings
5. Audit has brought the following shortcomings in examination of this subject:


(ii)

(ii)

2

MNRE did not take any action to develop a dedicated workforce needed
to run the plant on a continuous basis though the National Advisory
Council constituted for the project in its meeting held in May 2011 had
discussed the need for a dedicated workforce for running the plant once it
was commissioned.

The plant was taken over from IIT by MNRE before getting the project
performance appraised by the RDPAC and without ensuring availability of
dedicated workforce for its operation.

No action could be initiated for sale of 1 MWe solar power planned to be
generated under the project.

Development of dedicated workforce to run the plan of dedicated workforce to run the lant

6.

On being asked about the action taken by the MNRE to develop a dedicated

workforce to run the Solar Thermal Power Plant on a continuous basis as
suggested by the National Advisory Council in May 2011, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:

“(The National Advisory Council constituted by IIT Bombay in its second
meeting held on 57 May, 2011 in Solar Energy Centre (SEC), suggested that
a dedicated workforce need to be developed under SEC for running of the
plant once it is commissioned and the project period is completed. However,
in the initial sanction, there was no provision of the workforce after
completion of the project. During the implementation of the project, the
project team consisted of the 12 faculty members from different departments
of [[T Bombay and 25 nos. of project staff contributed to the project with a
total expenditure of % 3.27 crore which was incurred by IIT Bombay out of the
funds made available by MNRE in the project cost.

(ii) Under the project, IIT Bombay had developed a dedicated workforce till
the date of completion and was meeting the expenses from the project cost.
After handing over to NISE, NISE retained the workforce and operated the
plant till August 2015 using its own budget. But, the arrangement was not
sustainable as NISE was newly formed and had very limited funds.

(iii) NISE made efforts to run the plant through a third party for which it
invited the EOI titled ‘For running solar thermal power plant set up at NISE’ in
August 2015. However, due to poor response from a single party with
unreasonable tariff of 39/kWh, the work could not be awarded.

(iv) Further, NISE in August 2018, floated an Eol entitled “Replacement of
identified worn out/defective components/sub-systems; debugging and
operationalization of software and; Supply of technical manpower having
necessary expertise for operation and maintenance and Preventive
Maintenances for 1 MWe Solar Thermal Power Plant Installed at NISE,
Gurugram.” But, no proper response was received.

(v) Thus, due to the higher cost of revival of the plant as well as higher
recurring operation and maintenance cost beside the technical reasons, the
sustainable operation of the plantis not possible.”

Taking over of Plant from IIT, Bombay before getting the एस सर: over_of Plant from IIT Bombay before etting the performance
appraised by the RD PAC PAC

7.

When asked about the reasons for taking over the plant from IIT, Bombay by

MNRE before Performance appraised by the Research and Development Sectoral
Project Appraisal Committee (RDPAC), the Ministry explained as under:


8.

3

“The project was appraised by the R&D Sectoral Project Appraisal
Committee on Solar Thermal on 07.08.2013. The RDPAC noted/observed
the following:

*“All major components of the power plant have been installed and tested for
its functionality. This includes testing of turbine using steam generated from
the solar field comprised of parabolic trough solar collectors and linear
Fresnel reflectors. Power evacuation from the solar plant would start as soon
as the weather conditions become favorable.

*An oil test rig has been installed and commissioned at project site for
evaluation of thermal performance of concentrators. Presently, trial runs are
being performed on a paraboloid dish called Arun supplied by Clique
Developments Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.

+ A flux mapping system has been designed for measuring the concentrated
flux obtained from linear focusing solar collectors. This is a novel low cost
technique and can be effective in laboratory environment as well as outdoor
conditions. A Patent has been filed on this system.

*The preliminary version of the simulator was released in July 2011, and
subsequently its Evaluation Version v 1.0 was released in November-2012

The committee observed that most of the project goal have been achieved.
The project has resulted in facility which offers unique opportunity to gain a
lot of experience in operation, vendor management and generating
performance data. However, future of facility in terms of assigning
responsibility for its operation and maintenance after the project period ends
need quick address by the Ministry. In terms of utilization, the facility has
high potential for research work aiming at cost effective solar thermal power
generation, manpower training and component testing. The Committee
suggested Ministry to take view in the matter.”

Since, NISE was the one of the consortium partners for the project, the R&D
project had been completed with extension, and the project was in NISE
campus, accordingly, the MNRE found NISE as responsible agency for its
operation and maintenance after the end of project period. For operation and
maintenance and smooth transition of project, the Ministry extended the
project for period of six months for transferring the works from IIT Bombay to
NISE team. It was taken over by NISE on 7" March 2015 from IIT Bombay.”

In response to the aforesaid reply of MNRE, Audit in their vetting comments

stated as under:

“The reply of MNRE indicate that RDPAC appraised the project in
August 2013.The project duration ended in March 2015. As such, the Solar
Thermal Power Plant was taken over from IIT, Bombay by MNRE/NISE.
before getting the project performance appraised by the RDPAC.”

The MNRE on the aforesaid Audit comments replied as follows:

“The plant was handed over to NISE after the review and recommendation of
RDPAC in meeting held on August 2013 in which the Committee observed
that most of the project goals had been achieved. The project had resulted in
facility which offers unique opportunity to gain a lot of experience in
operation, vendor management and generating performance data. Since,
NISE was one of the consortium partners for the project, the R&D project
had been completed with extension, and the project was in NISE campus,
accordingly, the MNRE found NISE as responsible agency for its operation
and maintenance after the end of project period.”

Action for Sale of 1MWe Solar Power under the Project



10.

4

Further, on the issue of non-initiation of action for sale of 1 MWe Solar

Power planned to be generated under the project, the MNRE in their reply have
stated as under:

11.

“NISE initiated actions with and approached Dakshin Haryana Bijili Vitaran
Nigam (DHBVN) for facilitating the feeding of the power to the grid. This led
to laying of a dedicated 11 kV, HT cable line from Secor-56 Gurugram to
NISE campus for power evacuation from the Plant in May 2013.A meeting
was taken by MNRE with Managing Director, Dakshin Haryana Bijlee Vitran
Nigam (DHBVN) on 42 November 2012 regarding issues related to
connectivity of this 1 MW solar thermal power plant. It was agreed by CMD,
DHBVN that connectivity would be provided to the plant with 11 KV line
which has already been laid and in the meantime, PPA would be formalized
based on decision on tariff. CMD also indicated that the minimum tariff of
batch II for PV projects, which is = 7.49 per unit, may be acceptable to
DHBVN. It was stated that same would be confirmed after necessary
processing within DHBVN. On the MNRE side, it was mentioned that the
acceptance on the proposed tariff of & 7.49 per unit would be considered
based on the assessment of annual estimated revenue and the requirement
of funds for annual maintenance of the plant. MNRE will further consider the
offer of DHBVN and get back. Thereafter, once the Plant was grid
synchronized, NISE made efforts for signing of PPA for power evacuation
with Haryana Power Purchase Centre at the rate of हैं 6.44 per kWh as per
the provision made for Solar photovoltaic power in April 2015. However, no
formal response was received.”

In their vetting comments of aforesaid reply of MNRE, Audit observed that

the reply is silent about the action taken by NISE with Haryana Power Purchase
Centre after April, 2015.

12.

In response to the aforesaid vetting comments, the MNRE in their written

replies submitted as under:

"NISE made efforts in signing of PPA for power evacuation with Haryana
Power Purchase Centre at the rate of € 6.44 per KWh as per the provision
made for Solar photovoltaic power in April 2015. However, no formal
response was received.

While NISE was operating the Plant from March 2015 to August 2015, it was
found that the power output was much lower than the designed value of 1.0
MWe and operating the plant was uneconomical. As a result, the plant
became non-operational from 44 September, 2015. Hence, thereafter no
action was initiated by NISE with Haryana Power Purchase Centre for
signing of PPA.”

Delay in making the Solar Thermal Power Flan’ सायरएत the Solar Thermal Power Plant functional

13.

On being asked for the reasons for such a long delay in making the Solar

Thermal Power Plant functional, the MNRE has explained as under:

“After sanction on 07" September 2009, the project was under execution till
September 2014, which was extended till 6" March 2015. The IIT Bombay
operated the plant ti! 6" March 2015. Thereafter, it was handed over to
NISE w.ef., 7 March 2015. The plant was operated by human resource
employed on contract basis by NISE up to 31° August 2015. During that
time, it was concluded that plant could be run on trial basis by NISE.
Further, in September 2017, NISE engaged a team to revive the plant and


5

the efforts resulted in making the plant partially operational during the first
week of March in 2018. NISE was able to make the collectors to track the
sun manually and some amount of steam was generated. However,
sustained operation of the plant could not be achieved.”

14. In response to the aforesaid reply of the MNRE, Audit in their vetting
comments stated that the reply is silent about the action taken by MNRE to timely
deploy a dedicated workforce. As a result, the plant became non-operational from
14"'September, 2015.

15. In regard to the abovesaid Audit comments, reply of MNRE is given as
under:

"MNRE identified NISE as responsible agency for operation
& maintenance of the plant for R&D purpose. The Ministry extended the
project for period of six months transferring the works from IIT Bombay to
NISE team. It was taken over by NISE on 7" March, 2015 from IIT Bombay.
NISE operated the Plant till August 2015 by retaining the associated
workforce using NISE’s own budget. During this period, NISE found that the
power output was much lower than the designed value of 1.0 MWe and
operating the Plant was technically not feasible.”

Action initiated by MMRE/NISE/IIT, Bombay to make the plant functional

16. | When asked about the action taken by the MNRE/NISE/IIT, Bombay to make
the plant functional, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:

“i.The project was handed over to NISE by IIT Bombay on 7"March, 2015,
and since then NISE managed operation and maintenance of the plant.
However, the plant became nonoperational from 1%September 2015 on
account of administrative, financial and technical reasons.

i.NISE initiated the process for signing of PPA with HPPC in March 2014.
Though, the PPA could not be signed for this plant.

iii. The facility was used for training and demonstration purpose since its
commissioning. Further, in September 2017, NISE engaged a team to revive
the plant and the efforts resulted in making the plant operational for couple of
days in first week of March in 2018. NISE was able to make the collectors to
track the sun manually and some amount of steam was generated. However,
sustained operation of the plant could not be achieved.

iv.NISE took initiative to make the power plant operational and approached
the MNRE for seeking funds. NISE also facilitated a study which was
conducted through consultants appointed by the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO).

v.A detailed study was conducted during January to March, 2019 through a
team of consultants (one from Germany and another from India) for
assessing the technical problems associated with solar field, power block,
other major accessories and software for reviving the operation of the plant
and to estimate requirement of funds for this purpose. A detailed report titled
‘Refurbishment of the 1.0 MWe Concentrating Solar Power Plant at the NISE’
was prepared and was presented in the MNRE in the last week of March,
2019.

vi.The report indicates about the various components, parts/systems to be


6

overhauled/repaired/replaced along with financial implications for making the
plant operational. The detailed list of the spares is also given in the report.
The cost of renovation of the power plant was estimated to about %3.22 crore
and annual operation and maintenance cost was estimated to about हैं 74.20
lakh. NISE submitted the report to the MNRE for consideration.

vil. The Governing Council of NISE in 8"meeting held on 20.06.2019,
recommended that efforts should be made to make the plant functional and
possibly on economical basis for recovering the cost of O&M through
electricity generation by the project.”

147. In their vetting comments, Audit stated that the reply did not indicate the
action taken by MNRE/NISE/IIT during the two-year period from 11 September,
2015 to September, 2017.

48. In their reply to abovesaid Audit comments, the MNRE submitted as under:

“During 2015 to 2017, plant was non-operational on account of
administrative, financial and technical reasons. The facility used for training
and demonstration purpose since its commissioning. NISE made efforts to
tun the plant through a third party for which it invited the EO! titled ‘For
running solar thermal power plant set up at NISE’ in August 2015. However,
due to poor response from a single party with unreasonable tariff of ¥ 39
KWh, the work could not be awarded.”

Status of operation of the Solar Thermal Power Plant

49. Regarding the current status of operation of the Solar Thermal Power Plant,
the Ministry have replied as under:

“In the initial sanction, there was no provision to run the plant on commercial
basis. In RDPAC 2017 it was also mentioned by IIT Bombay that the facility
may be treated as a Research and training facility and not as a commercial
power plant. At present plant is not in operation. However, the facility in its
present condition is being utilized for demonstration and training purpose for
the National and International training programmes being organized by
NISE, besides for the visitors and students. Till 2019-20, NISE organized
434 National and 36 International training programmes in the campus in
which the facility was utilized for training and demonstration purpose. NISE
generates revenue out of these trainings.”

Midway corrections by MNRE/NISE to improve the efficiency of the Plant to the efficiency of the Plant to
develop a National Training facility

(A) Action taken by the NISE to make the Plant functional. functional.

20. The Ministry in their reply to actions taken by the NISE to make the plant
functional have stated as under:

1. “NISE has initiated number of steps for revival of plant. Mr. Nehra,
who was engaged as consultant on behalf of IIT Bombay for
installations and commissioning of this plant at NISE and gave action
plan for renovation. In September 2017, NISE engaged a team of six
technical experts to revive the Plant. The team worked for about 7
months and made efforts in overhauling/servicing of the major
equipment/ components of power plant such as PTC solar field,


(B)

21.
under:

(9)
22.

7

compressor, boiler, cooling tower, RO system, DM plant, turbine,
alternator, HTF system, heat exchangers and other feed pumps etc.
Senior manager of M/s Godawari Power Limited was invited to visit
NISE to make action plan for revival of PTC filed. Thereafter, their
engineers visited NISE and overhauled the PTC field. M/s KG Design
(manufactures of LFR) visited NISE for overhauling of LFR field.

ii, The servicing and overhauling of turbine was also done but pressure
of 40 bar @ 325 C superheated steam could not be achieved due to
low available radiation, dust and pollutions and only steam was
Produced. Many parts were found damaged including automation
system and the team proposed the major repair/replacement of parts
involving high cost of investment.

iii. The efforts resulted in making the plant operational partially during the
first week of March in 2018.NISE was able to make the collectors to
track the sun manually and some amount of steam was generated.
However, sustained operation of the plant could not be achieved due
to technical and financial reasons, as it required extensive repairs,
replacement and overhauling of different sub-systems.

iv. For carrying out the rectification work, NISE spent a total amount of &
37.17 Lakh including %17.84 Lakh towards manpower and 19.33
Lakh towards spare parts in addition to the project cost from its own
budget during October 2017 to April 2018.

v. A detailed study was conducted during January to March, 2019
through a team of consultants (one from Germany and another from.
India) for assessing the technical problems associated with solar field,
power block, other major accessories and software for reviving the
operation of the plant and to estimate requirement of funds for this
purpose. A detailed report titled ‘Refurbishment of the 1.0 MWe
Concentrating Solar Power Plant at the NISE’ was prepared and was
presented in the MNRE in the last week of March, 2019.

vi.  NISE conducts trainings for National and International participants in
the solar. photovoltaics, solar thermal and hydrogen energy. The
facility, in its present condition, is being used for various National and
International training programmes organised by NISE to showcase
PTC and LFR based solar thermal power plant technology.”

Use of Plant for training purpose

Regarding use of National Training Facility, MNRE in their written replies as

“The facility in its present condition is being utilized for demonstration and
training purpose for the National and International training programmes
being organized by NISE, besides for the visitors and students. Till 2019-20,
NISE, organized 134 National and 36 International training programmes in
the campus in which the facility was utilized for training and demonstration
purpose. NISE generates revenue out of these trainings. Currently online
trainings are being organized and it is expected that trainings in physical
mode will be resumed shortly.”

Training courses being provided in National Training Facility

On being asked about the training courses that are being provided in

National Training facility, MNRE in their written replies stated as under:


(D)
23.

8

"NISE conducts various trainings for National and International participants in
the solar photovoltaics, solar thermal and hydrogen energy. The facility, in its
present condition, is being used for various National and International
training programmes organised by NISE to showcase PTC and LFR based
solar thermal power plant technology. During the last year FY 2019-20, 14
National training programmes were organized by NISE namely start-up
Indian Skill Development program, RE training Program for Armed Forces,
Training Program for Industry & PSU/ONGC Military Engineering Service
(MES)\Power Finance Corporation Ltd(PFC), 6 months Advance Solar
Professional Course. Seven International Training Programs 1.8. International
Training Programme on Solar Technologies and Applications, ITEC
Programme in Solar Energy for Master Trainers from ISA Member Countries,
Renewable Energy Capacity building program for India Africa Forum Summit
Ill for mid carrier professionals were organized in NISE campus in which the
facility was utilized for training and demonstration purpose.”

Persons benefied from the Training Facility Eacilit

The Committee sought to know about the number of

institutions/organisations and persons that have been trained or benefitted from the
Training facility so far, the MNRE stated as under:

(E)
24,

“The facility in its present condition is being utilized for demonstration and
training purpose for the National and International training programmes
being organized by NISE, besides for the visitors and students. Till 2019-20,
NISE, organized 134 National and 36 International training programmes in
the campus in which the participants were from academic institution, defense
organization, public sector under takings, industry, State Governments,
Utilities etc. The international participants were mainly from Africa, Latin
America and South East Asian Countries. During the FY 2019-20, 514
number of participants in 14 National training programmes and 213
participants in 7 International training programmes organized in the NISE
campus participated in the trainings.”

Establishing of three more Solar Thermal Power Plants Thermal Power Plants

The Committee desired to know that as to how the learning from this project

could encourage development of other Solar Thermal power Plants. In response,
the MNRE in their written replies submitted as under:

25.

“This Project demonstrated the technology for large scale solar thermal
power generation for the first time in the country. We believe that this
inspired the developers, who came forward to install the solar thermal power
plant under National Solar Mission and following 3 solar thermal power
plants with a total capacity of 225 MW were established in India:
i. 125 MW plant (LFR technology) in Dhursar, Rajasthan completed in
2014;
ii 50 MW plant (PTC technology) in Nokh Village, Rajasthan
completed in 2013;
iii, 50 MW plant (PTC technology) in Anantpur, AP completed in 2014.”

Further, when asked if, solar thermal power generation technology is not able

to take off for economic reasons, how 3 more solar thermal power plants with a total
capacity of 225 MW were established and are now economically viable. In



9

response, the MNRE in their written replies submitted as under:

“The following 3 solar thermal power plants operating in India have the
advantages of three main factors i.e. higher capacity of 50 MW and above,
locations with good solar radiation throughout the year and the higher tariffs
from % 11.34/kWh to ₹ 12.20/kWh at which the PPA was signed:
SI. Solar Thermal | Technology | Location Installed PPA
No. | Power Plant Capacity Signed
Tariff
(Rs./kWh)
1. |Godawari Solar] Parabolic | Nokh, 50 MW 12.20
Project Trough Pokaran,
Rajasthan
2. Megha Solar Parabolic | Anantapur, | 50 MW 11.31
Trough Andhra
Pradesh
3. Reliance Linera Dhursar, 125 MW 11.97
Power's Fresnel Pokaran,
concentrated Reflector Rajasthan
solar power
project
At present Solar thermal power plants are not competitive & viable for power
generation as compared to the low tariff offered by solar PV power plant of about =

2.00/kWh.

(F) Steps taken for revival of Piant by IIT Jodhpur

26. During evidence on the subject, representative of MNRE apprised the
Committee that IIT Jodhpur has taken any initiative for revival/relocation of the non-
functional Solar Plant situated at NISE. On being asked about the current status of
this matter, MNRE in their written replies submitted as under:

“IT Jodhpur has expressed interest to shift the facility created under this 1
MW project from NISE to IIT Jodhpur for further research purpose. The detail
Proposal is under submission by IIT Jodhpur. The proposal will be
considered by the Ministry on Merit."

27.  Apprising the Committee about the details of the project decided to be taken
over by IIT Jodhpur, representative of the MNRE deposed before the Committee
that IIT Jodhpur intend to make a consortium of one Megawatt by joining the facility
of this solar Thermal Power Plant and the Photo Voltaic Power Plant for which PPA
of = eight has been decided with an Electricity Purchasing company of Jodhpur.

(E) Steps taken towards achieving the target of 500 GW energy by 2030 towards achieving the target of 500 GW eneray by 2030

28. The Hon'ble Prime Minister of India has laid down a goal of achieving 500
GW energy capacity from non-fossil fuel sources by 2030 in Glasgow. The
Committee sought to know about the details of the process and procedures to be
undertaken for achievement of this target. Apprising the Committee about these


10

details, the MNRE in their written replies submitted as follows:

"So far, a cumulative renewable power capacity, including large hydro of 162
GW has been installed and 64.55 GW Renewable Power capacity is under
implementation against the target goal of 500 GW of non-fossil fuel capacity
in the country by 2030.Hence a balance of about 273.45 GW capacity from
non-fossil fuels needs to be achieved by 2030.

Several means, process and procedures and actions are proposed for energy
transition to achieve the ambitious renewable energy target of 500 Gigawatt
of energy from the non-fossil fuel sources by the year 2030 as given below:

(a) Permitting Foreign Direct Investment (FD!) up to 100 percent under
the automatic route,

(b) Waiver of Inter State Transmission System (ISTS) charges for inter-
state sale of solar and wind power for projects to be commissioned by
30th June 2025,

(c) Ministry of Power has also issued an order on Renewable Purchase
Obligations (RPO) and Energy Storage Purchase Obligations
trajectory till 2029-30. This will also support in achieving the target.

(d) Aligning of the State RPO trajectories to that with the National RPO
Trajectory notified by the Ministry of Power upto FY 2029-30.

(e) Setting up of Ultra Mega Renewable Energy Parks to provide land and
transmission to RE developers on a plug and play basis,

(f) Schemes such as Pradhan Mantri KisanUrja Suraksha
evamUtthaanMahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM), Solar Rooftop Phase ll,
42000 MW CPSU Scheme Phase Il, etc.

(g) Laying of new transmission lines and creating new sub-station
capacity under the Green Energy Corridor Scheme for evacuation of
renewable power,

(h) Notification of standards for deployment of solar photovoltaic
system/devices,

(i) Setting up of Project Development Cell for attracting and facilitating
investments,

(i) Standard Bidding Guidelines for tariff based competitive bidding
process for procurement of Power from Grid Connected Solar PV and
Wind Projects.

(k) | Government has issued orders that power shall be dispatched against
Letter of Credit (LC) or advance payment to ensure timely payment by
distribution licensees to RE generators.

(I) Production Linked Incentive Scheme ‘National Programme on High
Efficiency Solar PV Modules’, for supporting setting up of integrated
manufacturing units of high efficiency solar PV modules.

(m) Amendment in the Electricity act for including penal provisions to
comply with the RPO targets notified by the respective SERCs/JERC.

(n) Electricity (Promoting Renewable Energy through Green Energy Open
Access) Rules, 2022, notified for promoting generation, purchase and


29.

41

consumption of.green energy with the end goal of ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and green energy.

(0) Establishment of off-shore wind energy projects including various
business models for Offshore Wind Development.

(p) Promotion of energy storage coupled with renewable energy by Solar
energy corporation of India.

(q) Establishment of 13 nos. Renewable Energy Management Centres
(REMCs).The REMCs are equipped with Artificial Intelligence based
RE forecasting and scheduling tools and provide greater visualization
and enhanced situational awareness to the grid operators.

(r) The National Green Hydrogen Mission has been announced with the
over arching objective to decarbonise major economic sectors, making
India energy independent and serving as an inspiration for the global
clean energy transition.

The Ministry of New and Renewable energy has constituted a Committee for
preparing a roadmap to achieve 500 GW of non-fossil fuel-based energy
capacity by 2030. The Committee includes representative from important
agencies dealing with renewable energy & electricity and can also co-opt
other stakeholders. It was decided to constitute four thematic Sub-groups,
identifying the responsibility of respective Sub-groups to access the potential
for RE capacity addition considering feasibility conditions for RE
development. The following responsibilities are assigned to each Sub-group.

Sub Group |: Assess the requirement of Regulatory changes, RPO
enforcement, Storage elements and Market Design to achieve 500 GW non-
fossil fuel capacity in a least lost manner.

Sub Group II: Assess the role of Open access, Decentralized PM-KUSUM,
Roof Top Solar, Hydro Power in achieving the target of 500 GW

Sub Group Ill: Assessment of additional RE capacity required for green
Hydrogen production

Sub Group IV: Assessing the investment in transmission required for
achieving 500 GW non-fossil fuel capacity in a cost-effective manner,
including use of storage elements in transmission planning."

During evidence, the Committee desired to be apprised of the details of

energy to be generated from Solar Power and the wind Power.

30.

In this regard, representative of MNRE replied as under:

“Sir, roughly 280 to 300 GW will come from Solar. The rest will come from
wind. It is a rough figure. We have reached 112 GW. Some capacity of 60 to
70 GW is under implementation. So, if you take all this into account, we have
to do about the remaining 270 to 280 GW."

thie


12

Part —Il

Observations/Recommendations

Introductory

1. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) sanctioned
(September 2009) a Research and Development (R&D) project, ‘Development
of a Megawatt-scale Solar Thermal Power Testing, Simulation and Research
Facility’ for implementation by Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. The
project was expected to facilitate development of 1 Mwe grid interactive solar
thermal power plant. National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE) was required to
enter into a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with Dakshin Haryana Bijli
Vitran Nigam (DHBVN) for sale of solar power. The project was sanctioned for
a duration of five years, i.e., up to September 2014 and was further extended
up to March 2015. An amount of %46.72 crore had been released by MNRE for
the project. The plant was formally handed over by ॥ to NISE on 7 March
2015 and had generated 9Mwh of electricity upto 31 August 2015.

The Committee are constrained to observe that the plant was operated
upto August 2015 by engaging employees on contract basis by NISE.
Thereafter, the contract was not extended for want of funds. As a result, the
plant stopped functioning from September, 2015. As of February 2016, a total
expenditure of 246.36 crore had been incurred on the project, and IIT
refunded (June 2016) the unspent balance (with interest) amounting to = 37.10
lakh to MNRE. The project completion Report submitted by lIT was reviewed
(June 2016) by the R&D Project Appraisal Committee (RDPAC) of MNRE. The
observations of the RDPAC were communicated to IIT in July 2017. However,
no further action was taken on the project and the plant has remained non-

functional.


2B

Audit findings

2. Audit findings as contained in C&AG Report on the Subject revealed
that MNRE did not take any action towards developing a dedicated workforce
needed to run the plant on a continuous basis though the National Advisory
Council constituted for the project in its meeting held in May 2011 had
discussed the need for a dedicated workforce for running the plant once it
was commissioned. Further, the plant was taken over from IIT by MNRE prior
to getting the project performance appraised by the RDPAC and without
ensuring availability of dedicated workforce for its operation. Audit further
observed that no action could be initiated for sale of 1 Mwe Solar Power
planned to be generated under the project. These shortcomings have been

discussed in detail in the succeeding Paragraphs of this Report.

Dedicated workforce for the project
3. The Committee note that although the National Advisory Council had

suggested creating a dedicated workforce at the Solar Energy Centre (SEC)
for running the plant after commissioning of the project, yet MNRE did not
take any action in this regard. Consequently, the plant could not be run. As
informed by MNRE, IIT Bombay had developed a dedicated workforce for
engagement till the date of completion of the project and the expenses
thereon were met from the project costs. After handing over to NISE on 7"
March, 2015, NISE retained the workforce and operated the plant till August
2015 by using its own budgetary resources. But, the arrangement was not
sustainable as NISE was newly formed and had very limited funds. The
Committee are astonished to note that neither the Ministry took any steps
towards knowing the fund requirements of NISE for this purpose nor did they
try to resolve the issue of funding for creating a dedicated workforce for the

project. This is indicative of lack of co-ordination between NISE and MNRE.


14
The Committee are of the view that NISE being a newly formed agency, the
MNRE should have taken adequate steps towards providing proper guidance
and direction, as well as adequate funds to NISE. The Committee further note
that NISE, in co-ordination with MNRE took initiatives towards operating the
plant by means of floating Eo! for engaging a third party in August 2015 and
in August 2018, but no potential response was received. The Committee are
of the view that it was essential on the part of MNRE to take appropriate,
adequate and timely action in this regard more so, as NISE was identified as a
potential agency for operation and maintenance of the plant for R&D purpose
following the commissioning of the project. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the MNRE update their monitoring/coordination mechanism so as to
avoid such lapses in future. The Committee also find it to be inappropriate
that while IIT, Bombay, in a written letter, had suggested that the Plant needs
to be run on a continuous basis, no positive action was taken by the
MNREINISE for ensuring continuous operation of this plant. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the reasons for not taking appropriate measures
towards developing of a dedicated workforce and recommend that henceforth
the MNRE should adopt systemic planning and exercise effective foresight in
initiating such type of projects so that similar lapses do not recur.
Suitable/clear guidelines need to be developed and prescribed for these types
of projects in future. The Committee also recommend that officials
responsible for inaction in taking policy measures need to be suitably

sensitized so that such happenings do not continue.

Taking over the plant from IIT, Bombay prior to performance appraisal erformance appraisal

4, The Committee are constrained to observe that the plant was taken
over from IIT, Bombay by MNRE before getting the project performance

appraised by the RDPAC. The MNRE, however, indicated that the project was


15
appraised by the R&D Sectoral Project Appraisal Committee on Solar Thermal
On 07-08-2013 wherein the RDPAC observed that most of the project goals
had been achieved. The reasoning given by the Ministry that the project was
ending in 2015, owing to which it was felt that obtaining approval of RDPAC
prior to the timeline is not tenable. The entire responsibility is sought to be
put on NISE on the ground that the project was completed with NISE as a
responsible consortium partner is also not totally justifiable. The manner in
which the Ministry took over the plant from IIT, Bombay without getting the
performance apprised by RDPAC and placing the responsibility of operation
and maintenance on NISE without assessing the requirements of NISE for
enabling in sustained functioning of the Plant is, in the opinion of the
Committee incorrect. The MNRE do not appear to have taken this issue
seriously till the lapse was pointed out by Audit and that too after a
significant time gap, and incurring an expenditure to the tune of € 46.36 crore.
The Committee consider it be unfortunate that no efforts were made by MNRE
for obtaining the ‘completion Report’, which is an essential requirement in the
process of handing over a project. The Committee feel that had the issue
been handled with care and foresight, the expenditure of = 46.36 crore,
incurred for completion of the project could have not become infructuous.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take appropriate measures,
at least, now, with a view to ensuring that such issues are avoided in similar

projects in future.

PPA PPA for sale of 1Mwe Solar Power under the project sale of 1Mwe Solar Power under the project

5. The Committee further find that no action could be initiated for sale of
1Mwe Solar Power planned to be generated from the plant. In this regard, the
Committee have been informed that NISE initiated actions and approached

Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam (DHBVN) for facilitating in feeding the


16
power to the grid. Although, NISE made efforts towards signing of PPA for
Power evacuation with Haryana Power Purchase Centre at the rate of = 6.44
per KWh as. per the provision made for Solar Photovoltaic power in April
2015, no formal response was received. Further, as apprised by the MNRE,
while NISE was operating the plant from March, 2015 to August, 2015, it was
found that the power output was much lower than the designated value of
41.0Mwe and operating the plant was uneconomical. Consequently, the plant
became non-operational from 4°* September 2015 and no further action was
initiated by NISE for signing of PPA with Haryana Power Purchase Centre.
During the course of evidence, the representative of MNRE informed the
Committee that the project was mainly R&D oriented, power generation was
not the main objective of this project, and it was not commercially viable for
being run for a long time. The Committee note in this regard that when the
decision was taken at first to build this project, the basic objective stated was
to generate 1Mwe solar power. It was only after the project proved to be
commercially unviable that it has been formed as a R&D _ project. The
Committee feel that if the plan was to conceive the plant as only R&D
oriented, the MNRE should have satisfied the audit about the objectives of the
plant so that the Audit would have made a suitable Observation and the
Committee would not have been seized of the matter. A representative of
MNRE too accepted and stated during evidence that if the sanction given was
for generating 1 MW electric power, it should have been generated, atleast for
a couple of years. The Committee, recommend in this regard that steps
should be taken to revive the plant as a significant amount of tax payer’s
money i.e. 246.36 crore has been invested in implementing the project, which
remained wasted as there is no generation of energy. The Committee further

desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of improving the


17
technology of this plant so that it can contribute towards strengthening solar

power generation.

Delay in making the Solar Thermal Power Plant functional in making the Solar Thermal Power Plant functional

6. There was long delay of eight years (September 2009 to 201 7) in making
the Solar Thermal Power Plant functional. From the information furnished by
MNRE, the Committee note that following the sanction on 77 September,
2009, the project was in the execution phase till September, 2014, which was
further extended till 6 March, 2015.

The information furnished by the Ministry is also silent on the reasons
for delay of three years in operationalizing this Solar Thermal Power Plant
(STPP), as well as escalation in cost of plant, ie, from € 41.17 crore
sanctioned in 2009 to 46.72 crore till 2015. Lack of foresight and proper
planning seem to be the reasons behind the delay in making the plant
functional and the consequent loss of expenditure incurred thereon. The
Committee, therefore, emphasise that, henceforth, the MNRE should follow a
systemic planning by taking into consideration all variables like availability of
resources, credibility of implementing agency based on past performance,
time frame for completion of projects, maintenance and financial viability of
the project etc. at the planning stage of such type of projects so as to avoid

delay in completing/execution of the projects in future.

Action initiated by MNRE/NISE/IIT, Bombay to make the plant functional initiated by MNRE/NISE/IIT, Bombay to make the plant functional

7. The Committee note that during 2015 to 2017, the plant was non-
operational on account of administrative, financial and technical reasons. The
facility was used for training and demonstration purpose since its
commissioning. The Committee are constrained to observe that though NISE
had taken several steps viz. engaging a team to revive the plant, making the

collectors to track the sun manually, approaching the MNRE for seeking


18
funds, facilitating a study which was conducted through consultants
appointed by the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation
(UNIDO) during January to March 2019 for assessing the technical problems
associated with solar field power block, other major accessories and software
for reviving the operation of the plant, it could not be made functional. The
Committee have also been apprised by the MNRE that a detailed Report titled
‘Refurbishment of the 1.0Mwe Concentrating Solar Power Plant at the NISE’
was prepared and presented to MNRE in the last week of March, 2019, which
detailed the various components, parts/systems to be
overhauled/repaired/replaced along with the financial implication on account
of making the plant operational. Further, the Governing Council of NISE in the
87 Meeting held on 20-06-2019, recommended that efforts should be made to
make the plant functional preferably on economical basis for recovering the
cost of O&M through electricity generation from the project. The Committee
are concerned to note in this regard that no serious interest seems to have
been taken for making the plant functional as recommended by the
Governing council of NISE. The Committee recommend that the MNRE should
take necessary measures towards revamping the plant and making it

functional.

Usage of Plant for training purposes

8. The Committee note that the Solar Thermal Power Project in its present
condition is being utilized for demonstration and training purpose for the
National and International training programmes being organised by NISE,
besides having visitors and students to showcase PTC and LFR based solar
thermal power plant technology. The Committee have been informed that till
2019-20, NISE organised 134 National and 36 international training

programmes in the campus in which the facility was utilized for training and


19
demonstration purposes. The Committee are of the view that it may not be
appropriate to see any R&D Project in isolated or ‘non-functional state’. The
Committee also wish to point out in this regard that ₹ै 46.36 crore were spent
on this single project which had not lead to any scientific R&D nor
contributed to energy generation. Further, the Ministry have not apprised the
Committee about the percentage of R&D Budget sanctioned for this Purpose
and actual R&D expenditure incurred thereon. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the number of research Projects sanctioned till date; expenditure

incurred thereon; output there from; and institutions involved therein.

Steps taken for Revival of Plant by IIT Jodhpur taken for Revival of Plant by IIT Jodhpur

9. During the oral evidence of the representatives of MNRE on the
subject, the Committee have been informed that IIT Jodhpur has expressed
interest in the revival of this plant. IIT Jodhpur intend to constitute a
consortium for producing 1 Megawatt of power by way of joining the facility
of this Solar Thermal Power Plant and a Photo Voltaic Power Plant and enter
into a PPA with an Electricity purchasing company in Jodhpur, at a tariff of
%8/kWh. While taking note of the interest towards operationalising the plant,
the Committee would also like to be informed about the progress made in this
regard and the current status of this project. The Committee wish to be
apprised of the commercial viability of this arrangement and the possibility of

reviving and reusing the plant, as a whole.

Steps taken towards achieving the target of 500 GW eneray by 2030 taken towards achieving the target of 500 GW energy by 2030

10. As regards Power generation, the goal laid down is for achieving 500
GW energy capacity from non-fossil fuel sources by 2030. In connection with

preparedness for achieving this Goal, several steps are stated to have been


20
initiated by the MNRE. The Committee have also been apprised during
evidence that MNRE have already commissioned 57 GW of solar energy and
60 GW of generation capacity is in the pipeline. The Committee have further
been informed that roughly 280 to 300 GW of power will come from solar
sources and the rest from wind energy. Accordingly, MNRE have to achieve
the remaining 270 to 280 GW in the next seven years. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the strategy formulated by MNRE towards achieving
this target, action taken thereon and present status of power generation by

means of both solar and wind energy till date.

Conclusion

41. As brought out in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee wish to
once again highlight the fact that MNRE had not taken any steps on the
recommendations of National Advisory Council (May 2011), which suggested
that a dedicated workforce be developed under SEC for running the solar
power plant. Due to non-deployment of a dedicated workforce, the plant
became non-operational from 4** September, 2015. The Solar Thermal Power
Plant was taken over from IIT, Bombay by MNREINISE before getting the
project performance appraised by the RDPAC. Furthermore, the MNRE could
not ensure proper follow up with IIT, Bombay to sustain the project in
operational condition. The MNRE also did not co-ordinate with NISE to
resolve the issue of funding, to undertake future high potential research
works under this developed facility. Further, no action was taken by NISE
with Haryana Power Purchase Centre after April, 2015 for sale of 1Mwe Power
generated from this plant. MNRE did not provide any substantial future
alternatives to recover the cost of plant, except for utilizing the plant for
training and demonstration purposes. From this, the Committee cannot help

concluding that this project led to an infructuous expenditure of % 46.36 crore


21
of Public money. The Committee are of the view that had the feasibility of the
project been evaluated objectively and comprehensively, the loss could have
been avoided. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that at least now,
MNRE should explore the possibility of reviving the plant at the earliest and
make it functional. The Committee also take note of the submission made as
per which by way of studying the technology of this plant, three other
projects of similar kind (two in Rajasthan and one in Andhra Pradesh) have
been set up and are running successfully. The Committee are, therefore, of
the view that if the technology adopted could inspire other private
companies, revival of this plant remains a distinct possibility. The Committee,
therefore, urge that instead of using this plant as a mere demonstration
project for R&D, efforts need to be made for studying the technology used in
the other plants of similar nature that are being run successfully so as to

enable in reviving the plant.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
03 April, 2023_ Chairperson,

13 “Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

hme