33

KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN AND GUJARAT
VIDYAPITH

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty Second Report
(167 Lok Sabha)]

Ministry of Education
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2241

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN AND

GUJARAT VIDYAPITH

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty Second Report
(167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ys \s3\2)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS |
COMMITTEE (2020-21)
INTRODUCTION ..................... ७ हत््ज्ज coneusneeeeeeeesunenneeees (iv)
CHAPTER | Report ooo... cee cecceeeeeeeeeeeetnteeeseeaeeeeeeeeeees
CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have been

accepted by the Government ...............-...------
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the

Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the

replies received from the Government ................
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which replies of the Government have not been

accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration .... we
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim

18185 ..................... cece e eee eee seen eee ser eens

APPENDICES
|| Minutes of the 117 Sitting of the Public Accounts

Committee (2020-21) held on 10" March, 2021.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri 1. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shree Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

४8% ९? 73 9 ७७ #+ २ (२

aoe
ARGH = S

RAJYA SABHA

6. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Shri Naresh Gujral

8. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
19. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. 0. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri. S. R. Mishra - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director
4. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

*Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021.

(_ iw)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty-third Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Gujarat Vidyapith’ relating to the
Ministry of Education.

2. The One Hundred and Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabhaj/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 187 December, 2018. Action Taken Replies of the Government to
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on
26.09.2019, 06.12.2019, 08.01.2020 and 27.10.2020. The Committee considered the
draft Report on the subject and adopted the Report at their Sitting held on 107" March,
2021. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-l.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty-second
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
\9 30 March, 2021 Chairperson,
Ny Phaiguna, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

ty


CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) and Gujarat Vidyapith (GVP)"relating to Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD).
2. The One Hundred and Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was
presented to the Parliament 0०1 18.12.2018.lt contained _— twelve
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the
Ministry of Human Resource Development in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorised as follows:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government
Para Nos.1 -8, 10-12.
Total:11
Chapter Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
NIL
Total:Nil
Chapter III
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
Para No. : 9
Total:01
: Chapter IV
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies

NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that KVS

incurred expenditure on the Project ‘Kendriya Vidyalayas’ (KVs) in violation of
prescribed conditions and as on 31 March 2016, Rs.59.67 crore were due from 81
Project KVs of which 34 had been closed, rendering the possibility of recovery as
remote.


2

The Committee found that four institutes under the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee; Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University, Lucknow, Indian Institute of Management, Ranchi and Indian Institute of
Technology, Patna) and one institute under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation (Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata) had made payment of service tax
amounting to Rs.12.42 crore on the outsourced services, although these services were
exempted from payment of such tax. The Committee also observed that Post Based
Rosters as per Gol norms were not being maintained for the teaching and the non-
teaching staff and appointments in teaching and non-teaching posts were made in
contravention of UGC/Gol instructions which resulted in overpayment of Rs.2.29 crore.
4. The Committee had recommended various measures to be undertaken by
Ministry of Human Resource Development, KVS and Gujarat Vidyapith such as
recovery of dues by KVS from various project authorities, amending/ adding provisions
in Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) of KVS with Project Authorities to strengthen
KVS; setting up of a cell to coordinate with the Ministry of Finance and organizations
under the Ministry for seeking tax related clarifications; regular preparation of Post
Based Rosters in GVP,theneed to develop a mechanism to monitor all institutes under
its aegis by the MHRD on a regular basis and review of all the organizations accredited
by NAAC/UGC to verify that their functioning, appointments and all other aspects are in
order etc.

5. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on _ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and
Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will now deal
with the Action Taken by the Government on 50686 of _ their
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which merit comments.

6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Human Resource Development to
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations
contained in Chapter Iwithin six months of the presentation of the Report to the
House.

Recommendation at Para No. 2- KVS-Recovery of dues


3

7. The Committee had noted that Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS), an
autonomous body under Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD)
establishes and manages Kendriya Vidyalayas (KV) and that this scheme of KV had
also been extended to the children of the employees of Public Sector Undertakings
(PSUs)/nstitute of Higher Learning (IHL) owned by Government of India (Gol), at their
request (i.e. PSU and IHL), on the condition that all recurring and non-recurring
expenditure on running these Vidyalayas would be provided by the sponsoring
agencies. The sponsoring authorities of some existing/functioning and closed Project
Vidyalayas defaulted in payment of dues resulting in recoverable amount of RsS.24.57
crore in the year 2003. The Committee had further noted that where the sponsoring
authority defaulted in making the required payments, KVS diverted the Government
grants to meet the expenditure towards pay & allowance of the staff and other recurring
and non-recurring expenditure. The Committee were disappointed to note that despite
C&AG’s Audit Report No. 4 of 2004 and subsequently the Committee’s 46” Report in
2006-07 recommending that the matter may be resolved early by MHRD in coordination
with other Departments of GOI with a view to recover the amount due to KVS, the
recoverable amount increased to Rs.58.60 crore as on 30.09.2018. The Committee
were of the opinion that along with the key concern of recovery of dues which have
been long pending, the matter needed to be looked at in the larger perspective of the
importance of Project Kendriya Vidyalayas in providing education to children of PSU
employees apart from transferable employees of the Government of India as well as
floating population and others including those living in remote and undeveloped
locations of the country. The Committee had felt that there are certain inter-linked
issues such as amending the provisions of MoU entered into by KVS with the Project
Authorities, running of KVs in the event of request for closure/closure by Project
Authorities etc. which also need to be addressed to prevent further instances of default
by project authorities.

Accordingly, while acknowledging the various steps taken by MHRD to recover the
amount due such as meeting the representatives of various ministries whose PSUs
sponsored KVs, discussion with the Regional Offices, interaction at personal level by
officials of KVS with the concerned Project Authority etc., the Committee had
recommended that for those Project KVs, functioning and closed, with whom KVS


4

does/did not have an Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), the Administrative
Ministry of the Project Authority may be asked by the MHRD to either pay the amount
due to KVS or the sponsoring authority may be asked to transfer the infrastructural
assets where the KV is/was running i.e. the land, the building and all the property
contained therein to allow KVS to run the school in the larger interest so that KVS does
not have to spend large amount of money on the same. Further, those sponsoring
authorities that the KVS had an MOU with, while the KVS/MHRD may in the first
instance pursue the steps outlined above, if the same do not yield any result, Clause 14
of the MOU which provided for referring the matter to an arbitrator may be resorted to.

8. The Ministry of Human Resource Development in the Action Taken Notes have

submitted as under:
1. “Regarding transfer of infrastructural assets of functional KVs.

(i) D.O. letters have been issued by the MHRD conveying the
recommendations of PAC and inter-alia requesting therein to pay the
amount due to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS).

2. Regarding invoking of Clause 14 of Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU).

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has MoU with the sponsoring authorities of
all 22 KVs opened in project sector/IHL after BoG meeting dated
20.6.2007. Out of these 22 KVs, Central University of Hyderabad is
defaulting in release of KVS dues. As such, the provision of Clause 14 of
MoU to settle the issue through arbitration shall be resorted to if, the dues
are not cleared by the Central University of Hyderabad even after taking
up the issue by Ministry of Human Resource and Development (MHRD).

3. Regarding transfer of Infrastructural Assets of closed Project KVs,

(i) It is stated that the Kendriya Vidyalaya under project sector is opened on the
request of the concerned project sponsoring authority committing thereby the
recurring and non recurring expenditure of the KV shall be borne by the
sponsoring authority. Some of the project KVs were closed years back and no
reference or request for opening or running those project KVs has been
received by KVS till now from the side of Sponsoring Authorities of those
project KVs. Raising the issue of transfer of land and infrastructure at this
stage would have /entail many difficulties with respect to the present status of
land & building.


(ii) Further, re-opening of such schools involves recurring and non recurring
expenditure and being a policy matter, KVS will take up the matter in BoG
meeting for deliberation.

4. Regarding recovery of dues, MHRD/KVS has taken various steps as
detailed below:-

(a) The Secretary, School Education & Literacy (SE&L), MHRD conducted a
meeting on 05.04.2017 with the representatives of various Administrative
Ministries of respective PSUs.

(b) Consequently, KVS (HQ) organised meetings with the representatives of
Sponsoring Projects on four different dates namely 18.05.2017, 19.05.2017,
22.05.2017 & 24.05.2017.

(c) KVS has deliberated the issue of outstanding dues in the annual Deputy
Commissioners’ Conference of KVS held in July, 2017 and July, 2018 with
the directions that they should personally interact with the concerned Project
Authority for the immediate recovery of overdue amount after reconciliation
and confirmations of dues.

(d) In addition to regular correspondence, DO letters dated 21.12.2017,
17.09.2018, 4.02.2019 have also been issued by KVS to the Chairman/
Managing Director of defaulting Project Authorities.

(e) Further, D.O. letters dated 14.5.2019 have been issued by the MHRD to
Administrative Ministry of the Project Authorities requesting therein to pay
the amounts due to KVS.

(f) KVS has informed that after September, 2017, no funds have been
diverted from Govt. Grants for Kendriya Vidyalayas of defaulting Project
Authorities. However, in order to mitigate the suffering of KV staff due to
non-payment of salaries by the project authorities of three project KVs
namely, HPCL Jagiroad, HPCL Panchgram and CCl Bokajan, KVS has
released an amount of Rs. 4.80 Crore out of User Charges, on loan basis
with the approval of BoG, KVS.

5. KVS has informed that as on 31.01.2019, an amount of Rs 35.72 Crore is
recoverable from the sponsoring authorities of 21 operating project
Kendriya Vidyalayas and Rs 15.04 Crore from project authorities of 34
closed Project Kendriya Vidyalayas. In addition, a Loan of Rs. 4.80 Crore
given by KVS out of its user charges, with the approval of BoG, KVS, is
outstanding against the sponsoring authorities of three Project KVs
namely, HPCL Jagiroad, HPCL Panchgram and CCI Bokajan. Out of dues
of Rs.35.72 Crore, an amount of Rs. 19.41 Crore is recoverable towards
outstanding dues from the project authorities of above said 03 project
Kendriya Vidyalayas. These sponsoring authorities have shown their


6

inability to clear outstanding dues and requested KVS for conversion in
Civil Sector KVs.

9. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-

“Further progress in respect of following may be furnished to PAC:

a) Recovery of dues of Rs.35.72 crore from the sponsoring authorities of
21 operating project KVs which includes an amount of Rs.19.41 crore
recoverable from the project authorities of 03 project KVs wherein
sponsoring authorities have shown their inability to clear outstanding dues
and requested KVS for conversion in Civil Sector KVs;”

10. 116 Ministry of Human Resource Development in their Action Taken Notes have

further submitted as under:

“Updated status

KVS has informed that as on 31.7.19 an amount of Rs.41.33 crore is recoverable
from Sponsoring authorities of 24 operating project KVs, this includes Rs. 25.66
Crore recoverable from the project authorities of 3 Project KVs namely HPC Jagi
Road, HPC Panchgram & CCI Bokajan.

Further, National Company Law Tribunal has ordered the liquidation of M/s
HPC Ltd. on 02.05.2019. M/S Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited is
sponsoring authority of Kendriya Vidyalaya Jagi Raod & Panchgram. KVS
has already submitted the claim to the appointed liquidator Shri Kuldeep
Verma Insolvency Professional on 20.08.2019.

The KVS has submitted a proposal for conversion of three Project Kendriya
Vidyalaya viz. HPC Jagi Road, HPC Panchgram & CCI Bokajan into Civil
Sector KVS. However, Project KVS function as per the terms of the
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) entered into between KVS and the
Public Sector Understanding (PSU) concerned. Civil Sector KVs are opened
on the basis of proposals received from State Governments/Sponsoring
Authorities offering land/temporary accommodation as per the norms of KVS
and subject to the recommendation of the “Challenge method” Committee.
There is no provision for conversion of a Project Sector KV into a Civil Sector
KV as the latter category of KVS are opened with the approval of CCEA,
based on the recommendations of Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC)/Standing Finance Committee (SFC) as the case may be.

KVS has informed that the matter of conversion of the three Kendriya
Vidyalaya viz. HPC Jagi Road, HPC Panchgram & CCI Bokajan was taken
up with the State Government concerned. However, proposal from the State


11.

7

Government for opening of Civil Sector KVs in place of these three project
KVs is still awaited.

(b) Recovery of dues of Rs. 15.00 crore from project authorities
of 34 closed Project Kendriya Vidyalayas.

Updated status:

KVS has vide letter dated 30.05.2019 requested the Project Authorities of
closed Project KVs for immediate settlement of outstanding dues. As per the
latest information received from KVS on 15.10.2019, the total outstanding
dues from the project authorities of 34 closed project KVs still stands at Rs.
15.04 crore.

(c) | Recovery of due from Central University of Hyderabad

Updated status

As on 31-07-2019 as amount of Rs.1,85,47,528/- is recoverable from the
Central University of Hyderabad. The project authority has requested to
Ministry of HRD to waive the Administrative Overhead Charges. The
outstanding amount of Rs.1,85,47,528 includes Rs.1,02,90,000/-towards
Administrative Overhead Charges (2016-17 to 2018-19), for the services
rendered by KVS such as Administrative control, Recruitment, Posting,
Training of staff, various centralised activities etc.

As per codal provisions, the AOC amount cannot be waived off and hence
the same has already been intimated to University of Hyderabad vide this
office letter dated 16.08.2019. Separately, the Central University Division of
MHRD has also informed that the University of Hyderabad may clear the
outstanding dues of KVS from their own resources as the project KV was
started without any prior approval of University Grants Commission and there
is already a CAG para on this issue.

(d) Decision taken by BoG on reopening of closed schools.

Updated status

Re-opening of closed school is a policy matter involving recurring and non-
recurring expenditure incurred by KVS. Accordingly, KVS proposes to take up
the matter in the next BoG for deliberation and decision.

KVS has been advised to place the matter before the BoG at the earliest
opportunity.”

Taking into account the fact that the dues payable for running Project KVs

were pending since 2003, the Committee had recommended that for such Project
KVs, functioning or closed, with whom KVS did not have a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU), the Administrative Ministry of the Project Authority may be


8

asked by the MHRD to either pay the amount due to KVS; or the sponsoring
authority may be asked to transfer the infrastructural assets where the KV is/was
running i.e. the land, building and all other property within the premises so as to
allow KVS to run the schools. The Committee had also recommended that for
such sponsoring authorities with whom the KVS had an MOU, while the
KVS/MHRD, may in the first instance, pursue the steps as outlined above, and if
the same do not yield result, Clause 14 of the MOU which provides for referring
the matter to an Arbitrator may be resorted to.

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that as on 31.7.19 an
amount of Rs.41.33 crore was recoverable from Sponsoring authorities of 24
operating project KVs, and as on 15.10.2019, the total outstanding dues from
the project authorities of 34 closed project KVs stood at Rs.15.04 crore. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the last communication by
the MHRD conveying the recommendations of PAC, and inter-alia asking for
paying the amount due to KVS was sent on 14.5.2019. Also, the Project
Authorities of closed Project KVs were asked vide communication dated
30.05.2019 to immediately settle the outstanding dues. The Committee desire
that the Ministry/KVS follow up the issue so as to enable early settlement of the
dues. The Committee also desire that the Department of School Education &
Literacy(SE&L), MHRD may convene a meeting of the representatives of various
Administrative Ministries of respective PSUs, as was done in 2017, for settling the
dues. The Committee reiterate that for such sponsoring authorities that the
KVS has entered into an MOU with, while the KVS/MHRD may, in the first
instance, pursue the steps as outlined above, if the same do not yield any
result, Clause 14 of the MOU which provides for referring the matter to an
Arbitrator may be resorted to.

Further, the Committee note that after September, 2017, no funds have
been diverted from Government Grants for Kendriya Vidyalayas of defaulting
Project Authorities. However, in order to mitigate the suffering of KV staff due
to non-payment of salaries by the authorities concerned in respect of the three
project KVs, namely HPC Jagi Road, HPC Panchgram & CCI Bokajan, KVS has
released an amount of Rs.4.80 Crore out of User Charges, on loan basis with
the approval of BoG, KVS. The Committee note that the sponsoring
authorities of these three KVs have shown their inability to clear the
outstanding dues and requested for their conversion as Civil Sector KVs. As
per the reply of the Ministry, the matter of conversion of the above three KVs
was taken up with the State Government(s) concerned. However, the proposal
from the State Government(s) for opening of Civil Sector KVs in place of
these three project KVs was still awaited. The Committee desire that other
corporate entities in the area may also be approached for taking over the
above said three KVs so that the children studying in these three KVs are not
deprived of continuing with their education. The Committee also desire to be


9

apprised whether MoUs were signed with the project authorities in these three
cases and the respective Ministries had conveyed their concurrence for opening
of these three KVs.

The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that the re-
opening of closed schools is a policy matter involving recurring and non-
recurring expenditure incurred by KVS. Accordingly, KVS has proposed to
take up the matter in the next BoG for deliberation and decision. The
Committee reiterate that the importance of Project Kendriya Vidyalayas in
providing education to children of PSU employees apart from transferable
employees of the Government of India as well as floating population and others
including those living in remote and undeveloped locations of the country cannot
be downplayed. They, therefore, desire that the MHRDMKVS may firstly make an
assessment of the number of children who have lost out on quality school
education due to closure of the KVs in their area and if there are sufficient
number of children, KVS may approach other corporate entities/ Ministries/ other
sponsoring authorities/ MHRD/ KVS to sponsor KVs in these areas and place a
comprehensive proposal for re-opening of these schools before the BoG for
consideration. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress in the matter
at the earliest. The Committee, in this regard cannot also help expressing their
disappointment on the fact that the matter of recovery of dues has been pending
for almost 2 decades, and once again urge upon the Ministry to deliberate and
decide on the way forward with a view to ensuring that the dues are settled
urgently.

Recommendation at Para No. 3- MoU Provisions

12. The Committee note that KVS placed the matter of default by some project
sponsoring authorities in payment of KVS dues before the Board of Governors (BOG),
KVS in its 77 meeting held on 20.06.2007. BOG, KVS decided signing of MOU with the
Sponsoring project Authorities for Kendriya Vidyalayas under project sector and the
same is being signed in respect of all new project sector KVs opened after 2007. The
Committee also note that the BOG, KVS in its 79" meeting on 26.06.2008, approved
the inclusion of a clause “The concerned Ministry, through its Secretary shall also
convey their concurrence to the MOU through a separate letter’ and that KVS is taking
the concurrence in all cases before opening of new Project Sector KVs since then. The
Committee are of the view that it is imperative to amend/add provisions in MoUs of KVS
with Project Authorities to strengthen KVS in case of default by the latter. The
Committee recommend that the MHRD/KVS may consider adding a clause in the MOU
to provide for transfer of infrastructural assets to the KVS in case of repeated non-


10

payment of dues to KVS or closure of KV by Project Authority. Further, while noting that
KVS has drawn certain amendments/parameters in the existing norms prescribed for
opening of new Project KVS such as a tripartite MOU involving the concerned
Administrative Ministry which would stand as a financial guarantor to make payment of
dues to KVS in the event of default by the Project Authorities for approval by the BOG,
the Committee desire that the same may be done at the earliest and would like to be
apprised of the status in this regard.

The Committee note that KVS has emphasized on the issue of opening of escrow
account by the Project Authorities who have opened Project KVs after the decision of
BOG, KVS dated 20.06.2007 and that the Regional Offices have been directed to look
into the issue of opening of the same to ensure compliance immediately. The
Committee are surprised that the compliance of the said provision was not monitored by
KVS earlier and enjoin upon the KVS to ensure opening of the escrow accounts by all
Project KVs and also apprise the Committee of the status thereof. The Committee
further urge the MHRD/KVS to direct the existing Project KVs to also open the said
accounts.

13. 116 Ministry of Human Resource Development in their Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:

1. “Inclusion of Clause in MoU regarding transfer of infrastructural assets to KVS.
As directed by PAC, for inclusion of a clause in MoU regarding transfer of
infrastructural assets to KVS, in case of repeated non-payment of dues to
KVS or closure of KV by Project Authorities, KVS has stated that taking over
the infrastructural assets of a project KV is a policy matter. Hence, KVS will
take up the matter in Finance Committee/ 805 meeting for further
deliberation.

2. Regarding tripartite agreement in MoU.

As reiterated by PAC regarding entering into tripartite, KVS has informed that
the tripartite agreement as one of the norms for opening of project KV shall be
placed before BoG, KVS for decision.

3. Opening of Escrow Account in all existing project KVs.

(i) For opening of Escrow Account by the existing project Kendriya Vidyalayas,
KVS has issued instructions to all the Deputy Commissioners of the Regional
Offices vide letter dated 28.12.2018. KVS has informed that the following
project Kendriya Vidyalayas have opened the Escrow Accounts:-

Si. KV Project Authorit



a1

No.

1 Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Reserve Bank of
Private Limited India
BRBNMPL)Mysore

2 HGMCL (Hutti Gold Mines Company Ltd ) Hutti Gold Mines
Hutti Company

Ltd

3 NHDC Narmada Nagar NHPC Ltd

4 No1 Kalpakkam Deptt of Atomic
Energ

5 No2 Kalpakkam Deptt of Atomic
Energ

|. | CUTIN Thiruvarur Central University
of
TamilNaidu

7 AAI! Rangpuri Airport Authority of
India

| | SPG Dwarka Special Protection
Group

po NTPC Kayamkulam National Thermal
Power
Corporation

10 No1 CPCRI Kasargod CPCRI

11 Amarkantak Indira Gandhi
National
Tribal
Universit

12 Sagar No 4 Central University

Dr

HarsinghGo
urVishwa
Vidyalaya

13 IIT Jodhpur Indian Institute of
Technolog

14 Bandarsindri Central University

of Rajasthan

15 RahyaSchunani Central University

of Jammu

16 Wardha Mahatama Gandhi

Antarrashtriy
a Hindi
Vishwavidyal
aya Gandhi
Hills,

17 Nabinagar Power Generating Company NPGCL Nabinagar
Limited (NPGC)Nabinagar Power

Generating

Compan’



12

Limited

18 NIT Silchar National Institute of
Technolog

19 Assam Universit Assam Universit

20 MU Aizwal Mizoram Universit

21 ONGC Baroda ONGC.

22 SAC Ahmadabad Spece Application
Centre

23 ONGC Surat ONGC

24 ONGC Mehsana ONGC

25 ONGC Chandkheda ONGC

26 ONGC Ankleshwar ONGC

27 Kribhco Surat Kribhco

28 IFFCO Gandhidham IFFCO

29 FRI Dehradun FRI

30 BHEL Haridwar BHEL

31 KV No.2 Survey of India Survey of Inda

32 NHPC Banbasa NHPC

33 ONGC Dehradun ONGC

(ii)Since, all the Project Kendriya Vidyalayas could not open the Escrow
Accounts, KVS has again directed all the Deputy Commissioners vide office
letter dated 31.01.2019 to issue necessary directions to remaining project
Vidyalayas for opening of Escrow Accounts.

(iii) KVS has further informed that although Escrow Account has been opened by
some of the project Kendriya Vidyalayas, required funds have not been
transferred into these accounts by the project authorities. The matter has
been pursued further by KVS and instructions have been issued to the
Deputy Commissioners vide letter dated 01.02.2019 and 11.03.2019.

14. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments. The same along
with further action taken by the Ministry is as under:-

Further progress may be intimated to PAC in respect of the following:

(a)Taking over the infrastructural assets of a project KV in case of repeated non-
payment of dues to KVS or closure of KV by Project Authorities:

Updated status:
Since, the taking over of the infrastructural assets of a Project KV is a policy

matter, KVS vide email dated 15.10.2019 has informed that it will place the
matter in the next Finance Committee and BoG meetings for further deliberation
and decision.

KVS has been advised to place the matter before the BoG at the earliest
opportunity.


15.

13

(b)Entering into the tripartite agreement as one of the norms for opening of
project KV

Updated Status:
KVS vide email dated 15.10.2019 has informed that the tripartite agreement is

one of the norms for opening of new project Kendriya Vidyalaya, hence it shall be
placed before next BoG meeting for decision.

KVS has been advised to place the matter before the BoG at the earliest
opportunity.

(c) Opening of Escrow Accounts by remaining project Vidyalayas and transfer of
funds therein.

Updated Status:

In addition to 33 KVs, intimated earlier, following 6 KVs also have opened the
Escrow Account:

NHPC Dehradun
CTPP Chhabra
NIT Agartala
STPS Suratgarh
Avikanagar
ONGC Cambay

9? ० के ५० ०-३

Although Escrow account has been opened by the above said project KVs,
required fund has not been transferred by the project authorities in Escrow
Account except Project Authorities of 03 KVs viz. BRBNMPL, Mysuru, NPGC
Nabinagar, KV, Hutti.

It has been intimated by some of the project authorities that they are not
defaulting in release of funds hence they should be allowed not to open the
Escrow account and deposit the funds in Escrow account. _ In this connection, it
is pertinent to mention that a good number of project authorities have deposited
the funds in advance to KVS.

However, once again instructions have been issued to all the Deputy
Commissioners of Regional Offices vide letter dt. 13.09.2019 for opening of
escrow account and transfer of funds in escrow account.

The Committee had recommended that the MHRD/KVS may consider

adding a clause in the MOU providing for transfer of infrastructural assets to the
KVS in case of repeated non-payment of dues or closure of a KV by the Project
Authority. The Committee had also desired that the amendments to the existing
stipulations for opening new Project KVS, such as entering into a tripartite MOU
involving the Administrative Ministry concerned as well, which would stand as a
financial guarantor for making payments to KVS in the event of default by the
Project Authorities be placed before the BOG at the earliest. The Committee, in
this regard, note with disappointment that KVS is yet to place the issue of adding


14

the appropriate clauses in the MOUs before the BOG and therefore, enjoin upon
the KVS to do the same urgently.

Further, the Committee had desired that MHRD/KVS may direct the new and
existing project KVs to open Escrow Accounts to strengthen the hands of KVS in
the event of default. The Committee note that although Escrow accounts have
been opened by project KVs, except for the Project Authorities of 03 KVs viz.
BRBNMPL, Mysuru, NPGC Nabinagar, KV, Hutti, the required funds have not been
transferred by the project authorities to the Escrow Accounts. The Committee
express the opinion that maintenance of Escrow Accounts safeguards the
interest of KVS by ensuring adherence to financial obligations on the part of the
depositors. The Committee desire that the KVS may pursue the matter and ensure
that the required amounts are deposited in the Escrow Accounts opened by the
project authorities.

Recommendation at Para No.5- Differential Fee structure in Project KVs

16. The Committee note that the KVS has authorized project authorities to
prescribe/charge a differential fee structure vis-a-vis civil sector KVs to enable them to
generate additional resources for meeting their liabilities towards KVS. The Committee
are of the opinion that this goes against the principle of parity and would not be fair for
children of local inhabitants studying in the school who would be paying higher fees
solely for the purpose of meeting the liability towards KVS by the Project Authority and
recommend that while KVS as a whole may revise its fee structure, differential fees may
be permitted only after adequate justification.

17. The Ministry of Human Resource Development in their Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:
“While reviewing the fee structure, the recommendations of the Committee will
be placed before BoG, KVS.”

18. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:-
“Further progress may be intimated to PAC.

19. | The Ministry of Human Resource Development in the Action Taken Notes have
further submitted as under:
“The proposal for revision of fees structure of Govt. Financed KVs is under
submission. Once the proposal is approved, the recommendation of committee
regarding adoption of same fee structure in project KendriyaVidyalayas will also
be deliberated in the next Finance Committee Meeting/BoG, KVS, for its
decision.


15

However, KVS has been advised to place the matter before the BoG at the
earliest opportunity.’

20. Noting that KVS had authorized the project authorities to prescribe/charge
a differential fee structure vis-a-vis civil sector KVs to enable them to generate
additional resources for meeting their liabilities towards KVS, the Committee had
recommended that while revision of fees for the KVs as a whole could be made,
differential fee structure may be permitted only if there was adequate justification.
The Committee, in this regard, note from the reply of the Ministry that once the
proposal for revision of the fee structure of govt. financed KVs is approved, the
recommendation of the Committee expressing preference for maintaining a
uniform fee structure for all Kendriya Vidyalayas will also be deliberated in the
next Finance Committee Meeting/BoG, KVS, for taking a decision thereon. The
Committee reiterate their recommendation that differential fee structure between
civil sector KVs and Project KVs may be permitted only with adequate
justification and prior consent and approval of KVS. As emphasised upon by the
Committee, the parents of the children studying in Project KVs should not, in any
way be over-burdened with the fee structure and the Project Authorities should
be in a position to garner resources for meeting the liabilities. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the decision taken in this regard.

Irregularities of Appointments etc. in Gujarat Vidyapith
Recommendation at Para No.9- Monitoring by Ministry and UGC

21. | The Committee had noted that in respect of both the issues of non- preparation
and filling up of posts as per Post Based Reservation (PBR) roster and irregularities in
appointments and pay scales given for various posts, on the directions of MHRD, UGC
had constituted a Committee to look into these affairs. Based on its report, Gujarat
Vidyapith was directed to take immediate corrective action including administrative
action against the erring officials. The Committee had observed that the Ministry had
asked the UGC to direct the Institute to terminate all illegal appointments.The
Committee had observed that UGC would recover the money spent on payment of
salary to these illegal appointments by reducing future grants to Gujarat Vidyapith from
next year. In this regard, the Committee had been of the opinion that if a strong system
of internal audit had been in place, irregularities of such kind would not have taken
place. While acknowledging the steps taken by MHRD/GVP to strengthen the internal
audit system, the Committee had felt that the MHRD needed to develop a mechanism to
monitor all institutes under its aegis on a regular basis so that such instances do not


16

recur.

22, The Ministry of Human Resource Development in their Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:

“As per the information received from UGC, GVP has informed that the services
of five employees, who were found to have been recruited in violation of extant
Government of India rules, have since been discontinued. All the five employees
have filed the Special Civil Application (SCA) in the Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat
against the decision of GVP and got the stay orders for further recoveries.
However, the final verdict of the Court is still awaited. The concerned advocate
has been asked by Gujarat Vidyapith to initiate the process for speedy disposal
of the ongoing legal cases in the Hon’ble high Court of Gujarat. Further, GVP has
already appointed a Committee of External Experts in Administration (CEEA) to
look into the details of all the appointment existing as on 317 March, 2018, to
bring out the irregularities and also to identify the officials responsible for the
involvement in such irregularities and also to fix the responsibility. As per the
comments received from GVP, the Board of Management in its meeting held on
02.03.2019 has extended the period for submission of the final report upto
30.06.2019. Moreover, UGC has already deducted Rs. 2.29 Crores from the
maintenance grants of GVP on account of irregular payments made by GVP for
illegal appointments.”

23. The Committee had desired that the MHRD needs to develop a mechanism
to monitor all Institutes functioning under the Ministry’s aegis on regular basis so
that instances such as non-preparationof Post Based Reservation Rosters (PBRs)
and irregularities in appointments and grant of pay in the scales attached to
various posts etc. do not recur. The Committee, while noting that various steps
have been taken by GVP to correct the irregularities, which include, appointing a
Committee of External Experts in Administration (CEEA), are nevertheless,
dismayed at the silence of the Ministry on the need expressed for developing an
effective mechanism for monitoring all Institutes functioning under the Ministry’s
administrative control on regular basis. The Committee, reiterate their
recommendation that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential to prevent
recurrence of irregularities in Institutes functioning under the Ministry’s
jurisdictional control.

Recommendation at Para No.12- Report of Committee of External Experts

24. The Committee had noted GVP’s submission that all the cases were very old and
required in-depth study of all the papers/records related to the appointments to identify
the officials, if any, responsible for the irregularities made in these cases. GVP had
appointed a Committee of External Experts in Administration (CEEA) to look into these
aspects, to fix the responsibility. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the


17

findings of the CEEA and the action taken thereon. The Committee had further desired

that in case collusion and mala-fide action is established, penal action may be taken

against the officials involved in the matter.

25.

The Report of CEEA received from the Ministry of Human Resource

Development in their Action Taken Notes mentions following important points:

ili,

vi.

vii.

“ Gujarat Vidyapith (a Deemed to be University) is a unique institution, founded

by Mahatma Gandhi, who held the office of the Chancellor in it for a period spanning
over 27 years up to 30.01.1948. Late Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, late Dr. Rajendra
Prasad, former President of India, and late Shri Morarji Desai, former Prime Minister of
India, remained associated with it as Chancellors for long periods.
When the question of funding this Vidyapith by declaring it a Deemed to be University
was discussed by late Shri Morarji Desai, then Vice Chancellor, with late Shri D.S.
Kothari, then Chairperson, UGC, the funding of this Vidyapith was agreed to on the
assurance that this Vidyapith, being run on Gandhian ideals, would continue to enjoy
complete autonomy in its functioning. Such assurance from the UGC might be oral and
it was not recorded in writing.

Late Shri Ramlalbhai Dahyabhai Parikh remained associated with Gujarat Vidyapith as
its Registrar and later as its Vice Chancellor and Chancellor for a period spanning over
28 years up to 21.11.1999. It appears that during his tenure, Vidyapith functioned under
the oral assurance of functional autonomy [(referred to at (ii) above], even after its
declaration as a Deemed to be University in the year 1963, with 100% funding for its
day-to-day functioning. Deviations in the advertisement/notification of vacancies,
recruitment, appointments, pay-scales, promotions, counting of past service, etc., when
seen in the light of the DoPT orders/instructions and the UGC Regulations and
guidelines, pertain to his tenure in Gujarat Vidyapith, apparently under the oral
assurance of functional autonomy. The above aspects may deserve to be kept in view
while assessing the gravity or otherwise of the deviations.

In the earlier period, some of the appointments were made by internal circulation of
vacancies in Vidyapith without following the advertisement/employment exchange
procedure. In regard to the teaching staff comprising Group ‘A’ posts, it is observed that
the practice was to publish the vacancies in the local Gujarati newspapers, and not in All
India newspapers.

The Recruitment Rules for the non-teaching staff were framed by GVP for the first time
in the year 2005, which were brought into force with effect from 01.04.2006. In the
absence of the DoPT orders/instructions on service matters having been adopted by
Vidyapith [which is run by a public Trust, namely Gujarat Vidyapith Mandal (Trust)] prior
to 01.04.2006, the deviations, seen in the light of the DoPT orders/instructions, may call
for a considerate view.

As regards the cases where appointments/promotions or financial benefits, granted to
the persons, are found to be not in order, it appears that the Administration was mainly
responsible, and that the concerned employees might not be responsible except in
cases where the concerned employees were duty bound to inform the Administration
regarding their ineligibility for the same.


18

x. The lack of officers and staff, having good understanding of the Central Government
service rules, including the UGC Regulations/Guidelines, too, appears to be a major
contributing factor in non-adherence to such rules, regulations and guidelines in the
past. Therefore, it appears that the officers and staff working in the Administration of
GVP need to be exposed to short-term Trainings/Workshops on establishment matters,
including Recruitment Rules, FRs/SRs, Conduct Rules, UGC Regulations, etc., at the
ISTM, New Delhi, and any other Institutes, in order to ensure better implementation of
the service rules.”

26. In para 8.5 of the Report, the CEEA has mentioned as follows:-

“In the absence of relevant documents such as notings to show the
selection process or the process for the approval of the competent authority
having been available in such cases, this Committee had no option but to infer
that the then Vice-Chancellor and/or the Registrar was/were involved because
the overall responsibility normally rests with the Registrar and the Vice-
Chancellor in a University”.

27. In page 12 of the Report CEEA has mentioned that UGC vide its letter No. 66-
9/86 (NP-II/IIl dated 19.07. 1993 conveyed to GVP as follows :-

see You are therefore, requested to intimate whether the recruitment
qualifications of Non- teaching staff have also been reviewed as per Government
of India Orders.”

28. The CEEA in this context mentioned that even after this letter no action seems to
have been initiated in GVP to review the recruitment qualifications for the non-teaching
posts and frame their own set of Recruitment Rules presumably on the premise that
Administration of this Vidyapith enjoy a complete autonomy as per the oral
understanding with the Chairperson UGC.

29. CEEA has also quoted many such communications from UGC to GVP which
have been ignored by the Vidyapith.

30. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the findings of the Committee
on External Experts in Administration (CEEA) set up to look into the details of all
the appointments made in the past, so as to bring forth the irregularities and also
identify the officials responsible and fix responsibility. The Committee had further
desired that in case collusion and malafide action was established, penal action
may be taken against the errant officials. The Report of the CEEA, which has been
furnished with the Action Taken Notes, inter-alia points out that during the period
‘spanning over 28 years upto 21.11.1999’, the ‘Vidyapeeth functioned under the
oral assurance of functional autonomy, even after its declaration as a Deemed to
be University in the year 1963, with 100% funding for its day-to-day functioning’.
As per the Report, this, as also other similar aspects ‘may deserve to be kept in
view while assessing the gravity or otherwise of the deviations in the


19

advertisement/notification of vacancies, recruitment, appointments, pay-scales,
promotions, counting of past service etc.’ vis-a-vis the DoPT orders/instructions
and the UGC Regulations and Guidelines. Further, the CEAA Report also adds
that ‘lack of officers and staff, having a good understanding of the Central
Government service rules, including the UGC Regulations/Guidelines appears to
have been a major contributing factor in non-adherence to such rules, regulations
and guidelines in the past’. In order to ensure better implementation of the
Service rules, emphasis has also been made on exposing the officers and staff
working in the Administration of GVP to short-term Trainings/Workshops on
establishment matters, including Recruitment Rules, FRs/SRs, Conduct Rules,
UGC Regulations, etc. The Committee acknowledge the findings of the CEEA, and
considering the facts of the matter in entirety, urge upon the UGC/GVP to review
the status of GVP and its recruitment policy so that suitable persons who are well
versed with the relevant rules as are applicable are recruited and no confusion
remains on record regarding the status and functioning of this prime institution.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the remedial action taken by the
Ministry/GVP in this regard within one month of the presentation of this Report to
Parliament.

pore

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

\© March, 2021 Chairperson,
१५ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee