27

APPAREL EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCIL

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report
(160 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2235

TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

APPAREL EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCIL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report

(16% Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF TEXTILES

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2021 /Magha, 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)

INTRODUCTION .................. ... ० cee ्््ज्ज्ज्ल्ल्ल्ज््ल्ज्ल््ज्ज्ल्ल्लल््ल््ज्ल्ल्त्ल्»
CHAPTER | रि8ए0ा ..............- नल जजनलल
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies
APPENDICES
| Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2020-21) held on 04.02.2021
॥ Analysis of the Action Taken by the

Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha)

PAGE
(iii)

(iv)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury = ~SSChairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2. Shri T. R. Baalu
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Shri Naresh Gujral
18. Shri C. M. Ramesh
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Shri Bhupender Yadav
21. Vacant
22. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. 5. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.R Mishra - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S Tuteja - Additional Director
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Assistant Executive Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Twenty Seventh Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Apparel Export
Promotion Council’ relating to Ministry of Textiles.

2. The One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report was presented to Lok
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 197" December, 2018. Replies of the
Government to all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Twenty Seventh Report at their sitting held on 04.02.2021.
Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of
the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty
Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury,
__February, 2021 Chairperson,

Magha, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (160 Lok Sabha) on the subject “Apparel
Export Promotion Council" based on the Chapter XVII of C&AG Report No.11 of 2016
relating to the Ministry of Textiles.

2. The One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (167 Lok Sabha), which was presented
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 190 December, 2018 contained 7 Observations
and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Textiles and are broadly
categorized as under:

(0) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos.1, 2,4 & 5 Total: 4
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos .7
Total: 1
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para Nos.3, 6
Total: 2
Chapter — V


2

3. A detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed gross
mismanagement of Apparel Export Promotion Council (AEPC) which resulted in the loss of
Rs.17.42 crore. The Committee found that the Executive Committee of AEPC extended
unfair benefit while renting out office accommodations at Bhikaji Cama Place to M/s TUL at
minimal rates and granted extension of contract without resorting to competitive bids. The
Ministry had also not taken immediate measures to resolve discrepancies pointed out by
Audit.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Textiles in respect of all the
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the Original Report
which either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Textiles to furnish Action Taken Notes in
respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter | and final replies in
respect of observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter V within six months of
the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

6. Noting the progression of events from notification of advertisement via short
classified ads in newspapers without detailed tender enquiry, incomplete information on
opening and closing tender dates, awarding rent lease to a private party ie. M/s. TUL
despite it being non-party in the bidding process, grant of rent in favour of the private
party and extension of rent contract to the same party without seeking response of other
potential bidders etc., the Committee had opined that the Executive Committee of AEPC
has not been impartial and intentionally favored the private party in awarding the rent
contract. The Committee felt that the Ministry remained a mute spectator instead of
taking the officials of AEPC to task. The Committee noted that matter was formally
brought to the notice of the Ministry by Audit on 15.12.2015. However, the Special
Internal Audit ordered by the Ministry for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 to evaluate
the performance of AEPC and to identify the points of shortcomings and deviations from
the established rules could not bring out the lapses in awarding rent contract to the
private party. The Committee had noted from the submission of the Ministry that due to
meager staff strength, Internal Audit Wing could audit only less than half of the units as
prescribed in a year and since internal audit is only an attest audit, it is not possible for it
to figure out all omissions and errors of an auditee during the period of audit. The
Committee were shocked to note that instead of strengthening the Internal Audit Wing,
the Ministry is trying to cover up its inadequacies. The Committee desired that adequate
staffing in the internal Audit Wing may be done urgently to make sure that internal
audits are conducted as per the schedule and the terms of reference for Internal Audit
of the organizations in the Ministry may be reassessed to ensure that all the


3

transactions above a threshold value are invariably audited. Further, a system of strong
internal controls and reporting may be evolved to ensure transparent and fair dealings.

7. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“Efforts are being made to strengthen the Internal Audit Wing (IAW) by
way Of filling up the vacant posts.”

8. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:

“Para pertains to strengthening of Internal Audit Wing of the Ministry.
Ministry has stated that efforts to strengthen the IAW are being made, however,
status of filling up vacancies is not given. Thus, no comments.”

9. In their updated reply, the Ministry stated as under:

“The matter was taken up by Internal Audit Wings (IAW) with the Cadre
Controlling Authority ie. O/o CGA to fill up the vacant posts in Internal Audit
Wings. Subsequently, 1 Senior Accounts Officer, 1 Assistant Accounts Officer in
IAW (West Zone) and 2 Assistant Accounts Officers in IAQ (HQ) have been
provided. Office of CGA for creation of 2 additional Group A posts, 1 post of
Deputy Controller of Accounts and 1 post of Assistant Controller of Accounts has
been requested by IAW to strengthen Internal Audit Wings of PAO.”

10. The Committee had observed that the Executive Committee of AEPC
awarded the rent contract to a private party while the Ministry remained a
spectator instead of questioning the officials of AEPC in the matter. Further, the
Special Internal Audit ordered by the Ministry for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015
to evaluate the performance of AEPC and to identify the points of shortcomings
and deviations from the established rules could not bring out the lapses in
awarding rent contract to the private party. The Committee had, therefore, desired
that adequate staffing in the internal Audit Wing may be done urgently to make
sure that internal audits are conducted as per the schedule and the terms of
reference for Internal Audit of the organizations in the Ministry may be
reassessed to ensure that all the transactions above a threshold value are
invariably audited. Further, a system of strong internal controls and reporting
may be evolved to ensure transparent and fair dealings. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that the strengthening of the internal audit wing was
being done by way of filling up the vacant posts. However, the Committee note
that only four posts have since been filled up. The Committee desire that all
vacant posts in the Internal Audit wing may be filled up without any further delay
and the request for creation of more posts may be pursued vigorously to ensure
that all the units prescribed for a particular year are audited in that year itself.
Further, the Committee note that Ministry has not responded to the


4

recommendation of the Committee regarding reassessing the terms of reference
of the internal audit to ensure that the transactions above a threshold level are
invariably audited; the internal audit is conducted as per schedule; and evolving
a system of strong internal controls and reporting to ensure fair and transparent
dealings. The Committee are of the considered opinion that strong system of
internal control and internal audit provide an assurance that applicable laws and
regulations are being complied with and the operational and financial reporting is
reliable besides aiding in preventing, detecting and responding to the
shortcomings and deviations from the established rules timely. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that all the transactions above a
threshold value be invariably audited and a system of strong internal controls
and reporting evolved to ensure transparent and fair dealings, and desire to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.

(Recommendation Para No. 4)

41. The Committee found that the out of the 32 members/Exporters of the elected
Executive Committee, three members are Government Nominees. Observing that
these Government Nominees were purposely nominated in the Executive Committee to
safeguard the interest of the Government and public money, the Committee were
unable to comprehend the inability of these Government Nominees to prevent the
apparent mismanagement of funds and decisions taken in favour of a private party
which resulted in a huge loss. The Committee, therefore, desired that explanation of
the Government nominees for their inaction in the whole process may be called for an
appropriate action.

42. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“As directed by the Committee, explanation is being sought from
Government nominees.”

13. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:

“As the explanation is being sought from Government nominees, further
action taken will be examined during next audit of AEPC.”

14. In their updated reply, the Ministry stated as under:

“AEPC has furnished its comments on this para vide its letter No.
AEPC/HO/SG/2020 dated 31/08/2020. In the above mentioned letter AEPC has
stated that Rs.17.42 crore is not the revenue loss toAEPC or to the exchequer
and AEPC is not liable to deposit the amount. Further, Council has again
submitted that AEPC has consistently followed the same procedure for renting of
the property which was followed earlier too. AEPC is of the view that the question
of seeking explanations from the Government Nominees does not arise, who


were part of decision making by Executive Committee, a body competent to take
decisions as per AEPC’s Memorandum and Articles of Association, when the
Bhikaji Cama Place premises was rented / rent negotiated. Further the matter of
rent reduction from the tenant which was earlier rejected by AEPC, was done at
the instance of recommendation from Hon'ble Minister of Textiles.

In order to take a larger view in consonance with the Government of India
vision of "Minimum Government and Maximum Governance" Ministry of Textiles
has decided to withdraw the name of Government nominees from all Textiles
Export Promotion Council. A direction, vide Order dated 13.8.2020 has already
been issued to all Textiles EPCs. As per this order, wherever, the Government
assistance under any scheme is provided to the Textiles EPCs, a separate
Empowered Committee / Standing Committee shall be constituted by respective
Councils for monitoring of such expenditure.”

15. The Committee had, while observing that the three Government nominees
on the Executive Committees apparently did not ensure proper management of
funds, and decision taken in favour of the third party resulted in losses, desired
that explanation be called from them for their inaction in the whole process. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that, as per AEPC, Rs.17.42 crore is
not the revenue loss to AEPC or to the exchequer and AEPC is not liable to
deposit the amount. Further, Council has again submitted that AEPC has
consistently followed the same procedure for renting of the property which was
followed earlier too. AEPC has been of the view that the question of seeking
explanation from the Government Nominees, who were part of decision making
by Executive Committee, a body competent to take decisions as per AEPC’s
Memorandum and Articles of Association, when the Bhikaji Cama Place premises
was rented/rent negotiated does not arise. The Committee, while referring to the
reply of the Ministry to another recommendation in regard to the awarding of the
rent contract which inter-alia states that the Chairman, AEPC and various
members of the Executive Committee and officials like Secretary General of
AEPC have been responsible for this decision which apparently lacked propriety,
are of the considered opinion that Government nominees who were made part of
the Executive Committee primarily to safeguard the interest of the Government
and the public money were not effective in discharging their duties. The
Committee, while further noting that in consonance with the Government of India
vision of "Minimum Government and Maximum Governance", Ministry of Textiles
has decided to withdraw the Government nominees from all Textiles Export
Promotion Councils and wherever, the Government assistance under any scheme
is provided to the Textiles EPCs, a separate Empowered Committee / Standing
Committee is to be constituted by respective Councils for monitoring of such


6

expenditure, are of the view that these Standing Committees need to be
adequately empowered so that they can function independently and effectively.

(Recommendation Para No.7)

46. The Committee found that in response to the query regarding the composition of
the tendering committee, the Ministry stated that since formal tender was not issued,
tendering committee was not constituted. However while replying to another query, the
Ministry had given the list of the members of tendering committee, first negotiation
committee and second negotiation committee respectively. The matter was formally
brought to the notice of the Ministry only on 15.12.2015 through the audit para received
from the Principal Director of Audit. Ministry immediately ordered internal audit of the
accounts of AEPC and deputed an audit team. However, as per Ministry's own
submission the special internal audit for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was ordered
on 7.9.2015 and the internal audit of the accounts of AEPC was conducted only in July
2018 after being raised by the PAC. The Committee took strong exception to the callous
approach in responding to their queries and contradictory replies sent by the Ministry
was has seriously hampered the examination of the subject by them. The Committee
desired that the Secretary may look into the matter and take appropriate action against
those responsible for such replies. Further, the Committee desired to be apprised of the
correct position within one month of the presentation of the Report to the House.

17. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:-

“As stated in the written reply to PAC, no tendering committee was
constituted. AEPC constituted two Committees on 18.9.2007; viz. 14 Negotiation
Committee and 2™ Negotiation Committee. The 11 Negotiation Committee
opened the quotations and 2707 Negotiation Committee comprising senior
members of the Council to negotiate rent rates. Since formal tender was not
issued in the case, no tendering committee was constituted. Only a short
classified advertisement was released in the property pages of Tol and HT.
Ministry came to know about revenue loss through the draft CAG audit para on
15.12.2015. In its reply on draft CAG Para, AEPC claimed that office space at
Bhikaji Cama Place was purchased by AEPC through its own funds. Ministry
conducted internal audit of AEPC in May, 2016 to ascertain whether Bhikaji
Cama Place building was purchased out of Government money. Audit
observations were duly incorporated by the Ministry while replying to draft CAG
para on 22.6.2016.Ministry issued an order dated 7.9.2015 for conducting an
internal audit, on alleged irregularities brought out by the then SG, AEPC in the
functioning of Council. The said irregularities brought out by the then SG, AEPC
did not involve the issue of revenue loss due to renting out of office space at


7

Bhikaji Cama Place. Based on the order dated 7.9.2015, special internal audit for
the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was conducted from 16.11.2015 to 2.12.2015.
In addition to above mentioned audit of accounts of AEPC, Ministry of Textiles
once again ordered audit of accounts of AEPC on 4.7.2018 after PAC sitting in
order to confirm the source of funding for purchase of Bhikaji Cama Place
Building.”

18. Audit in their vetting comment stated as under:

“Reply of the Ministry is factual. However, the reply of the Ministry on the
matter of arrangement of funds is not correct. As per Ministry reply dated
22.6.2016, it is clearly confirmed that “Property was purchased from the earnings
of Government Funds. Under these circumstances, Government has suffered a
loss in letting of furnished office premises to private party, the funds provided by
Government for purchase of building have been misutilized.

Reply of the Ministry is factual. Ministry of Textiles conducted the Special
Internal Audit of AEPC for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015.

However, Ministry is silent in respect of the outcome of Ministry's order in
July, 2018 regarding the Audit of AEPC.

No reply has been given by the Ministry in respect of this para.”
19. In their updated reply, the Ministry stated as under:

“Ministry was not involved in the process at any stage. Moreover, the
matter is under litigation before NCLT. PAC/CAG would be informed consequent
upon judgment to be given by NCLT.”

20. The Committee had observed that even though a special internal audit of
AEPC accounts for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was ordered on 7.9.2015, the
same was conducted only in July 2018, and that too after the issue was raised by
the Committee. They, therefore, had desired that the Ministry may look into the
same. The Ministry, in its action taken reply, clarified that a special internal audit
was carried out from 16.11.2015 to 02.12.2015 for the period cited above, on the
alleged irregularities brought out by the then SG, AEPC in the functioning of the
Council, based on the Ministry’s order dated 07.09.2015. The Ministry has further
stated that the aforesaid internal audit did not involve the issue of revenue loss
due to renting out of office space at Bhikaji Cama Place as the Ministry came to
know about the revenue loss only through the draft CAG audit para on
15.12.2015. Consequently, the Ministry conducted another internal audit of AEPC
in May, 2016 to ascertain whether the building was purchased out of Government
money. As per Audit, findings of the internal audit done in May 2016 confirmed
that the property was purchased from the earnings of Government Funds and,


therefore, Government has suffered a loss in letting of furnished office premises
to a private party. The Committee further note that as a follow up of their
intervention in the matter, the Ministry ordered another audit of accounts of AEPC
on 04.07.2018 in order to confirm the source of funding for the purchase of
Bhikaji Cama Place Building. However, the Ministry, in the Action Taken Note,
has not apprised the Committee of the outcome of the Audit ordered on 4.7.2018.
The Committee, while noting that even after being specifically pointed out, the
Ministry has failed to apprise the Committee of the findings of the Audit ordered
on 4.7.2018. The Committee take exception to the apparently indifferent attitude
of the Ministry and desire that the findings of the Audit along with the action
taken thereon may be furnished to them within one month of the presentation of
this Report to the Parliament. The reply is also silent on the action taken against
the officers responsible for furnishing contradictory replies on the constitution of
the Tendering Committee. The Committee desire that the matter be inquired into
and appropriate action taken against those found responsible for the lapse. The
Committee wish to be apprised of the details in this regard within one month of
the presentation of this report to Parliament.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury,
__February, 2021 Chairperson,

Magha, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

On detailed examination of Para No.17.1 of C&AG Report 11 of 2016 on the
subject “Undue benefit to a private party", the Committee find gross mismanagement of
Apparel Export Promotion Council (AEPC), a body under the Ministry of Textiles, has
resulted in loss of Rs.17.42 crore to the company. The Committee find that the
Executive Committee of AEPC extended unfair benefit, while renting out office
accommodations at Bhikaji Cama Place to M/s. TUL at minimal rates and granted
extension of contracts without resorting to competitive bidding to attract other potential
parties willing to pay higher rent rates. The Committee also find that the Ministry of
Textiles had not taken immediate necessary measures to resolve the aforesaid
discrepancy highlighted by audit. The recommendations / observations of the
Committee are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

[Para No.1]
Action taken by the Ministry

Factual. PAC Para may be resolved as action taken required on the
observations / recommendations are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

Observation/ Recommendation

Noting the progression of events from notification of advertisement via short
classified ads in newspapers without detailed tender enquiry, incomplete information on
opening and closing tender dates, awarding rent lease to a private party i.e. M/s. TUL
despite it being non-party in the bidding process, grant of rent in favour of the private
party and extension of rent contract to the same party without seeking response of other
potential bidders etc., the Committee had opined that the Executive Committee of AEPC
has not been impartial and intentionally favoured the private party in awarding the rent
contract. The Committee felt that the Ministry remained a mute spectator instead of
taking the officials of AEPC to task. The Committee noted that matter was formally
brought to the notice of the Ministry by Audit on 15.12.2015. However, the Special
Internal Audit ordered by the Ministry for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 to evaluate
the performance of AEPC and to identify the points of shortcomings and deviations from
the established rules could not bring out the lapses in awarding rent contract to the
private party. The Committee had noted from the submission of the Ministry that due to
meager staff strength, Internal Audit Wing could audit only less than half of the units as


10

prescribed in a year and since internal audit is only an attest audit, it is not possible for it
to figure out all omissions and errors of an auditee during the period of audit. The
Committee were shocked to note that instead of strengthening the Internal Audit Wing,
the Ministry is trying to cover up its inadequacies. The Committee desired that adequate
staffing in the internal Audit Wing may be done urgently to make sure that internal
audits are conducted as per the schedule and the terms of reference for Internal Audit
of the organizations in the Ministry may be reassessed to ensure that all the
transactions above a threshold value are invariably audited. Further, a system of strong
internal controls and reporting may be evolved to ensure transparent and fair dealings.

[Para No.2]
Action taken by the Ministry

Efforts are being made to strengthen the Internal Audit Wing (IAW) by way of
filling up the vacant posts.”

Vetting comment of Audit

Para pertains to strengthening of Internal Audit Wing of the Ministry. Ministry has
stated that efforts to strengthen the IAW are being made, however, status of filling up
vacancies is not given. Thus, no comments.

Updated reply of the Ministry

The matter was taken up by Internal Audit Wings (IAW) with the Cadre
Controlling Authority ie. 010 068 to fill up the vacant posts in Internal Audit Wings.
Subsequently, 1 Senior Accounts Officer, 1 Assistant Accounts Officer in IAW (West
Zone) and 2 Assistant Accounts Officers in IAQ (HQ) have been provided. Office of
CGA for creation of 2 additional Group A posts, 1 post of Deputy Controller of Accounts
and 1 post of Assistant Controller of Accounts has been requested by IAW to strengthen
Internal Audit Wings of PAO.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that the AEPC is a Company registered under Section 8 of
Companies Act., Further, the Committee find from the submission of AEPC that since
the rent money, collected from M/s. TUL for leasing an office space at Bhikaji Cama
Place, was neither received from Government nor to be deposited in Consolidated Fund
of India, the question of following General Financial Rules did not arise. The Committee
did not concur with the above statement of AEPC as being recognized by the
Government it discharges state like functions whilst providing services to its members
and therefore, was expected to emulate principles of financial propriety enshrined in the
GFRs. The Committee while noting that AEPC had purchased this office out of the
Export Promotion Fund and Fashion Design cum Office Building Reserve Fund in 1991,


11

with grant from the Government of India, opined that the Executive Committee of AEPC
has miserably failed in enforcing the relevant financial rules and therefore, their role in
the same be inquired into and responsibility be fixed.

[Para No 3]
Action taken by the Ministry

Ministry is instituting an enquiry at the level of Financial Adviser to the
Government of India. Based on the inquiry further necessary action will be taken.”

Vetting comment of Audit

As the Ministry is instituting an enquiry, further action will be examined during the
next audit of AEPC.

Updated reply of the Ministry

Para would be resolved after completion of enquiry at the level of Financial
Adviser.

- Observation/Recommendation

The Committee found that the out of the 32 members/Exporters of the elected
Executive Committee, three members are Government Nominees. Observing that
these Government Nominees were purposely nominated in the Executive Committee to
safeguard the interest of the Government and public money, the Committee were
unable to comprehend the inability of these Government Nominees to prevent the
apparent mismanagement of funds and decisions taken in favour of a private party
which resulted in a huge loss. The Committee, therefore, desired that explanation of
the Government nominees for their inaction in the whole process may be called for an
appropriate action.

[Para No. 4]
Action taken by the Ministry

As directed by the Committee, explanation is being sought from Government
nominees.

Vetting comment of Audit

As the explanation is being sought from Government nominees, further action
taken will be examined during next audit of AEPC.

Updated reply of the Ministry


12

AEPC has been directed to submit explanation of Government nominees. Para
would be resolved after receiving explanation from the Government.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA), pursuant to
special internal audit, has observed that the Council returned the principal amount of
Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and penalties / forfeitures of EMD. However, Council
had earned %214.44 crore as interest on EMD till the time it is fully returned to the
exporters / Government. Out of this amount, only %9.90 crore was deposited in the
Government Account. Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs for appointment of Government Administrator and for superseding the Executive
Body of the Council. In response, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs had ordered an
inspection u/s 206(5) of the Companies Act., 2013 in the matter of AEPC in August,
2016. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also filed interlocutory application u/s
242(2)(k), 246 read with. 336 of the Companies Act 2013 before the Hon'ble National
Company Law Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi in August 2018 seeking inter alia,
suspension of the Executive Committee of the AEPC and for freezing of the assets of
the management of AEPC. The Committee, however, observed that the matter was
taken up by the Ministry only after their intervention. The Committee desire that the
interest on EMD may be deposited in the Government Account in a time bound manner.
Disheartened to note the lackadaisical approach of both the Ministry of Textiles in
monitoring the affairs of AEPC and Ministry of Corporate Affairs for taking more than
two years in submitting an interim report, the Committee desire that a robust
mechanism for speedy detection and timely process of cases of apparent irregularities
be developed by the Ministries / Department of Government of India so that such cases
are finalized at the earliest.

[Para No. 5]
Action taken by the Ministry

Ministry has already written to AEPC to deposit Rs.214.44 crore in Consolidated
Fund of India vide this Ministry's letter dated 31.10.2018, followed by reminder dated
14.1.2019.

Vetting comment of Audit

The matter with regard to the management and functioning of AEPC is pending
with the NCLT. Further progress of the matter will be examined during next audit of
AEPC.


13

Updated reply of the Ministry

The issue contained in this para has been challenged by AEPC in the Hon'ble
Delhi High Court. AEPC is not depositing the amount. The matter is pending before the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. Further action would. be initiated after judgment of the
Hon'ble High Court.


14

CHAPTER Ill
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


15

CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find that in response to the query regarding the composition of
the tendering committee, the Ministry stated that since formal tender was not issued,
tendering committee was not constituted. However while replying to another query, the
Ministry has given the list of the members of tendering committee, first negotiation
committee and second negotiation committee respectively. The matter was formally
brought to the notice of the Ministry only on 15.12.2015 through the audit para received
from the Principal Director of Audit. Ministry immediately ordered internal audit of the
accounts of AEPC and deputed an audit team. However, as per Ministry's own
submission the special internal audit for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was ordered
on 7.9.2015 and the internal audit of the accounts of AEPC was conducted only in July
2018 after being raised by the PAC. The Committee take strong exception to the callous
approach in responding to their queries and contradictory replies sent by the Ministry
was seriously hampered.

[Para No. 7]
Action taken by the Ministry

As stated in the written reply to PAC, no tendering committee was constituted.
AEPC constituted two Committees on 18.9.2007; viz. 1st Negotiation Committee and
2nd Negotiation Committee. The 1st Negotiation Committee opened the quotations and
2nd Negotiation Committee comprising senior members of the Council to negotiate rent
rates. Since formal tender was not issued in the case, no tendering committee was
constituted. Only a short classified advertisement was released in the property pages of
Tol and HT.

Ministry came to know about revenue loss through the draft CAG audit para on
15.12.2015. In its reply on draft CAG Para, AEPC claimed that office space at Bhikaji
Cama Place was purchased by AEPC through its own funds. Ministry conducted
internal audit of AEPC in May, 2016 to ascertain whether Bhikaji Cama Place building
was purchased out of Government money. Audit observations were duly incorporated
by the Ministry while replying to draft.CAG para on 22.6.2016.


16

Ministry issued an order dated 7.9.2015 for conducting an internal audit, on
alleged irregularities brought out by the then SG, AEPC in the functioning of Council.
The said irregularities brought out by the then SG, AEPC did not involve the issue of
revenue loss due.to renting out of office space at Bhikaji Cama Place. Based on the
order dated 7.9.2015, special internal audit for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was
conducted from 16.11.2015 to 2.12.2015.

In addition to above mentioned audit of accounts of AEPC, Ministry of Textiles
once again ordered audit of accounts of AEPC on 4.7.2018 after PAC sitting in order to
confirm the source of funding for purchase of Bhikaji Cama Place Building.

Vetting comment of Audit

Reply of the Ministry is factual. However, the reply of the Ministry on the matter
of arrangement of funds is not correct. As per Ministry reply dated 22.6.2016, it is
clearly confirmed that “Property was purchased from the earnings of Government
Funds. Under these circumstances, Government has suffered a loss in letting of
furnished office premises to private party, the funds provided by Government for
purchase of building have been misutilized.

Reply of the Ministry is factual. Ministry of Textiles conducted the Special
Internal Audit of AEPC for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015.

However, Ministry is silent in respect of the outcome of Ministry's order in July,
2018 regarding the Audit of AEPC.

No reply has been given by the Ministry in respect of this para.
Updated reply of the Ministry

Ministry was not involved in the process at any stage. Moreover, the matter is
under litigation before NCLT. PAC/CAG would be informed consequent upon judgment
to be given by NCLT.


17

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that the AEPC is a Company registered under Section 8 of
Companies Act., Further, the Committee find from the submission of AEPC that since
the rent money, collected from M/s. TUL for leasing an office space at Bhikaji Cama
Place, was neither received from Government nor to be deposited in Consolidated Fund
of India, the question of following General Financial Rules did not arise. The Committee
did not concur with the above statement of AEPC as being recognized by the
Government it discharges state like functions whilst providing services to its members
and therefore, was expected to emulate principles of financial propriety enshrined in the
GFRs. The Committee while noting that AEPC had purchased this office out of the
Export Promotion Fund and Fashion Design cum Office Building Reserve Fund in 1991,
with grant from the Government of India, opined that the Executive Committee of AEPC
has miserably failed in enforcing the relevant financial rules and therefore, their role in
the same be inquired into and responsibility be fixed.

[Para No. 3]
Action Taken by the Ministry

Ministry is instituting an enquiry at the level of Financial Adviser to the
Government of India. Based on the inquiry further necessary action will be taken.”

Vetting comment of Audit

As the Ministry is instituting an enquiry, further action will be examined during the
next audit of AEPC.

Updated reply of the Ministry

AS&FA submitted an enquiry report on 14.8.2020. As per the said Report, the
matter has been further enquired and it is found that although M/s. TEESTA URJA
LIMITED did not participate in the tender proceedings, the Chairman, AEPC did direct
the Director Administration and HR to include the proposal of M/s. TEESTA URJA
LIMITED (TUL) along with three highest bidders who had participated in the tender
proceedings. The then Secretary General, Mr. Anil Kumar Bamba, (ITS) AEPC also
recommended this inclusion of M/s TUL in violation of General Financial Rules (GFRs).
Since, the proposal of M/s. TUL was at higher rate than the other three bidders who had
participated in the tender, the proposal of M/s TUL was accepted by the Executive


18

Committee of AEPC in its meeting held on 11.1.2008 in which the following members of
the EC Committee were present:-

1. Mr Vijay Kumar Agarwal, Chairman, AEPC
2. Mr Rakesh Vaid, Sr. Vice Chairman (NR)
3. Mr Vinod Dhawan, Vice Chairman (ER)

4. Mr Qaiser Shamim, Joint Secretary, MoT.
5. Mr Anil Kumar Bamba (ITS), SG, AEPC.

Based on the report, it can be seen that Chairman AEPC and various members
of the Executive Committee and officials like Secretary General of AEPC have been
responsible for this decision which disregarded the rule of propriety. The issue has been
challenged by AEPC before Hon'ble Delhi High Court through Writ Petition
No.5846/2019. The matter is sub-judice. PAC will be informed as soon as judgement in
the case is delivered.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that from the interim report of the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs that AEPC had not complied with the directions of the Ministry of Textiles, issued
under Article 101 with regard to renting of premises, which resulted in the loss of
Rs.17.42 crore to the company. The report stated that extending undue benefit to a
Private Party i.e. M/s. Teesta Urja Limited in letting out the office space at Bhikaji Cama
Place, New Delhi at reduced rate amounted to failure on the part of directors to
discharge their fiduciary duties to the Company. The Interim report suggested
regulatory action for disobedience of Government directions by the company and
officers. The interim report also recommended that the Executive Committee of AEPC
be suspended and in terms of provisions of Section 242(2) (0), 15 (fifteen) persons be
appointed as directors, to manage the affairs of the company and such directors may
report to the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) on such matters as it may direct.
The Committee desire to be apprised whether responsibility had been fixed against
officials responsible for the lapses in discharging fiduciary duties and appropriate action
taken against the officials. The Committee, noting that an interlocutory application is
pending with the NCLT with regard to the management and functioning of AEPC, desire
to be apprised of the arrangements made by the Ministry to oversee the functioning of
AEPC before the decision on the matter is taken by NCLT. The Committee also desire
that the details of the outcome of the matter in NCLT may be intimated to the
Committee as and when it is taken.

[Para No. 6]


19
Action taken by the Ministry

Ministry is instituting an enquiry at the level of Financial Adviser to the
Government of India. Based on the inquiry further necessary action will be taken. The
outcome of the matter in NCLT will also be intimated to the Committee as and when it is.
taken.

Vetting comment of Audit

As the Ministry is instituting an enquiry and as the matter with regard to the
management and functioning of AEPC is pending with the NCLT, further action taken
will be examined during next audit of AEPC.

Updated reply of the Ministry

This matter has been enquired in detail by a Committee headed by AS&FA of
Ministry of Textiles and it has been observed that M/s TUL made a request for reducing
the monthly rental to the prevailing market rate on 14th November, 2008 and 10th
February, 2009. AEPC did reject the request and replied to M/s TUL by their letter dated
19th November, 2008 that the rent already agreed to cannot be changed.

Subsequently, the M/s TUL made a representation to Office of Hon’ble Minister
of Textiles and the Office of Hon'ble Minister of Textiles forwarded the representation of
M/s TUL to AEPC for sympathetic consideration. In view of the recommendation from
the Office of Hon'ble Minister of Textiles, Chairman AEPC constituted a Special Senior
Management Committee consisting of few Executive Committee members of the
Council along with the Secretary General of AEPC to look into this matter. Accordingly,
this Committee met the representative of M/s TUL and negotiated downward review of
rental for the premises of Council. During the meeting, M/s TUL submitted a request for
reduction of rent from Rs. 270 per sq. ft. per month to Rs. 150 per sq. ft per month. But
this Committee recommended reduction only upto Rs. 190 per sq. ft. per month. The
matter was subsequently placed before the Finance and Budget Sub Committee of
AEPC during its meeting dated 11.6.2009 where the sub-committee noted the decision
taken by the Committee constituted by Chairman, AEPC for this purpose. The Minutes
of finance and Budget Sub Committee were subsequently ratified by the Executive
Committee of AEPC.

The meeting of the Special Sub Committee which recommended the reduction of
rental was attended by following persons. These persons are primarily responsible for
the decision:-

i. Sh. Rakesh Vaid, Chairman, AEPC

ii. Sh. Praveen Nayyar, Vice Chairman (ER) & Chairman F&B, AEPC

iii. Sh. HKL Magu, Chairman, AHM Committee, AEPC

iv. Sh. Vimal Kirti Singh, IAS, Secretary General, AEPC


20

v. Sh. Jaideep Lakhtakia, Vice Chairman of M/s Teesta Urja Ltd.
vi. Sh. Sudhakar Rai, Dy. General Manager, M/s Teesta Urja Ltd.

Subsequently, M/s TUL submitted another request on 14th February, 2012 for
reduction of rent and they quoted the similar commercial space which was available for
lease in and around Bhikaji Cama Place area at the rate from Rs.80 per sq. ft. per
month to Rs.130 per sq. ft. per month. The matter was placed before Finance and
Budget Sub Committee of the Council held on 10th March, 2012 where the Committee
authorised Mr. HKL Magu, Vic Chairman, Northern Region and Chairman, Finance and
Budget Committee to initiate and fixed up a suitable rate so that the revenue loss to the
Council may be minimise. The matter was further placed before the Finance and Budget
Sub-Committee meeting held on O8th June, 2012 where the Committee ratified the
revision of the rate from Rs. 190 per sq. ft. per month to Rs. 165 per sq. ft. per month
and the following persons were present for the meeting who are responsible for
approval of the second reduction of rent:-

i. Mr. A. Sakthivel, Chairman, AEPC

ii. Mr. H.K.L.Magu, VC (NR) & Chairman F&B Committee
iii. Mr. Ashok G. Rajani, Sr. VC

iv. Mr. Ashok Logani, VC (ER)

Vv. Mr. Praveen Nayyar, Member

vi. Mr. Rakesh Vaid, Member

vi. Mr. Vijay Mathur, ASG

It may be seen that in this present case, AEPC in the first instance rejected the
request of M/s TUL for reduction of the rent and reconsidered the request only when
they received recommendation from the Office of Hon'ble Minister of Textiles. Further, it
is noted that the financial collapse of 2008 is well known and the rental usually go down
in such situation and land lord to retain the tenant usually agree to the reduction in the
rent.

The enquiry report also noted that the same people, who have been involved in
constitution of this company which has been formed for a public purpose, continue to
remain in management for extremely long duration. In this situation, there is need to
change the rules of governance of this organisation in a manner that they would be
mandated to follow principles of transparency and accountability as followed by any
Government organisations. There should also be provision for inclusion of new and
young faces in the Executive Committee and there should be a limit on no. Of years one
can stay as part of Executive Committee and at other position of responsibility.
Apparently, there appears to an inbuilt system which does not allow new and young
garment manufacturers or exporters to join this organisation in management.
Resultantly, the effectiveness of this organisation has reduced and can also be seen in
stagnation of export of apparel from the country and stagnation of the organisation. So,


21

it may be in the fitness of the thing to have a serious look at the rules of governance of
this organisation to make it more accessible to all exporters of the country.

Fixing responsibility / action against Government nominees may not be possible
in view of the Writ Petition pending before the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT).
An exporter has filed Writ Petition No.56 (D)/2016 before the Hon'ble NCLT. AEPC is R-
1 in the case.

Ministry has noted the above suggestions of the enquiry report. As the matter is
sub-judice before the Hon'ble NCLT, suitable action would be initiated based on the
judgment of the NCLT in the above Writ Petition.

Hon'ble PAC would be apprised about judgement in the matter and action
initiated by the Ministry.


(APPENDIX - I!)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CONTAINED

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,2,4 & 5
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee

do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 7

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 3 & 6

IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT

7

Total: 4
Percentage - 57.14%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: 1
Percentage-14.29%

Total: 2
Percentage —28.57%


Confidential

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-
21) HELD ON 4™ FEBRUARY, 2021.

The Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) sat on Thursday, the 4" February, 2021

from 1430 hrs to 1440 hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

ONAARYON

14.
15.
16.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
Members

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shree Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri C. M. Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav


-2-
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G.Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri S.R.Mishra - Director
Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - Additional Director

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND SEES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

1. Shri Deepak Anurag - Director General
2. Shri K.S. Subramaniam - Director General
3. Ms. Kavita Prasad - Director General
4... Shri S. V. Singh - Principal Director

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the
office of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions
of the Members on the following Draft Reports:-

i. XXxx 20000 XXXXX
ii. 2000९ XXXXX XXXXX
iii. 2000९ XXXXX XXXXX
iv. Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Apparel Export
Promotion Council”

v. Xxxx XXXXX XXXXX
vi. 200९ XXXXX XXXXX
vil. 2900९ XXXXX XXXXX
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports

without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light
of factual verification done by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.

अजअंज हज के के