 
82
 
 
 
Provisioning, Procurement and Issue of High 
Altitude, Clothing, Equipment, Ration and Housing.
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their 55
th
 
Report (17
th
 
Lok Sabha)]
 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
 
(2023
-
24)
 
 
 
EIGHTY
-
SECOND REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
              
 
                     
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 


PAC 
No
. 2312   
 
 
 
E I G H T Y
-
S E C O N D
 
R E P O R T
 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
 
(2023
-
24)
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their 55
th
 
Report (17
th
 
Lok 
Sabha)]
 
 
 
                                       
 
 
                                        
                                     
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 
 
1
8
.12.2023
 
           
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 
 
 
18
.12.2023
 
 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T
 
N E W  D E L H I
 
 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
Provisioning, Procurement and Issue of High 
Altitude, Clothing, Equipment, Ration and 
Housing
 

 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
Page
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 
COMMITTEE (2023
-
24) 
    
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
……………………………...
 
……………………..
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
             
 
 
Report ……………………………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER II
*
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………..
 
 
CHAPTER III
*
 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..…………..
 
 
CHAPTER IV
*
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Com
mittee and which require 
reiteration …………………………………………….
 
 
 
CHAPTER V
*
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies …………………………………………………
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES*
 
 
I
 
 
Minutes of the 14
th
 
sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2022
-
23) held on 14.12.2023.
 
 
 
II
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty
-
fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
 
*Not appended to the Report
 
 
 
 
 
 

Composition of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2023
-
24)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat
 
 
1. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja
 
 
-
 
Director
 
2. Ms. Malvika Mehta
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
 
 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar
 
Baalu
 
3.
 
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
 
4.
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
5.
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
6.
 
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 
7.
 
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
 
8.
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
9.
 
Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
 
10.
 
Shri Brijendra Singh
 
11.
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
alias
 
Lalan Singh
 
12.
 
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
 
13.
 
Shri Jayant Sinha
 
14.
 
Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
 
15.
 
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
16.
 
Shri 
Shaktisinh Gohli
 
 
17.
 
Dr. K. Laxman
 
18.
 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
 
19.
 
Shri 
Tiruchi Siva
 
20.
 
Dr. M. Thambidurai
 
21.
 
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
 
22.
 
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023
-
24) having been authorised by the 
Committee, do present this 82
nd
 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
cont
ained in their 55
th
 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“
Provisioning, Procurement and 
Issue of High Altitude, Clothing, Equipment, Ration and Housing
” 
relating to Ministry of Defence 
(Department of Military Affairs)
.
 
2.
 
The 
Fifty
-
fifth 
Report was presented 
to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 14
th 
December, 2022. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and 
adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on
 
14
th
 
December, 2023. Minutes of the Sitting are 
given at Appendix I.
 
3.
 
For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in 
bold
 
in the body of the Report.
 
4.
 
The Committee also place on re
cord their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
 
Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India
.
 
5.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifty
-
fifth 
Report (
Seventeenth Lok Sabha
) is 
given at 
Appendix
-
II
.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:
 
 
 
                
 
   
 
      
    
ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
 
14 
December
, 
2023
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Chairperson,
 
23 
Agrahayana 1945 (
Saka
)                          
 
 
 
    
Public Accounts Committee
 
 
 

CHAPTER 
–
 
I
 
REPORT
 
 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the 
Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fifty
-
fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Provisioning, procurement and 
issue of High Altitude Clothing, Equipment, Ration and Housing' relating to Ministry of 
Defence, Department of Mil
itary Affairs.
 
2.
 
The Fifty
-
fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Parliament 
on 14.12.2022. It contained 22 Observations/Recommendations.  Action Taken Notes 
have been received from the Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affair
s in 
respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorised as 
follows:
-
 
 
 
(i)
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 
Government
 
 
Para Nos. 2
-
8, 10
-
22.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total: 20
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II
 
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendat
ions which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
NIL
 
Total: Nil
 
Chapter III
 
 
(iii)   
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
 
require reiteration
 
Para Nos. 1 and 9.
 
 
 
 
Total:02
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV
 
(iv)
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have 
furnished interim replies
 
NIL
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total: Nil
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ch
apter V
 
 
3.
 
The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that 
there were instances of delays stretching upto four years in procurement of clothing 
items from the time of ‘Acceptance of Necessity’ (AoN); there were inordinate delays
 
in 
receipt of contracted items from Ordnance Factories; delayed procurement action and 
delayed receipt of contracted items that led to acute shortage of essential clothing and 

equipment items and adversely affected timely issue of the same to the troops; 
health 
and hygiene of troops stationed at high altitude areas was reportedly affected as a 
result of procedural delays, non
-
supply or supply of recycled or alternate items at the 
time of need; lack of Research and Development by defence laboratories and fa
ilure in 
indigenization resulted in prolonged and continued dependence on import;  substitutes 
in lieu of scaled items were authorized in a given percentage on cost
-
to
-
cost basis 
which affected the quantity of calorie intake of troops in high altitude area
s;  the project 
for improving housing conditions of the troops in high altitude areas was executed in an 
ad
-
hoc manner; despite incurring an expenditure of Rs.274 crore, the pilot project was 
not successful; execution of works and subsequent handing over o
f assets for use to 
the units in the most formidable climatic conditions was inordinately delayed and, the 
Numerical Assets Register(s) (NAR) were not being maintained leading to gaping 
discrepancies between the assets shown in NAR and those on the ground 
etc.
 
 
4.
 
Based on the examination of the subject, summarized account of some of the 
important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee in their Fifty
-
fifth 
Report are shown as under:
-
 

 
Separate budget heads for clothing, equipment, ration and housing for high 
altitude areas would help the troops in being provided with commensurate 
clothing, equipment, housing facility and ration. 
 

 
Economies of scale may be built into the procurement proc
ess to lower costs and 
the task of building reserves may be completed within a specific timeframe.
 

 
A distinction may be drawn in clear terms between ‘shelf life’ and ‘serviceability’ 
which would better indicate the usability of a product after due inspecti
on. 
Regular reviews of the stock in hand may be carried out and the same may be 
rationalized as per current/ projected requirements. All efforts may be made to 
fully implement phase III of CICG. 
 

 
Revision of the DPM
-
2009 may be done in view of the changes 
in requirements 
of the Army, changes in the sources of procurement, indigenisation of products 
and the fact that the erstwhile Ordnance Factories have been converted into new 
defence PSUs etc.
 

 
Accurate data may be provided to Audit. Steps may be taken to e
nsure that 
boots and other such items of similar category are retained by the troops at high 
altitudes. 
 

 
Ministry may consider overhauling the contracting process between the Ministry 
and vendors where there are more built
-
in contractual responses and cont
ractual 
liabilities on the vendors and the contracts are not open to subjective interference 
or interpretation. Ministry/ Army may sign contracts for longer periods with 
appropriate performance/ product guarantees as constituent provisions of the 

contract.
 
A mechanism may be evolved to ensure outcome oriented monitoring of 
expenditure and revenue and capital procurement. 
 

 
With higher delegation of powers and more freedom in decision making, the new 
DPSUs may expedite their procurement processes so that the 
lacunae ailing the 
erstwhile ordnance factories do not continue to persist. The Ministry may 
handhold the new DPSUs for the same.
 

 
Ministry/ Army may take necessary steps towards increasing staff strength, 
improving testing facilities, ensuring adequate num
ber of samples and 
computerizing the process of trials and formulation of technical specifications.  
Ministry may collaborate with friendly countries with similar terrain/ geographical 
conditions and learn from their experiences. 
 

 
While noting the various 
steps taken by the Ministry viz. acceptance of vendor 
certification for non
-
critical parameters and use of simulation techniques; conduct 
of concurrent trials, where feasible; provisioning of maximum advance 
information about trial methodology during Reque
st for Proposal stage; and hand 
holding of vendors to enable ‘in
-
situ’ rectification of equipment, the Committee 
desired to be apprised of the resultant effect of the measures so taken.
 

 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance may be brought under the Serv
ices to 
make it more responsive and accountable. 
 

 
Comprehensive review of requirements may be made for all high altitude areas 
and the products be procured accordingly to meet the needs.
 

 
Testing procedures/ standards may be streamlined.
 

 
Indigenization shou
ld be coupled with in
-
house surge capacity in the country 
while maintaining quality of indigenised products at par with international 
standards and adhering to the specifications suggested by troops serving in such 
geographically difficult and hostile cond
itions.
 

 
Ministry may devise ways and means to reduce the timelines of contracting 
processes. The Committee recommended that periodic reviews/ feedback from 
troops deployed at high altitude areas should be taken to comprehend the issues 
in entirety i.e. tas
te, quality and hygenic condition of the rations being provided to 
them and recommend carrying out improvements, as may be found to be 
necessary.
 

 
The Committee wished to be apprised of the status construction of habitats for 
troops in Eastern Ladakh. The C
ommittee desired that the Ministry be pro
-
active 
in using expertise available in various Indian institutions including IITs to the 
fullest extent.
 

 
Mechanism to hand over assets immediately following the completion of the work 
may be followed scrupulously and measures be taken to carry out inspection of 
the completed assets/ work expeditiously.
 

 
Setting up of digitalized e
-
NAR and the process may be 
completed in a time 
bound manner.
 

 
Medical facilities being provided to the troops at forward locations may be made 
more comprehensive so that the soldiers do not have to risk hazards of health.
 


 
Oil PSUs may construct more underground storage tanks as part 
of their CSR 
activities. Ministry to explore the possibility of other energy sources based on 
solar, wind and other hybrid based technologies with the help of PSUs under the 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy to minimize dependence on Kerosene 
based Bukhar
ies.
 
 
5.
 
The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty
-
fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report 
in the succeeding para
graphs. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by 
the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original 
Report which require reiteration/merit comments. 
 
6.
 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence, Department of 
Military 
Affairs to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter I within six months of the presentation of 
the Report to the House.
 
 
Recommendation No. 1
-
 
Budget for clothing, equipment, ration and housing in
 
High Altitude Areas
 
 
7.
 
The Committee note that there is no separate allotment for expenditure on 
clothing, equipment, ration or housing for high altitude areas. The expenditure on High 
Altitude Clothing and Equipment (HACE) is met from allotment of ‘Gene
ral stores and 
clothing’ which also caters to requirements of the Army as a whole. For housing, the 
Committee note that the Operational Works procedure is a special provision which 
primarily caters for creation of infrastructure along the borders and inclu
des high altitude 
areas. The Committee note that Operational Works has a separate budget head and is 
allotted on an average Rs. 800 Crore out of which Rs. 400 Crore is spent for troop 
formations deployed along the Northern Borders. The Committee note the M
inistry’s 
contention that with regard to rations, budget allocated is sufficient and no separate 
allotment in the budget for high altitude rations is required. The Committee also note 
that funds are allocated as part of the Army budget in various Minor Hea
ds, Sub Heads 
and Code Heads and that the bifurcation of existing Code Heads are need based and 
not terrain/region based. 
 
 
While acknowledging the fact that the Government has authorized clothing, 
equipment and ration at enhanced/ enriched scales for the 
troops operating at high 
altitudes, the Committee, nevertheless feel that it may be preferable to have special 
provisioning for soldiers safeguarding our country in the inhospitable and icy climatic 
conditions of high altitude areas where the temperature f
alls to as low as minus 50 

degree Celsius. This becomes even more crucial in view of the threat to India’s borders, 
owing to which our troops are constantly in a state of alert for protecting the country’s 
borders. The Committee, therefore, express the vie
w that it may be ideal to have 
separate budget heads for clothing, equipment, ration and housing for high altitude 
areas. Having separate heads of budget amounts, the Committee feel, would help the 
troops in being provided with commensurate clothing, equip
ment, housing facility and 
ration. This will go a long way in enabling our soldiers to effectively withstand the harsh 
and inclement weather of high altitude areas.
 
8.
 
The Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affairs furnished the following 
action t
aken replies to the recommendation of the Committee:
-
 
“
Funds are allocated as part of the Army budget in various Minor Heads, Sub 
Heads and Code Heads. The bifurcation of existing Code heads are need based 
and not terrain/ region based.
 
There has not been a single instance wherein limitation of budget has affected 
the procurement of special clothing and equipment or its availability with the 
troops deployed in high altitude areas facing harsh and inclement weather. 
Extreme Cold Clothing &
 
Equipment (ECC&E) and Special Clothing 
Mountaineering Equipment(SCME) provisioning and procurement is not 
constrained by budgetary allocations. Therefore creation of separate budget 
head for ECC&C and SCME would not affect their provisioning and procureme
nt 
in any manner.”
 
9.
 
Audit made the following observations:
-
 
“Ministry’s statement that provisioning and procurement of high altitude clothing 
and equipment are not constrained by budgetary allocations is not consistent 
with their earlier reply (March 
2019) regarding shortage in AHQ reserve of ECC & 
E wherein they had stated that budgetary constraints led to cuts in quantity being 
procured. (Paragraph 2.2.1 (i) of the CAG report No. 16 of 2019 refers).
”
 
10. 
 
The Ministry gave the following response to a
udit remarks:
-
 
“It is confirmed that presently all efforts are being put in for procurement of SCME 
items for building up stocks as per yearly authorization of troops deployed in 
Super High Altitude Areas and also 100% reserves as authorized. There are 
pre
sently no constraints of budget whatsoever and creation of separate budget 
head for ECC & C and SCME is not required for ensuring procurement of ECC & 
C and SCME as per authorized quantities."
 
11. 
 
The Committee had noted that funds are allocated as part o
f the Army 
budget under various Minor Heads, Sub Heads and Code Heads and that the 
bifurcation of existing Code Heads are need based with terrain/region not having 
any separate or distinct categorisation or recognition. While acknowledging that 
the Governm
ent had authorized clothing, equipment and ration at enhanced/ 
enriched scales for the troops operating at high altitudes, the Committee, had felt 

that it may be preferable to have special provisioning for soldiers safeguarding 
our country in the inhospita
ble and icy climatic conditions of high altitude areas. 
The Committee had recommended that it may be ideal to have separate budget 
heads for clothing, equipment, ration and housing for high altitude areas. In 
response, the Ministry has reiterated its reply
 
that bifurcation of existing Code 
heads are need based and not terrain/ region based. The Ministry has further 
submitted that there has not been a single instance wherein limitation of budget 
has affected the procurement of special clothing and equipment 
or its availability 
with the troops deployed in high altitude areas and that creation of separate 
budget head for ECC&C and SCME would not affect their provisioning and 
procurement in any manner.  The Committee, however, wish to point out that 
various inst
ances of procedural delays, non
-
supply or supply of recycled or 
alternate items at the time of need were highlighted during Audit. Further, as per 
Audit Ministry’s statement that provisioning and procurement of high altitude 
clothing and equipment are not 
constrained by budgetary allocations is not 
consistent with their earlier reply (March 2019) regarding shortage in AHQ reserve 
of ECC & E wherein they had stated categorically that budgetary constraints led 
to cuts in quantity being procured. The Committee
 
while noting from the 
Ministry’s reply that there are presently no constraints of budget and creation of 
separate budget head for ECC & C and SCME is not required for ensuring 
procurement of ECC & C and SCME as per authorized quantities are of the 
conside
red view that having separate budget heads/ sub heads will not only help 
the Ministry in maintaining funds commensurate with the requirements in respect 
of clothing, equipment, housing facility and ration in high altitude areas but also 
enable the senior o
fficers in monitoring the expenditure incurred against the 
funds allocated, making proper estimations and timely revisions. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation for creating and maintaining separate 
budget heads/ sub heads for clothing,
 
equipment, ration and housing for high 
altitude areas.
 
Recommendation No. 3 
-
 
Issue and holding of shelf
-
life expired items
-
 
Serviceabiltity
 
12.
 
The Committee are concerned to note that a huge amount of life saving and 
essential items under SCME Category
-
II worth Rs.43.60 lakh with expired shelf life were 
issued after receiving release orders by AHQ.  Further, stores amounting to Rs. 30.31 
lakh wer
e lying in stock after completion of shelf life/expiry date. As another example, 

against the expired 6025 numbers of Fire Star Refill Tubes kept since 2012, 551 
numbers were issued to the units and balance 5474 were in stock as of July 2018. The 
Committee 
note that the only reason given for issue of such a huge quantity of items 
with expired shelf life was that the depot was only a stocking echelon and all 
receipts/issues from the depot were based on release orders from higher formations. 
The Committee fail
 
to understand why such a huge quantity of stocks were 
procured/held when they were not issued/required for long.
 
The Committee also observe that Advance Base Ordnance Depot (ABOD ‘B’) was 
holding 19 items (one Mattress Kapok
-
MK
-
II and 18 different sizes o
f Boot Combat RW 
HA) of shelf life expired condition valuing Rs. 4.59 crore. The Committee note from the 
Ministry’s reply that shelf life is only a guideline and items were stocked properly in 
proper storage accommodation and were held in serviceable condi
tion. Expiry of an 
item is declared when it has not been found fit for operational use after due inspection 
by qualified board of officers. In view of the explanation of the Ministry, the Committee 
recommend that a distinction may be drawn in clear terms b
etween ‘shelf life’ and 
‘serviceability’ which would better indicate the usability of a product after due inspection. 
The Committee also desire that regular reviews of the stock in hand may be carried out 
and the same may be rationalized as per current/ pr
ojected requirements.
 
In this regard, the Committee note that Central Inventory Control Group (CICG), an 
automated centralized database for effective inventory management and procurement 
has been created to mitigate such issues of holding excess and expire
d/non
-
serviceable 
stock. The Committee observe that first phase of CICG has been completed and 
second phase has been rolled out and is under ‘operations and maintenance stage’ up 
to July 2025. On completion of Phase III, computerization of all India invent
ory visibility 
will be achieved and Phase III is at grant of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) stage and 
its roll out is expected to commence 17 months after AoN is accorded and is to be 
deployed fully in the subsequent 24 months thereafter. The Committee desi
re that all 
efforts may be made to fully implement phase III of the project as planned and trust that 
following the roll out, instances of shortage/wastage of stock will be obviated and there 
would be gainful utilization of all inventory. The Committee may
 
be apprised of the 
stage
-
wise status of implementation of the project.
 
13.
 
The Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affairs in their Action Taken 
Notes have submitted as under:
 
“
The procurement of items is undertaken based on past wastages experien
ce as 
the future wastage cannot be accurately predicted. In the instant case, 
subsequent usages were less than that estimated. However, restricting 
procurement for fear of shelf life expiry may result in denial of stores to troops 
deployed under critical c
onditions, which can adversely affect operational 
preparedness and is therefore not acceptable.
 
The shelf life is only a guideline for usage of equipment and does not explicitly 
imply immediate down
-
gradation of equipment post expiry of shelf life. The 
pri
nciple is followed for all warlike stores including sensitive items like 
ammunition, where shelf life is extended repeatedly post its serviceability state 
evaluation, for gainful utilization. It is reiterated that there is a clear distinction 

between ‘shel
f life’ and ‘serviceability’ of an item. Following the extant principle in 
letter and spirit ensures that no unserviceable item is ever issued to the troops. 
 
It is once again clarified that the concern raised is not about 19 items, rather two 
items (a) Bo
ot Combat RI (18 different sizes) and (b) Mattress Kapok Mk
-
II, 
which were transferred to Northern Command for their gainful utilization. 
Moreover, regular reviews of the stock, as desired by the Committee, are being 
carried out, which form the basis for p
rojecting requirements. 
 
As highlighted by the Committee, Computerized Inventory Control Project 
(CICP), an automated centralized database, has been created for effective 
inventory management and procurement. Its first phase has been completed and 
second p
hase has been rolled out and is under stabilization till year 2025. On 
completion of third phase, all India visibility will be achieved which would 
significantly contribute to efficient management and gainful utilization of stocks.  
.
”
 
 
1
4
.
 
Observing that 
a huge quantity of stocks were procured/held when they 
were not issued/required for long, the Committee had recommended that a 
distinction may be drawn in clear terms between ‘shelf life’ and ‘serviceability’ 
which would clearly indicate the usability of a
 
product after due inspection. The 
Committee had also recommended that regular reviews of the stock in hand may 
be carried out and the same may be rationalized as per current/ projected 
requirements. It is observed that Ministry is carrying out regular rev
iews of the 
stock, as desired by the Committee, which form the basis for projecting 
requirements. The Committee, while opining that to ensure usability of a product 
post expiry of shelf life, regular and timely reviews of such items are essential 
desire th
at comprehensive guidelines may be formulated for prescribing 
periodicity of review and  storage conditions to ensure that only serviceable 
items are lying in the stock for further issuance.
 
The Committee had further desired that all efforts may be made to
 
fully implement 
phase III of the 
Central Inventory Control Group (CICG)
 
project and that they may 
be apprised of the stage
-
wise status of implementation of the project. The 
Ministry has apprised that first phase of CICG has been completed and second 
phase
 
has been rolled out and is under stabilization till year 2025. On completion 
of third phase, all India visibility will be achieved which would significantly 
contribute to efficient management and gainful utilization of stocks.  The 
Committee desire to be 
apprised of the timelines of completion of phase
-
 
III of the 
project and the results of phase 
–
II of the project.
 

 
Recommendation No. 9
 
Quality Control
 
1
5
.
 
The Committee had noted that absence of well
-
defined Qualitative 
Requirements/ General Staff Qualitative Requirements (QR/GSQR) for special clothing 
had for long been identified as a handicap/ disincentive in quality issues in procurement. 
Broad technical 
specifications were being used in place of QRs and GSQRs for special 
clothing items which were not formulated due to peculiar nature of these items. It was 
admitted by the Ministry that the existing system had led to narrow vendor base for most 
of the spec
ial clothing items. It was stated that efforts were underway to formulate 
GSQRs as well as important qualifying specifications of all items of special clothing. The 
Committee had noted that based on the GSQR and other important qualifying technical 
specifi
cations prepared by Army HQ, detailed technical specifications of SCME would 
be formulated by DGQA. However, only provisional technical specifications were 
formulated by the DGQA for 11 items viz. Avalung
-
II, Boot Multipurpose, Ice Axe, Boot 
Crampons, Glov
es Outer, Gloves Inner, Modular Gloves, Rucksack, Jacket Down, 
Trouser Down (JDTD) and Snow Goggles.
 
The Committee had observed one such instance where ‘Face Mask for Extreme Cold 
Weather’ was not found acceptable to troops but was continued to be provided
 
to the 
soldiers. Troops were constrained to use a Face Mask which they did not find to be 
suitable. The Committee had noted from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
the face mask that was sought to be changed was designed by DRDO/ DMSRDE, and 
t
ried and approved before it was procured and supplied. The same was accepted by 
way of ‘quality assurance’ by DGQA. Since, the identification and approval of an 
alternative was delayed, continued supply of existing product till an improved product 
was made
 
available to the soldiers after trials was essential with a view to avoid break 
in supplies. The Committee had also noted that subsequently an improved product had 
been introduced and supplied to the troops. This issue raised concerns relating to the 
natu
re of quality assurance offered by DGQA as also the research undertaken by 
DMSRDE. With regard to formulation of technical specifications, as had been brought 
out in the various interactions with the Ministry, the Committee had desired that the 
Directorate
 
General of Quality Assurance be brought under the Services so as to make 
it more responsive and accountable. 
 
1
6
.
 
The Ministry submitted the following in their action taken replies:
-
 
“The process for switching over to common/ generic specifications based 
procurement has already been initiated. Presently all Extreme Cold Clothing & 
Equipment (ECC&E) items and 36 out of 57 Special Clothing Mountaineering 
Equipment (SCME) items are being 
procured based on detailed common/ 
generic specifications. 
 
It is reiterated that Product Improvement (PI) is a continuous process which is 
undertaken to improve the quality of an item. Undertaking PI for an item neither 
makes the in
-
service item sub
-
stand
ard nor its procurement is discontinued 
straightaway on receipt of request for its PI. Instead the item remains current and 

part of inventory to avoid disruption in supply till regular supply of improved item 
commences. Thus PI is not connected to quality 
assurance activity by DGQA.”   
 
1
7
.
 
Audit made the following observations:
-
 
"Ministry may please state whether these 57 (SCME) and all (ECC&E) items 
were found satisfactory by the users."
 
1
8
. 
 
The Ministry gave the following response to audit remarks:
-
 
"It
 
is submitted that bulk supplies to the troops are made only after the troops 
have approved the sample of an item during user trials/ wider user trials. No 
supplies are made of those items which are found unsatisfactory by the troops 
during trials. The tro
ops have the liberty to raise defect report for an item during 
exploitation stage also. However no such reports have been received from the 
user."
 
19
.
 
Observing that limited technical specifications were formulated by the 
DGQA for 11 items and products who
se quality was not accepted by the troops 
were accepted in terms of quality assurance by the Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance as well as on the basis of various interactions with the Ministry, the 
Committee had desired that the Directorate General 
of Quality Assurance be 
brought under the Services so as to make it more responsive and accountable. 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that Product Improvement is a 
continuous process and it is not connected to quality assurance activity by
 
DGQA. However, the Committee note from the Charter of DGQA that DGQA is to 
adopt a proactive approach in all interactions with the customer, and meet the 
customers' requirements in a professional manner and that all technical advice 
and inputs are to be r
endered keeping in view the overall perspective and in the 
time frame as per users expectations. The Committee are, therefore, of the 
considered opinion that DGQA cannot be absolved of its responsibilities as it was 
the duty of DGQA to interact with the us
ers and meet their requirements keeping 
in view the overall aspects. Noting the Ministry’s submission that presently all 
Extreme Cold Clothing & Equipment (ECC&E) items and 36 out of 57 Special 
Clothing Mountaineering Equipment (SCME) items are being procu
red based on 
detailed common/ generic specifications, the Committee are of the considered 
view that the DGQA has to play a more proactive role to meet the users' 
requirements in a professional manner and hence, the Committee reiterate that 
Directorate Gene
ral of Quality Assurance be brought under the Services in order 
to make it more responsive and accountable.
 

Recommendation No. 11
 
Acceptance of rejected rucksacks
 
2
0
. 
 
The Committee had noted that MGO EM Dte concluded a contract for supply of 
67,066 rucksa
cks for which Pre Despatch Inspection (PDI) of the consignment was to 
be done at seller’s premise to check compliance of the specifications. Further, on 
receipt of the consignment at buyer’s premise Joint Receipt Inspection (JRI) was to be 
done for quantit
ative and functional parameters of the stores as well as testing of 
material and dimensions as per specification. Only in case the store was found 
acceptable during PDI jointly by DGQA and seller’s representative, the JRI would be 
restricted to visual exam
ination.
 
The Committee had observed that the first consignment was found acceptable in PDI 
and PDI was not carried out for the subsequent consignments. The DGQA had sent 
samples of the second and third consignments to two laboratories who reported that 
the
re was percolation of water drops through the fabric. The Committee had noted that 
based on the lab reports, DGQA had rejected both the consignments in JRI. The 
Committee had noted that on the objection raised by the seller firm, the Empowered 
Committee (E
C) had decided to retest the samples from a different laboratory, which 
passed the samples. The EC had decided to conduct re
-
JRI based on the retesting 
reports and in the re
-
JRI, the consignments had been accepted. The Committee had 
noted with consternatio
n that in all three consignments, the samples had been first 
rejected when DGQA adopted the test procedure (ISO 811 standard) as per the 
contract, but were accepted after retesting (AATCC 127) in a different laboratory which 
apparently is a deviation from 
the ‘contract provisions’. This led to “acceptance” of the  
rucksacks. The Committee had failed to understand why a test method, which was not 
stipulated in the contract, was adopted.  If, as the DGQA had certified, the alternate 
testing method i.e. AATCC 
(American) test was identical to the testing methods 
mentioned in the contract, then the issue of why this was not included in the contract 
would arise.
 
The Committee had also been aghast at the conflicting replies the Ministry had provided 
on different oc
casions. While, at first, it had been informed that the store items were  
accepted to overcome the possibility of anomaly and to avoid litigation; subsequently, it 
was stated that the actual test results formed the basis for deciding on acceptance of  
the 
store item.
 

While noting the reply of the Ministry that Empowered Committee now closely monitors 
testing in PDI and JRI and all discretions exercised by DGQA have been curtailed, the 
fact remained that it was the EC that decided on retesting of the samples
 
from a 
different laboratory. The Committee had desired that the matter be looked into in detail 
and they be apprised of the factual details of the matter. The Committee had further 
desired that the testing procedures/ standards be streamlined and specific
 
efforts made 
to obviate such instances in future.
 
2
1
.
 
In response, the Ministry submitted the following written replies:
-
 
“The, Empowered Committee for SCME has been dissolved w.e.f. 08thJuly 2022. 
All SCME procurement now is being undertaken in accordanc
e with the Financial 
Powers, delegated, as per DFPDS
-
2021. 
 
Since ex
-
import procurement has been ceased w.e.f. December 2021, PDI and 
such like activities have been completely ceased which obviates occurrence of 
such incidents in future.  
 
The audit conclu
sion that inferior stores, which were rejected initially and 
accepted subsequently after retesting, has not been proven after usage.
 
The minutes of EC meetings indicate that decision of retesting was not uni
-
dimensional to avoid litigation, but was a holis
tic decision based on essential 
need for continuity of supplies, efficacy & similarity of both standards, as also the 
probability of legal disputes.
 
As per contract, testing was to be carried out as per ISO standard. However, 
during PDI, DGQA carried out t
esting as per AATC (American) standard because 
as per DGQA, the AATC (American) standard was identical to ISO standard and 
there was no impact on quality. The same was accepted by the EC. The proof of 
quality of stores is their effective utilization by the
 
troops and no complaints 
received about their quality.”
 
2
2
.
 
 
Audit made the following observations:
-
 
"(i)
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken stated that the audit conclusion that 
inferior stores, which were rejected initially and accepted subsequently 
after 
retesting have not been proven after use.
 
 
(ii)
 
In this connection, please state:
 
(aa)
 
Why the stores failed in the test procedure (ISO 1811 standard), as per 
the contract, when the test procedures ISO 1811 standard and AATCC 127 are 
identical?
 
(ab)
 
Whether any analysis was carried out to ascertain the reasons for failure 
of stores in testing procedure ISO 1811 Standard?"
 
2
3
. 
 
The Ministry gave the following response to audit remarks:
-
 

" (i)
 
Inputs were sought on the ibid JRIs from DGQA(S)/ CQA(T&C). 
In their reply, it 
has been stated that while it is correct to mention that Test Procedure ISO 811 and 
AATCC
-
127 2008
-
 
Option
-
2 are identical in procedure but for Water Resistance 
Hydrostatic Pressure Test, the result can vary on account of precision and b
ias. The test 
results are tester dependent. Test result also depends on the conditioning of test 
specimen. It may also vary on account of deviation of test results between two different 
labs. 
 
  
(ii)
 
Further it has been stated that a limited study on the s
ame was carried out by an 
International body which concluded that the verdict depending on the test results needs 
to be carried cautiously."
 
2
4
.
 
Taking note of the deviations from contract for supply of 67,066 rucksacks 
wherein the samples were first rejected when DGQA adopted the test procedure 
as per the contract, but were subsequently accepted after retesting in a different 
laboratory with a dif
ferent test, the Committee had desired that the matter may be 
looked into in detail and they be apprised of the factual details of the same. The 
Committee had further desired that the testing procedures/ standards may be 
streamlined and specific efforts ma
de to obviate such instances in future. The 
Committee note that according to the minutes of EC meetings, the decision to 
undertake retesting was not a uni
-
dimensional one to avoid litigation, but was 
taken by considering all factors holistically, particula
rly the need for ensuring 
continuity of supplies, efficacy & similarity of both standards, as also the 
probability of legal disputes. The Committee further note that while as per 
contract, testing was to be carried out as per ISO standard, DGQA carried out
 
testing as per AATC (American) standard because as per DGQA, the AATC 
(American) standard was identical to ISO standard and there was no impact on 
quality. This fact was accepted by the EC. The Committee also note from the reply 
of the Ministry that the p
roof of quality of stores is their effective utilization by the 
troops and no complaints were received about their quality. In this regard, the 
Committee desire to be apprised of the system of feedback/ complaints that may 
have been received following the 
usage of the products. While noting from the 
reply of the Ministry that SCME procurement is now being undertaken in 
accordance with the Financial Powers, delegated, as per DFPDS
-
2021 and such 
like activities have been completely ceased, the Committee hope 
that henceforth, 
the interest of soldiers will be kept paramount and inferior stores will not be 
accepted.
 
 

Recommendation No. 16
 
 
Housing in High Altitude Areas
 
2
5
. 
 
The Committee had noted from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
c
reation of h
abitat
s
 
in HAA is a specialist task and varies with terrain, user requirements 
and altitude factor and maximum efforts were being undertaken to improve habitat and 
living conditions of troops within available budgetary support and execution capabilities 
of
 
Indian Army Engineers. The Committee had been 
of the opinion 
that there is 
sufficient 
technical expertise available in various Indian institutions including IITs which 
can be deployed for projects in harsh terrains. The Committee had desired that the 
Mini
stry be pro
-
active in using such expertise to the fullest extent.
 
2
6
.
 
The Ministry stated the following in their reply:
-
 
“Sustained efforts are being carried out to introduce new technology for 
construction of habitat buildings for troops in High Altitude 
Area by carrying out 
active interaction with industry and academia. Further, habitat for 18,000 troops 
which was under construction has now been completed.”
 
2
7
.
 
Noting that creation of habitats in High Altitude Areas is a specialist task 
and maximum  efforts were being undertaken to improve habitat and living 
conditions of troops within available budgetary support and execution 
capabilities of Indian Army Engineer
s, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry be pro
-
active in using technical expertise available in various Indian 
institutions including IITs.  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that 
sustained efforts are being carried out to introd
uce new technology for 
construction of habitat buildings for troops in High Altitude Area by carrying out 
active interaction with industry and academia. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Accounting Issues 
–
 
NAR
 
2
8
. 
 
The Committee had noted that all assets created out of Operational Works were 
to be entered in the “Numerical Assets Register” (NAR). This document accounted for 
assets with record of detailed history including year of creatio
n, utilization, location, cost 
and present use etc. It could also be used as the basic document for planning and 
working of annual maintenance grant. The NAR was to be maintained independently at 
3 levels viz., Corps HQ, formation HQ and the Engineer Regim
ent (ER). However, it 
was found that mainly the ER was maintaining it, thus defeating the purpose of the NAR 
being a tool for internal control. The Committee had been disappointed to note that in 

most cases, updating had been done upto 2015
-
16 whereas in s
ome cases entries 
beyond 2012
-
12 were not reflected. Needless to say, the NAR were not being 
maintained as per the laid down procedure. As a result, there were discrepancies 
between the assets shown in NAR and assets on the ground, viz. shortfall in number
 
of 
assets on the ground, type and number of assets identified by the Board of Officers 
(BoO) on ground being different from those recorded in the NAR etc. which defeated the 
purpose of maintaining the records of housing assets. The Committee had noted tha
t 
the digitalized e
-
NAR was being set up in Corps HQ and the units. The Committee had 
desired to be apprised of the progress in setting up of the same and had hoped that the 
process would be completed in a time bound manner.
 
29
.
 
The Ministry submitted the 
following action taken reply:
-
 
“Field formations have confirmed that NARs have been updated and digitization 
is being carried out in phases to complete it in a time bound manner.”
 
30
.
 
Observing discrepancies between the assets shown in Numerical Assets 
Reg
ister and assets on the ground, the Committee had desired to be apprised of 
the progress in setting up of digitalized e
-
NAR in Corps HQ and the units. The 
Committee are disappointed with the one line information on the same stating 
that Field formations ha
ve confirmed that NARs have been updated and 
digitization is being carried out in phases to complete it in a time bound manner. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of details of progress in setting up of the e
-
NAR such as the units covered till date and th
e time frame in which the remaining 
units would be covered.
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
Fuel Storage Facilities in Forward Locations
 
3
1
.
 
The Committee had noted from the reply of the Ministry that Kerosene was the 
main fuel being used for the purpose of warming and drying purposes. Kerosene based 
Bukharis are in use for warming/heating. The Committee had also noted that multiple 
means of fu
el storage were employed to include underground storage tankers, barrels 
and jerricans. The Committee had been informed that some underground storage tanks 
were constructed by Oil PSUs at their own expense. The Ministry had also stated that 
other than usag
e of Oil Bukharis, generators were being provided where there was no 
civil supply, and solar and hybrid based technologies were also being introduced.
 

Realising the importance and imperatives of the storage facility for the purpose of 
warming and drying by
 
the troops in forward locations, the Committee had desired that 
the Oil PSUs should construct more underground storage tanks as part of their CSR 
activities so that the troops deployed at forward locations in the High Altitude areas do 
not face any inconv
enience due to fuel shortage. They had also impressed upon the 
administrative Ministry to explore the possibility of other energy sources based on solar, 
wind and other hybrid based technologies with the help of PSUs under the Ministry of 
New & Renewable E
nergy so that dependence on the Kerosene based Bukharies could  
be minimised.
 
3
2
.
 
The Ministry submitted the following reply:
-
 
 
“
Infrastructure Development with respect to Fuel Storage
 
It is reiterated that the Indian Army is deployed in varying terrain conditions. 
Depending upon the peculiarities of terrain, as also ways of carrying the fuel to 
deployment locations, multiple means of fuel storage are employed to include 
underground stor
age tanks, barrels and jerricans. Quantity 624 Nos. of 
underground tanks have been constructed in Indian Army for storage of fuel. 
Payment for these storage facilities is made out of the budget allotted by 
Financial Planning Directorate. However, some unde
rground storage tanks are 
constructed by Oil PSUs at their own expense.
 
 
Issue/Payment of Kerosene Oil for Bukharies
 
Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO) is issued to authorized units for use in Bukharies. 
The issues are free and not on payment by the unit/ personn
el.
 
 
Development/Usage of Alternate Technology to Reduce Dependence on 
Kerosene Based Bukharies
 
Kerosene oil is the main fuel being used for the purpose of warming and drying. 
Presently Kerosene based bukharies are in use for warming/ heating purposes. 
LPG
 
is being introduced wherever feasible. Also, the trials for use of propane are 
being planned. M/s IOCL is in the process of getting sanction for bottling of 
propane.”
 
 
3
3
.
 
The Committee had desired that Oil PSUs may construct more 
underground storage tanks as part of their CSR activities to help keep the troops 
warm and dry.  Further, to minimise dependence on Kerosene based Bukharies, 
the Committee had impressed upon the ad
ministrative Ministry to explore the 
possibility of other energy sources based on solar, wind and other hybrid based 
technologies with the help of PSUs under the Ministry of New & Renewable 

Energy. While observing the reply of the Ministry that LPG is bein
g introduced 
wherever feasible; trials for use of propane are being planned and that IOCL is in 
the process of getting sanction for bottling of propane, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation 
to explore the possibility of other energy sources
 
based on solar, wind and other hybrid technologies with the help of PSUs under 
the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
. The Committee are of the view that 
expanding on the resource base of energy would not only benefit the soldiers, 
but would also reduce c
osts of procuring kerosene at such heights. The 
Committee, accordingly, impress upon the Ministry of Defence to discuss and 
collaborate with the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy to explore options of 
other sources of energy for meeting the requirements o
f our troops. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress of such collaborations.
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
 
1
4
 
December, 2023
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
Chairperson,
 
2
3
 
Agrahayana 
, 1945 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
   
Public Accounts Committee
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX
-
II
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FIFTY
-
FIFTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
(i)
 
Total number of Observat
ions/Recommendations
 
 
2
2
 
 
 
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
Total : 20
 
 
which have been accepted by the Government:
 
 
Percentage: 
90.90
%
 
 
Para Nos. 
–
 
2
-
8 and
 
10
-
22
 
 
(iii)
 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
 
 
 
Total : 00
 
 
 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 
 
Percentage: 00
 
 
the reply of the Government:
 
 
 
Para Nos.  
–
 
NIL
 
 
(iv)
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 
 
Total : 0
2
 
which replies of the Government have not been 
 
 
Percentage: 0
9.09%
 
 
accepted by the
 
Committee and which require 
 
 
reiteration:
 
 
 
 
Para Nos. 
 
-
 
1 and 9
 
 
(v)
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 
 
Total : 00
 
which the Government have furnished interim replies: 
 
Percentage: 00
 
 
 
 
Para Nos. 
–
 
NIL
 
 