 
 
 
131 
 
 
Failure to implement Scheme objectives on 
disbursement of Capital Subsidy 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 39th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Ministry of Textiles 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
___________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 


 
 PAC NO. 2361   O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  F I R S T  R E P O R T   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)   (SEVENTEENTH LO K S ABH A)                                        
    Ministry of Textiles  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 39th Report (17th Lok Sabha)]                                                                                          Presented to Hon’ble Speaker Lok Sabha on 23.02.2024                           Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ……………….             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………  L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I  February 2024/ Phalguna 1945 (Saka) 
Failure to implement Scheme objectives on disbursement of Capital Subsidy 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                  
(iii) 
COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................     (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..............................................................       1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
                  replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                  by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I* Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023- 24) held on                  
06 February 2024 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in 
their Seventy-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri  Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Brijendra Singh 
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13. Shri Jayant Sinha 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien* 
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja           -   Director 
3. 
 
Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma  -   Deputy Secretary 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 
18.08.2023. 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this 131st Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained 
in their 39th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Failure to implement 
Scheme objectives on disbursement of Capital Subsidy”.  
 
2. The Thirty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 8th August, 2021 and 11th August 2021. Replies of the Government 
to all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft 
Report at their Sitting held on 6th February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are 
given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of 
the Report. 
 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and 
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-ninth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
 6   February, 2024              Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)       Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Failure to implement Scheme 
Objectives on Disbursement of Capital Subsidy" based on Chapter XX of  C&AG 
Report No. 12 of 2017 relating to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Thirty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2021 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2021.  The Report contained twenty two 
Observations/Recommendations.   Action Taken Notes all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Textiles and 
are categorized as under: 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 18, 19, 20 and 21 
                 Total:      08       
                 Chapter – II 
 
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para Nos. 10, 11, 12, 14,15 and 17 
                   Total:    06      
                Chapter – III 
 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
                     Para Nos. 5, 7, 8, 9, 16 and 22     
                                                     Total:    06 
                 Chapter – IV 
 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 

7 
 
 
 
Para No. 6, 13     
          Total:    02        
          Chapter -V  
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Textiles on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-ninth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of 
this Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action 
Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which 
either need reiteration or merit comments. 
4. The Committee desire the Ministry of Textiles to furnish Action Taken Notes in 
respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I within six months 
of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.  
 
Legal Action against Jute Mills 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
5. The Committee had noted that following the audit observations, NJB/Ministry of 
Textiles had taken legal action against the Jute Mills for recovering the subsidy 
amount wrongfully drawn under the “Acquisition of Plant and Machinery (Capital 
Subsidy)” under the Jute Technology Mission (JTM) Mini-Mission-IV. Some of the Jute 
mills had refunded the amount. The National Jute Board had also filed 18 money suits 
against the other mills as per the directive of the Public Accounts Committee. 
Regarding the time frame for recovery of ` 27939847/- involved, the Committee were 
informed that Court proceedings have been delayed due to the pandemic and these 
would be taken up after normalcy returns. The Committee had recommended to be 
apprised of the outcome of the money suits filed. The Committee was also  informed 
that Joint Inspection Teams JIT) had been constituted for undertaking physical 
verification and inspection of all 124 jute mills which received subsidy. The Committee 
had recommended to know the details of the final report of the Joint Inspection 
Teams. The Committee recommend that all the involved in the irregularities related to 

8 
 
 
 
capital subsidy be blacklisted from availing any benefit under any scheme of the 
Government in future. 
 
 
6. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
Case-wise status of money suits is given below : 
 
Sl.
No 
Name of the Party Money Suit 
Value/(Rs) 
Present Status 
1. Murlidhar Ratanlal Export Ltd. 
(Unit : Barshul Jute Mill) 15,08,029 Total Money suit value was Rs 21,74,000.  On payment/recovery of Rs 6,65,971, the money suit value has been revised to Rs 
15,08,029. 
2. Uma Spinners Private Limited 2,80,000 No recovery 
3. Nilkantha Jute Processing 
Pvt. Ltd. 
57,56,000 No recovery 
4. MurlidharRatanlal Export Ltd. 
(Unit : Hastings Jute Mill) 13,54,000 No recovery 
5. MurlidharRatanlal Export Ltd. 
(Unit : India Jute Mill) 7,32,000 No recovery 
6. Mr. Ashok Chowdhury, M/s. Saroda Textiles          
12,93,000 
Total Money suit value was Rs12,96,000.  On payment/recovery of Rs. 3,000 the money suit value has been revised to Rs 12,93,000. 
7. Sunbeam Vanijay Pvt. Ltd. 3,93,000  No recovery 
8. Baranagore Jute Factory Plc 5,50,000 No recovery 
9. MFL Corporation Ltd. (Usha 
Corporation) 18,85,847 Total Money suit value was Rs 
97,25,847.  On payment/recovery 
of Rs 78,40,000, the money suit 
value has been revised to Rs 
18,85,847. 
10. Parvati Industries         
18,77,000 
No recovery 
11. H.R. International        12,90,541  No recovery 
Total 1,69,19,41
7 
 
 
Status of cases lying with CBI: 

9 
 
 
 
Initially, three cases as indicated below had been taken up suo-moto by the CBI. The 
progresses in the cases as reported by CBI-ACB, Kolkata vide their letter no. 
2626/RC 010 2017 A0036/CBI/ACB-Kol dated 24.08.2020, is as hereunder: 
Case No. Name of the Party Status of the case 
RC 
0102018A0002 
M/s MFL 
Corporation Ltd. 
An amount of Rs. 78,40,310/- has been 
recovered from the mill and Money suit filed 
against it. Further, action has been taken 
against the involved officials in the case. 
Prosecution sanction against Shri N. 
Sengupta was accorded by Secretary, NJB 
to CBI. 
Denial of sanction against Shri Goutam 
Chattopadhyay official of IJIRA by IJIRA is 
under legal scrutiny. 
RC 
0102018A0036 
M/s The Ganges 
Manufacturing Co. 
Ltd. 
The case has been added in closure, 
recommending RDA minor. The closure 
Report has also been accepted by LD Court 
17.03.2021 
RC 
0102018A0003 
M/s Hastings Jute 
Mill 
The case has been added in closure, 
recommending such action as deemed fit. 
The closure Report has also been accepted 
by LD Court on 28.01.2021 
 
CBI-ACB has disposed off the case against M/s The Ganges Manufacturing Co. Ltd. 
stating that the case is disposed as FR(T) as sufficient evidence was not found 
against the accused persons. However, CBI-ACB has recommended blacklisting the 
company from availing benefit under NJB Schemes.  As per the direction of CBI-ACB, 
an Internal Note NJB/PAC/CAG/2020 dated 20.10.2020 has been issued to strictly 
ensure compliance of the direction for blacklisting M/s The Ganges Manufacturing Co. 
Ltd. from getting any subsidy from NJB in future. Letters have also been sent to the 
Office of the Jute Commissioner and Jute Corporation of India vide office 
communication no. NJB/JTM/CBI-ACB/2020 dated 13.10.2020 with a request of 
implementing the directives of CBI-ACB. 
NJB vide its letter no. NJB/PAC/ACB-Kol/2020 dated 25.08.2020 have forwarded the 
balance 12 cases for taking up for investigation by CBI-ACB, Kolkata 
1. Ambica Jute Mills Ltd. 
2. Saroda Textiles 

10 
 
 
 
3. Alliance Mills (Lessee) Ltd. 
4. Ganges Jute Pvt. Ltd. 
5. Baranagar Jute Factory 
6. Kamarhatty Co. Ltd. 
7. MREL (Unit) India Jute Mill 
8. Bally Jute Co. Ltd. 
9. MREL (Unit) Barshul Tex 
10. Nilkantha Jute Processing Pvt. Ltd. 
11. Sunbeam Vanijya Pvt. Ltd. 
12. UMA Spinners Pvt. Ltd. 
 
CVO, NJB has been interacting regularly with the concerned CBI officials, DIG, CBI 
and HoB who is heading the organization in Kolkata. Regular follow up meetings are 
being done to garner progress in these cases.   
 Details of the Final report of the Joint Inspection are as below:- 
S. 
No. 
Description No. of 
Mills/Units 
Nos. of 
Claims 
Remarks 
1 Total Number of 
Jute Mills/Units 
availed subsidy 
 
124 429 JTM (6.4) during 2007-
2013 
2 Before PAC 
Total number of 
Jute Mills/units 
jointly inspected by 
the officials of NJB, 
CAG, O/o JC 
&others 
21 81 Irregularities are found in 
26% claims i.e. 21 claims 
(15 units) out of total 81 
claims inspected. An 
amount of ` 4.50 Cr. 
including interest has 
been recovered out of ` 
3.76 Cr. (Principal 
Amount) and money suits 
filed against all the 
disputed cases. 
3 After PAC 
Total number of 
Jute Mills/Units 
inspected by NJB 
officials in the past 
and the Joint 
103 348 Irregularities found in 4 
claims [before PAC 
meeting] out of total 348 
claims inspected. Further, 
after PAC, recovery 
against 2 claims is 

11 
 
 
 
 
7. The Committee had inter-alia recommended to be apprised of the 
outcome of money suits filed against Mills/Mill owners.  The Committee were 
informed by the Ministry that money suits amounting to ` 2,79,39847 in respect 
of 18 (Eighteen) defaulting units have been filed.  However, in their Action taken 
Notes Ministry has furnished case wise status of money suits which give details 
of only (11) Mills instead of 18 defaulting units, no recovery have been made 
against Mills at Sl. No. 2,3,4,5,7,8,10 and 11.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons as to why money suits have been filed only against 11 
mills and why no recovery has been made from Mills mentioned above.  The 
Committee had also recommended that all the Jute Mills/Units and their 
director/promoters who have been found to be involved in irregularities relating 
to capital subsidy be blacklisted from availing any benefit under any scheme of 
the government in future.  The reply of the Ministry in their Action taken note is 
totally silent in this regard.  The Committee express its displeasure for 
furnishing reply in a casual manner, and reiterate its recommendation for 
blacklisting all the defaulting Mills from availing any benefit, under any scheme 
of the government in future. 
Inspection Team 
(JIT) till date  
completed. An amount of 
`1.71 crores has been 
recovered. Balance 
recovery against 2 claims 
is in process. Money suits 
have been filed.. 

12 
 
 
 
Restructuring Jute Sector related organisations 
(Recommendation Nos. 7) 
8. The Committee noted that, National Jute Board (NJB) was constituted vide 
National Jute Board Act, 2008 (12 of 2009) which became effective from 1st April 
2010, after merger of erstwhile Jute Manufacture Development Council and National 
Centre for Jute Diversification. The Committee noted that NJB had been implementing 
the scheme for modernization of Jute Industry for more than a decade. The 
Committee were distressed to see that NJB has not been successful in achieving its 
objectives. The Jute Industry as a whole is suffering from many problems, and the 
desired results are not being yielded. The Committee felt that this is mainly owing to 
the fact that NJB itself is beset with many problems, as well as issues such as 
shortage of staff, particularly technical staff, lack of accountability, ad-hocism, 
administrative inefficiency, lack of internal control and monitoring and out-sourcing of 
crucial posts. The Committee, therefore recommend that a review of the organization 
structure and functioning of NJB be conducted to streamline the functioning of NJB, 
so that it fulfills its intended role in spearheading the expansion, growth and revival of 
jute industry. The Committee were of the view that the Ministry must look into policy 
loopholes that have come to notice over the last decade, and as indicated in the on-
going inspection / audit reports. The Committee also laid emphasis on the role and 
quality of human resources that plays a vital role in the success of any policy and of 
the organization. The Committee recommended that the NJB should induct, at every 
level, professionals with requisite experience and qualifications rather than requisition 
manpower from SIDBI and appoint personal with questionable credentials and without 
proven integrity by way of outsourcing.    
 
9. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 “The matter of organizational restructuring of NJB and other organizations of 
MoT is under consideration and the last meeting in this regard was held on 8th 
March, 2022. 

13 
 
 
 
 In the 25 th Board Meeting of NJB held on 7th February, 2022, meantime it has 
been decided to strengthen the NJB Head Office at Kolkata and its Regional 
Office at New Delhi by merging the Regional Offices at Chennai and 
Hyderabad. Suitable action has been initiated in this regard. Further, modalities 
are being worked out to implement the recommendations of the Committee.”  
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
10. The Committee found that various organizations/authorities/bodies/institutions 
like National Jute Board (NJB), Jute Corporation of India (JCI), Office of Jute 
Commissioner, Indian Jute Industries Research Association (IJIRA), Centre for Jute 
Machinery Development (CJMD) etc. are operating in the Jute Sector. The roles and 
functions of these entries overlap and also conflict with each other. The role of some 
organizations had not been satisfactory, and there are also issues of shortage of 
personnel, budget, etc. Some of these institutions are structured to adapt to the 
changing scenario and are not responsive to the evolving demands.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommended the Ministry to take necessary measures to evaluate the 
relevance of these institutions and realign and reorient their role so as to be in 
consonance with the present requirements.   
11. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 “Various Jute Organisations viz National Jute Board (NJB), Jute Corporation of 
India (JCI), Office of the Jute Commissioner, Indian Jute Industries Research 
Association are working for development of jute sector. The mandates / 
functions of these Jute Organisations are given below: - 
Sl.No Organisations Main Activity 
(i) National Jute 
Board 
NJB has been established under NJB Act, 2008 
(No 12 of 2009), subsuming too erstwhile 
organizations viz Jute Manufactures 
Development Council (JMDC) and National 

14 
 
 
 
Centre for Jute Diversification. The enactment 
aims at development of the cultivation, 
manufacture and marketing of jute and jute 
products and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto.   
(ii) Jute 
Corporation of 
India  
To ensure Minimum Support Price to the jute 
growers and to act as raw jute price stabilizing 
agency.  
(iii) O/o the Jute 
Commissioner, 
Ministry of 
Textiles, Govt of 
India 
To advice Government and the Jute Industry on 
all matters relating to the development of the 
jute industry and to implement the Government 
Policy.  
(iii) Indian Jute 
Industries 
Research 
Association 
(IJIRA) 
Engaged in fundamental and applied research 
on jute and its product. At present, IJIRA is an 
“Approved Body” of MoT in terms of Gazette 
Notification dated 06.08.2020 
(iv) Centre for Jute 
Machinery 
Development 
(CJMD)  
The CJMD was set up as an independent legal 
entity through PPP Mode for development of 
new technology and high productive machinery 
in the jute sector.   
 
 It may be seen above, the various jute organizations have their different area of 
activities for development and promotion of jute sector.” 
 
12. The Committee with a view to revamp the jute sector had recommended to 
review the role and functions including organisational structure, staffing, 
finance etc. of all existing organisations/institutions associated with Jute 
sector.  The Committee note with satisfaction that the matter of organisational 
restructuring of National Jute Board and other organisations of Ministry of 
Textiles is under consideration and meetings in this regard have been held.  
The Committee advise the Ministry to get a review study done of each and every 
organisation working in Jute Sector by an expert agency/consultant with clear 
mandate to develop Jute Sector in a decentralised manner with active 

15 
 
 
 
participation of all stake holders where Government play the role of just a 
facilitator. 
 The Committee express its dissatisfaction with reply of the Ministry, they 
have merely referred to the Activities/roles of the organisation like National Jute 
Board, Jute Corporation of India, Office of Jute Commissioner, Indian Jute 
industries research Association (IJIRA) and Centre for Jute machinery 
Development (CJMD),  The Committee had recommended to evaluate the 
relevance of these institutions and realign and reorient their role so as to be in 
consonance with the present requirements.  The Committee reiterate its earlier 
recommendations in this regard and strongly recommend to undertake a review 
of relevance/functions of  these organisations by an expert agency and take 
necessary steps, if required, to abolish, amalgamate, merge these 
organisations, to make them conducive and responsive to development of jute 
industry in country.  
13. The Committee with a view to develop the Jute Industry on modern lines and 
revamp the entire Jute Sector had recommended to place the India’s Jute 
Development Programme in the hands of Jute growers, entrepreneurs and other 
professionals in an organised cooperative frame work wherein, inputs, seed banks, 
plants, manufacturing units/mills, marketing network are owned, maintained and 
controlled by Societies/Associations and stake holder.  The Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to take initiative in developing a decentralised cooperative 
model with the active involvement and participation of different groups of farmers, 
entrepreneurs and industry etc.   
 The Committee find that at present the Jute Sector is dominated by composite 
Jute Mills, which are 98 in number. The Government of India owns 6 mills, the 

16 
 
 
 
Government of Tripura and Orissa own 1 mill each, 1 mill in Assam is operating in the 
co-operative sector, and the rest 89 are in private hands. A significant number of mills 
are considered inefficient, use obsolete technology and are purportedly also involved 
in manipulating, use obsolete technology and are purportedly also involved in 
manipulating the subsidy system for reaping benefits fraudulently. On the other end 
the spectrum, jute growers/farmers also face many problems. They do not get 
remunerative price for their produce. Sometimes there is no demand for raw jute in 
the market, and they face problems associated with price fluctuation, non-availability 
of inputs, lack of training, etc. similarly, entrepreneurs and small units engaged in 
production of jute products do not get quality raw material readily. There is a need to 
place India’s jute development programmers in the hands of jute growers, 
entrepreneurs and other professionals in an organized co-operative framework, 
wherein inputs, seed banks, retting plants, manufacturing units/mills, marketing 
network, etc. are maintained and controlled by the Jute farmers/producers at the 
village level. The Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry should take the 
initiative in developing decentralized cooperative model with the active involvement of 
voluntary groups which have been successfully operating in the area such as the 
Bharat SevaSangh so that the farmers and the marginal workers can earn their 
livelihood without facing the uncertainty of market forces. 
 
14. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 “NJB in association with Jute Corporation of India (JCI), ICAR-CRIJAF & ICAR-
NINFET has been implementing Jute-ICARE (Improved Cultivation and Advanced 
Retting Exercise) project to facilitate the Jute farmers with modern agronomic 
practices. Under the programme the following implements are provided to the 
registered farmers:  
 
I. Certified High Yield variety seeds at 50% subsidized rate. 
II. Seed Drill, Nail Weeder and Cycle Weeder machines at free of cost.  
III. Retting accelerators viz. CRIJAF-SONA & NINFET-SATHI are being supplied 
free of cost. 
IV. Excavation of In-situ retting ponds in convergence with MGNREGA, RKVY and 
PMKSY Schemes. 

17 
 
 
 
V. The seeds and other implements under Jute-ICARE are distributed by the field 
offices of JCI by involving the local cooperatives, farmers club / FPOs, including 
Bharat SevaSangh etc.” 
 
15. The Committee are disappointed at the Perfunctory manner and callous 
disregard with which the Ministry have furnished Action Taken replies on such 
an important observation/recommendations of the Committee, which was  
meant to shape and guide the India’s Jute Industry in future.  The Ministry have 
merely informed and mentioned the Name and salient features of Jute-I CARE 
(Improved Cultivation and Advanced retting exercise), an scheme which was 
launched back in year 2015. 
 The Committee, with a view, not just to save the moribund Jute Industry 
but make it vibrant, robust and self sustaining, urge and enjoin the Ministry to 
transform the entire existing setup of the Industry dominated by 
institutions/organisations under control of Government and few Jute Mills.  The 
Committee are of firm opinion that jute industry should be develop in a 
decentralised manner, comprising of cooperatives, SHG, Multi Stakeholders 
Cooperatives, start-ups, farmer groups etc. all working in tandem and in a 
collaborative approach .  The Committee would like to be apprised of the Action 
Taken by the Ministry within six months of the presentation of the Report. 
Revitalising the Jute Sector – Operation Golden Fibre” 
16. The Committee had noted that, the Jute Industry occupies an important place in 
the national economy more significant in achieving environment friendly goals. 
Termed as the ‘Golden Fiber’, Jute meets all the standards required for ‘safe’ 

18 
 
 
 
packaging. Being a natural, renewable, biodegradable and eco-friendly product, 
demand for jute will only increase in future, especially as an alternative to 
plastics/synthetic materials. The Committee, in this regard, noted that the jute industry 
provides direct employment to about 0.37 million workers in the organized mills and in 
diversified units including the tertiary sector and allied activities, and supports the 
livelihood of several lakhs of farm families. The total turnover of jute industry is around 
`  10000 crore, with approximately 40 lakh farmers engaged in Jute farming and the 
country contributing about 70 percent of the World’s jute production and products. The 
key to success and growth of the jute industry is modernization and diversification. 
Quality jute has to be produced, capacity has to be built, cultivators have to be 
incentivized and the demand for raw jute has to be met successfully. The Committee 
visualized and aspired for a robust jute sector in future with a diversified jute products, 
increased exports as well as domestic consumption of this environment friendly 
product. Shrinking land and jute production is matter of concerned for committee. The 
committee therefore advised the Ministry to take necessary steps with a futuristic 
perspective by bringing more land under production educate people through various 
means to adopt jute cultivation and promote the market for the products. The entire 
jute sector including the NJB need to be restructured to meet these goals. It is 
imperative on the part of the Ministry to draw a perspective plan for increasing the 
area under jute production, improving productivity and net profits in the hands of 
farmers, close the door for fly-by-night operators and diversified usage of jute 
products. The Committee therefore specifically recommended launching “Operation 
Golden Fiber” on lines similar to “Operation Flood”.  As already emphasized upon the 
Ministry needs to take action to involve local organizations, Cooperatives, NGOs, Self 
Help Groups, and Women’s Organizations in various allied work in the sector so that 
the entities concerned are enabled in carrying out their operations in trouble free 
manner and the programme is successful. The Committee would await the details of 
action taken by the Ministry in the matter. 
17. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 

19 
 
 
 
 “The National Jute Development Program (NJDP) has been approved in the 
meeting of SFC of Ministry of Textiles, held on 20th May 2021. NJDP is an 
umbrella scheme for overall development and promotion of jute sector starting 
from Agriculture to finished products including Market Promotion of Jute and 
Jute Products. The total outlay of the Program is `  485.58 crore for the period of 
15th Finance Commission (2021-22 to 2025-26). The various schemes with 
objectives are given below: -     
1. JUTE-ICARE (Improved Cultivation And  Retting Exercise) Scheme 
 With introduction of a package of modern and scientific agronomic practices, for 
quality and productivity improvement in Jute  Cultivation. Land under Jute 
ICARE has to be covered during 05 years from 125000 lakh hectares to 270000 
hectares.  
  Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS) 
(I) Capital Subsidy for Acquisition of Plant & Machinery (CSAPM)  for Jute 
Diversified Products : To Facilitate modernization / Upgradation of the existing 
Jute  mills and  MSME  JDP  Units,  manufacturing Jute  Diversified  Products, 
incentive @ 30% on cost of the JDP machineries is provided.  
 
(II) Jute Resource  Cum  Production Centre (JRCPC) : To  spread jute  
diversification  programme  by  providing trainings to  new  artisans, NGOs/ 
WSHGs for sustained  employment   in  production  of  JDPs. 
 
(III) Jute  Raw  Material  Bank (JRMB) :  To Supply jute raw materials to  Jute  
Artisans, MSMEs  JDP  Producing units,  and Beneficiaries  of  JRCPCs  to  
manufacture  Jute  Diversified  Products  at  Mill  Gate  Price 
 
 (IV) Jute  Retail  Outlets (JRO) : To facilitate existing  and  new Artisans /  
Entrepreneurs,  for  promotion & Sale of JDPs  through  Retail  Outlets /  
Showroom. 
 
(V) Jute  Design  Resource  Centre   (JDRC):  Designing and  development  
of Market  worthy innovative  Jute Diversified  Products through NIFT/NID and 
helping  existing  and  new  JDP  manufacturers  and  exporters.  
 
(VI) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) : Jute Mills and MSME JDP units 
exporting JDPs to be supported with incentive @ 5% of the cost of jute raw 
material or 3% of export value and making them cost competitive in the 
international markets to help fetch export orders for JDPs. 
 
2. Market Development & Promotion Scheme (MDPS) : To support  the  
JDP  units  for  promotion  and  sale  of  JDPs,   in  the  Domestic  market 

20 
 
 
 
and to   registered  jute  exporters to boost  export of  jute  goods. 
Development  of  Jute  Mark  Logo  for certification  of  Quality  Jute  
Diversified  products and Launching Publicity  campaign  to  popularise  
Jute  as  Eco-friendly  products  in  Domestic  and  international  market. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
18. In the course of examining the Audit observations, it was evident that though 
the Officers of the Ministry were aware of problems facing the jute sector yet, no 
concrete action seems to have been initiated to address the problems. The committee 
expected that the recommendations made in the report are considered with due 
seriousness and implemented for addressing the issues ailing the sector. The 
Committee desired that the Action Taken Notes on the Audit observations are 
furnished to the satisfaction of the Audit and clear and unambiguous action taken 
replies furnished to the Committee in respect of each Recommendation/Observation 
made in this report. 
 
19. The Ministry of Textiles in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 “With a view to addressing the problems in jute agriculture, product 
development in Mill/MSME JDP sector, the National Jute Development Program 
(NJDP) – An umbrella scheme for development and promotion of jute sector is 
being implemented by National Jute Board during 15th Finance Commission 
Period (2021-2 to 2025-26) at total financial outlay of `  485.58 crore. The 
program comprises following schemes for overall development of jute sector.  
Jute ICARE (Improved Cultivation and Advanced Retting Exercise) – 
Introduction of modern and scientific agronomic practices in jute agriculture.  
 
Jute Diversification –Modernization upgradation for manufacturing JDPs, 
providing trainings to new artisans / WSHGs for sustain employment, Jute Raw 
Material Bank, Jute Retail Outlet, Jute Design Resource Centre, Production 
Linked Incentive.  
 

21 
 
 
 
Market Development Promotion Schemes for Jute Products.  
 
The recommendations and guidance of the Committee has been duly taken into 
consideration while framing scheme specific guidelines of NJDP.” 
 
20. The Committee taking into account the importance of Jute Sector from 
both economic and environmental point of view and in view of myriad problems 
being faced by Jute Sector, had recommended the Ministry to launch ‘operation 
Golden Fibre” on lines similar to ‘Operation Flood’ in a mission mode.  
However, the Ministry in their Action Taken Notes has simply stated that a New 
National Jute Development Programme has been approved as an Umbrella 
Scheme consisting of Jute ICARE, Jute Diversification, Market Development 
Promotion Schemes, etc. 
 The Committee feel surprised rather perturbed to note that the ministry 
has not fathomed the significance and considered opinion of the Committee to 
revamp, revitalise rather resurrect the Jute Sector from present State of 
Stagnancy and decline.  The Ministry has simply stated that a New Scheme 
christened rather rechristened as National Jute Development Programme has 
been approved as an umbrella Scheme, with a total outlay of ` 485.58 crore for 
the period of 15th Finance Commission i.e. 2021-22 to 2025 -26.  The Committee 
vehemently oppose this kind of approach, this will not serve the purpose to 
develop the Jute Sector.  This is just a cluster of programmes with a target just 
to spend ` 485.58 crores over a period of five years.  The Committee feel 
apprehensive that the scheme and the fund provided under the proposed 

22 
 
 
 
scheme will not yield the desired result unless structural changes are effected, 
the Committee feel that Jute Sector does not simply need an Umbrella Scheme, 
it requires an ecosystem to function and flourish, a paradigm shift in approach, 
fresh ideas, refreshed thinking.    The Committee reminds the Ministry that there 
is tremendous opportunity in Jute Sector for job creation, growth, earnings for 
both raw jute farmers and entrepreneurs and in fact for all stakeholders 
especially in view of potential of jute products as a replacement for plastic 
products which have recently been banned in country, the Committee exhorts 
the Ministry to get up from deep slumber and recognise and realise that the 
Jute Industry is at cusp of change, and unless we take prompt corrective action, 
we will miss the golden opportunity for golden fibre.   The Committee, therefore,  
reiterates its recommendation to draft a scheme with futuristic perspective to 
restructure the entire Jute Sector on a New footing, e.g. New Generation 
Cooperatives/Multi Stakeholder cooperatives, start-ups, whereby 
farmers/producers of raw Jute themselves process the raw commodity, as a 
result, farmers not only receive market prices for their produce, they also gain 
the opportunity to profit from processing and marketing these value added 
products.  In this there is no requirement of providing  funds for each 
programme, the Government just need to hand hold these types of 
cooperatives.  The Committee would await the details of the Action taken by the 
Ministry on above lines within six months of presentation of the report. 
 

23 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
  6  February, 2024              Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 