60

PREPAREDNESS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
(SDGs)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 3210 Report (17" Lok
Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

SIXTIETH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2288

SIXTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PREPAREDNESS FOR THE

IMPLEMENTATION OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 320 Report (177 Lok
Sabha)]

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: WY. 19-2022.

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ly 2: 2022

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2022-23)

INTRODUCTION .............................. ७७० ceeetteeeeesseeeeteseneesa

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

रि670ां ........................... ५५५५० ५७००० ०००५५ ५५५०

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................--

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration .........................-५-----७०००००५० ०५० ५५५५५५५

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEPlIOS oo... ce eect eee eeeteeeee eee ens

APPENDICES

“Minutes of the 12" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2022-23) held on 57" December, 2022.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Thirty-
second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3... Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

4... Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
9... Shri Brijendra Singh

10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

12. Shri Jayant Sinha

13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik

19. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

20. Vacant"

21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

* Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha
on 21 June, 2022.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixtieth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Thirty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Preparedness for the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals” relating to NITI Aayog.

2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 15"... March, 2021. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Committee considered and adopted the Sixtieth Report at their Sitting held on 05
December, 2022. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-/.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 December, 2022 Chairperson,

16 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Thirty-Second Report of the Public Accounts Committee (17" Lok Sabha) on
"Preparedness for the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)".

2. The Thirty-Second Report (17" Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 157 March, 2021 contained 20 Observations/Recommendations.
The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have
been received from the NITI Aayog and these are broadly categorized as follows:

i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1 to 20
Total: 20
Chapter — Il

ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter — Ill

iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - IV

iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies/no replies:
NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V

3. The 32™ Report of PAC (17" Lok Sabha) was based on the Audit Review of the
preparedness of the Government for the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), Audit had observed several deficiencies in the preparedness for


2

Implementation of SDGs viz. non-initiation of measures towards preparation of a
roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be achieved, non-
conducting of meetings of the Multi-disciplinary Task Force at regular intervals, delay in
finalisation of 15 year Vision Document, mapping exercise undertaken in the selected
States was not comprehensive, focused or sustained, no centralized Public awareness
campaign was envisaged, strategy document did not project the financing and
budgeting requirements, delay in approval of NIF held up finalization of monitoring and
reporting framework on implementation of SDGs, there was no proposal to identify
milestones for the national indicators, specific and sustained measures for promoting
awareness and stakeholders involvement with Goal 3 were not seen in the States,
Policy Coherence initiatives undertaken were either absent or inadequate in states,
need for augmentation of Public health expenditure and non-availability of
regular/uniform data for certain health indicators etc. The Committee had accordingly
given the Observations/ Recommendations in their Thirty - Second Report (17" Lok
Sabha). Gist of important Observations/Recommendations as contained in this Report
is given as under:

a) The Committee, while expecting a suitable explanation in this regard impressed
upon NITI Aayog on the need for arranging meetings at quarterly intervals so that the
suggestions/feedback may become available more frequently, and consequently boost
the monitoring process.

b) The Committee desired that NITI Aayog pursue the matter with the defaulting
States for expeditious completion of the required documents and put in place an
effective co-ordinating/monitoring mechanism in order to fast track the achievement of
the SDGs and related targets.

०) The Committee were of opinion that there is a need to share the commitments for
the future with the younger generation. The Committee would, therefore, expect to be
apprised of the measures taken in this direction.

d) The Committee desired that NITI Aayog should have an Interactive web page to
teach out to the States and the general public.

e) The Committee desired that NITI Aayog should frame detailed guidelines for the
Private Sector to enable the sector to channel their resources and activities towards
achievement of SDGs. Businesses need to be invited to apply their creativity and


3

innovation towards solving sustainable development challenges and engaged as
partners in the development process. The Committee further desired that NGOs and
similar organisations involved in charity work are apprised of SDGs through various
means and they may be encouraged to participate in the awareness programme on
SDGs.

f) The Committee recommended that MoSPI should initiate effective steps
expeditiously so as to identify the milestones for all the indicators and commence
working on these indicators in right earnest.

9) The Committee desired that besides the meetings of Ministries concerned and
the Task Force, Members of Parliament, MLAs, Chairman, Zila Panchayat, District
Health officer, Officers at the Block level etc. may also be associated with the task of
taising awareness and thereby enabling effective participation in achievement of SDGs.
h) The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
should develop an_ effective mechanism for monitoring the various
programmes/schemes at the Block, District and State level so as to achieve the target
of mapping by all the States.

i) The Committee desired that with a view to improving health services in remote
areas, at least one Allopathic doctor along with paramedical staff should be posted in
each Wellness Centre. The Committee felt that there was also an imperative need to
constantly monitor the functioning of Wellness Centres at regular intervals besides
ensuring regular attendance of Doctors so that the goal of providing affordable, effective
and reliable health care, especially for the poor in the rural areas is achieved.

4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which either need

reiteration or merit Comments.

1. Efforts towards mainstreaming activities pertaining to SDGs
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

5. The Committee noted that NITI Aayog had undertaken several multi-disciplinary
stakeholder consultations and conducted periodic reviews with States and UTs for
mainstreaming activities like preparation of vision/strategy documents; creation of nodal
structures; mapping of targets; capacity building for implementing, monitoring and


4

evaluation; formulation of state-specific indicators and orienting budgets with SDGs.
However, preparation of a roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to
be achieved was not initiated till the time of presentation of the Audit Report. The
Committee, in this regard, noted that milestones for the SDGs have been a part of the
2030 Agenda. For achieving these milestones, comprehensive and co-ordinated efforts
of all stakeholders is a necessity. The Committee were surprised to note that the nodal
institution, NIT| Aayog pursued the matter with the States for developing the roadmaps
only after the issue was pointed out by Audit. The Committee, in this regard, expressed
the view that the apparently inappropriate attitude displayed at the initial stage towards
a commitment made by India in the United Nations may have a bearing on the good
standing the country has in the pursuit of SDGs. The Committee, therefore, exhorted
NITI Aayog to take suitable measures to compensate for the delayed action. NITI
Aayog’s role in implementation of SDGs in the Allocation of Business should be clearly
specified. The Committee also desired to have details of the current status of
development of roadmaps by all the States/UTs and remedial measures taken against
the defaulting States/UTs.

6. The NITI Aayog in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“A roadmap usually includes objectives, milestones, deliverables and planned
timeline. NIT| Aayog has been working with the States and UTs right from the
year 2016 to help develop these key elements of the SDG roadmap. As has also
been maintained before, objectives and milestones are clearly enunciated in the
SDGs and associated targets as endorsed by India along with other countries.
Vision Documents of States and UTs reconfirm the SDGs, indicate strategies to
achieve them and also inform about programmes and _ initiatives being
implemented in that direction. The SDG mapping of schemes/programmes and
departments also reorient them in the direction of SDG implementation. The
monitoring of schemes and programmes is further focused by the adoption of
State SDG Indicator Frameworks, which are prepared in consistency with the
National Indicator Framework and also by addressing the contextual specificities
of respective States. Monitoring conducted along the indicators help in focusing
on deliverables (programme outputs) in keeping with the timeline. As of now,
most States (except Goa, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana, and West Bengal) and some UTs (except Chandigarh, Jammu and
Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and
Diu) have Vision Documents. Similarly, most States (except Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Maharashtra, Punjab and Telangana, where it is under preparation) and some
UTs (Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Delhi) have already prepared State
Indicator Framework. NITI Aayog is continuously following up with the States and
UTs for preparation and use of State Indicator Framework for monitoring.


7.

5

The SDG India Index computed annually since 2018 has played a very effective
role in goading States and UTs in their efforts towards implementation and
achievement of SDGs. It brings out the status of States and UTs in terms of SDG
achievement based on latest available data and ranks their performance. India is
internationally acknowledged as a pioneering country to have developed,
adopted and regularly used such a tool in monitoring SDG achievement at
national and sub-national levels.”

During the course of vetting of the aforesaid replies of NITI aayog, Audit stated

as under:

9.

“NITI Aayog had not responded to the PAC’s recommendation regarding clearly
specifying its role in implementation of SDGs in the Allocation of Business.

Preparation of Vision Document and State Indicator Framework is yet to be
completed by all the States/UTs. As desired by PAC, measures taken against the
defaulting States/UTs may be elucidated.”

In reply to the aforesaid Audit observation, NITI Aayog submitted as under:

“It is not for NIT Aayog to modify the Allocation of Business Rules.

With regard to ensuring that States/UTs prepare Vision Document and State
Indicator Framework, measures taken by NITI Aayog fall into three categories.
NITI Aayog takes up the matter in meetings with the States/UTs concerned.
Second, it brings up the issues in common reviews with States and presses for
action. Third, the SDG India Index Report records the performance of States and
UTs in the context of comparison and ranking, which has substantial influencing
and persuasive power.”

In their Original Report the Committee had observed that work on

preparing a roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be

achieved was not initiated till the time of presentation of Audit Report. While

exhorting NITI Aayog to take suitable measures to compensate for the delayed

action, the Committee desired to be apprised of the current status of formulation

of roadmaps by all the States/UTs and remedial measures taken against the
defaulting States/UTs. In this regard, NITI Aayog in their ATN informed the
Committee that as of now, most States (except Goa, Kerala Meghalaya, Odisha,

Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and West Bengal) and some UTs (except

Chandigarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep and Dadra and Nagar

Haveli and Daman and Diu) have prepared vision documents. Similarly, most


6

States (except Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Telengana, where it
is under preparation) and some UTs (Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Delhi)
have already prepared State Indicator Framework. From the information
furnished, it is evident that a number of States and UTs neither have the Vision
Document ready nor developed the State Indicator Framework. Moreover, as for
the Action Taken towards formulation of roadmaps by all the States/UTs, NITI
Aayog have merely stated that they are continuously following up with the States
and UTs the matter of preparing the State Indicator Framework for monitoring.
Considering the facts of the matter, the Committee feel constrained to observe
that no sincere efforts have been made by the NITI Aayog to ensure that the
States/UTs prepare their Vision Document and State Indicator Framework. The
Committee are also perturbed to note that no concrete measures have been taken
by the NIT! Aayog to ensure that the State Governments prepare the documents.
The Committee cannot accept the flippant attitude towards this pertinent issue
after it was highlighted by Audit in their Audit Report and the recommendation of
the Committee as made in their 320 Report (177 Lok Sabha). Though, several
steps are stated to have been taken by the NITI Aayog to ensure that States/UTs
prepare their roadmap with defined milestones, the status still remains the same.
While reiterating their recommendation made in this regard, the Committee
emphasize upon NITI Aayog to take some stringent measures against those
States/UTs who, are yet to prepare the roadmaps. Responsibility of the concerned
officials may also be fixed for the delay in preparation of the Vision Document
and State Indicator Framework. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
details of the action taken in this regard as well as the current status of
development of roadmaps by all the States/UTs and remedial action taken against
the defaulting States /UTs.

i. Meetings of the Multi-Disciplinary Task Force
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

10. | The Committee found that apart from directly reviewing the work on SDGs in the
State and Central Ministries, NIT| Aayog had constituted in August 2017 a multi-
disciplinary Task Force to analyse and review implementation of SDGs. Though the


7

Task Force was required to meet at least once in each quarter, the Committee found

that only two meetings were held since its constitution. The Committee, while expecting

a suitable explanation in this regard impressed upon NITI Aayog on the need for

arranging meetings at quarterly intervals so that the suggestions/feedback may become

available more frequently, and consequently boost the monitoring process.

11.

12.

13.

14.

In their Action Taken Note, NITI Aayog submitted as follows:

“The membership of the SDG Task Force comprised four representatives from
NITI Aayog, one each from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation, one from the National Institute of
Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), one from the Research and Development
System for Developing Countries (RIS) as well as one representative each from
three State Governments and one Central Ministry on an annual rotation basis.
Experience showed that the participation of Central Ministries and State
Governments was limited and restrictive and likely to generate a sense of
exclusion in other States/UTs not part of the Task Force on a regular basis.
Participation of experts also needed to be more broad-based. Therefore, after the
2020 VNR preparatory meeting, no other meeting of the said Task Force has
been undertaken, primarily due to the challenges imposed by the pandemic.
While a more widely sourced technical consultative group is being formed,
regular consultations with States and UTs have continued.”

In their vetting comments to aforesaid Action Taken Note, Audit stated as under:

“PAC may take a suitable view of Ministry's reply that no other meeting of the
Task Force has been undertaken after the 2020 VNR preparatory meeting.
Further, composition of technical consultative group being formed along with
outcomes of meetings of the said group may be furnished to PAC.”

In response to the aforesaid Audit Comments, NITI Aayog submitted as follows:

“With a view to accessing broader consultative and technical support, the SDG
Task Force has been reconstituted on 20.09.2021 with Vice Chairman, NITI
Aayog as the Chair. The membership of the Task Force has now been expanded
to include eight Central Ministries/Departments and all States/UTs on a regular
basis. This improves the strategic compass of the Task Force and the expertise
at its disposal. The next meeting will be scheduled in the 2™ half of October
2021.”

While observing that only two meetings were held since the constitution of

multi-disciplinary Task Force in August 2017, to analyse and review the

implementation of SDGs, the Committee in their 32"! Report had impressed upon

NITI Aayog on the need for arranging such meetings at quarterly intervals in


8

order to get their suggestions/feedback more frequently. In their Action Taken
Notes, NITI Aayog have informed inter-alia that the participation of Central
Ministries and State Governments was limited and restrictive and participation of
experts also needed to be more broad-based. This amply reveals that the Apex
policy-making body, NITI Aayog, while constituting the Task Force could not
foresee these bottlenecks and resorted to an adhoc approach. The Committee
feel that analyzing and reviewing the implementation of SDGs is a very important
task and NITI Aayog should have adopted a more professional approach by
taking into consideration all concomitant facts while constituting the Task Force
so that the bottlenecks which were faced could have been avoided. The
Committee have also been informed that no meeting of the Task Force was held
after 2020 VNR preparatory meeting primarily due to challenges imposed by the
Pandemic. However, it has now been informed that with a view to accessing
broader consultative and technical support, the SDG Task Force was re-
constituted on 20-09-2021 with the meetings scheduled. The Action Taken Note
submitted by NITI Aayog is however, silent on the reasons for not conducting
such sittings regularly and efforts made in this direction. Only the pandemic
situation is cited as being the contributing factor in this regard, which is not
acceptable and NITI Aayog should have explored the possibility of conducting
such meetings virtually during the pandemic. The Action Taken Note also does
not specify the steps initiated by NITI Aayog to persuade the Central
Ministries/State Governments for joining the Task Force. This is indicative of a
non-serious approach displayed by NITI Aayog on this aspect. The Committee
would like to know the position of participation of Central Ministries and State
Governments in the re-constituted SDG Task Force. The Committee may also be
apprised of the reasons that prompted NITI Aayog to re-constitute the SDG Task
Force, when the earlier Task Force had not done anything tangible. The
Committee would, therefore, desire NITI Aayog take all necessary measures with
the view to ensuring that the meetings of the re-constituted Task Force are held
at regular intervals. The Committee feel that holding meetings of the re-
constituted Task Force regularly as per requirement will not only strengthen the
existing mechanism for analyzing and reviewing implementation of SDGs, but


9

also enable NITI Aayog to keep a constant watch over the progress in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. The Committee would also like to be
informed of the meetings of the re-constituted Task Force held so far and the
outcome thereof.

Ill. Preparation of "15 Year Vision Document"
(Recommendation Para No. 5)

415. The Committee were concerned to note that the “15 Year Vision Document”
which is to serve as the basis for the strategy and Action Agenda document is yet to be
released although five years have passed. The Committee were appreciative of the
intention of NIT| Aayog to make the vision Document broad-based and integrally
focused on States expectations and priorities owing to which importance has been
given to obtain inputs from the Ministries and the States. While noting that NITI Aayog is
in the process of reviewing and finalizing the draft document and has assigned the work
to a multi-disciplinary team, the Committee found it to be intriguing in this regard is that
it was only after the Audit pointed out this issue, that NIT| Aayog took the initiative of
assigning the work to a multi-disciplinary team. The Committee had desired to be
apprised of the conclusive details in regard to the date on which the multi-disciplinary
team was constituted and by when the vision Document would be finalised. The
Committee desired to be apprised of the conclusive details in this regard.

16. In their Action Taken Note, NITI Aayog stated as under:

“The work on the preparation of the Vision Document has been underway for the
last two years. However, preparation has been delayed due to the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the pandemic has necessitated re-working of
the growth models, assumptions and requires new sets of data to project key
economic indicators for the next 15 years incorporating the post-COVID reality.
Taking this into account, the exercise of making fresh projections has
commenced and preparation of the Vision Document is expected to be
completed by March 2022.”

17. The Committee were constrained to observe that the “15 Year Vision
document”, which was to serve as the basis for the strategy and Action Agenda
document was not released till the presentation of 32"? Report (17" Lok Sabha) of
Public Accounts Committee to Parliament. Apprising the Committee about the
present position of preparation of the Vision Document, the NITI Aayog in their


10

ATN has stated that since the impact of the Pandemic has necessitated re-
working of the growth models and requires new set of data to project key
economic indicators for the next 15 years, the preparation of this document is
expected to be completed by early 2022. The Committee would desire to be
apprised of the present position in regard to formulating and implementing the

Vision Document.

IV. Preparation for achieving the SDGs Goals
(Recommendation Para No. 6)

18. So far as the preparation for achieving the goals at the State level is concerned,
the Committee felt perturbed to note that the work on Vision/Strategy/Action Agenda
documents in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were at preparatory stage. Kerala had
prepared a Perspective plan, 2030 in the year 2014 but the Plan has not been reviewed
and realigned with SDGs. Chhattisgarh had published its Vision 2030 document in
March 2019. The Committee also regretted to observe that the mapping exercise
undertaken in the selected States was not comprehensive. For instance, certain
Schemes/Goals/Targets have reportedly not been mapped at all in Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee were
constrained to observe that NITI Aayog had not explained the reasons for slow progress
at the State level and the obstacles the States may have been facing in
adopting/implementing the SDGs. The Committee desired that the monitoring agency,
NITI Aayog needs to identify and recognize the difficulties faced by different States,
assist in addressing them and apprise the Committee of the same. The Committee also
desired NIT] Aayog to pursue the matter with the defaulting States for expeditious
completion of the required documents and put in place an effective co-
ordinating/monitoring mechanism in order to fast track the achievement of the SDGs
and related targets.

19. In the Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendations, the Committee
submitted as under:

“NITI Aayog continues to follow up with the States with respect to localisation of
SDGs. States excepting those of Goa, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Telangana and West Bengal have completed/adopted their Vision


20.

21.

22.

11

2030. All the States have also completed their mapping documents and reviewed
their mapping of schemes with a view to making them comprehensive.

In the context of SDG localisation, States have increasingly laid emphasis on
monitoring of SDG implementation and assessment of progress. All the States,
except the State of Punjab, have State Indicator Frameworks (SIF) in place. The
SIFs are extremely useful in monitoring of various schemes and tracking of
outputs/outcomes thereof as relevant to corresponding SDG targets. States have
put in place high level institutional mechanisms under the leadership of senior
officials to review progress on a regular basis. In course of the last one year, NITI
Aayog has extensively visited the States (Assam, Meghalaya, Odisha, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Arunachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Sikkim among others) to
orient key government officials on general issues of SDGs, the SDG India Index,
Indicator Frameworks and tracking of progress.

NIT! Aayog is also working with laggard States on the matters of concern. For
instance, after the release of the SDG India Index 2020-21 on 3% June 2021, the
NITI Aayog team is visiting the States to discuss progress on 506
implementation, highlight issues and concerns and explore remedial measures at
the highest level — in many cases involving the Chief Ministers. So far, the States
of Assam, Meghalaya, Odisha, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra
Pradesh, Sikkim and Nagaland have already been visited.”

In their Vetting Comments Audit observed as follows:

“Reply is silent on putting in place an effective coordinating/monitoring
mechanism in order to fast track the achievement of the SDGs and related
targets.”

In response to abovesaid Audit observation, NITI Aayog stated as under:

“NIT| Aayog’s role and function in coordination and monitoring of SDG
implementation has been described. Further, the reconstituted SDG Task Force
will play an important role in strengthening the monitoring and coordination
process.”

In their Original Report, while noticing that NITI Aayog has advised the

States to do their own mapping in consonance with the manner it is done at the

Central level, the Committee desired NITI Aayog to pursue the matter with the

defaulting States for expeditiously completing the required documents and

establishing an effective co-ordinating / monitoring mechanism in order to fast

track the achievement of the SDGs and related targets. In their ATN, NITI Aayog

have stated that States, except Goa, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil

Nadu, Telangana and West Bengal have completed/adopted their Vision 2030. All


12

the States have also completed their mapping documents and reviewed mapping
of schemes with a view to making them comprehensive. However, NITI Aayog
have not furnished the information regarding putting in place an effective
coordinating/ monitoring mechanism so as to ensure expeditiously achieving the
SDGs and related targets. The Committee wonder how in the absence of effective
monitoring mechanism NITI Aayog can review the achievement of targets by the
States and also reviewed the action initiated/taken against the defaulting States.
While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee urge the NITI
Aayog to vigorously pursue the matter with the remaining States and desire to be
apprised of the remedial/corrective action taken in this regard. They would also
like to be informed of the complete/updated details of the preparation of
Vision/Strategy/Action Agenda Documents and mapping of Schemes/Goals /
Targets by all the States/UTs within a period of three months of the presentation
of this Report to Parliament.

५४. Mobilisation of Resources for Implementation of 50७ Agenda
(Recommendation No. 10)

23. The Committee observed that no comprehensive exercise for assessing and
identifying the financial resources required for implementing SDGs has been
undertaken either by the Ministry of Finance at the Centre or by the selected States. No
steps have been initiated at the Central level for integrating SDGs in national budgeting
and most of the selected States were only at the preliminary stage of orienting their
budget with SDGs even after 5 years following the General Assembly Resolution. The
Committee found that NIT] Aayog has not been able to apprise the Committee of the
steps taken towards integration of 506 related financial resources in national
budgeting. It was only after the Committee took up the subject for examination, that NITI
Aayog took the initiative of conducting a study by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for estimating the
financial resources needed to achieve the SDGs in the areas of education, health,
electricity, roads and water and sanitation. The study Report was currently stated to be
under finalization. The Committee desired to be apprised of the outcome of the study
and follow up action taken thereon by the NITI Aayog and Ministry of Finance


13

(Department of Economic Affairs). The Committee were of the view in this regard even
in the likelihood of harmonizing the SDGs with the Central Sector Schemes, the benefit
towards achieving SDGs should be clearly delineated so that India can showcase the

country’s achievement.

24. — In their Action Taken Note, NITI Aayog stated as under:

“The study conducted by Ministry of Finance (D/o Economic Affairs) jointly with
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for estimating the financial resources needed
to achieve SDGs in the areas of education, health, electricity, roads and water
and sanitation is under finalisation.”

25. In their vetting comments Audit observed that the probable date of finalization of
study report may be intimated to PAC.

26. The Committee are perturbed to note that the study by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for estimating the financial resources
needed to achieve the SDGs in the areas of education, health, electricity roads
and water and sanitation is yet to be finalised. The Committee are concerned to
note that the NITI Aayog have merely furnished the same reply which was placed
before them prior to presentation of original Report on the subject. The very fact
that the Study is yet to be finalised, despite the lapse of two years, confirms the
conviction of the Committee that no sincere efforts have been made by NITI
Aayog as well as the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to
complete the same at the earliest. The Committee would like to know the reasons
for delay in finalisation of such Study Report and the precise date by which it
would be completed. The Committee would like NIT] Aayog to convey the
Committee’s concern over the delay in finalization of the study to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and request them to expedite the
same. The Committee would like to be informed of the status of the study within a
period of two months.

VI. National Indicator Framework (NIF)

Recommendation Para No. 11

27. The Committee noted that for enabling monitoring and review, the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has been entrusted with the task of


14

developing a National Indicator Framework (NIF) which was published only in
November 2018. As a result, tasks that are key to the institution of a proper monitoring
and reporting framework such as preparation of baseline data were completed only in
March 2019. Milestones have not been aligned with the timelines for achieving the
targets. In the seven selected States, action on developing indicators and identification
of data sources has not achieved required level of progress. The Committee were
apprised in this regard that the NIF, with 306 indicators was devised by MoSPI in
consultation with all stakeholders. Further, data in respect of 250 indicators is currently
said to be available and for collecting the data for rest of the indicators, new surveys
have reportedly been initiated. Some such surveys include the periodic Labour Force
Survey (PLFS), Time Use Surveys (TUS), Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) on
Agriculture Households Conditions etc. The Committee, while appreciating the steps
initiated by MoSPI, desired to know as to when these surveys were initiated and the
time frame by which the surveys would be completed. The Committee desired to be
apprised of the results of these surveys and also desired that data in respect of the
remaining milestones be compiled and made available expeditiously. While noting the
fact that some of the indicators which are a part of the General Assembly resolution are
treated as new in the Indian context for which, as informed by the Secretary, MoSPI,
milestones have not been delineated as of now, and would be worked out in course of
time, the Committee, recommended that MoSPI should initiate effective steps
expeditiously so as to identify the milestones for all the indicators and commence
working on these indicators in right earnest.

28. In their Action Taken Note NITI Aayog submitted as under:

“MoSPI developed the NIF for SDGs, in sync with Global Indicator Framework
(GIF), initially consisting of 306 national indicators (version 1.0) along with
identified data sources and periodicity in consultation with concerned
Ministries/Departments, UN Agencies and other stakeholders.

The Union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 24.10.2018, approved the proposal of
the Ministry on NIF for SDGs on constitution of High Level Steering Committee
(HLSC) to periodically review and refine the NIF. Accordingly, the HLSC under
the Chairmanship of Chief Statistician of India cum Secretary, MoSPI with
members from NITI Aayog, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Health and FW,
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Finance and
MoSPI has been constituted to periodically review, refine and modify the NIF.
Thenceforth, several initiatives have been taken by the MoSPI which inter-alia


15

include release of first Baseline Report on SDG-NIF, release of SDGs
Dashboard, preparation and circulation of guidelines for States/UTs for
development of State Indicator Framework, Capacity Development on SDGs for
Central and State officials, launching of new surveys for bridging the data gaps
by collecting data on certain indicators in the next round of National Sample
Surveys, alignment of existing surveys as per SDG data requirements, etc.

The NIF is evolutionary in nature and is refined from time to time in consultation
with line Ministries/Custodian Agencies. At present, the latest version of the NIF
(Version 3.1) consists of 295 indicators and data is available on 266 indicators.
MoSPI has conducted several surveys, such as, the Periodic Labour Force
Survey (PLFS), Time Use Surveys (TUS), Situation Assessment Survey (SAS)
on Agriculture Households Conditions etc. to come out with relevant data for a
number of indicators from the NIF.

With respect to initiating effective steps in order to identify the milestones for all
the indicators and commence working on these indicators in right earnest, MoSPI
had a meeting with NITI Aayog and thereafter the data source
Ministries/Departments along with the line Ministries/Departments, responsible
for implementation of respective SDGs, were requested to fix the milestones of
the concerned SDG national indicators so as to monitor the progress made
towards achieving the SDGs. The matter was rigorously followed with the line
Ministries/Departments and 5 online workshops with concerned line
Ministries/Departments were conducted so as to collectively resolve the issues
relating to fixing the milestones.

While facilitating the concerned data source/implementing Ministries/Department
in fixation the milestones for SDG indicators, the following challenges were
faced:

i. The data source Ministries/Departments were different from the
Implementing Ministries in respect of several SDG indicators because indicators
were based on Survey/Census/other compiled statistics;

i. For some of the SDG indicators, it was not feasible to set the milestones,
especially budget related indicators;

iii. The data source Ministries/Departments suggested refinements in the
some of the existing SDG indicators.

As per SDG NIF Progress Report 2021 (Version 3.1) released on 29" June,
2021; there are 295 indicators in the NIF and data is available for 266 indicators.
With regard to these 266 national indicators for which data is available, the status
on milestone setting is as under:

a. For 142 indicators either Milestones have been set or
Ministries/Departments have provided inputs or have submitted that it is not
feasible to set the milestones.

b. For the remaining indicators, the line Ministries/Departments have
informed that they are still working with their concerned Divisions/Wings/Units or
with other related Ministries (wherever applicable). MoSPI will continue to interact
with the line Ministries/Departments for facilitating milestones fixing on remaining
indicators.


16

29. In their Vetting Comments Audit observed that as data for 29 out of 295 National
indicators is still not available, efforts made by MoSPI may be intimated to PAC.

30.  ATN received from the NITI Aayog with respect to Vetting Comments is given as
under:

“MoSPI has released the Sustainable Development Goals-National Indicator
Framework Progress Report 2021 (version 3.1) on 29th June 2021. At present,
there are 295 indicators in National Indicator Framework (NIF), out of which data
is available for 266 indicators. MoSPI has taken several steps for compiling data
on the remaining 29 NIF indicators which inter-alia include conduct of a Multiple
Indicator Survey (MIS) during 78th Round of National Sample Survey (NSS).
Further, MoSPI is all set to launch a Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey
(CAMS) as part of NSS 79th round to capture and compile data on some of the
SDG indicators. Apart from this, MoSPI is rigorously pursuing with respective
subject matter Ministries of the Government of India for getting data for remaining
indicators.”
31. The Committee note from the ATNs that as per SDG NIF Progress Report,
2021, Version 3.1 (released on 29" June, 2021) there are 295 indicators in the NIF
and data is available for 266 indicators. In regard to compiling data on the
remaining 29 NIF indicators, several steps are stated to have been undertaken by
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation viz. launching a
Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey (CAMS) as part of National Sample
Survey (NSS) 79" round to capture and compile data on some of the indicators,
pursuing the respective subject matter with Ministries of Government of India for
getting data for remaining indicators etc. The Committee would like to know the
present status of collecting the data for remaining indicators as a result of the
aforesaid steps taken in this regard. Further, while providing status on milestone
setting in regard to 266 national indicators, the Committee have been informed
that for 142 indicators either milestones have been set or Ministries/Departments
have provided the inputs or have submitted that it is not feasible to set the
milestones. It has further been informed that MoSPI will continue to interact with
the line Ministries/Departments for facilitating milestones fixing on remaining
indicators. While appreciating the steps taken in this regard by the MoSPI, the
Committee would desire that the work relating to fixing of milestones on

remaining indicators be completed at the earliest so that the progress made


17

towards achieving the SDGs could be effectively monitored. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the present position in this regard.

Vil. Integration of Policy Framework

(Recommendation Para No. 15)
32. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has initiated

several measures that are supportive of achieving horizontal and vertical policy
coherence. However, coherent policy initiatives have either been absent or inadequate
in the States. In all the seven States, the Centre and the States have not been playing
their respective roles effectively in a collaborative manner for achieving the intended
outcomes. The Committee also felt anguished to note that with regard to the aspect of
vertical coherence, a working group set up by the M/o H&FW for implementing Goal 3 in
the States and UTs has not held any meeting. It was only after the issue was pointed
out by the Committee in their sitting on 23 January, 2020, that the Working Group of the
National Task Force held a meeting on 28 January, 2020. It was informed by the
Ministry that the National Task Force reiterated the need for conducting regular
meetings of the working groups and that necessary instructions have been
communicated to all the officials concerned. While observing that mere issue of
instructions would not produce the desired results unless these are complied with both
in letter and spirit, the Committee recommended that the meetings of the Working
Groups be held at regular intervals so as to suggest ways and means to achieve vertical
as well as horizontal coherence on policy measures between the Centre and the State
Governments. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the sittings of working
groups held so far, the steps suggested by them to maintain policy coherence and the
action taken by the Centre/States thereon.

33. In their Action Taken Note NITI Aayog stated as under:

“The first meeting of the working group on the roll out of SDG-3 in States/UTs
was held on 28" January 2020. Mapping of the SDG indicators was emphasised
during the meeting. The working group suggested that the State/UTs are to be
encouraged in developing their own State Indicator Framework (SIFs), in sync
with the National Indicator Framework. Subsequently, due to the ongoing
pandemic situation the meeting could not be convened.”


18

34. Vetting Comments of Audit on the NITI Aayog’s ATN is give as under:

“The Committee may be informed whether the possibility of virtual meetings have
been explored for holding such meetings.”

35. ॥ their ATN with respect to Vetting Comments of Audit NITI Aayog stated that
the subsequent meetings planned will also have the option of virtual participation.

36. The Committee are astonished to note that since 287 January, 2020 no
sitting of the Working Group set up by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for
effective implementation of Goal 3 in the States and UTs has been convened due
to pandemic. The Committee are concerned to observe that after pointed out by
Audit, during the course of vetting of Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare decided to have the option of virtual participation for the
subsequent meetings. The Committee cannot accept the reply of the Ministry as
the steps for conducting virtual meetings should have been initiated earlier. The
ATN is also silent about the meetings held so far and the corrective Action Taken
by the Ministry on the suggestions made therein in regard to developing of State
Indicator Framework in syc with the National Indicator Framework. The
Committee would, therefore, desire to know about the present status of the
meetings held by the Working Group till date either physically or virtually, the
suggestions made therein to achieve vertical as well as horizontal coherence on
Policy measures between Centre and the States and the steps taken by the

Ministry thereon.

Vill. Adequacy of Public Health Care Facilities
(Recommendation Para No. 17)

37. The Committee were concerned to find that despite the prevalence of
Plans/Policies as well as increase in allocations for augmenting physical and human
resources, significant shortages continue to persist in regard to the physical resources
in all seven States. As for human resources, there were considerable shortages in the
States of Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee were of the considered view
that the primary responsibility for attaining Goal-3 in an efficacious manner within the
given timeframe lies with the Ministry of Health Family Welfare. The Committee advised


19

to post at least one MBBS Doctor in the Wellness Centres as para-medical personnel
cannot prescribe medicines to the patients. Effective utilisation of the services of MBBS
Doctors in the health care delivery system of India right from Wellness Centres, can
possibly make a big difference in achieving the SD Goals. The Committee were also of
the view that to prevent doctors from going abroad, suitable facilities and
encouragement may be given to them to serve the people in the country. The
Committee, therefore desire that with a view to improving health services in remote
areas, at least one Allopathic doctor along with paramedical staff should be posted in
each Wellness Centre. The Committee feel that there is also an imperative need to
constantly monitor the functioning of Wellness Centres at regular intervals besides
ensuring regular attendance of Doctors there so that the goal of providing affordable,
effective and reliable health care, especially for the poor in the rural areas is achieved.
38. Action Taken Notes as furnished by the NITI Aayog is given as under:

“As per the operational guidelines of AYUSHMAN BHARAT — Comprehensive
Primary Health Care through Health and Wellness Centres - The services
envisaged at the Health and Wellness Centres (HWC) level include early
identification, basic management, counselling, ensuring treatment adherence,
follow up care, ensuing continuity of care by appropriate referrals, optimal home
and community follow up, and health promotion and prevention for the expanded
range of services. The primary health care teams at the SHCs led by the
Community Health Officers (CHO) are trained to provide first level of
management and triage, i.e. refer the patient to the appropriate health facility for
treatment and follow up. The Medical Officer (MBBS) at the PHCs/UPHCs would
be responsible for ensuring that Comprehensive Primary Health Care services
are delivered through all SHCs-HWCs in her/his area. Further, teleconsultations
are done by the CHOs at SHCs with Medical Officers (MO) at PHC level or MO
at State/District level Hubs and subsequently medicines are dispensed by the
CHO based on the prescriptions of these MO. Similarly, specialist
teleconsultations services are being provided between MO at PHC and specialist
at State/District level Hubs. As on 11th August 2021, 91.66 Lakhs such
teleconsultation services (e-sanjeevani HWC consultations - 46.11 lakhs and e-
sanjeevani OPD consultations — 45.5 Lakhs) have been provided.”

39. Vetting Comments of Audit on the aforesaid Action Taken Note are as follows:
“Ministry has not furnished details on the following recommendations of PAC:

(i) Steps taken to post at least one Allopathic doctor along with paramedical
staff in each Wellness Centre to improve health services in remote areas,
and

(ii) Steps taken to constantly monitor the functioning of Wellness Centres at
regular intervals besides ensuring regular attendance of doctors.”


20

40. ATN with respect to Vetting Comments is given as under:

“(i) Under Ayushman Bharat — Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs), as
on 22.09.2021, there are 21,290 PHC-HWCs (Rural Primary Health Centre)
and 4,135 UPHC-HWCs (Urban Primary Health Centre) are functional where
at-least one MBBS (Allopathic) Doctors are posted to cater to the healthcare
needs.

(ii)To monitor the functioning of the HWCs following measure are taken.

a) Constant monitoring on the implementation of CPHC services closer to the
population through HWCs, happen through regular review meetings & Video
conferences to provide required technical handholding and financial support.
b) This regular review and monitoring have enabled the achievement of FY
2020-21 target of 70,000 HWCs, well ahead of time by converting the existing
SHCs, PHCs and UPHCs into HWCs. The State/UTs were able to
operationalise 74,947 against the target of 70,000 HWCs by 31 March 2021.
c) Regional review conferences are organised regularly from FY 2018-19,
clustering with group of State/UTs to review the implementation challenges.

d) The performance of State in operationalisation of HWCs is documented
tegularly and placed in public domain (http://117.239.180.230/hwcllive
application/hwc/home /new_releases).

e) Further, under Incentive conditionality under NHM Framework from FY
2020-21 has an indicator for achieving the target for operationalisation of
HWCs.

f) Moreover, third-party evaluation of HWCs is undertaken for the
performance of HWCs in FY 2019-20 and FY 2020-21 and the report will be
released soon.

NIT! Aayog also suggested that 2% of functional HWCs are to be evaluated
independently by Third party.”

41. The Committee note that with a view to monitoring the functioning of
Wellness Centres at regular intervals so as to achieve the goal of providing
affordable, effective and reliable health care, especially for the poor in the rural
areas, several steps are stated to have been taken by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare such as (i) constant monitoring on the implementation of CPHC
services closer to the population through HWCs, regular review meetings and
video conferences, (ii) regular organisation of Regional review conferences from
FY 2018-19, clustering with group of States/UTs to review the implementation
challenges; (iii) regular documentation of performance of State in

operationalisation of HWCs and placing the same in public domain, (iv)


21

conducting Third-Party evaluation of HWCs in FY 2019-20 and FY 2020-21 and (v)
evaluation of 2% of functional HWCs independently by Third-Party. While taking
note of the steps taken by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, the Committee
desire that these measures should be constantly reviewed for making the SDGs
more purposeful and focused so as to facilitate the growth and development of
Health Sector and enhance their competitiveness to meet the challenges of
globalization. Further, as regards the Third Party evaluation of HWCs undertaken
in 2019-20 & 2020-21, the Committee have been informed that the Report of this
evaluation would be released soon. The Committee would like to know the
current status of release of evaluation Report, the
Observations/Recommendations contained therein, and the action taken by the

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare thereon.

IX. Addressing the shortcomings highlighted
(Recommendation Para No. 19)

42. The Committee felt that the best practices for achieving the SDGs as followed by
various States should be studied in depth by the M/oH&FW and wherever feasible,
replicated in the States where deficiencies are noticed. The Committee also
recommended that the Ministry should also conduct a study of the best healthcare
systems prevailing in other countries - both developed and developing, so that the
health schemes could be restructured accordingly to make the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals a grand success. In particular, the Ministry should
study the Cuba model, which is considered to be one of the best health care system in
the world.

43. Action Taken by the NITI Aayog is as under:

“Under the Innovation summit of NHM an additional category for best practices
for implementation of State Specific intervention towards achievement of SDGs
will be included. Further, the Ministry also will study the Cuba model of health
care system to learn the good practices.”

44. In the Vetting Comments Audit stated that conclusive action is yet to be taken on
PAC’s recommendation.

45. The Committee observe that on the recommendation of the Committee
regarding conducting a study of the best healthcare systems prevailing in other


22

countries (both developed and developing) particularly the ‘Cuba Model’, the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that under the Innovation
Summit of NHM, an additional category for best practices for implementation of
State specific intervention towards achievement of SDGs would be included. The
Committee are dismayed to find that the Ministry have not taken any concrete
steps for implementation of their recommendation. Obviously, the matter has not
been addressed seriously and the failure of the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare to act upon the specific recommendation of the Committee is quiet
evident in this case. What is further disquieting is that the Ministry failed to take
any effort towards study of the best healthcare systems in other countries as well
as the ‘Cuba Model’. While expressing deep dissatisfaction over the inaction and
apathy displayed by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in the matter, the
Committee would like the Ministry to address the matter seriously and take all
necessary and effective measures to ensure that the study as recommended by
the Committee is conducted at the earliest. The Committee would like to be
informed of the status of such study within a period of three months.


— Al-

CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation No. 1:
India's Commitment to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

The 70" session of the UN General Assembly held on 25" September, 2015
adopted the document titled “Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development” comprising 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and 169 associated targets. The SDGs seek to address not only the
root causes of poverty but also the universal need for development to provide
a life of dignity to all and are the most comprehensive list of global goals
integrating the Social, economic and environmental dimensions of
development both for present and future generations. It also endeavours to
create conditions for inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared
prosperity and decent work for al. It envisages achievement of 21 Targets by
2020, three targets by 2025 and remaining Targets by 2030. Countries have the
primary responsibility for follow-up and review, at the national, sub-national
and lower levels with regard to the progress made in implementing the goals
and targets over the next 15 years. Though not legally binding, the SDGs have
become defacto international obligations and will re-orient domestic spending
priorities during the next fifteen years. Implementation of SDGs and their
success will rely on countries own sustainable development policies, plans
and programmes.

In this Assembly, Government of India affirmed its commitment to the 2030
Agenda and SDGs. In regard to implementation of 2030 Agenda in India,
Government of India entrusted (September 2015) National Institution for
Transforming India (NITI Aayog) with the responsibility of coordinating and
overseeing the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. NITI Aayog was
specifically given the task of identifying national targets and assigning them to
Ministries/Departments concerned for implementation of SDGs in India. In
addition, it has been tasked (May 2016) to formulate, a longer vision of 15
years keeping in view the social goals and SDGs, a Seven Year Strategy
document as part of “National Development Agenda” and a Three Year Action
Agenda for goals to be achieved. NITI Aayog involved the states and UTs
Government in the preparedness exercise by associating them with the
formulation of the Vision and Strategy documents and advising them to
undertake mapping of Goals and Targets with various departments, while
building their institutional capacities for implementing, monitoring and
evaluation of the SDGs. Further, Ministry of Statistics and programme
Implementation (MoSPI) is responsible for the development of the National
Indicator Framework (NIF) for measuring the progress of the SDGs and
associated targets. MoSPi is also making efforts to ensure that State
Governments and UTs have guidance and capacities to monitor the SDGs at
the state and Lower levels. Ministry of Health & Family welfare was given the
responsibility of Goal-3 of SDGs i.e. "Good Health and well being” which is
intended to ensure healthy living and promote well-being of people of all ages.

The committee's examination of the subject is based on the Audit review of the
preparedness of the Government for the implementation of Sustainable


oe Ayr

Development Goals. Audit selected seven States (Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and west Bengal) on the basis of
ranking (both high and low) of Health indices for 2015-16. The purpose of the
review, as stated, is to ascertain the extent to which the Government adapted
the 2030 Agenda into its national context, extent to which the Government
identified and secured resources and capacities needed to implement the 2030
Agenda, to assess the robustness and accuracy of procedures put in place to
track the allocation of resources against targets within the SDGs and the
extent to which the Government established a mechanism to monitor, follow-
up review and report on the progress towards the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. Examination of the subject by the Committee in detail has revealed
that there have been certain deficiencies in the preparedness for
implementation of SDGs. The Committee have dealt with the various aspects
of the preparedness for the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals
in the subsequent Paragraphs.

(SI. No. 1; Appendix II; Para No.1 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)
Action Taken

NITI Aayog has executed the tasks assigned to it with regard to the implementation
of SDGs in the context of its Allocation of Business Rules. For the purpose, it is
working in partnership with Central Ministries, and States and UTs according to the
principles of cooperative federalism.

MoSPI developed a National Indicator Framework (NIF) for SDGs, in sync with
Global Indicator Framework (GIF), initially consisting of 306 national indicators
(version 1.0) along with identified data sources and periodicity in consultation with
concerned Ministries/Departments, UN Agencies and other stakeholders. Further, in
compliance to Cabinet decision, a High Level Steering Committee (HLSC) on SDG
under the Chairmanship of the Chief Statistician of India cum Secretary, MoSPI with
members from NITI 89५05, M/o Home Affairs, M/o Health and Family Welfare, M/o
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, M/o Finance and MoSPI has been
constituted to periodically review, refine and modify the NIF.

Similar to GIF, the NIF is evolutionary in nature. MoSPI, in consultation with line
Ministries/Departments and Custodian Agencies, examines the suitability of existing
indicators as well as new indicators for the relevant target(s) and periodically review
and refine the NIF. At present, the NIF (Version 3.1) consists of 295 indicators and
data is available on 266 indicators. Further, MoSPI is providing technical support to
States/UTs in development of their State Indicator Frameworks (SIFs).

Vetting Comments of Audit
No Comments.

Observation/Recommendation No. 2

Efforts towards mainstreaming activities pertaining to SDGs

The Committee note that NITIAayog has undertaken several multi-disciplinary
stakeholder consultations and conducted periodic reviews with States and
UTs for mainstreaming activities such as preparation of vision/strategy
documents; creation of nodal structures; mapping of targets; capacity building
for implementing, monitoring and evaluation; formulation of state-specific
indicators and orienting budgets with SDGs. However, preparation of a
roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be achieved was


~ 9¢-
not initiated till the time of presentation of the Audit Report. Apprising the
reasons for not initiating measures towards drawing up the roadmap initially,
NITI Aayog stated that as these targets have already been specified in the 2030
Agenda which was endorsed by India along with other countries, it was felt
that identification of separate milestones may not be necessary. Further to
this, NIT| Aayog informed that they have been working closely with all the
States to create their SDG roadmaps to achieve the milestones as per the SDG
targets and most of the States have already developed their SDG roadmaps.
The committee, in this regard, note that milestones for the SDGs have been a
part of the 2030 Agenda. For achieving these milestones, comprehensive and
co-ordinated efforts of all stakeholders is a necessity. What the committee find
to be surprising to note is that the nodal institution, NIT| Aayog pursued the
matter with the States for developing the roadmaps only after the issue was
pointed out by Audit. The Committee, in this regard, express the view that the
apparently inappropriate attitude displayed at the initial stage towards a
commitment made by India in the United Nations may have a bearing on the
good standing the country has in the pursuit of SDGs. The Committee,
therefore, exhort NITI Aayog to take suitable measures to compensate for the
delayed action. Also, it may be preferable to clearly specify NITI Aayog’s role
in implementation of SDGs in the Allocation of Business. The committee would
also like to have details of the current status of development of roadmaps by
all the Statas/UTs and remedial measures taken against the defaulting
States/UTs.

(SI. No. 2; Appendix Il; Para No.2 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)
Action Taken

A roadmap usually includes objectives, milestones, deliverables and planned
timeline. NITI Aayog has been working with the States and UTs right from the year
2016 to help develop these key elements of the SDG roadmap. As has also been
maintained before, objectives and milestones are clearly enunciated in the SDGs
and associated targets as endorsed by India along with other countries. Vision
Documents of States and UTs reconfirm the SDGs, indicate strategies to achieve
them and also inform about programmes and initiatives being implemented in that
direction. The SDG mapping of schemes/programmes and departments also reorient
them in the direction of SDG implementation. The monitoring of schemes and
programmes is further focused by the adoption of State SDG Indicator Frameworks,
which are prepared in consistency with the National Indicator Framework and also by
addressing the contextual specificities of respective States. Monitoring conducted
along the indicators help in focusing on deliverables (programme outputs) in keeping
with the timeline. As of now, most States (except Goa, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, and West Bengal) and some UTs (except
Chandigarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, and Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Daman and Diu) have Vision Documents. Similarly, most States (except
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Telangana, where it is under
preparation) and some UTs (Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Delhi) have already
prepared State Indicator Framework. NITI Aayog is continuously following up with
the States and UTs for preparation and use of State Indicator Framework for
monitoring.

The SDG India Index computed annually since 2018 has played a very effective role
in goading States and UTs in their efforts towards implementation and achievement
of SDGs. It brings out the status of States and UTs in terms of SDG achievement
based on latest available data and ranks their performance. India is internationally


- 2b
acknowledged as a pioneering country to have developed, adopted and regularly
used such a tool in monitoring SDG achievement at national and subnational levels.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

NITI Aayog had not responded to the PAC’s recommendation regarding clearly
specifying its role in implementation of SDGs in the Allocation of Business.

Preparation of Vision Document and State Indicator Framework is yet to be
completed by all the States/UTs. As desired by PAC, measures taken against the
defaulting States/UTs may be elucidated.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments
It is not for NITI Aayog to modify the Allocation of Business Rules.

With regard to ensuring that States/UTs prepare Vision Document and State
Indicator Framework, measures taken by NITI Aayog fall into three categories. NITI
Aayog takes up the matter in meetings with the States/UTs concerned. Second, it
brings up the issues in common reviews with States and presses for action. Third,
the SDG India Index Report records the performance of States and UTs in the
context of comparison and ranking, which has substantial influencing and persuasive
power.

Observation/Recommendation No. 3

Meetings of the Multi-Disciplinary Task Force

The committee find that apart from directly reviewing the work on SDGs in the
state and central Ministries, NIT| Aayog had constituted in August 2017 a
multi-disciplinary Task Force to analyse and review implementation of SDGs.
Though the Task Force was required to meet at least once in each quarter, the
Committee find that it has held only two meetings since its constitution. It has
been merely informed to the committee that the last meeting of the Task Force
was held during the preparation of VNR Report 2020 and no explanation has
been given for not holding the meetings at quarterly intervals. The Committee,
while expecting a suitable explanation in this regard also impress upon NITI
Aayog on the need for arranging meetings at quarterly intervals so that the
suggestions/feedback may become available more frequently, and
consequently boost the monitoring process. The Committee may also be
apprised of the outcome of the sitting(s) of the Task Force.

(SI. No. 3; Appendix Il; Para No.3 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)
Action Taken

The membership of the 506 Task Force comprised four representatives from NITI
Aayog, one each from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation, one from the National Institute of Public Finance
and Policy (NIPFP), one from the Research and Development System for
Developing Countries (RIS) as well as one representative each from three State
Governments and one Central Ministry on an annual rotation basis. Experience
showed that the participation of Central Ministries and State Governments was
limited and restrictive and likely to generate a sense of exclusion in other States/UTs
not part of the Task Force on a regular basis. Participation of experts also needed to
be more broad-based. Therefore, after the 2020 VNR preparatory meeting, no other
meeting of the said Task Force has been undertaken, primarily due to the challenges


गण लग
imposed by the pandemic. While a more widely sourced technical consultative group
is being formed, regular consultations with States and UTs have continued.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

PAC may take a suitable view of Ministry's reply that no other meeting of the Task
Force has been undertaken after the 2020 VNR preparatory meeting. Further,
composition of technical consultative group being formed along with outcomes of
meetings of the said group may be furnished to PAC.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

With a view to accessing broader consultative and technical support, the SDG Task
Force has been reconstituted on 20.09.2021 with Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog as the
Chair. The membership of the Task Force has now been expanded to include eight
Central Ministries/Departments and all States/UTs on a regular basis. This improves
the strategic compass of the Task Force and the expertise at its disposal. The next
meeting will be scheduled in the 2" half of October 2021.

Observation/Recommendation No. 4

Designation of Nodal Ministries for 5095

The Committee find that in the revised mapping document issued by the NITI
Aayog in August 2018, the aspect of designating a specific Ministry as being
the nodal Ministry for specific SDGs has been done away with. The Committee
are of the view in this regard that this may lead to lack of proper
accountability, and monitoring by NITI Aayog only may not help in achieving
the desired results.

(SI. No.4; Appendix Il; Para No.4 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)

Action Taken

As the mapping of Ministries and schemes revealed, each 506 involved
engagement of and implementation by a number of Ministries/Departments. Each
Ministry played an equally important role and allocation of the nodal function to one
of them was often arbitrary. On the other hand, Ministries have similar collaborative
linkage across many SDGs and related targets on account of interconnectedness of
SDGs. So, there are equally important interactive correlations among Ministries both
horizontally and vertically, which have been indicated in the 2018 version of the
mapping document. In this context, allocation of the nodal function to one Ministry for
each SDG was found to be deficient and arbitrary. Instead, a model of free-flowing
collaboration at the level of policy, schemes and programmes was opted for in which
each Ministry is encouraged to work with all relevant actors including other
Ministries/Departments, which are identified in the mapping document.

Vetting Comments of Audit_
The Committee’s concern regarding ensuring proper accountability and monitoring
has not been addressed in the reply.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

It is submitted that by the allocation of responsibilities of the Ministries in the revised
mapping in a more specific manner at the level of SDG targets along with the
identification of interconnectedness across the Ministries/Departments improves


- 728-
monitorability and sharpens accountability. This also allows for better inter-sectoral
coordination and convergence.

Observation/Recommendation No. 5

Preparation of "15 Year Vision Document"

The Committee are concerned to note that the “I5 Year Vision Document”
which is to serve as the basis for the strategy and Action Agenda document is
yet to be released although five years have passed. The Committee are
appreciative of the intention of NITI Aayog to make the vision Document broad
based and integrally focused on States expectations and priorities owing to
which importance has been given to obtain inputs from the Ministries and the
States. As informed, NITI Aayog is in the process of reviewing and finalizing
the draft document and has assigned the work to a multi-disciplinary team.
While the Vision Document was expected to be finalized by March, 2020, the
process of preparation of the Document is said to have been severely affected
due to COVID-19 pandemic. What the Committee find to be intriguing in this
regard is that it was only after the Audit pointed out this issue, that NITI Aayog
took the initiative of assigning the work to a multi-disciplinary team. The reply
of NITI Aayog is also silent on the date on which the multi-disciplinary team
was constituted and by when the vision Document is now likely to be finalised.
The committee would await conclusive details in this regard.

(SI. No. 5; Appendix Il; Para No.5 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)

Action Taken

The work on the preparation of the Vision Document has been underway for the last
two years. However, preparation has been delayed due to the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic. The impact of the pandemic has necessitated re-working of the growth
models, assumptions and requires new sets of data to project key economic
indicators for the next 15 years incorporating the post-COVID reality. Taking this into
account, the exercise of making fresh projections has commenced and preparation
of the Vision Document is expected to be completed by March 2022.

Vetting Comments of Audit.
Final action is awaited.

Observation/Recommendation No. 6

Preparation for achieving the SDG Goals

So far as the preparation for achieving the goals at the State level is concerned, the
Committee feels perturbed to note that the work on Vision/Strategy/Action Agenda
documents in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were at preparatory stage. Kerala had
prepared a Perspective plan, 2030 in the year 2014 but the Plan has not been
reviewed and realigned with SDGs. Chhattisgarh had published its Vision 2030
document in March 2019. The Committee also regret to observe that the mapping
exercise undertaken in the selected States was not comprehensive. For instance,
certain schemes/Goals/Targets have reportedly not been mapped at all in Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee have been
informed that NIT] Aayog has advised the States to do their own mapping in the light


- >4-
of the mapping done at the Central level. । Aayog has also been persuading the
States and UTs from time to time to accelerate this process. The Committee are
constrained to observe that NIT! Aayog has not explained the reasons for slow
progress at the State level and the obstacles the States may have been facing in
adopting/implementing the SDGs. The Committee are appreciative of the stance
towards localizing the SDGs. However, as the monitoring agency, NITI Aayog needs
to identify and recognize the difficulties faced by different States, assist in addressing
them and apprise the Committee of the same. The Committee also desire that NITI
Aayog pursue the matter with the defaulting states for expeditious completion of the
required documents and put in place an effective co-ordinating/monitoring
mechanism in order to fast track the achievement of the SDGs and related targets.

(SI. No.6; Appendix Il; Para No.6 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)

Action Taken

NITI Aayog continues to follow up with the States with respect to localisation of
SDGs. States excepting those of Goa, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil
Nadu, Telangana and West Bengal have completed/adopted their Vision 2030. All
the States have also completed their mapping documents and reviewed their
mapping of schemes with a view to making them comprehensive.

In the context of SDG localisation, States have increasingly laid emphasis on
monitoring of SDG implementation and assessment of progress. All the States,
except the State of Punjab, have State Indicator Frameworks (SIF) in place. The
SIFs are extremely useful in monitoring of various schemes and tracking of
outputs/outcomes thereof as relevant to corresponding SDG targets. States have put
in place high level institutional mechanisms under the leadership of senior officials to
review progress on a regular basis. In course of the last one year, NITI Aayog has
extensively visited the States (Assam, Meghalaya, Odisha, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Sikkim among others) to orient key
government officials on general issues of SDGs, the SDG India Index, Indicator
Frameworks and tracking of progress.

NITI Aayog is also working with laggard States on the matters of concern. For
instance, after the release of the SDG India Index 2020-21 on 3 June 2021, the
NITI Aayog team is visiting the States to discuss progress on SDG implementation,
highlight issues and concerns and explore remedial measures at the highest level —
in many cases involving the Chief Ministers. So far, the States of Assam, Meghalaya,
Odisha, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand,
Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Sikkim and
Nagaland have already been visited.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

Reply is silent on putting in place an effective coordinating/monitoring mechanism in
order to fast track the achievement of the SDGs and related targets.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

In the submission above, NITI Aayog’s role and function in coordination and
monitoring of SDG implementation has been described. Further, the reconstituted
SDG Task Force will play an important role in strengthening the monitoring and
coordination process.


Observation/Recommendation No. 7

Public Awareness Programmes

The Committee note that as per the United Nations Development Group
(UNDG) Reference Guide titled ‘Mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda’, raising
awareness is one of the key means to achieve the SDGs. This includes
Planning, issuing instructions and action for awareness and IEC (Information,
Education and communication) activities for Government officials and others
viz. civil society, general public, institutions etc. The Committee have noticed
in this regard that the awareness programmes on SDGs have not been
extended to educational institutions, students and youth organisations. The
Committee are of opinion that there is a need to share the commitments for the
future with the younger generation. The Committee would, therefore, expect to
be apprised of the measures taken in this direction.

(SI. No. 7; Appendix Il; Para No.7 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17" LokSabha)

Action Taken

NITI Aayog has involved representatives of universities and other educational
institutions in all its national and regional consultations on SDGs. Its civil society
partners have also carried forward sensitisation of students and youth on the SDGs
across the country. With respect to extending exclusive awareness programmes on
SDGs to educational institutions, students and youth organisations, NITI Aayog is
encouraging State Governments and civil society organisations to take up planned
interventions in this regard.

Vetting Comments of Audit.
No comments.

Observation/Recommendation No. 8
Consultations with Stakeholders

The Committee also note that building awareness of the SDGs and adoption of
a participatory multi-stakeholder approach is aimed at ensuring inclusive,
effective and sustainable implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Committee
are, however, concerned to note that (i) there have been delays in finalising
outcome of these consultations and placing the reports in public domain; (ii)
in case of most consultations, definite outcomes and recommendations for
time-bound follow up action were not identified owing to which there was
limited assurance that the deliberations enabled in shaping the
roadmap/policies for SDGs; (iii) according to its website, SRI workshops on
SDG related issues have not been held post March 2017; (iv) extent and
effectiveness of efforts made by stakeholders to increase public awareness is
not ascertainable in the absence of feedback; (v) no centralised public
awareness campaign has been envisaged; (vi) absence of dedicated
awareness measures for general public may dilute the objective of making the


— Br

2030 Agenda inclusive and participatory; and (vii) five out of the 15 Ministries
where this aspect was reviewed were yet to initiate/report any capacity
building exercise. The committee are also constrained to observe that efforts
to raise public awareness about SDGs and initiatives undertaken in the seven
selected States have not been comprehensive, focussed and sustained. On
this aspect too, NITI Aayog has averred that the onus of implementing
schemes and programmes to achieve SDGs rests with the States and the
relevant administrative Ministries. The committee, in this regard, also express
the view that awareness and communication campaigns would be more
effective if they are tailored to the context, language, values and resources
accessible to the local stakeholders and audiences. To this end, NITI Aayog is
reportedly taking measures towards motivating the States/UTs and other
stakeholder to take up specific and targeted awareness initiatives. Also, public
awareness programmes that are being undertaken being of a subdued nature,
do not seem to be very effective in terms of outreach. The Committee desire
that NIl Aayog should have an Interactive web page to reach out to the States
and the general public. The committee, in this regard, would also like to know
whether fresh series of stakeholder consultations have been conducted. The
Committee would await the details of the outcome of these consultations.

(SI. No.8; Appendix Il; Para No.8 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)

Action Taken

The pages on SDGs in NIT! Aayog website do provide elaborate information on
SDGs generally and their pursuit in India. After regular publication of annual SDG
India Index Reports, an interactive dashboard has been added which can be used to
generate customised information with regard to performance on SDGs both at
State/UT and national level according to the user’s needs and convenience. NITI
Aayog is on the continuous lookout to improve the content, accessibility and user-
friendliness of its SDG webpages.

NITI Aayog has developed a capacity development module for senior government
officials with the help of the Administrative Staff College of India which is ready to be
rolled out after the COVID-19 situation eases out.

NITI Aayog is also initiating a series of Regional Consultations to cover all the
States/UTs. The first of the Consultations has been conducted in the North Eastern
Region during 12-14 April 2021, which extensively involved government officials at
State as well as district levels. Based on a consensus in the consultation, a regional
SDG District Indicator Framework has been developed which is being used to bring
out a regional District Index Report to monitor SDG performance at the district level.
It is expected to accelerate the implementation process at district and sub-district
level and contribute significantly to bettering progress on the ground in all the North
Eastern States. In a similar perspective, other regional consultations are planned to
be rolled out after greater normaicy is attained across the country in the fight with the
COVID-19 pandemic.

As mentioned above, simultaneously, NIT| Aayog has continued sensitisation and
capacity building workshops at the State level attuned to the felt needs of the
government officials and allied stakeholders. During 2020-21, these workshops have
been held in Assam, Meghalaya, Odisha, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Himachal
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Andhra Pradesh, Sikkim and Nagaland.


29.7
Vetting Comments of Audit. 3
As desired by PAC, details of outcome of consultation meetings organized by NITI
Aayog may be provided.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

The meetings with the State governments have focused on the following: status of
progress on SDGs; progress of SDG localization initiatives; State Indicator
Frameworks and data on indicators; issues of progress and performance on different
SDGs and related targets; and preparation ofreform action plans needed to improve
performance.

Several outcomes have been generated: clarity on SDG targets/indicators and data;
identification of areas of improvement in SDG localization initiatives and programme
implementation pertaining to relevant SDG targets; and reform action plans to
address areas of improvement.

NITI Aayog (Ministry of Planning)

Observation/Recommendation No. 9

Participation of the private sector and NGOs

The Committee have also looked into the possible role, the private sector and
NGOs could play in achieving the SDGs. The means by way of which
Businesses source, invest, employ and spend, have a significant influence on
sustainable development. The comprehensive framework of the SDGs
necessitate that the growing strength of the private sector in terms of finance,
technology, skills, innovation and outreach is appropriately harnessed so as
to ensure that the SDG implementation efforts are fructified. The Committee
note in this regard that in the view of NITI Aayog, the Private sector can
become a key factor in implementing SDGs and enabling sustained economic
growth, social inclusion and environmental protection. Thus, it would be
imperative to enable the private sector to go beyond its core business
activities and start helping in technology transfer, capacity development,
creation of public goods for the poor and efficient implementation of policies
and programmes to achieve the SDG targets. Similarly, the Committee have
also enquired about the role of NGOs and noted that the NGOs involved in
charity work/not-for-profit organisations are also an important partner in
implementation of SDGs. They have all along been part of the sensitization and
awareness development work of NITI Aayog. NIT! Aayog have informed the
Committee that NGOs have also supported them in their own awareness and
capacity development work on the SDGs at the grassroots and other levels.
Those working with disadvantaged communities directly or indirectly are
contributing to the work of social inclusion so that ‘no one is left behind’. NITI
Aayog partnered with a number of such organisations and their networks in
2019-20 to hold nation-wide consultations on all SDGs with various vulnerable
social groups such as, children, women, farmers, people from Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, migrant labour, elderly, people with disabilities,
people with HIV, etc. The outcome of the consultations have been incorporated
in the VNR Report. The Committee desire that NITI Aayog frame detailed
guidelines for the Private Sector to enable the sector to channel their
resources and activities towards achievement of SDGs. Businesses need to be
invited to apply their creativity and innovation towards solving sustainable
development challenges and engaged as partners in the development process.
The Committee further desire that NGOs and similar organisations involved in
charity work are apprised of SDGs through various means and they may be


— S3-
encouraged to participate in the awareness programme on SDGs. The
committee would await details of the action taken in this regard.

(SI. No.9; Appendix Il; Para No.9 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17" LokSabha)
Action Taken

With the support of NITI Aayog, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has prepared and
issued the ‘National Guidelines for Responsible Business Conduct (NGRBCs)’ and
the Business Responsibility and Sustainability Report (BRSR) formats through 2019-
2020, which fully factors in SDGs and enables the private sector to align its initiatives
and investments with SDGs. These guidelines are fairly detailed and prepared based
on adequate stakeholder consultations. Further, in order to steer and stimulate
private sector investments towards achievement of SDGs, the SDG Investor Map for
India has been launched jointly by NITI Aayog, UNDP and Invest India — the National
Investment Promotion and Facilitation Agency. This market intelligence tool provides
localized data and specific information on SDG-aligned investment and business
opportunities and contributes to an enabling environment for impactful partnerships
between investors, industry, policy makers and elected representatives. Going
forward, the SDG Marketplace, a web- based technology Platform, is being jointly
developed by NITI Aayog, UNDP and Primus Partners (a management consultancy
firm working as technical partner) to facilitate SDG-linked investments in India. This
platform seeks to address the information asymmetry faced by various investors,
facilitate matchmaking between investors and implementing agencies, link risk
capital and private investment, and incentivise funding into the SDGs and
geographies that most need it. Six States, such as, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Maharashtra, Punjab, and Rajasthan have expressed interest to be part of the
14 pilot programme. Thus, NIT] Aayog continues to engage with private sector
organisations and their networks to strengthen partnerships and help harness their
creativity, innovation and other resources in the implementation of the SDGs. On the
other hand, NITI Aayog also continues to link with NGOs and other civil society
organisations for information communication and awareness generation work on
SDGs.

Vetting Comments of Audit

The details of NITI Aayog’s engagement with NGOs and Civil society organisations
may also be furnished to the Committee.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

In all national and regional SDG consultations, NITI Aayog has invited a number of
active and relevant NGOs and civil society organisations (CSOs). In the Voluntary
National Review (VNR) 2020, about 1000 NGOs/CSOs participated. In collaboration
with them 14 national consultations and 20 subnational consultations were organized
to discuss the situation and issues of various vulnerable communities as follows: (i)
Adivasis; (ii) Adolescents, Youth and Youth Workers; (iii) Children; (iv) Dalits; (५)
Victims of forced labour and human trafficking (vi) De-notified, Nomadic and Semi-
Nomadic Tribes; (vii) Elderly; (viii) Farmers; (ix) Migrants and Urban Poor, (x) North-
Eastern Region; (xi) People Living with HIV (PLHIVs); (xii) Persons with Disabilities
(PWDs); (xiii) Sexual Minorities (lesbians, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer,
intersex, asexual plus); and (xiv) Women. The issues, concerns and
recommendations emerging from the consultations were included in the VNR2020
report.


— 3Yy-
Observation/Recommendation No. 10

Mobilisation of Resources for Implementation of SDG Agenda

The committee further observe that the 2030 Agenda lays stress on identifying
and securing all means, including the financial resources required for
implementation of the Agenda. The Voluntary National Review Report and the
Three Year Action Agenda have highlighted several steps taken by the
Government for optimizing domestic resource mobilisation. However, no
comprehensive exercise for assessing and identifying the financial resources
required for implementing SDGs has been undertaken either by the Ministry of
Finance at the Centre or by the selected States. No steps have been initiated at
the Central level for integrating SDGs in national budgeting and most of the
selected States were only at the preliminary stage of orienting their budget
with SDGs even after 5 years following the General Assembly Resolution.
According to NITI Aayog, under the Central Sector Schemes, the relevant line
Ministry/Department hold discussions/consultations with the State
Governments in order to achieve the national goals which also involves
discussions on the financial requirements for the same. The
Ministries/Departments, based on the sharing pattern make projections of
financial requirements to the Ministry of Finance which appraise and approve
the desired financial assistance. The Committee find that NITI Aayog has not
been able to apprise the Committee of the steps taken towards integration of
SDG related financial resources in national budgeting. It was only after the
Committee took up the subject for examination, that NITI Aayog took the
initiative of conducting a study by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for
estimating the financial resources needed to achieve the SDGs in the areas of
education, health, electricity, roads and water and sanitation. The study Report
is currently stated to be under finalization. The Committee trust that the study
would be completed expeditiously. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the outcome of the study and follow up action taken thereon by the
NITI Aayog and Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs). The
committee are of the view in this regard even in the likelihood of harmonizing
the SDGs with the Central Sector Schemes, the benefit towards achieving
SDGs should be clearly delineated so that India can showcase the country’s
achievement.

(SI. No. 10; Appendix II; Para No.10 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)
Action Taken

The study conducted by Ministry of Finance (D/o Economic Affairs) jointly with
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for estimating the financial resources needed to
achieve SDGs in the areas of education, health, electricity, roads and water and
sanitation is under finalisation.
Vetting Comments of Audit.

The probable date of finalization of study report may be intimated to PAC,

Observation/Recommendation No. 11

National Indicator Framework (NIF)

The Committee note that for enabling monitoring and review, the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has been entrusted with the


2S -

task of developing a National Indicator Framework (NIF) which was published
only in November 2018. As a result, tasks that are a key to the institution of a
proper monitoring and reporting framework such as preparation of baseline
data were completed only in March 2019. Milestones have not been aligned
with the timelines for achieving the targets. In the seven selected States,
action on developing indicators and identification of data sources has not
achieved required level of progress. The Committee have been apprised in this
regard that the NIF, with 306 indicators was devised by MoSPI in consultation
with all stakeholders. Further, data in respect of 250 indicators is currently
said to be available and for collecting the data for rest of the indicators, new
surveys have reportedly been initiated. Some such surveys include the
periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS), Time Use Surveys (TUS), Situation
Assessment Survey (SAS) on Agriculture Households Conditions etc. The
Committee, while appreciating the steps initiated by MoSPI, in this regard
would like to know as to when these surveys were initiated and the time frame
by which the surveys would be completed. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the results of these surveys and desire that data in respect of
the remaining milestones be compiled and made available expeditiously. The
Committee also note the fact that some of the indicators which are a part of
the General Assembly resolution are treated as new in the Indian context for
which, as informed by the Secretary, MoSPI, milestones have not been
delineated as of now, and would be worked out in course of time. The
Committee feel that non-identification of milestones may affect the
preparations of an effective roadmap/policy for achieving the related targets.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoSPI should initiate effective
steps expeditiously so as to identify the milestones for all the indicators and
commence working on these indicators in right earnest.

(SI. No.11; Appendix Il; Para No.11 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)
Action Taken

MoSPI developed the NIF for SDGs, in sync with Global Indicator Framework )GIF(,
initially consisting of 306 national indicators )version 1.0 (along with identified data
sources and periodicity in consultation with concerned Ministries/Departments, UN
Agencies and other stakeholders.

The union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 24.10.2018, approved the proposal of the
Ministry on NIF for SDGs on constitution of High Level Steering Committee (HLSC)
to periodically review and refine the NIF. Accordingly, the HLSC under the
Chairmanship of Chief Statistician of India cum Secretary, MoSP! with members
from NITI Aayog, M/o Home Affairs, M/o Health and FW, M/o Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, M/o Finance and MoSPI has been constituted to periodically
review, refine and modify the NIF .Thenceforth, several initiatives have been taken
by the MoSPI which inter-alia include release of first Baseline report on SDG-NIF,
release of SDGs Dashboard, preparation and circulation of guidelines for States/UTs
for development of State Indicator Framework, Capacity Development on SDGs for
Central and State officials, launching of new surveys for bridging the data gaps by
collecting data on certain indicators in the next round of National Sample Surveys,
alignment of existing surveys as per SDG data requirements, etc.

The NIF is evolutionary in nature and is refined from time to time in consultation with
line Ministries/Custodian Agencies .At present, the latest version of the NIF )Version
3.1 (consists of 295 indicators and data is available on 266 indicators.

MoSPI has conducted several surveys, such as, the Periodic Labour Force Survey
(PLFS), Time Use Surveys (TUS), Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) on


Be-
Agriculture Households Conditions etc. to come out with relevant data for a number
of indicators from the NIF. The details regarding these surveys have been placed in
Annexure-l.

With respect to initiating effective steps in order to identify the milestones for all the
indicators and commence working on these indicators in right earnest, MoSPI had a
meeting with NITI Aayog and thereafter the data source Ministries/Departments
along with the line Ministries/Departments, responsible for implementation of
respective SDGs, were requested to fix the milestones of the concerned SDG
national indicators so as to monitor the progress made towards achieving the
SDGs .The matter was rigorously followed with the line Ministries/Departments and 5
online workshops with concerned line Ministries/Departments were conducted so as
to collectively resolve the issues relating to fixing the milestones.

While facilitating the concerned data source/implementing Ministries/Department in
fixation the milestones for SDG indicators, the following challenges were faced:

i. |The data source Ministries/Departments were different from the Implementing
Ministries in respect of several SDG indicators because indicators were based
on Survey/Census/other compiled statistics;

ii. For some of the SDG indicators, it was not feasible to set the milestones,
especially budget related indicators;

iii. | The data source Ministries/Departments suggested refinements in the some
of the existing SDG indicators.

As per SDG NIF Progress Report 2021 )Version 3.1 (released on 29" June, 2021;
there are 295 indicators in the NIF and data is available for 266 indicators .With
regard to these 266 national indicators for which data is available, the status on
milestone setting is as under:

a. For 142 indicators either Milestones have been set or Ministries/Departments
have provided inputs or have submitted that it is not feasible to set the
milestones.

b. For the remaining indicators, the line Ministries/Departments have informed
that they are still working with their concerned Divisions/Wings/Units or with
other related Ministries (wherever applicable). MoSPI will continue to interact
with the line Ministries/Departments for facilitating milestones fixing on
remaining indicators.

Detailed response related to Milestone setting for SDG national Indicators is placed
at Annexure-il.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

As data for 29 out of 295 National indicators is still not available, efforts made by
MoSPI may be intimated to PAC.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

MoSPI has released the Sustainable Development Goals-National Indicator
Framework Progress Report 2021 (version 3.1) on 29th June 2021. At present,
there are 295 indicators in National Indicator Framework (NIF), out of which data is
available for 266 indicators. MoSPI has taken several steps for compiling data on
the remaining 29 NIF indicators which inter-alia include conduct of a Multiple
Indicator Survey (MIS) during 78th Round of National Sample Survey (NSS).
Further, MoSPI is all set to launch a Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey
(CAMS) as part of NSS 79th round to capture and compile data on some of the SDG
indicators. Apart from this, MoSPI is rigorously pursuing with respective subject
matter Ministries of the Government of India for getting data for remaining indicators.


—2-
Observation/Recommendation No. 12

Goal 3-Good Health and Well Being

The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for
Goal-3 of SDGs i.e. "Good health and well being" which is intended to ensure
healthy living and promote well-being of people of all ages. To monitor SDG-3, a list
of 73 Health related indicators have been identified by MoSPI and communicated in
the Health Indicator Framework (HIF). These include, ‘mortality’ as also other
indicators which have an impact on health. As per the National Indicator Framework
(NIF) prepared by MoSPI, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is to serve as the
data source agency for 44 indicators (which is a subset of above mentioned 73 HIF
indicators). Further, as for the remaining indicators which have an impact on health,
the major data sources are the office of Registrar General of India (ORGI),
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation under Ministry of Jal Shakti, National
Crime Record Bureau (NCRB), Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change
etc.

The Committee note that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are optimistic of the
country achieving the following targets as per the timelines indicated:

MMR, released by the SRS (ORGI), has declined to 122 per 1 lakh live births during
2015-17 from 130 during 2014-16. If India continues to maintain the present percent
change (-6.2%) annually, the country is expected to achieve the MMR target of 70 by
the year 2025.

USMR has declined from 39 per 1000 live births in 2016 to 37 per 1000 live births in
2017 (as per SRS report). India is expected to achieve SDG target well before by the
year 2020-21 if the past trend is continued.

NNMR has declined to 23 per 1000 live births as per SRS, 2017. India is expected to
achieve the SDG targets of 12 by the year 2025 if the past trend is continued.

The Committee trust that the goals would be within reach despite the challenges
posed by the ongoing pandemic, for tackling which a significant amount of resources
are being utilized. The Committee would like to know the present status of
achievement of the said targets and steps taken to achieve the same within the
stipulated time.

(SI. No. 12; Appendix Il; Para No.12 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17" LokSabha)
Action Taken

The present status of achievement of the said target is as follows:

+ MMR, released by the SRS (ORGI), has declined to 113 per 1 lakh live during
2016-18 from 122 per lakh during 2015-17. The State-wise data is given
at Annexure Ill.

« US5MR has declined from 37 per 1000 live births in 2017 to 36 per 1000 live
births in 2018 (as per SRS report). The State-wise data is given at Annexure
Iv.

« NNMR is 23 per 1000 live births as per SRS, 2018. The State-wise data is
given at Annexure V.

National Health Mission represents an important vehicle to achieve the SDGs. While
it is clear that it would take at least a decade or more for India to provide Universal
Health Coverage (UHC) to all her citizens, implementation of the NHM for the next


29 -

2?
five years, will build on the steps already taken. The Health System Strategies (HSS)
under NHM, focused on improving quality of facility-based delivery, strengthening the
district hospitals, expanding and improving outreach services, provision of free
medical consultation, diagnostics, essential medicines and referral transport and
capacity building and skilling of human resources, are the building blocks for
progress towards the achievement of SDG.

Further, the specific interventions mapped against the said targets are:
Target: To reduce MMR to less than 70 per 1,00,000 live births

Programme Interventions:

o JananiSurakshaYojana (JSY), JananiShishuSurakshaKaryakaram (JSSK),
SurakshitMatritvaAashwasan (SUMAN),

o PradhanMantriSurakshitMatritvaAbhiyan (PMSMA), Anemia Mukt Bharat
(AMB), Labour Room & Quality Improvement Initiative (LaQshya),

o Midwifery Initiative,

o Emergency obstetric and newborn care (EmMONC), Basic Emergency obstetric

and newborn care (BEMONC),

Skill Birth Attendant (SBA), and Dakshata

Strengthening FRU delivery points,

MCH Wings, Skill Labs,

Setting up of Obs. HDU/ICU, Comprehensive Abortion care (CAC), Maternal

Death Surveillance & Response (MDSR).

००००

Target: End preventable deaths of new-borns and children under 5 years of age

Programme Interventions:

« Facility Based Newborn Care (FBNC), Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC),
Home Based care of Young Child (HBYC),Nutrition Rehabilitation Centre
(NRC), है

+ Comprehensive Lactation Management Centre (CLMC), Anemia Mukt Bharat
(AMB), National Deworming Day (NDD),

¢ Intensive Diarrhoea Control Fortnight (IDCF), Social Awareness and Actions
to Neutralize Pneumonia Successfully (SAANS),
RashtriyaBalSwasthyaKaryakram (RBSK),

« Child Death Review (CDR).

Vetting Comments of Audit_
No comments.

Observation/Recommendation No. 13

Consultative Process-Ministryof Health and Family Welfare

The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
organized consultations on transitioning from MDGs to SDGs and also held a
State Level Conference on Goal 3. However, three Ministries/Departments,
namely, AYUSH, Tribal Affairs and Home Affairs that are associated with Goal
3 of the SDGs have not been involved in such consultations; and it was only
after the matter was pointed out by the Audit as well as the Committee that the
representatives of these Ministries were included in the National Task Force.
The Committee also note with dismay that specific and sustained measures for
promoting awareness and stakeholder involvement in regard to Goal-3 have
not been seen in the States. The Committee have been informed in this regard
that besides regular meetings that are held with related Ministries as also the
National Task Force and Working Groups, Joint video conferences with the


related Ministries are used as a means for enhancing stakeholder engagement
and raising awareness. Expanding the scope of public awareness from
boardrooms to the ground level SDGs may not be easy to achieve. The
Committee, therefore, desire that besides the meetings of Ministries
concerned and the Task Force, Members of Parliament, MLAs, Chairman,
ZilaPanchayat, District Health officer, Officers at the Block level etc. may also
be associated with the task of raising awareness and thereby enable in
effective participation in achievement of SDGs.

(SI. No. 13; Appendix Il; Para No.13 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)
Action Taken

The observation is noted.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

As per direction of PAC, the replies should be comprehensive and not inconclusive,
vague, or couched in general terms like ‘Noted’ or ‘accepted’ etc. Hence, details of
specific steps taken in compliance to PAC’s observation may be elucidated.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

The National Health Programmes mapped against the targets and indicators to
achieve SDG-3 Goal are supported under National Health Mission for including
Information, Education and Communication (IEC), and awareness activities. The
programme specific activities which are organised by States/UTs involve
stakeholders ranging from grassroots level to Zila Panchayat, District Health officer,
Officers at the Block level, etc.

Besides coordinating, the IEC and awareness activities at the Programme Division
level, the Swasth Nagrik Abhiyaan (SNA) division of the Ministry executes
comprehensive IEC activities and provision of awareness on various National Health
Programmes from time to time so that the slated objectives under the programmes
are eventually achieved, which will lead the country to achieve SDG-3 targets.

Observation/Recommendation No. 14

Monitoring by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

The Committee note that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare specifically
aligned different interventions/initiatives/schemes and targets with Goal 3 in
the 2017-2020 phase of NHM. It was, however, noted that mapping in respect of
Goal 3 was not comprehensive in the selected States and several State
sponsored Health Schemes were also not mapped with Goal 3. The Committee,
in this regard, are of the view that cases of gaps could have been filled if
proper Audit of all the States/UTs had been done. As informed to the
Committee, mapping in the States has been reinforced as a result of the
meeting of the Working Group on the rollout of SDG-3 in States/UTs that was
held on 28 January, 2020. Mapping in respect of Goal 3 will be facilitated by
way of ensuring regular support and monitoring and Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare is proactively working with all States for helping them to
complete the exercise of mapping. As per the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, States are constitutionally mandated to deliver on most of the socio-
economic sectors that constitute the SDGs. Yet, the Committee are of the view
that primarily on account of the fact that the Country is committed to achieving
certain specific goals, the aspect of monitoring and providing support to the
States would ideally rest with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and other
relevant Ministries concerned. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the


lyo~

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should develop an effective mechanism for
monitoring the various programmes/schemes at the Block, District and State
level so as to enable in achieving the target of mapping by all the States. The
Committee would also emphasise on continuing with persuading and
understanding the problems faced by the States and the implementing

agencies at the ground level so that the goals envisaged can be achieved.
(SI. No. 14; Appendix Il; Para No.14 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(177 LokSabha)

Action Taken

A web based online dashboard (i.e. 506 Health Dashboard) has been developed
under the guidance of DoHFW with technical and financial support from WHO. This
is an interactive dashboard which provides a visual representation of all-India and
state-wise performance for various health indicators and thus enables Policy
makers/Program implementers, to identify priorities for action and in framing future
action plan towards achieving SDG goals by 2030.

The SDG Health Dashboard has in-built business intelligence tools to correlate the
Goal with Indicators to exhibit, through graphic presentation of charts, graphs and
maps, the indicator values, their trend and enable tracking the performances, at
national and sub-national levels, towards achieving the SDG-3 Health Goal.

The SDG Health Dashboard was launched on Universal Health Coverage Day on
12" December 2020 and the States have been oriented and are encouraged to
develop their own SDG Health Dashboard in the same line.

Vetting Comments of Audit.
No Comments.

Observation/Recommendation No. 15

Integration of Policy Framework

From the information furnished, the Committee note that the Ministry of Health
& Family Welfare has initiated several measures that arc supportive of
achieving horizontal and vertical policy coherence. However coherent policy
initiatives have either been absent or inadequate in the States. As per the
submission of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, however, there is
adequate policy coherence between the Centre and the State Governments.
The Committee find this contention of the Ministry to be untenable, as in all the
seven States, the Centre and the States have not been playing their respective
roles effectively in a collaborative manner for achieving the intended
outcomes. The Committee also feel anguished to note that with regard to the
aspect of vertical coherence, a working group set up by the M/o H&FW for
implementing Goal 3 in the States and UTs has not held any meeting. It was
only after the issue was pointed out by the Committee in their sitting on 23
January, 2020, that the Working Group of the National Task Force held a
meeting on 28 January, 2020. It has also been informed by the Ministry that the
National Task Force reiterated the need for conducting regular meetings of the
working groups and that necessary instructions have been communicated to
all the officials concerned. The Committee are of the view in this regard that
mere issue of instructions would not produce the desired results unless these
are complied with both in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the meetings of the Working Groups be held at regular
intervals so as to suggest ways and means to achieve vertical as well as
horizontal coherence on policy measures between the Centre and the State
Governments. The Committee would also desire to be apprised of the sittings


wn ८
of working groups held so far, the steps suggested by them to maintain policy
coherence and the action taken by the Centre/States thereon.

(SI. No. 15; Appendix II; Para No.15 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17" LokSabha)
Action Taken

The first meeting of the working group on the roll out of SDG-3 in States/UTs was
held on 28" January 2020. Mapping of the SDG indicators was emphasised during
the meeting. The working group suggested that the State/UTs are to be encouraged
in developing their own State Indicator Framework (SIFs), in sync with the National
Indicator Framework. Subsequently, due to the ongoing pandemic situation the
meeting could not be convened.

Vetting Comments of Audit,

The Committee may be informed whether the possibility of virtual meetings have
been explored for holding such meetings.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments
The subsequent meetings planned will also have the option of virtual participation.

Observation/Recommendation No. 16

Public Health Expenditure

The Committee note that NHM envisages to increase the Public Health expenditure
from around one percent (2015-16) to 2.5 percent of GDP (at current price by 2025).
As per the Audit observation, however, though Public Health Expenditure as a
percentage of GDP has been increasing since 2015-16, it has remained within a
narrow band of 1.02 lo 1.28 per cent of GDP. The Committee also find that the
National Health Mission -was being allocated comparatively less funds during the
years 2017-18 and 2018-19. Inadequate allocations may hinder achieving the
laudable targets set. Considering the need to achieve the SDGs in health sector, the
Committee recommend that there should not be any inadequacy of funds that may
hamper in reaching the target level of achievement of Goal-3. Additionally, the
Centre as well as the States should make proper assessment of their financial
requirements and availability of financial resources for the implementation of Goal-3.
Further, steps also need to be taken to ingrate SDGs into the accounting and
budgeting framework both at the Centre and the States. The Committee are also
unhappy to note that though the NHP prescribed increasing States health spending,
records of seven selected States reveal that the allocation for health care has been
inadequate. Although several steps are stated to have been taken to nudge the
States to augment health spending, the Committee are of the considered view that
the expenditure on health must receive earnest consideration and priority.

(SI. No. 16; Appendix II; Para No.16 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17% LokSabha)

Action Taken
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has provided no response.

Vetting Comments of Audit



— br

PAC may take a suitable view that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has not
furnished any reply.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

As per the National Health Account Estimates, out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE) as
a percentage of current health expenditure (CHE) has declined by 5.9 percentage
points from 69.1 per cent in 2013-14 to 63.2 per cent in 2016-17. This implies that
financial protection to households for healthcare has improved over this period.

Central Government has taken several initiatives for supplementing the efforts and
availability of financial resources for the implementation of Goal-3 by providing
quality and affordable healthcare services to the people. Some of the major
initiatives include National Health Mission, Ayushman Bharat (AB)-Health &
Wellness Centres (HWCs), PradhanMantri Jan ArogyaYojana (PMJAY),
PradhanMantriSwasthyaSurakshaYojana (PMSSY) and upgradation of medical
colleges. This Ministry has supported the efforts of the States/UTs under India
COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package-l and II
for the management of COIVD-19 pandemic and strengthening of the healthcare
infrastructure.

The other major initiative, announced in the current year budget (2021-22) is
PradhanMantriAtmaNirbhar Bharat Yojana (PM-ASBY), a new Centrally Sponsored
Scheme, with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 Crores. This will develop capacities of
primary, secondary, tertiary care Health Systems, strengthen existing national
institutions, and create new institutions to cater to detection and cure of new and
emerging diseases. This will be in addition to the National Health Mission.

Further, it is ensured that State Health Budget is increased by at-least 10 per cent
over last year. Where such increase over last year is less than 10 per cent, then the
average of last 3 years is considered as a conditionality for release of 2"4instalment
of funds to the States/UTs with the objective of encouraging States to make higher
allocations to health from their own budgetary resources.

Observation/Recommendation No. 17

Adequacy of Public Health Care Facilities

The Committee are concerned to find that despite the prevalence of
Plans/Policies as well as increase in allocations for augmenting Physical and
human resources, significant shortages continue to persist in regard to the
physical resources in all seven States. As for human resources, there were
considerable shortages in the States of Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee, in this regard are not in agreement with the plea taken by the
MoH&FW that Public Health and Hospitals is a State subject and the primary
responsibility of strengthening the healthcare delivery systems lies with the
respective States. This argument does not absolve the Ministry from the
responsibility of being the nodal Ministry in the health sector, which can create
the intended healthcare facilities across the country. The Committee are of the
considered view that the primary responsibility for attaining Goal-3 in an
efficacious manner within the given timeframe lies with the MoHFW. Further, in
regard to the large difference between the PHCs required as per population
norms and PHCs actually functioning in the selected States, the Committee
have been apprised that under Ayushman Bharat Scheme, it is envisaged to
transform 1.5 lakh Sub Health Centres (SHCs), Primary Health Centres (PHCs)
and Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHCS) into Health and Wellness Centres
(AB-HWCs) by December, 2022. These centres are proposed to be headed by a


— lig-

new cadre of Community Health Officers (CHOs) who would be B.Sc. Nursing
Graduates or Ayurvedic Practitioners trained in six-month course in certificate
programme for core competencies in Public Health and Primary Health Care.
The Committee in this regard feel that it would be advisable to post at least
one MBBS Doctor in these Wellness centres as para-medical personnel cannot
prescribe medicines to the patients. Effective utilisation of the services of
MBBS Doctors in the health care delivery system of India right from Wellness
Centres, can possibly make a big difference in achieving the SD Goals. The
Committee are also of the view that to prevent doctors from going abroad,
suitable facilities and encouragement may be given to them to serve the
people in the country. The Committee, therefore desire that with a view to
improving health services in remote areas, at least one Allopathic doctor along
with paramedical staff should be posted in each Wellness Centre. The
Committee feel that there is also an imperative need to constantly monitor the
functioning of Wellness Centres at regular intervals besides ensuring regular
attendance of Doctors there so that the goal of providing affordable, effective
and reliable health care, especially for the poor In the rural areas is achieved.

(SI. No. 17; Appendix Il; Para No.17 of the Thirty-Second Report of the Public
Accounts Committee) (17 LokSabha)

Action Taken

As per the operational guidelines of AYUSHMAN BHARAT - Comprehensive
Primary Health Care through health and wellness Centres - The services envisaged
at the Health and Weliness Centres (HWC) level include early identification, basic
management, counselling, ensuring treatment adherence, follow up care, ensuing
continuity of care by appropriate referrals, optimal home and community follow up,
and health promotion and prevention for the expanded range of services. The
primary health care teams at the SHCs led by the Community Health Officers (CHO)
are trained to provide first level of management and triage, i.e. refer the patient to the
appropriate health facility for treatment and follow up. The Medical Officer (MBBS) at
the PHCs/UPHCs would be responsible for ensuring that Comprehensive Primary
Health Care services are delivered through all SHCs-HWCs in her/his area. Further,
teleconsultations are done by the CHOs at SHCs with Medical Officers (MO) at PHC
level or MO at State/District level Hubs and subsequently medicines are dispensed
by the CHO based on the prescriptions of these MO. Similarly, specialist
teleconsultations services are being provided between MO at PHC and specialist at
State/District level Hubs. As on 11th August 2021, 91.66 Lakhs such teleconsultation
services (e-sanjeevani HWC consultations - 46.11 lakhs and e-sanjeevani OPD
consultations — 45.5 Lakhs) have been provided.

Vetting Comments of Audit.
Ministry has not furnished details on the following recommendations of PAC:

(i) Steps taken to post at least one Allopathic doctor along with paramedical staff in
each weliness Centre to improve health services in remote areas, and

(ii) Steps taken to constantly monitor the functioning of Wellness Centres at regular
intervals besides ensuring regular attendance of doctors.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments

(i) Under Ayushman Bharat — Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs), as on
22.09.2021, there are 21,290 PHC-HWCs (Rural Primary Health Centre) and
4,135 UPHC-HWCs (Urban Primary Health Centre) are functional where at-least
one MBBS (Allopathic) Doctors are posted to cater to the healthcare needs.


Yue
JAY
(ii) To monitor the functioning of the HWCs following measure are taken.

a) Constant monitoring on the implementation of CPHC services closer to the
population through HWCs, happen through regular review meetings & Video
conferences to provide required technical handholding and financial support.

b) This regular review and monitoring have enabled the achievement of FY
2020-21 target of 70,000 HWCs, well ahead of time by converting the
existing SHCs, PHCs and UPHCs into HWCs. The State/UTs were able to
operationalise 74,947 against the target of 70,000 HWCs by 31% March
2021.

c) Regional review conferences are organised regularly from FY 2018-19,
clustering with group of State/UTs to review the implementation challenges.

d) The performance of State in operationalisation of HWCs is documented
regularly and placed in public domain (http://117.239.180.230/hwcllive

_application/hwc/home /new_releases).

e) Further, under Incentive conditionality under NHM Framework from FY 2020-
21 has an indicator for achieving the target for operationalisation of HWCs.

f) Moreover, third-party evaluation of HWCs in 18 is undertaken for the
performance of HWCs in FY 2019-20 and FY 2021-21 and the report will be
released soon.

g) NITI Aayog also suggested that 2% of functional HWCs are to be evaluated
independently by Third party.

Observation/Recommendation No. 18
Data on Health Parameters

The Committee observe that both at the Central and State levels, there is
evidence of insufficient efforts at putting in place a comprehensive indicator
framework, identification of data sources, and production of disaggregated
data for Goal 3 which are essential for creating a robust monitoring and
reporting framework. The Committee are also astonished to find that for some
important indicators such as Maternal Mortality Rate, Under-five Child
Mortality Rate and Neonatal Mortality Rate, data was not uniformly or regularly
available. The Committee are constrained to observe in this regard that the
absence of relevant data would obviously hamper the Ministry in monitoring
such cases and combating the same. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the M/o H&FW needs to collect and collate authentic data on various
health parameters. The database so compiled also needs to be digitalized and
constantly updated so as to enable in taking effective steps for addressing
issues relating to mortality rates. The Committee further find that in the
National Indicator Framework (NIF) the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare was
assigned the responsibility of maintaining and supplying information on 44
NIF health related indicators. The Committee have been apprised that the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has provided SDG baseline data in respect
of 42 out of the assigned 44 Health indicators. For two indicators i.e. viral
Hepatitis (including A&B) and number of deaths due to cancer, robust datasets
were not available. Presently, however, Hepatitis has been included in the
National Family Health Surveys (NFHS), and the possibility of having authentic
data on deaths due to cancer is being explored. The Committee note that
substantial efforts are being made for putting in place a comprehensive
indicator framework, identification of data sources and production of
disaggregated data for SDG Goal 3. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the details of the indicators that have actually been mapped and those that
remain to be mapped following the validation by the C&AG establishment.



— lg-
(SI. No. 18; Appendix II; Para No.18 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)
Action Taken

As produced in the page No. 51 of the 32™Report of 17™Lok Sabha on
Preparedness for the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
out of the 44 indicators assigned to MoHFW, all the indictors have been mapped
except the indicator 3.4.1, 1.8. Number of deaths due to cancer. The details of the
rest of the indicators are attached at Annexure -VI.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Though the details of the indicators except one has been provided, it is not clear
whether the third column titled “India” in Annexure-VI provides the baseline data
figure or the present data status or the target of the concerned indicator. This may be
explained to PAC.

ATN with respect to Vetting Comments
The third column titled ‘India’ in Annexure-VI provides latest data available as per

the data source given. The legends in the table are corrected.
Observation/Recommendation No. 19

Addressing the shortcomings highlighted

For addressing the deficiencies in regard to Goal 3 of SDGs, as highlighted,
the Committee feel that the best practices for achieving the SDGs as followed
by various States should be studied in depth by the M/oH&FW and wherever
feasible, replicated in the States where deficiencies are noticed. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should also conduct a study of
the best healthcare systems prevailing in other countries - both developed and
developing, so that the health schemes could be restructured accordingly to
make the achievement of Sustainable Development goals a grand success. In
particular, the Ministry should study the Cuba model, which is considered to
be one of the best health care system in the world.

(SI. No. 19; Appendix Il; Para No.19 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17 LokSabha)
Action Taken

Under the Innovation summit of NHM an additional category for best practices for
implementation of State Specific intervention towards achievement of SDGs will be
included. Further, the Ministry also will study the Cuba model of health care system
to learn the good practices.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

Conclusive action is yet to be taken on PAC’s recommendation.
Observation/Recommendation No. 20

Corrective steps for timely achievement of SDGs

The Committee have noticed several deficiencies/shortcomings in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals in India. The facts stated in the foregoing
Paragraphs clearly identified certain shortfalls in each area, which require


- Ye

immediate attention and remedial action. Both at the Central and State levels,
the exercise of formulating policy documents in the context of SDGs is still
underway. A roadmap with defined milestones aligned with UN SDG Targets Is
yet to be prepared. Greater efforts also appear to be necessary for localising
and publicising the SDGs to ensure inclusiveness. With respect to resource
mobilisation for achieving the SDG targets, a financial gap analysis has not yet
been undertaken. Further, integration of SDGs into the accounting and
budgeting framework remains to be done at the Centre and in most States.
With respect to Monitoring and Reporting, the delay in publication of the
National Indicator Framework (NIF) had held back several key tasks such as
development of indicators and monitoring frameworks in the States and
identification of baseline data and milestones. The Committee express serious
concern over the facts narrated above and desire that in the light of the
committee's suggestions, the NITI Aayog and Ministries/Departments
concerned should take adequate/corrective steps with a view to effectively
achieving all the Sustainable Development Goals within a prescribed time
limit. The Committee also feel that there is a need for scrutiny in other sectors
as well.

(SI. No.20; Appendix Il; Para No.20 of the Thirty-Second
Report of the Public Accounts Committee)
(17" LokSabha)
Action Taken

As stated above, NITI Aayog continues to take forward the 506 Agenda in respect of
responsibilities allocated and strive to help improve implementation and performance. NITI
Aayog carries forward the national coordination of the implementation of SDGs in
collaboration with Central Ministries as well as States and UTs. It works with the States and
UTs for greater localisation of SDGs, which includes major initiatives on developing State
and District level indicators, improving the institutional system for SDG implementation and
monitoring, building capacities at various levels and strengthening partnerships with other
stakeholders, such as, the civil society, private sector, etc. NITI Aayog is publishing the SDG
India Index (3 editions already published) to track progress on SDGs both at national and
State/UT levels, which has become a globally recognised effective and catalytic tool to drive
performance at all levels. The Index has been sought to be further localised — the first
Regional District SDG Index for the North Eastern Region has been developed and launched
on 26 August 2021 in partnership with the Ministry of Development of the North Eastern
Region.

In view of the responsibility assigned, MoSPI developed an NIF for SDGs, and in compliance
to Cabinet decision, an HLSC on SDGs under the Chairmanship of Chief Statistician of India
cum Secretary, MoSPI with members from NITI Aayog, Ministries of Home Affairs; Health
and Family Welfare; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Finance and MoSPI, has
been constituted to periodically review, refine and modify the NIF. Accordingly, MoSPI, in
consultation with line Ministries/Departments and Custodian Agencies, examines the
suitability of existing indicators as well as new indicators for the relevant target(s) and
periodically reviews and refines the NIF.

Further, several initiatives have been taken by the MoSPI which inter-alia include release of
first Baseline report on SDG-NIF, release of SDGs Dashboard, preparation and circulation of
guidelines for States/UTs for development of State Indicator Framework, Capacity
Development on SDGs for the Central and the State officials, launching of new surveys for
bridging the data gaps by collecting data on certain indicators in the next round of National
Sample Surveys, alignment of existing surveys as per SDG data requirements etc.

Vetting Comments of Audit.

No comments.


जज Yar

Annexure |
Details of surveys conducted by MoSPI
PN Survey Year /Survey|Status as on 16.08.2021
period
1 |Periodic Labour Forcellnitiated in [Three annual reports have
‘Survey(PLFS): 12017 been released as on date

he major key parameters of
labour force estimated through
the PLFS are Labour Force
Participation Rate )LFPR(,

orker Population Ratio )WPR(,
land Unemployment Rate )UR.(

or the period:

July, 2017-June, 2018,

July, 2018 -June, 2019, and

July, 2019 -June, 2020

Eight Quarterly bulletins fo

lhe urban sector till the

uarter ending September,

2020 have been released}

viz .for the following periods:

lOct-.Dec., 2018

Jan-.March, 2019;

pril-June, 2019

July-Sept., 2019; Oct-.Dec.,

2019

an-.March, 2020; April-June,

12020, July-Sept., 2020

TUS is to be conducted

lonce in three years The

first TUS survey was

conducted in 2019 and the

result of the survey has

been released in

September, 2020.

3. INSS 77th round: Reports are in final stages

(i) Land and Livestock [December ind expected to be released
holdings, Isoon.

(ii) Debt & Investment,

(iii) Situation Assessment of
Agricultural Households:
The Surveys are aimed at
studying different indicators and
loperational holdings of rural
households including their
lownership of livestock and various
estimates related to the situation
of agricultural household;
hereas the Survey on Debt
land Investment aimed to
study )i (demand for credit from
rural families and )ii (the supply of
credit by credit agencies both

institutions and non-institutions;
‘Note <All the survey reports except the reports of NSS 77" round are available on
the website of the Ministry at www.mospi.gov.in.

2 ime Use Survey )TUS:( Initiated in

[The primary objective of TUS is |2019

to measure participation of men,
omen and other groups of

persons in paid and unpaid

activities



cc FHHoOUoa2’Jo—$jpjFSOTST-9onm!"”©DPIL750>°0-AW7TcCCO.80-2-20"”@™—o4u09090.-.0.-0—_DQVK0[c0[Vco0V—_BADXVLrTcTNMmM——"——TT]
Thirty-SecondReport(17thLokSabha)ofthePublicAccountsCommittee(2020-2021)on"PreparednessforthelmplementationofSustainableDevelopmentGoals(SDGs)"basedonC&AGReportNo.80f2019
Pe] Nationalindicator | 0७800७० | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry | 7? |] | | 2027 [7 | frome |
| 2.4.2:PercentageoffarmersissuedSoilHeal | INM,DAC&FW, Annual [MinistryofAgricultureandFarme 20% 40% 60% 90%
[000 |MinistryofAgricuitur rs'Welfare
JeandFarmers'Wetfa
re
|| |2.4.3:Percentageofnetareaunderorganicfa | INM,DAC&FW, | _| | | 15 | | 16 a 8.37
ming MinistryotAgricultur
jeandFarmers'Welfa
re
|2.5.1(a):Numberofplantresourcesforfood | MinistryofAgriculturea |Annual }4.6Lakh 4.7Lakhs }4.95Lakh
jandagricutturesecuredineithermedium- ndFarmers'Welfare,D
|ARE, NationalBureauo
acilties(innumber) _|PlantGeneticResoure
les (ICAR-NBPGR)
| 2.5. (byranimalgeneticresourcesforfoad — फिज्लापकतव्पाफत छतिया Numberofsem |Numberofs |Numberois | Numberofs
andagriculturesecuredineithermedium- ‘armers'Welfare,DARE, jendose:26700 jemendose: |emendose: jemendose:
jorlong-termconservationfacilities lationalBureauofAnimal 10; 302000; 342000; 397000;
jeneticResources,(ICA |Numberofso |Numberofso j|Numberofso |Numberofs
‘-NBAGR) maticceltvials | maticcelivials |maticcelivials |omaticcellvi
‘5400 :7400 9800 jals:12600
| '5.a.1:Operationallandholdings- AgncultureCensus,OAC |5years 22922 32179
|(femaleoperatedoperationalholding) |&FW,MinistryofAgriculty (in'000 (in'000
reandFarmers'Wetfare hectare) hectare)
| 1,5.1:Numberofdeaths,missingpersonsa | DisasterManagementDivi|Annual |MinistryofHomeAffairs(Disa |DMDhassubmittedthatitwouldnotbeappropriatetofixmile
Inddirectlyaffectedpersonsattributedtodis | sion MinistryofHomeA fai [sterManagementDivision) stonefortheindicatorasthenumberofdeath,missingperso
jastersper100,000popuiation(similartolnd [rs nsetc.arehighlyunpredictable
jicatort1.5.1and13.1.1)
| 1.5.3:Whetherthecountryhasadoptedandi |DisasterManagementDivi} Annual Achievedin2013.
| mplementednationaldisasterriskreductions |sion,MinistryofHomeAffai
trategiesintinewiththeSendaiF rameworkfor |rs
DisasterRiskReduction2015-
|2030, (similartolndicatort 1.b.1and13.1.2)



F*]

Nationalindicator

| 0०७७०७८५० |

ImplementingMinistry

| C= | 2027 |

Romarks

7.5.4 Proportionoflocaigovemmentst
lhatadoptandimplementlocaldisasterr
iskreductionstrategiesinlinewithnatio
Inaldisasterriskreductionstrategies (si
milartolndicator

11.b.2and13.1.3)

rs

| _

DisasterManagementDwvi [Annual
sion, MinistryofHomeAtfai

Annual

|dimplementednationaldisasterriskreductio
InstrategiesinlinewiththeSendaiFramewor
kforDisasterRiskReduction2015-
12030(similartolndicator11.b.1and13.1.2)

rs

sion MinistryofHomeAffai

i 17-5.1:Numberofdeaths,missingpersons isasterManagement
Janddirectlyaffectedpersonsattributedtodis | Division, MinistryofHom
jastersper100,000population(similartolndi |eAffairs
lcatort.5.1and13.1,1)

| 11.b-1:Whetherthecountryhasadoptedan  |DisasterManagementDvi Annual

है

||

11.b.2:Proportionoflocaigovernment
sthatadoptandimplementlocaldisaste
riskreductionstrategiesininewithnati
lonaidisasterriskreductionstrategies,(
/similartoindicator1.5.4and13.1.3)

rs

DisasterManagementOivi[Annual
sion, MinistryofHomeAffai

lastersper100,000population(similartolndi
leator1.5.1and11.5.1)

713-1.1:Numberofdeaths missingpersons
janddirectiyaffectedpersonsattributedtodis

rs

DisasterManagementDivi
sion, MinistryotHomeaftai

[Annual

||

73.1.2: Whetherthecountryhasadoptedandi
|mplementednationaldisasterriskreductions
trategiesininewiththeSendaiF rameworkfor
DisasterRiskReduction2015-

12030 (similartolndicator1.5.3and1.b.1)

rs

DisasterManagementDivi [Annual
sion, MinistryofHomeAtfai

‘By2023 alldistrictsinStates/UTsshalipreparethalrD
isasterManagementPlans.

DMDhassubmittedthatiwouldnotbeappropriatetofixmile
stonefortheindicatorasthenumberofdeath,missingperso
Insetc.arehighlyunpredictable

—

‘Achievedin2019.

By2023,alldistrictsinStates/UTsshallpreparethelrD
isasterManagementPlans.

[MDhassubmittedthatiwouldnotbeappropriatetofixmile
stonefortheindicatorasthenumberofdeath missingperso
Insetc.arehighlyunpredictable

‘Achievedin2079,

by



FP] Nationalindicator | patsource | Poriodicity ImplomontingMinistry | 9 | | 75 | 2027 [ ४ | [eems |
14 |73.1.3:Proportionofiocaigovernment DisasterManagementowi [Annual By2023,alldistrictsinStates/UTsshallpreparetherD
sthatadoptandimplementiocaldisaste sion, MinistryofHomeA fai isasterManagementPlans.
riskreductionstrategiesininewithnati ts
lonaidisasterriskreductionstrategies,(
simitartoindicator
1.5.4and11.b.2)
i 716.9-1:Percentageotbinnsregiste lOfficeofiheRegistrarG | | inistryotHomeAffars(Officeot _ [ORGlinformedihalasperORGvision-2024-
red leneral.india Ministryof theRegistrarGeneral, India) inderCivilRegistrationSystem(CRS)100%registrationofbir
Homeasfairs wouldbeachievedby2024
i 7-7 2:Percentageofhouseholdusingel MinistryorPetral [Annual IMinisiryorPetroleumandNatura  MinistyofPetroleum&NGhastargeled 100%L PGcoverageo
leancookingfuel leumandNatural iGas BeneficiaryhousehokistobeachievedbyMarch2022.
Gas
17 [6-4 2Percapiatossifuel MinistryofPetroleum Baseine Baseine [Baseline [Baseline _ |Baselinescenarioreferstoihe
|consumption (inkg.) landNaturalGas (MMT):247.7, |(MMT):273 |(MMT):291. |(MMT):32_|conservativecasewhenwetakethe
PCC (kg): 3,PC 1.0,PCC _|existingfactorstogrowonsimilar
154.4; 009): linesinpast&present
HTransition(M 200.4; _ | TransitionScenariooffersa
IMT):242.7,  |Transition( |Transition( | Transition |perspectivewherefavourable
PCC(kg): MMT):264. |MMT):279.3 |(MMT):30 |Governmentpolicies plausible
167.3;Transf_ |0,PCC PCC(kg): |4.0,PCC_|technologicalbreakthroughsandsocio-
lormation tka): 181.7;Tran — 009): leconomicdriversactasimpetus
(MMT):238.3, |176.7:Tran |sformation | 189.8;Tra_|towardsmeetingthegrowingeneray
२0009): sformation |(MMT):266. |nsformati__ |demandsofindia
164.3 (MMT):256 |5,PCC. lon HTransformationScenariooffersan
O,PCC (kg):173.4 —|(MMT):28 _optimisticperspectivewhereincertain
tkg):171.4 3.0,PCC _|sectorspecificdriversprovideathrust
009): todomesticeneraydemand
176.7
| 5.5.1 :Proportionoisealsheldbywomeninnat |(1) ElectionCommiss |SyearsforLokSabha (1)ElectionCommissionofindia( | lisnotfeasibletofixmilestoneforheindicator.
ionalPariiament,StateLegistationandLocal |ionofindia JandPRI;2YearsforR_|2)RajyaSabhaSecretariat(3)Mi
[SefGovemment(simiartolndicators: (2) RajyaSabhaS: jajyaSabha nistryofPanchayatiRaj

/10.2.2and16.7.1)

lecretariat(3)Ministr
{yofPanchayatiRaj

०9:


F*]

l= | = | 2087

|

Je(DPIIT),Ministryof
Commerceandin
dustry

Nationalindicator | ००७8०७८० | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry [rms
| 10.2.2:Proportionofseaisheldbywomeninn |(1) ElectionCommissio | SyearsforLokSab Ttisnotfeasibletofixmilestonefortheindicator.
ationalPartiament,StateLegislationandLoc |nofindia ha&PRI;2Yearsfor
jalSefGovemment,(similartoindicatorss.5. (2) RajyaSabhaS. RajyaSabha
1and16.7.1) lecretariat(3)Ministr
lyofPanchayatiRaj
20 [16.7.1:Proportionofseaisheldbywomeninn |(1) ElectionCommissio |SYearsfori.okSab Tisnotfeasibletofixmilestonefortheindicator.
ationalPariiament,StateLegislationandLoc |nofindia ha&PRI:2Yearsfo
jalSefGovemment(similartoindicatorss.5.1 |(2) RajyaSabhaS. RajyaSabha
jand10.2.2) lecretariat(3)Ministr
{yofPanchayatiRaj
21 [5.5 3:Numberofwomencandidatesoutoftot [ElectionCommissionofl [5Years [EiectionCommissionofindy ECihasinformedihatfixingmilestonesfortheseindicatorsisb
lalcandidatescontestingelections(inpercent |ndia a eyondthepurviewofECl,
lage)
| | 103 3:ProportionofSc/STpersonsin ElectionCommissionofl |5Years
Electedbodies,(LokSabha)(similarto India
16.7.2)
23|16.7.2:ProportionofSc/Stpersonsinineel_|EleclionCommissionofi|5Vears
lectedbodies(LokSabha)(similartoindicato_|ndia
10.2.3)
|| fe 2.2:Totainumberofpatentsissued{ DeparimentforPr 7 IMinisiryofCommerceandindust 32800 36200 ‘40000 | |
granted) ,(similartolndicator8.3.2and lomotionof ry
9.5.3) industryandintematTrad
Je(DPIT),Ministryof
Commerceandin
[dustry
25 [@.3.2:Totainumberofpatentsissued{ [DepartmentforPr [Annual 32800 36200 “40000 | 46200
Igranted)(similartoindicators8.2.2and lomotionot
9.5.3) IindustryandintemalTrad



[1] Natlonalindicator | 0०७8०७०० | Poriodicity ImplementingMinistry ia [| 2027 | 7 | Remarks
| 19.5.3:Totalnumberofpatentsissued( [DepartmentforPr = 32800 चल 40000 46200
granted) ,(similartoindicator8.2.2and lomotionof
8.3.2) |industryandintemaiTrad
|e(DPIIT),Ministryof
|Commerceandin
dustry
27117.11.1:Shareofindia'sexportsinGlobalex |DGFT,MinistryofCo |Annual |Merchandiseexports:2to2,5%and
ports (inpercentage) mmerce&industry serviceexport:4%by2030
a 1.4.2:Numberoftelephonesubscriptionsas |Departmentoffelecomm [Annual |MinistryofCommunications,Depar| | _| | | 95.7 | _]
percentageoftotalpoputation lunications MinistryofCo ltmentofTelecommunications
mmunications
i '9.c.1:NumberofIntemetSubscriptionsaspe |Departmentoffelecomm | Annual | | 94.93 | _| | | 9 0िशएश्षकणाा3॥8५शात३शीक्षाणा0आशा।४9५७
rcentageoftotalpoputation lunications, MinistryofCo bscription,
Immunications
| 17.6.1:Fixedintemetbroadbandsubscript (a)Numerator- |Annual MinistryofCommunicationhasproposedtorefinetheindicator.
ionspert 00inhabitants, byspeed DepartmentofTelecomm Theindicatorwillberefinedinconsuttationwithallconcemedst
junications MinistryofCo: akeholdersandmilestoneswillbefixedthereafter.
|mmunications(b)Denomi
nator-
OfficeoftheRegistrarGen
eral india, MinistryofHom
leatiais
31 [2.1.2:Proportionofbeneficiariescovere MinistryofConsumerAffai [Annual |MinistryofConsumerAffairs, | | | | | | | |
|dunderNationalF oodSecurityAct2013. Irs, FoodandPublicDistrib |FoodandPublicDistribution
jution
/ 12.3.2:Postharveststorageand IMinistryofConsumer [Annual Storageloss: | Storage [Storage (Storage
distributionlossesofcentral/states Affairs, Foodand (-)0.15% loss: loss: loss:
|poolstocksofwheatandrice /PublicDistribution |Transitloss: (-)0.16% (-)0.17% (-}0.18%
Jo.22% Transit Transitoss: [Transit
loss: 10.19% loss:
10.21% 10.16%
33 |5.5.2:Proportionofwomeninmanage MinistryofCorporateAffai | |MinistryofCorporateAffairs /MilestonecannotbesetsincenumberofwomenDirectorsisadi
rialpositionsincludingwomeninBoard rs |sclosurebasedindicatorandistotallydependentontheannuaidi

lofDirector, inistedcompanies (pert,
looopersons)

|sclosermadebythecompanies.



Nationalindicator [datasource | Periodicity [_tmplomentingtinisty | | | [7 | 2027 [| ems

77 4.1:Totalparcapfaexpendlureonthepre |Ministyorcukure ~ MinistryotCutare  MinistryotCulurehasinformedthaimilstonescannolbesetfor

servation protectionandconservationofalle theindicatorasbudgetisapprovedbyM/oFinancetakingintoco

luturalandnaturathertage nsiderationtheresources,expenditure,trendsetc.oftheprece
dingyear.

F411 CoastalWaterQualiyindex MinistryoteannSe! [Annual 7 Ministryott arth Scienceshasinformedinatacomprehenswve

lences consukationisrequiredwithMinistryofEarthSciences MoSP

I MoEF&CCandStateGovemmenttorfxingthemilestones.

4-3. :Averagemarneacidiy(pHymeasure |MnisiryorearthSel a MinistyrEarth Sclencesinformedinaimiesionecannolbesst

datagreedsiteofrepresentativesampingsta ences ortheindicatorasthepHinthecoastahvatersisdrivenbyanumb

tions eroffactorsincludingnaturalvariabiltyandongoingcimatecha
nge

Ta. T Alocationotbudgetesources(Bud | MinistryotzarihSei P| “Themisstonescannolbesetforbudgetrelatedindicator,

lgetEstimatesyforOceanServices,Modeli fences

Ing.ApplicationsResourcesandTechnolo

lay(OSMART)scheme,inRs.crore)

Tae Complanceofintemalionalaws  |MinistyofEarihSe [Annual ee

lences

[41.1 Percentageoistudentsingrade3, | MinistiyofEducation Dep [Annual Ministryofedueation Language crass: 700%

5,8and artmentofSchoolEducali Class3: 100%

Oachievingatleastaminimumproficien _onandLiteracy 90.28

cylevel
intermsofnationallydefinedlearning
loutcomes
tobeattainedbypupitsattheendofeachot
/abovegrades



[1] Nationalindicator ]__oatasource | Poriodicity [_imalementingttiisty | ae | | 2027 [7 | remakes |
| 4-1 2:GrossinlakeRatotothelast Deparimentar a Sassss8% 7 |Classs: [Class erases:
lgrade(primary.upperprimaryand |SchoolEducationand classe:98% — |98.5% 99% 100%
३९००॥००)) Literacy, Ministryor Class10: class: |Classé: | Class.
Education 82% 98.5% 99% 100%
classi0: |classto: —_|Classt0:
84% 86% 88%
|| a:1.31GrossEnrolmentRalionhighers |Deparmentot [Annual 35% 60% 38% 3%
Jecondaryeducation |SchoolEducationandl ite
racy,MinistryofEducation
| हाल लता नम Deparimentof fAnnual Primary Primary. [Primary 7 Primary:
primaryandupperprimary |SchoolEducationand 93% 95% 97% 100%
leducation Literacy Ministryot Upper lupper Upper Upper
Education Primary: Primary: Primary: Primary:
72% 75% 78% 100%
"AgjusteaNetenromentRatio Deparimentor 7 rimary: Primary. [Primary:
inprimary.upperprimaryand [SchoolEducationand 98% 98.5% 99%
Isecondaryeducation Literacy Ministyot Upper lUpper [Upper
Education Primary: Primary: [Primary
85% 88% 91%
Secondary: |Secondary: |Secondary:
65.0% 70% 75%
100%
| वितव्काफ्ाम काका Deparimentof [Annual Brimary: Primary, [Primary. _[Prmmary:
lenrolledinGrade 1 whoreaches [SchoolEducationand 88% 90% 95% 400%
lastgradeorprimary/upper Literacy, Ministryof Elementary: [Elementary [Elementary |Elementar
primary/secondarylevels Education 77% 81% 85% y:20%
Secondary: |Secondary: |Secondary: |Secondar
84% 68% 72% 80%
"| fa-1.7 Numberolyearsinireeand Deparimentat Annual a
(i)}compulsoryeducationguaranteedin _| SchoolEducationandLite
legatrameworks racy,MinistryofEducation
° 14.2.1 Grossearlychildhoodeducat Deparimentof | | 30% 70% 30% 30%
jonenrolmentratio |SchoolEducationandL ite

racy MinistryofE ducation

-hs 7


3025 [| जा 2037 |

(a)nationaleducationpolicies;(b)curricula;
(c)teachereducation;
|and(d)studentassessment(Similartolndicat
lors12.8.1and13.3.1)

Nationalindicator ]__ datasource | Periodicity [_imetementingtinisty | Femns ििए
47 [42.2 Paricipationratemorganizedieamin _|Deparimentof [Annual 65% 50% 35% | 100%
lgoneyearbeforeofficialprimaryentry |SchoolEducationandLite
racy MinistryofEducation
i /4.5.1-GenderPariyindcesforPrimary IMinistryofEducation _ |Annual | | | | | |
|/Secondary/HigherSecondary/Tertiar
lyeducation
49 [4.5.2:Enrolmentratioofchidrenwithdisa  [Deparimentof [Annual Primaryt Primary: [Primary: [Primary
bitties [SchoolEducationandL ite 05 }.1UpperPri_|1.15UpperPri |1.2UpperPr|
racy,MinistryofEducation UpperPri fmary:1.16E1 |mary:1.18Ele |imary:1.2E!
lementary —_|mentary:1.16 |ementary:1
Elementary:1. |:1.13, |Secondary.0. |.2Secondar
08 |Secondary:0.|73 y:0.75Hr.S
Secondary:0. |72 Hr.Secondar Jecondary:0
74 Hr.Secondar |y:0.36 38
Hr.Secondary: |y:0.35
0.34
कि [Deparimentor [Annual Mainstreamedalindicatorsexcludingreligiouseducation
[ducationand(iijeducationforsustainabled | SchoolEducationandLite
jevelopmentaremainstreamedin racy,MinistryofEducation

ts
ql


F]

Lm |

|

2027

|

Nationalindicator | 0%७8०05०. | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry Romarks
| [4.2 1Proportionofschoolswih Deparimentor [Annual Electricity: Electricity: |Electriciy: Electricity
:(a}electrcity:(b) | SchoolEducationand 188% 192% 196% 100%
lcomputersforpedagogical Literacy, Ministryof Computers: {Computers |Computers: |Computer
purposes;(c)adaptedinfrastructure Education 142% 45% 48% 8:51%
jandmaterialsforstudentswith Ramp:100% — |Ramp: Ramp: Ramp:
disabilties/disabledtriendlyramp Disabled 100% 100% 100%
andtoilets,(d)basiedrinking friendly Disabled [Disabled —| Disabled
Iwater;(e)single-sexbasicsanitation toiet:25% friendly friendly {friendly
facilties;and(fbasichandwashing Drinking foilet:28% — ftoilet:31% —|toilet:
taciliies(aspertheWASHindicator lwater:98% [Drinking [Drinking 35%
definitions), (inpercentage) Boystoiet: water: water: Drinking
198% 199% 400% water:
Giristoiet Boystoilet: |Boystoilet: {100%
98% 199% 100% Boys
Handwash © ‘|Girstoilet: |Giristoilet: _toiet:
Hacility:92%  }99% 100% 100%
Handwash [Handwash {Girls
facitty: acilty: toilet:
94% 196% 100%
Hand
wash
racitty:
100%
$2 [4.¢.1-Proportionofrained Deparmentof Annual Primary: Primary: |Primary: Primary:
teachers byeducationieve! | School€ducationand 90% 95% 100% 100%
(primary upperprimary, Literacy, Ministryof Upper Upper Upper Upper
Jelementary, secondaryandhigher lEducation Primary: Primary:95 |Primary:10|Primary:1
|secondaryeducation) 90% % 0% 00%
Secondary: |Secondary: |Secondary: |Secondar
82% [84% 86% y:88%
53 /6.2.3:Proportionofschoolswithseparat | Deparimentot [Annual P a P| 700
etoiletfaciltyforgiris [SchoolEducationandLite
racy,MinistryofEducation
1 12.8.TExtentlowhich(iglobalctizenship _ |Deparimentof [Annual Wainstreamedalindicatorsexchidingreligiouseducation
Jeducationand(jijeducationforsustainable _|SchoolEducationandLite
Jdevelopmentaremainstreamedin racy,MinistryofEducation

(a)nationaleducationpolicies:(b)curricula;
(c)teachereducation;
jand(d)studentassessment(Similartolndicat
lors4.7.1and13.3.1)

~9S7


stablishedinaccordancewithAichiBiodiversi
ItyTargetzoftheStrategiesPlanforBiodiversit
y.2011-
12020;(b)Integrationofbiodiversityintonation
jalaccountingandreportingsystems,defined
|asimplementationofiheSystemofEnvironm
lenta-EconomicAccounting.

ee] Nationalindicator | 0०७8०/०० | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry [| | [7 | 2027 [ 5 | Romarks
| 73.3.1:Extentiowhich()giobalciizenship | Deparimentof Annual Mainstreamedalindicalorsexcludingreligiouseducation
leducationand(ijjeducationforsustainable | SchoolEducationandLite
|developmentaremainstreamedin racy.MinistryofEducation
(a)nationaleducationpolicies (b)curricula;
(c)teachereducatio
Jand(d)studentassessment(Similartoindicat
lors4.7.1and12.8.1),
[2020
|| [5.b.7-Percentageofwomenemployedinl | MinistryofElectro “Annual MinistryofElectroniesandinfor —_ [~37% =38% का ao-aa%
TandiTeSindustry nicsandinformati ImationTechnology
lonTechnology
57 [16.6.3:NumberofGovemmentservicespr | MinistryofElectro [Annual कक 4287 WaaT 4687
lovidedoninetocitizens nicsandinformati
lonTechnology
| 72.4.1 Whetherthecouniryhasratifiedint |Ministryofenvironment [Annual IMinistryofEnvironmentForestan ‘Achievedin2016
lemationalMuttilateralEnvironmentalagr —_|ForestandClimateChan JdClimateChange
leementsonhazardouswasteandotherc [ge
hemicals
| a2 TP re IMinistiyotEnvironment —|2Vears |... |
}2020action:Achievementofpre- ForestandClimateChan
12020goalsaspercountrypriority(percenta |ge
IgereductioninemissionintensityofGDP,o
\ver2005ievel)
| 75.7. 1:Numberofcasesregisteredunderth | Ministryofenvironment — [Annual MoEFCCinfommedihatiwouldnotappropriatetofimilestoneto|
leWildiifeProtectionAct,1972(similarto15.c, |ForestandCiimateChan rtheindicatorasthesamemayresulindecreaseinreportingthe
1) 9० numberof
asesofwildiifecrime.
61 |15.9.1(a)Progresstowardsnationalargeise - 75.5.A(bjisachieved.

Vee


| | | 5 ] 2027 [= |]

Nationalindicator | oatssourco | ImplomentingMinistry [remts i
हर 18.6.1: Numberofeasesregisteredunderth [MinisiryofEnvironment {Annual MoEFCCinformedihatiwouldnotappropriatetofixmilestonefo|
leWildifeProtectionAct,1972(similarto15.7 |ForestandCiimateChan theindicatorasthesamemayresultindecreaseinreportingthe
4) ge numberof
lcasesofwildlfecrime,
6310.7,7:Recnuimentcostbomebyemploye | MinisiryofExtemalaffal _ |Annual MinistryofextemalAfiairs MEAhasindicatedihattherecruimentcostisaonelimecosibor
leasaproportionofmonthlyincomeeamedi rs Inbytheemigrantworkerfortheentireworkcontractwhichisgene|
Incountryofdestination raly2a
months, TheaverageincomeatUSD200ismonthiyine
ome.
i 70.4.2:;Percentageofbudgetalocatedto _|MinistryofFinance [Annual Minisiryorrinance ‘The MinistryofFnanceinformedihatforbudgetrelatedindica
NorthEastemStates tors,milestonescannotbefixed.
65 [10.4 3:Percentageofbudgetaliocatediorwe |Ministryofrinance Annual
ifareofSCsandSTs
i 12 €:7-Amountoffossifuelsubsidy faNumerator- [Annual
perunitofGDP MinistryofFinanceb)Deno
minator-
NationalAccountsDivisio.
InMoSPI
Car rimarygovernmentexpenditu DEA MinisiryotFin [Annual
resasaproportionoforiginalapproved lance
budget
| | 717-7-7:Totaigovemmentrevenueasaprop a)Numerator- [Annual
lortionofSDP,bysource MinistryofFinanceb)Deno
minator-
NationatAccountsDivisio.
IMoSPI
"| 171.2Proporlionofdomesticbudgettun _ |MinisiryofFinance [Annual
ldedbydomestictaxes
70 |[17.19.1:MacroeconomicDashboard MinistryofFinance jAnnwat Achieved
71 [17.19.1 BudgetallocatediodiffereniMinisin’ |NationalAccountsDivisio |. | Forbudgetrelatedindicators miestonescannotbetixed.
lesforstrengtheningstatistics,(inRs.Lakh) |n,NSO.MoSPI

-$5 7


[|

Nationalindicator [__patssource | Poriodicity

72|2.2.4;Percentageofpregnantwomenag __|MinistryofHeathandr | vears
je15- /amilyWelfare(National
|49yearswhoareanaemic(<11.0g/dl) |FamilyHeathSurvey)

73 [2.2.5:Percentageoichidrenages- IMinistryoteathandF | 3Years
IS9monthswhoareanaemic(<11.0g/dl) —_jamilyWetfare(National

|FamilyHeathSurvey)

74 |3.1.2:Percentageotbirihs IMinistryorHeathandF | 3Years
attendedbyskilledheathpersonne\PeriodS | amilyWetfare(National
years) FamilyHeatthSurvey)

76 [3.1 S:Percentageotbiths MinistryotHeathandF | 3Years
attendedbyskilledheatthpersonnel(Period1 |amilyWetfare(National
year) FamilyHeatthSurvey)

76 [3.1 4:Percentageofwomenagedi5- MinistiyotHeathandr | 3Vears
/49yearswithalivebirth forlastbirth, whore _ |amilyWetfare(National
[ceivedantenatalcare fourtimesormore(P__|FamilyHealthSurvey)
leriodSyears/tyear)

77 [3.3.1 NumberoinewHivinfectionsper IMinistryotHeatihandF [Annual
1,000uninfectedpoputation jamilyWeare(National

AIDS
|Contro!Organisation)

76 [3.3 2:Tuberculosisincidencepert,00,.0 | MinistryofHeathandr ee
lOOpopulation jamilyWetfare(RNTCP

Division)

79 |3.3.3:Malaraincidencepert O0Opopulati |MinisiryofHeathandr Annual

lon /amilyWelfare(NVBDC
PDivision)
|| [3.3 5:Dengue:CaseFalaltyRatio, MinistryofHeathandF [Annual

jamilyWelfare(NVBDC
|P Division)

[ tnptemenngttinsty |

Ministryofteaitnandrami
yWetfare

P| P| 7
= a 7

0.035 0.03 0.02 |<0.07
| | | nia | |
pit 0.08 P| | ।
a eT <A a



FF]

lL |

LY]

LC |

C= |

Nationalindicator ]__datssource | Periodicity ImplomentingMinistry fremats ै|ै

|| 13.3.6.910901101061908- [/॥191/0168#1810# |Annual 15 0.75 0.25
|2casesamongstnewcasesofLeprosy,(Per }amilyWelfare
millionpopulation)

82 |3.3.7:Percentageofblocks MinistryofHeatth Annual 4 INumberof Numberof INumberof |Number
ireporting<1KalaAzarcaseper jandFamilyWelfare blocks blocks blocks jofblocks:
10,000populationoutofthetotal |(NVBDCPDivision) Ireporting<1 reporting< —jreporting< —_|reporting
jendemicblocks KalaAzar 1KalaAzar 1KalaAzar <1Kala

caseper Icaseper caseper |Azarcase
10,000 [10,000 10,000 per
/population- population- |population- | 10,000
633 833 1633 populatio
[n-633
| 3.3,8:26108119980विज्ञांटड MinistryofHealth Annual Numberof INumberof |Numberof Number
ireporting<1 %Microfilariarate JandFamilyWelfare districts districts districts lof
|(MF)outofTargetedEndemic |(NVBDCPDivision) reporting< reporting< —|reporting< —_|districts
districts 1% 1% 1% reporting
Microfilaria | Microfilaria |Microfilaria |<1%
jrate(MF)- jrate(MF)- rate(MF)- |Microfilari
146 188 231 arate
(MF)-272

| '3-7.1-Percentageolcurrentiymamiedwo  |MinistryofHealhand> SYears 75 79.4 a
menaged15- amilyWelfare(National
|49yearswhohavetheimeedforfamilyplan |FamilyHeatthSurvey)
ningsatisfiedwithmodemmethods

| ‘PercentageofinstitutionaiBirths(5 |MinistryofHeatthandF ‘SYears: P| P| P|
lyears/tyears) |amilyWelfare(Nationat

FamilyHeathSurvey)

| |3.7.4:Percentageofcurrentiymamiedwom | MinistryofHeaithandF 3Years: a | 3 55.3
jen(15~ jamilyWelfare(National
|49years)whouseanymodemfamilyplannin |FamilyHeatthSurvey)

Igmethods(similartolndicator3.8.1and5.6.
1)

हा Percentageofwomenaged15- MinistryofHeakhandr ‘sYears [7 65 a
19yearswhowerealreadymothersorpreg | amilyWetfare(National
nant |FamilyHeathSurvey)



C= |

(| Nationalindicator [__patssource | Poriodicity ImplomontingMinistry [7 | 2027 [remete
छह [38.1 Percenlageotcurrentiymamiedwom |MinistryoteathandF | 3vears a a |
Jen(15- amily\Wetare(National
J49years)whouseanymodemfamiyplannin.[FamilyHeathhSurvey)
]gmethods(similartoindicator3.7.4and5.6.
1)

"| [318 2:Proporionoipopulationwihlargehou [SORD MoSP] Byars Salingoimilestonesisnetherfeasblenordesiabe
Jseholdexpendituresonheathasashareotio
{ahhouseholdexpenditureorincome

" 3.8 SPereenlageotpeopleivngwihhiv | NinisiyoiHeainand® Annual PT a r छठ
lcurrentiyreceivingARTamongthedetecte _|amilyWetfare(National
JdnumberofadultsandchikirenivingwithH! |AIDS
lV IControlOrganisation)

Bi [3.b.aPrevalenceothyperiension IMinistryotHeath 3Years IMale:15.40; 7 |Wale: Male: ale, | Fargetselsthemaxmumima.
lamongmenandwomenage1$-49 jandFamilyWettare Female: 16.60; 17.40; 18.00;
years2015-16(inpercentage) {(NationaFamily 13.00 Female: |Female: | Female:

HeathSurvey) 14.50 15.00 16.00
|| [318 5:Percentageolpopulationinagegroup |MinistryoiHeathandF | 3Vears iale:76.00,  |Male1.25 |Male'86.50, |Wale90.00
15 amity Wetfare(National Female | |.Female8 |Females |.
|4awhoreportedsoughttreatmentoutottotal_ |FamilyeathSurvey) 3.04 5.65 8.26 Females
populationinthatagegrouphavingdiabetes 0.00

" 3.6 G:Percentageotwomenaged15- MinistryotHeathandF | vears En 46.65 C446 a
J49whohaveeverundergoneCervixexami |amilyWetfare(National
nations FamiyHeathSurvey)

है 5.8 7 PercentageotTBcasessuccesstully [MinistryotHeathandF — |2Vears 580 a 580 |
leated(curedplustreatmentcompletedjamo |amilyWetfare(RNTCP
IngTBcasesnotifedtothenationalheatthauth Division)
oritiesduringaspecifiedperiod

i 58: Tolalphysiciansnursesandmidwive |PublicheathOwision,M [Annual 25 P| a 5
Jspert0,000population,(similartolndicator _{inistyorHeatthandF ami
3.0.1) lywettare

S19


P*] Nationalindicator | 0७8०७०० | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry | | 2025 2027 p | omnes
' /3.9,2:Proportionofmenandwomenreportin |MinistryofHeaithandF 3Years Male:1.15,Fem |Male:1.10,F |Male:1.05,F |Male:1.0,F
|gAsthmaintheagegroup15-49years [amily Welfare(National jale:1.85 lemale:1.80 |emale:1.75 —_jemale:1.7
|FamilyHeathSurvey)
37 [S.a.1:Percentageofadultsteyearsand | MinistiyoiHeathandr  |SYears 2% 20%
Jabovewithuseofanykindoftobacco(sm lamilyWelfare(GlobalA
lokingandsmokeless) |dultTobaccoSurvey)
| 3.b.1:Percentageofchiddrenaged12- MinistryofHeathandr | SYears P| | | a
/23monthsfullyimmunized(BCGMeasles | amilyWelfare(Nationat
landthreedosesofPentavalentvaccine) |FamilyHeatthSurvey)
|] '3.b.2:BudgetaryaliocationforDepartmento [MinistryofHeatthandr /Annual 3766 4704 5349.26 7149.87
fHealthResearch (inRs.crore) jamilyWelfare
700 |5.c.1-Tolaiphysicians nursesandmidwive |PublichealhOwision.M [Annual a a a 455
| sper, 000population,inpercentage(simil _|inistryofHeatthandFami
jartoindicator3.8.8) tyWelfare
3.c.2:Percentageofgovemmentspending(i |NationalAccountsDivisio [Annual 1.72 | | |] 2.42
Includingcurrentandcapitalexpenditure)inh_|n.NSO,MoSP!
jeatthsectortoGDP
102 |5,6.1:Percentageofcurrentlymamiedwome |MinistryofHeathandF 3Years 52.4 7 3 $5.3
॥0(15- amityWetfare(National
/49years)whousemodemmethodsoffamily |FamilyHeathSurvey)
planning(similartoindicators3.7.4and3.8.1)
|] 5.6 2.Unmetneedforfamiyplanningforcurr |MinistryofHeathandr  |3Years its | |] 405
lentlymarriedwomenaged15- |amilyWetfare(National
/49years,2015-16(inpercentage) FamilyHeathSurvey)
704 |17.3.1-ProportionofcitieswithMasterpl MinistryofHousingand _ [Annual [MinisiryofHousingandUrba | | 5 | | 700
lans(similarto11.a.1) lUrbanattairs nAairs



FF]

C=]

| | 2035 2037 = |

Nationalindicator [| catasource | Periodicity [_implementingtinisty | frome |
iy 77.6.1: Percentageotwasteproces INinistryorHousingand | | 5 | | jroo 700
sed lUrbanaftairs
a 71.6 4:Percentageoiwardswih100%doon |MinistryofHousingand [Annual | | 700 | | 700
lodoorwastecollection lUrbanaffairs
107 |17-a.1:ProportionofciieswithMasterp! | MinistryofHousingand [Annual | | | | | | |
lans(similarto11.3.1) lUrbanaftairs
708 |12.5.1:Numberofwasterecycingplanisin | MinisiryofHousingand [Annual [Naseparatemilestonesarerequiredasihemiestoneshavebee
stalled Urbanaftairs InsetforSDGindicator1 1.6.1"Percentageofwasteprocessed’.
708 |12.5.2:NumberofUrbanLocalBodiesu __|MinistyyofHousingand [Annual "ThedatasourceMinistryhasproposedrefinementiniheindical
singwastesegregationtechniques lUrbanAftairs or.Theindicatorwill
berefinedfollowingdiscussionwithconcemedstakeholdersint
herelevantforaandmilestoneswillbesetaccordingly.
हर 6.2.1: Proportionofhouseholdshaving MinisiryotJaiShaki DWS |AnnuaforRuraiand WinistryordalShakt ‘Achievedin2019-20.
laccesstotoiletfacilty(Urban&Rural) {orRuralandMiS,NSS Mo |3yearsforUrban
SPitor
Urban
711 62 2:Percentageoibistrcisachieving [OWS MinistryotJalsha | Annual ‘Achievedin2019-20.
lOpenDetecationFree(ODF target ksi
a 6.4. 1-Percentagegroundwaterwihara _ CGWS,MinisiryofuaiSha [Annual DynamicGroundWaterResourcesarebeingassessedb
walagainstavailabilty ksi yCGWBjointlywithStateGW/NodalDepartmentsperiodica
lly(onceinthreeyears),
| | 6.6.1: Percentageofblocksimanda पा ‘DynamicGroundWaterResourcesarebengassessedb
isitalukaover-exploited yCGWBiointlywithStateGWiNodalDepartmentsperiodica
lly(onceinthreeyears).
114 |6.b.1-Existenceofadevelopedandoperation |MinistryofLabourand [Annual MinistryofLabourandEmp! Achieved
alizednationalstrategytoryouthemployment [Employment oyment
| asadistinctstrategyoraspartofanational
jemploymentstrategy
| 16.5.1:Numberofcourlsperlakhpopulatio | MinisuyofLawandJusii [Annual MinistryofLawandJustice MinistryofL wand Justiceinformedihattisnotfeasbletosetth
In ce emilestonefortheindicator.



FF]

(NABARD)

Nationalindicator [__oassource | Periodicity जज जरा [| | 5 | | 2027 | 0 | Romarks

776 |16.5.3:NumberofJudges(alievels)p iMinistryofLawandJusti {Annual MinistryofLawandJusticeinformedihatiisnotfeasibietosetth
Jerlakhpoputation ce emilestonefortheindicator.

177 |8.5-3:OutstandingCreditoMSME iMinisiryofMicro,Small [Annual IMinistryofMicro,SmallandMedia | DataontheindicatorisbeigcollectediromRBi HenceRBima
landMediumEnterpris mEnterprises ysetthemilestone.RBlinformedthatitdoesn'iprescribeanyta
les ‘sgettothebankswithregardstotheoutstandingcredittoMSM

Esectors,

| 8.3.4:NumberofMSMEunitsregisteredun | MinistryofMicroSmail [Annual 'ThedatasourceMnistryhasproposedrefinementniheindical

JdertheonlineUdyogAadhaarregistration _andMediumEnterpris or.Theindicatorwill
es berefinedfollowingdiscussionwithconcemedstakeholdersint
herelevantforaandmilestoneswillbesetaccordingly.

119 [9.3 2 PercentageofcreditiowoMSMEas _|Ministryofimicro, Smal 7 DataontheindicalonisbeingcollectediromRBl HenceRBima
JapercentageofTotalAdjustedNetBankCr —_|andMediumEnterpris ysetthemilestone.RBlinformedthatitdoesn'tprescribeanyta
edit es tgettothebankswithregardstotheoutstandingcredittoMSM

Esectors,

| F7-7.1:Percentageothouseholdseleciifi | MinistryofPower [Annual MinistryorPower ‘Achievedin2021.
led

है) जतःछाठठ;आफबताउककफछ बताकर |MinisiryofPower, Centr [Annual

runitofGDP (inTonne/RupeesCrore) alElectricityAuthority
1287
1173MilionTo [Million T
Innes Jonnes

"122 |1.3.SPersonsprovidedemploymenta DeparimentofRuralbev {Annual IMinistryofRuralbev "ThedatasourceMnistryhasproposedrefinementintheindicat
Sapercentageofpersonswhodemand Jelopment MinistryofRur lelopment or Theindicatorwill
Jed jalDevelopment berefinedfollowingdiscussionwithconcemedstakeholdersint
lemploymentunderMahatmaGandhiNationa herelevantforaandmilestoneswillbesetaccordingly.
{RuralEmploymentGuaranteeAct(MGNRE
IGA)

| 7-3 4:NumberofSelfHelpGroups(SHGs)pro | NationalBankforAgriculty [Annual ‘TheexistingindicalorsneedrefinementandimplementingMi
\videdbankcreditiinkage reandRuraiDevelopment nistryhasprovidedmilestonesforrefinedindicator.Theindica,

(NABARD) torwillberefinedfollowingdiscussionwithconcemedstakeho
dersintherelevantfora.

| Ba SiExclusivewomenSHGsnBan INafionalBankforAgricut | Annual
JASHGs,(inpercentage) reandRuralDevelopment

का


ee] Nationalindicator | 0%७8०७०० | ImplemontingMinistry [| [| 2026 | 2027 | ० | Femts |

| 8.8 S:Percentageothouseholdsrecewing _ |MinisiryofRuraibev | | "ThedatasourceMinistryhasproposeddeletionoftheindicator.
jsocialprotectionbenefitsunderMahatma —_|elopment Theindicatorwillbedeletedfollowingdiscussionwithconceme
|GandhiNationalRuralEmploymentGuara dstakeholdersintherelevantforaandmilestoneswillbesetacc
InteeAcl(MGNREGA) ordingly.

726 [9.5.2Researchers(nfuliimeequivalent) | MinistryofScienceand — [Annual MinistryofScienceandTech WinistryofScienceand fechnologyinformediisnotfeasiblet
[permitionpopulation [Technology nology osetthemilestonefortheindicatorasthesameiscompiledusin

gdivergentdatasources.

727 |1.3.6Numberofseniorciizensprovidedin [DepartmentofSocialJusti [Annual [MinistryofSocialJustice&Empow 7336064 | 1658654 | 2021724 | 2640969
stitutionalassistancethroughSeniorCitize _}ce&Empowerment,Minis. lerment,DepartmentofSocialJusti
InHomes/DayCareCentersfundedbytheG _|tryofSocialJustice& Emp lce&Empowerment
lovernment Jowerment

i 3.5.2: Numberofpersonstreatedinde- DeparimentofSociallustt | 7730300 | 1573300 | 2012565 | 2658427
addictioncentres(innumber) |ce&Empowerment,Minis

itryofSocialJustice&Emp
Jowerment

6.5.1 DirecicontributionofTourismiototalG |MinistryofTourism [Annual IMinistryofTourism ‘ThedatasourceMinisiryhasinformedihatfxangmilestonesfont

DPandingrowthrate heindicatorisnotfeasibleas Tourismindustryhasbeenbadlya
ffectedallovertheworldduetoCOVI0-19.

| fg. 5 2-Percentagechangennumberofvist | MinistryofTourism [Annual MinistryofTourismhastargetedtoincreaseindia sshareoir or
sbytourists(domestic8foreign)overprevio eignTouristArrvalsinworld'sintemationalTouristarrivalstot
jusyear ‘%Yyby2020andincreaseto2%by2025.

| 72.b.mplementationofstandardaccounti_ |MinistryofTourism Annual ‘ThedatasourceMnistryhasinformedihatfaingmilestonestort

Ingtoolstomonitortheeconomicandenviron
mentalaspectsoftourismsustainabilty

heindicatorisnotfeasibleasTourismindustryhasbeenbadlya
ffectedallovertheworldduetoCOVID-19.

9५


PY] Nationalindicator | patssource | Poriodicity ImplomentingMinistry [7 | 2028 2027 [ 7 | Romarks
132 1627 Existenceofindependeninatonahu |NafionalHumanRighisCo [Annual NationaHumanRighisCom | /क
Imanrightsinstitutionsincompliancewiththe  |mmissionofindia missionofindia
ParisPrinciples
15.3.1 Proportionofiandihalisdegraded — |NatonalRemoleSensing [SYears DeparimentolSpace ThereisnoWeniiiedprojectiomonforlanddegradalion
lovertotallandarea ICentre(NRSC),Departm stalusinNRSC.alpresent
lentotSpace
134 [71.1 PoveriyGapRato INITiAayog Years पाए ‘Thelatestestimalionsforbolhiheindicatorsarebasedonthe2
on.
12ConsumerExpenditureSurveyconductedbyNationalSta
tisticalOtfice(NSO).Dataonthelatestroundhasnolbeenrele
asedtoenabletargetsetting,
|] FZ.1Proponionofpopulalonivingbelo |NITIAayog Years
lwihenationalpovertyine
= 5.4 1-Proponionofimespentonunpaidde {TUS,.NSSMoSPI B¥ears SPI Tisnotfeasibletofamilesionefonheindicator.
Imesticandearework
{a7 [17-18 .Whethe rhecountryhasnatonals PT PAnnwal Achioved
atisticalegistaionthatcomplieswiththeF
lundamentalPrinciplesofOficialStatistes
a T68.ZProporioncipopulationcovere  JUniqueldenifieationAut [Annual UniqueldentiicationAut | | | | | 3.28
ldunderAadhaar horityofindia herityotindia

-19


Pe] Nationalindicator | 0०७8००५० | Periodicity ImplomontingMinistry [| [7 | 2027 po | FFemns |
739 [9.1 2:Passengerandireight (i)RaiwayBoardis [Annual [(ijRaiwayBoardisdata Estimated Estimated [Estimated [Estimated
lvolumes,bymodeoftransport Jdatasourcefor sourceforpassenger passenger [passenger passenger | passenge
passengermoverent Imovementandtreight lvotuneby lvolumeby —|volumeby —_jrvolume.
landtreightvolumes lvolumesbyRaitways(2) Road Road Road byRoad
lbyRaitways(2) ResearchWingofMinistry transport: fransport: transport: transport:
ResearchWingof lofRoadTransportand 36819.36 |47014.63. |60032.99 —_|a6621.42
MinistryofRoad Highwayisdatasourcefor Estimated Estimated | Estimated Estimated
Transportand lpassengermovementand Freight Freight Freight Freight
Highwayisdata freightvokimesbyRoads(3 Vokumeby —fVolumeby —|Volmeby [Volume
lsourceforpassenger )MinistryofCiviAviationis Road Road Road lbyRoad
Imoverentand ldatasourceforpassenger transport ltransport transport ‘transport
ireightvolumesby movementandfreight (ition (bition (जाता ition
Roads(3)Ministryof \volumesbyair tonnes): Hones): —_ tonnes): tonnes):
CivitAviationisdata 3835.05 4573.16 |5453.33 © |7101.17
sourceforpassenger
Imovementand
freightvotimesby
air
| -4.1-Proportionofpopulationivinginhous | M/oJalShakiiMioPowe [Annual iiifoJalshakii M/oPower,MioHeal | Thendicatoriscombinationofédifferentnationalndicatorsand
leholdswithaccesstobasicservices |r. M/oHeatthandFamily |thandFamilyWetfare, M/oEducatio| milestoneforsuchindicatorswillbesetunderrespectiveSDGs
Wetfare,M/oEducation, n,M/oPetroleumandNaturalGas
IM/oPetroleumandNatu
raiGas
747 |7.3.1-Energyiniensiiymeasuredntemsofp |MinistyorCoal Ministryot [Annual MinistryorCoal MinistryoiPetrole | ए
rimaryenergyandGDP inmegajoulesperru |PetroleumandNaturalGa lumandNaturalGasandCentralEl_| isnotfeasibletosetthemilestonefortheindicatorasthesameis
2००) |sandCentralElectricityAu lectricityAuthority compiledusingdivergentdatasources.
thority
742 [15.6.1.Whethercountryhasadoplediegis! _|Ministryofenvironment [Annual IMinistryorEnvironmentForestan ‘Achievedin2021.
ative,administrativeandpolicyframework — |ForestandClimateChan |dClimateChangeandMinistryof
[stoensurefairandequitablesharingofben | geandMinistryotAgricut |AgricultureandF armersWetfare
efits lureandFarmersWelfare

Fortheremainingindicators, thelineMinistries/DepartmentshaveinformedthattheyarestilworkingwiththeirconcemedDivisions/Wings/UnitsorwithotherrelatedMinistries(whereverapplicable). MoSPlwillcontinuetoin
teractwiththelineMinistries/Departmentsforfaciliatingmilestonesfixingonremainingindicators,


- 6

Annexure Ill

State-wise Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR)

St Ne | No |india/States 2016-18
1 | (10118 Pradesh
2 Assam

B | Bihar

4 Jharkhand
S| Gujarat

e |

7

e |

P|

[0 | Madhya Pradesh
[1 | Chhattisgarh

42 Maharashtra
13 lOdisha

10 | Puja

[4 | Rajasthan
[5 | |Tamil Nadu



=~ 69>

AnnexurelV

Under 5 Mortality Rate (U5MR) as per SRS 2018

3.10... | No. States

vue

India
Andhra Pradesh

2 Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
IS Delhi
6 | Gujarat

Jammu & Kashmir
0 Jharkhand

Karnataka

Kerala

Madhya Pradesh

14 Maharashtra

Orissa

Telangana

20 Uttar Pradesh A7
Uttarakhand 33
22 West Bengal 26

47


Te"

Annexure V

Status of Neonatal Mortality Rate (NMR) in India/ States/ UTs (2018)

48


yy

Annexure-VI

Details of 44 Indicators under SDG-3 assigned to MOHFW

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF India
(Latest data available)
(Goal 1) 1.3: Implement|(1) (1.3.1) Percentage of | 28.7

nationally appropriate —_ social
protection systems and measures
for all, including floors, and by
2030 achieve substantial
coverage of the poor and the
vulnerable

Households with any usual
member covered by a health
scheme or health insurance
(%), NFHS-4

(Goal 2) 2.1 : By 2030, end
hunger and ensure access by all
people, in particular the poor and
people in vulnerable situations,
including infants, to safe,
nutritious and sufficient food all
year round

(2) (2.1.1) Percentage of
Children who are underweight
(Weight-for-Age(below - 2SD)
%, NFHS-4

35.7

(Goal 2) 2.2 : By 2030, end all
forms of malnutrition, including
achieving, by 2025, the
internationally agreed targets on
stunting and wasting in children
under 5 years of age, and
address the nutritional needs of
adolescent girls, pregnant and
lactating women and older
persons

(3) (2.2.1) Percentage of
Children who are stunted
(Height-for-Age), NFHS-4

38.4

(4) (2.2.2) Percentage of
children who are wasted
(Weight-for-Height (below -
2SD) %, NFHS-4

21.0

(5) (2.2.3) Percentage of
women(age 15-49) whose
body mass index (BMI) is
below normal (<18.5 kg/m2),
NFHS-4, 2015-16

22.9

(6) (2.2.4) Percentage of
pregnant women age 15-49
years who are anaemic (<11.0
g/dl) NFHS-4, 2015-16

50.4

(7) (2.2.5) Percentage of
children age 6-59 months who
are anaemic (<11.0 g/d),
NFHS-4, 2015-16

58.5

(Goal 3) 3.1 : By 2030, reduce the
global maternal mortality ratio to
less than 70 per 100,000 live
births

(8) (3.1.2) Percentage of births
attended by skilled health
personnel (5 years preceding
the survey), NFHS-4

81.4

(9) (3.1.3) Percentage of births
attended by skilled health
personnel (last one year)

84.4

49



_R

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

India
(Latest data available)

NFHS-4, 2015-16

(10) (3.1.4) Percentage of
women aged 15-49 years with
a live birth, for last birth, who
received antenatal care, four
times or more (5 years),
NFHS-4, 2015-16

51.2

(Goal 3) 3.2 : By 2030, end
preventable deaths of newboms
and children under 5 years of age,
with all countries aiming to reduce
neonatal mortality to at least as
low as 12 per 1,000 live births and
under-5 mortality to at least as
low as 25 per 1,000 live births

(11) (3.2.3) Percentage of
children aged 12-23 months
fully immunized (BCG,
Measles and three doses of
Pentavalent vaccine), NFHS-
4, 2015-16

62.0

(Goal 3) 3.3 : By 2030, end the
epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis,
malaria and neglected tropical
diseases and combat hepatitis,
water- borne diseases and other
communicable diseases

(12) (3.3.1) Number of new
HIV infections per 1,000
uninfected population
(Incidence Rate) (NACO)

0.05 in 2019-20

(13) (3.3.2) Tuberculosis
incidence per 100,000
population (NTEP)

2019 = 193

(14) (3.3.3) Malaria incidence
per 1,000 population
(NVBDCP)

2020 = 0.13

(15) (3.3.4) Prevalence of
Hepatitis ‘B’ per 1 Lakh
population (NFHS-4)

0.95%

(16) (3.3.5) Dengue: Case
Fatality Ratio (CFR)
(NVBDCP)

2020 = 0.06

(170 (3.3.6) Number of
Chikungunia cases
(NVBDCP)

The indicator is
dropped.

(18) (3.3.7) Percentage of
blocks reporting <1 Kala Azar
case per 10,000 population
out of the total endemic blocks
(NVBDCP)

2020=97.47

(19) (3.3.8) Percentage of
district reporting <1%
microfilaria rate (MF) out of

2020=36.03

50



75~

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

India
(Latest data available)

the Targeted Endemic districts
(NVBDCP)

(20) (3.3.6) The proportion of
grade-2 cases amongst new
cases of Leprosy detected
(NLEP) per 10 lakh population

1.96 in 2019-20

(21) (3.3.1): HIV Adult
Prevalence Rate (NACO)

The indicator is
dropped.

(Goal 3) 3.4 : By 2030, reduce by
one third premature mortality from
non-communicable diseases
through prevention and treatment
and promote mental health and
well-being

(22) (3.4.1): Number of deaths
due to cancer

Under review

(Goal 3) 3.5 : Strengthen the
prevention and treatment of
substance abuse, including
narcotic drug abuse and harmful
use of alcohol

(23) (3.5.1) Percentage of
Women age 15-49 who drink
alcohol about once a week out
of total (figures given against

indicator 3.5.3) who drink |

alcohol (NFHS-4), 2015-16

35.0

(23) (3.5.1) Percentage of
men age 15-49 who drink
alcohol about once a week out
of total (figures given against
indicator 3.5.3) who drink
alcohol (NFHS-4) 2015-16

Men 15-49 = 40.7

(24) (3.5.3): Percentage of
men (15-54) who drink
alcohol, NFHS-4) 2015-16

29.5

(24) (3.5.3) Indicator:
Percentage of women (15-49)
who drink alcohol, (NFHS-4)
2015-16

1.2

(Goal 3) 3.7 : By 2030, ensure
universal access to sexual and
reproductive health-care services,
including for family planning,
information and education, and
the integration of reproductive
health into national strategies and
programmes

(25) (3.7.1) Percentage of
currently married women (15-
49) who have their need for
family planning satisfied with
modern methods, (NFHS-4),
2015-16

71.9

(26) (3.7.5) Percentage of
women aged 15-19 years who
were already mothers or
pregnant, (NFHS-4), 2015-16

7.9

51



aie

SDG Targets

indicators under NIF

India
(Latest data available)

(27) (3.7.3) Percentage of
institutional births (5 years),
(NFHS-4), 2015-16

78.9

(Goal 3) 3.8 : Achieve universal
health coverage, including
financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health-care
services and access to safe,
effective, quality and affordable
essential medicines and vaccines
for all

(28) (3.8.1) Percentage of
currently married women (15-
49 years) who use any
modern _ family planning
methods, (NFHS-4), 2015-16

47.7

(29) (3.8.7) Percentage of TB
cases successfully treated
(cured plus treatment
completed) among TB cases
notified to the national health
authorities during a specified
period (NTEP, 2019)

81

(30) (3.8.3) Percentage of
people living with HIV
currently receiving ART
among the detected number of
adults and children living with
HIV (NACO, 2019-20)

84%

(31) (3.8.4) Prevalence of
hypertension- Women (15-49),
(NFHS-4), 2015-16

11.0

(31) (3.8.4) - Prevalence of
hypertension - MEN (15-49
years), (NFHS-4), 2015-16

14.8

(32) (3.8.5) Percentage of
population in age group 15-49
who reported sought treatment
out of total population in that
age group having diabetes
(NFHS-4), 2015-16

Male= 72.50
Female = 81.30

(33) (3.8.6) Percentage of
women aged 15-49 who have
ever undergone Cervix
Examinations (NFHS-4),
2015-16

22.3

(34) (3.8.7) Prevalence of
current tobacco uses among
men and women aged 15-49
years

The indicator is removed

(35) (3.8.8) Total Physician,
nurses and midwives per
10000 population (Medical

31.30

52



~ 7 ~

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF India
(Latest data available)

Education, 2020)

(Goal 3)39 : By 2030, | (36) (3.9.2) Percentage of | 1.9

substantially reduce the number| women (15-49) __ reporting

of deaths and illnesses from | Asthma, (NFHS-4), 2015-16

hazardous chemicals and air, | (36) (3.9.2) Percentage of | 1.2

water and soil pollution and | men (15-49) reporting Asthma,

contamination (NFHS-4), 2015-16

(Goal 3) 3.a : Strengthen the | (37) (3.a.1): Percentage of | 28.6

implementation of the World| adults 15 years and above

Health Organization Framework} with use of any kind of

Convention on Tobacco Control in | tobacco (smoking and

all countries, as appropriate smokeless), 2016-17 (GATS)

(Goal 3) 3.b : Support the | (38) (3.b.2): Budgetary | 2100 Crores

research and development of | allocation for Department of

vaccines and| Health Research (DHR),

medicines for the communicable | 2020-21 (Rs. in crore)

and non-communicable diseases

that primarily affect developing

countries, provide access to

affordable essential medicines

and vaccines, in accordance with

the Doha Declaration on the

TRIPS Agreement and Public

Health, which affirms the right of

developing countries to use to the

full the provisions in the

Agreement on Trade-Related

Aspects of Intellectual Property

Rights regarding flexibilities to

protect public health, and, in

particular, provide access to

medicines for all

(Goal 3) 3.6 : Substantially | (39) (3.c.1) Total Physician, | 31.30

increase health financing and the | nurses and midwives per

recruitment, development, training | 10000 population (Medical

and retention of the health | Education, 2020)

workforce in developing countries,

especially in least developed

countries and small island

developing States

(Goal 5) 5.2 : Eliminate all forms | (40) (5.2.6) : Percentage of | 30.9

of violence against all women and
girls in the public and private
spheres, including trafficking and

ever married women age 15-
49 years who have ever
experienced physical or

53



7

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF India
(Latest data available)
sexual and other types of | sexual violence committed by
exploitation their

husband, (NFHS-4), 2015-16

(Goal 5)5.3 : Eliminate all harmful
practices, such as child, early and
forced marriage and female
genital mutilation

(41) (5.3.1): Percentage of
women aged 20-24 years who
were married by exact age 18
years, (NFHS-4), 2015-16

26.8

(Goal 5) 5.6 : Ensure universal
access to sexual and reproductive
health and reproductive rights as
agreed in accordance with the
Programme of Action of the
International Conference — on
Population and Development and
the Beijing Platform for Action and
the outcome documents of their
review conferences

(42) (5.6.1) Percentage of
currently married women (15-
49 years) who use modern
methods of family planning,
2015-16 (similar to 3.7.4 and
3.8.1) (NFHS-4), 2015-16

477

(43) (5.6.2) : Unmet need for
family planning for currently
married women aged 15-49
years, 2015-16 (in
percentage) (NFHS-4), 2015-
16

12.9

(44) (5.6.3) ) Proportion of
population aged 15-24 years
with correct knowledge of

HIV/AIDS (NFHS-4), 2015-16

Male= 31.50
Female = 21.70

54



77 -

CHAPTER Ill

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-Nil-

55


छः

CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

-Nil-

56


-~ 7 Go

CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-Nil-
eS
Lo
NEW DELHI; ay. RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 December, 2022 Chairperson,

16 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

57


~ Lrv-~

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR THRITY-SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. - 1-20

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. —NIL
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. -NIL

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. — NIL

20

Total : 20
Percentage: 100%

Total : 00

Percentage: 00

Total : 00
Percentage: 00

Total : 00
Percentage: 00