32

PREPAREDNESS FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGS) .

NITI AAYOG, MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE AND MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

THIRTY SECOND REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2240

THIRTY SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PREPAREDNESS FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGS)

NITI AAYOG, MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE AND MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 15293 rdedl

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: )5- 93-2424

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March 2021/ Phalguna 1942 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
CP NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-2020)...
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-2021)...
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE | OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-2020)........ Vv
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE | OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2020-2021)........ vi
INTRODUCTION
PART -।
[1 | Introductory | 12 |
P| Chapter-l: Overview and Audit Approach 3
(a) Audit Objectives and Scope
(b) Audit Observations te
पर Chapter-ll: Adapting the 2030 Agenda 6
(a) Implementation framework for the 2030 Agenda in India 6-7
(b) Institutional Arrangements at Central level 78
(c) Institutional Arrangements at the State level 8-9
(d) Preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda
documents 9-11
(e) Adapting SDGs in selected States .
(f) Building Awareness and Stakeholder involvement 41-12
(i) Initiatives at Central level 13-45
(ii) Initiatives at State Level 45-16
IV Chapter-lll: Resource Mobilisation for the 2030 Agenda 17-20
Vv Chapter-IV: Monitoring and Reporting 21-23
Vi Involvement of Private Sector 24
Vil Chapter-V: Goal 3: Good Health and Well-being 25-61
(a) Promoting awareness and stakeholder involvement
(b) Mapping of schemes 28-30
(c) Policy coherence 30-37
(d) Mobilisation of Financial Resources and Budget Allocation 37-39
(e) Physical infrastructure and Human Resources in Health 40-43
Sector 43-49
(f) Framework and data for monitoring at Central level
(g) Framework and data for monitoring at State level foes
PART -॥
Observations/recommendations of the Committee 62-83

APPENDICES *

1. Minutes of the 2" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2019-20) held on

13.09.2019,

का. Minutes of the 1 sitting of Sub-Committee | of Public Accounts Committee

(2019-20) held on 23.01.2019.

Ml. Minutes of the 1 sitting of Sub-Committee | of Public Accounts Committee

(2020-21) held on 05.11.2020

1४. Minutes of the 204 Sitting of Sub-Committee | of Public Accounts Committee

(2020-21) held on 09.03.2021.

v. Minutes of the 117 Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) held on

10.03.2021.

Net appended



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal

~ Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
5
S

oe IN AAA ०

S

hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

=

hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
2. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

5. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
6. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
7. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri P. Bhattacharya”
20. Shri C. M. Ramesh
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from
Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.

QD


10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

ORON =

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita*
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge*
Shri C. M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar
Shri Bhupender Yadav
SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri. M.L.K. Raja - Director

Shri S. R. Mishra - Director

Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

* Elected w.e.f. 11 February, 2021.

CIN)


Sub-Committee-|_ (Report No. 8 of 2019 - Preparedness for the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of Public
Accounts Committee (2019-20)

(i) Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
(ii) Shri Naresh Gujral - Convenor
(iii) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray - Member
(iv) Dr. Satyapal Singh - Member

(v) Shri Jagdambika Pal - Member
(vi) Smt.Darshana Vikram Jardosh - Member
(vii) Shri Rajeev Chandrashekhar - Member

Cw


Sub-Committee-l_ (Report No. 8 of 2019 - Preparedness for the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (5099) of Public
Accounts Committee (2020-21)

(viii) Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
(ix) Shri Naresh Gujral - Convenor
(x) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray - Member

(xi) Dr. Satyapal Singh - Member
(xii) Shri Jagdambika Pal - Member
(xiii) Smt.Darshana Vikram Jardosh - Member
(xiv) | Shri Rajeev Chandrashekhar - Member

\w))


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Preparedness for the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs))” based on C&AG Report No. 8 of 2019 relating to NITI Aayog,
Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Statistics and Programme Implementation.

2. The aforesaid subject was taken up for examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2019-20) who took oral evidence of the representatives of the NITI Aayog
as well as the Ministries of Health and Family welfare, Statistics and Programme
Implementation and Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 13" September, 2019.
Thereafter, the subject was allocated to the Sub-Committee — | (Preparedness for the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)) for examination. The Sub-
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare on 237 January, 2020 and the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation and NITI Aayog on 5" November, 2020.

3. The Sub-Committee - | of PAC (2020-21) considered and adopted this Report at
their sitting held on 09.03.2021. The Report was considered and adopted by the Public
Accounts Committee (2020-21) during their sitting held on 10.03.2021. The Minutes of
the Sittings of the Sub-Committee/Committee form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee/Sub-Committee - |
(Preparedness for the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)) for
taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministries of NITI Aayog, Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Statistics and
Programme Implementation and Finance (Department of Expenditure) for tendering
evidence before the Committee/Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite information
to them in connection with the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
\@March,2021 Chairperson,

\4 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT

I INTRODUCTORY

On 25" September, 2015 the 70" Session of the United Nations General
Assembly adopted a resolution (70/1) titled ‘Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development’. The resolution set a plan of action for people, planet and
prosperity. It sought to strengthen Universal Peace in larger freedom. The Assembly
resolved to free the human race from the tyranny of poverty and want to heal and secure
our planet. Signatories to the resolution also agreed to take bold and transformative
steps which are urgently needed to shift the world on to a sustainable and resilient path.
In this collective journey it was agreed that no one will be left behind. 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 associated targets announced in the resolution
demonstrates the scale and ambitions of the new Universal Agenda for the next 15

years.

2. The Agenda allows each Government to set its own national targets based on national
circumstances and decide how global targets would be incorporated into National
planning, processes, policies and strategies. To assist this process, the United Nations
Development Group created a Reference Guide for mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda
and SDGs.

3. The 2030 Agenda aims to end poverty and hunger everywhere; combat
inequalities within and among countries; build peaceful, just and inclusive societies;
protect human rights, promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls; and ensure the lasting protection of the planet and its natural resources. It also
endeavours to create conditions for inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared
prosperity and decent work for all.

4. The 17 Sustainable Development Goals are as follows:
(i) No Poverty

(ii) Zero hunger

(iii) | Good Health and well being

(iv) Quality Education

(v) | Gender Equality and empowerment of women and girls
(vi) Clean water and Sanitation

(vii) Affordable and Clean Energy


(viii)
(ix)
(0
(xi)
(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)

Decent work and Economic Growth
Industry, Innovation and infrastructure
Reduced inequalities

Sustainable Cities and Communities
Responsible consumption and Production
Climate Action

Life below Water

Life on land

Peace, Justice and strong Institutions
Partnerships for the Goals

Salient feature of the 2030 Agenda

3.

Salient features of the 2030 Agenda are given below:

Seeks to achieve sustainable development in all three dimensions i.e., Economic,
Social and Environmental in a balanced and integrated manner both for present
and future generations.

Identifies and lays stress on five components of development i.e., People, Planet,
Prosperity, Peace and Partnership and focuses on the principle of ‘leaving no one
behind’ by reaching the farthest first.

Allows each Government to set its own national targets based on national
circumstances and also incorporate global targets into national planning
processes, policies and strategies.

Envisages achievement of 21 Targets by 2020, three Targets by 2025 and
remaining Targets by 2030.

Envisages regular reviews of progress at national and sub-national (State) levels.
The outcomes from national level reviews will form the foundation for reviews at
regional and global levels.


I. CHAPTER-I|: OVERVIEW AND AUDIT APPROACH
(a) Audit objectives and scope
4. The Audit was taken up with the overall purpose of ascertaining ‘Preparedness of

the Government for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda’. The specific audit

objectives are as follows:

. to what extent has the Government adapted the 2030 Agenda into its national
context;

. to what extent has the Government identified and secured resources and
capacities needed to implement the 2030 Agenda;

. to assess the robustness and accuracy of procedures put in place to track
allocation of resources against targets within the SDG;

. to what extent has the Government established a mechanism to monitor, follow-
up, review and report on the progress towards the implementation of the 2030
Agenda.

5. The Committee noted that audit has examined the NITI Aayog as it is the nodal

institution for coordination and overseeing the implementation of the Agenda 2030 and
was entrusted with the task of identifying national targets, assigning the same to
Ministries/ Departments and communicating the commitments undertaken by India under
the 2030 agreement.

6. The audit also examined the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
which was entrusted with the task of preparing and monitoring indicators for SDGs
targets.

7. As the audit took up examination of preparedness with respect to implementation
of Goal 3 : Good Health and Well Being it examined specifically the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare (MoH&FW). To have a broader view on the preparedness on goal 3
audit also studied the activities undertaken in seven States viz. Assam, Chhatisgarh,
Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. These States were
selected on the basis of their ranking of Health indices for 2015-16. While Kerala is a top
ranking State, Haryana & Maharashtra are middle ranking States; Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal are ranked lower in the category.

8. Besides above the audit also examined the preparedness of 14 Ministries of
Government of India which have defined role in the achievements of SDGs.


9. The Committee noted that while examining the preparation for achieving targets

the audit has analysed how the institutional framework has been formulated, how the

government planning process, policies and strategies are working, how government is

building awareness and ensuring stakeholders involvement in the process, how a

coherent policy is being developed/ implemented, how the resource is being sourced to

achieve the declared goals and how the government is monitoring and reporting the

progress.

(b) Audit Observations

10. Following observations were made by the audit after detailed examination :

A roadmap is yet to be aligned with defined milestones for SDG targets
to be achieved in the year 2020, 2025 and 2030.

Vision document is still under preparation. States are yet to prepare
policy documents. Mapping of Goals/Targets undertaken by NIT] Aayog
and selected States is still ongoing.

Efforts to raise public awareness about SDGs and initiatives undertaken
in the selected States were not comprehensive, focused or sustained.

States may need to strengthen institutional arrangements by identifying
support departments and defining roles and responsibilities.

The Strategy document did not project the financing and budgeting
requirements. While it is recognised that projecting financial resources
for achieving the Targets by 2030 is a challenging task, Ministry of
Finance and State Governments are yet to integrate SDG related
financial resources in national budgeting for implementing SDGs.

Delay in approval of NIF held up finalization of monitoring and reporting
framework on implementation of SDGs. Initiatives undertaken in
selected States were still in progress.

There was no proposal to identify milestones for the national indicators.
Out of 306 indicators included in NIF, data for 137 indicators were not
yet available.

Mapping in respect of Goal 3 was not comprehensive in selected
States.

Though States had indicated actions to formulate plans and policies in
line with Goal 3, delays and absence of a holistic approach were noted.

Three Ministries linked with Goal 3, were not involved in national
consultation. Specific and sustained measures for promoting awareness
and stakeholder involvement with Goal 3 were not seen in the States.

Ministries associated with Goal 3 were not represented in Task Force
and working groups/sub-groups. Policy coherence initiatives undertaken
were either absent or inadequate in States.


There is still a long way to go before the target of public health
expenditure is achieved and the central allocation for health for 2019-20
was far short of target. In States, health spending as a percentage of
total States expenditure, ranged from 3.29 to 5.32 per cent which shows
that this need considerable augmentation.

Data for certain health indicators were not regularly or uniformly
available.


il. CHAPTER-II: ADAPTING THE 2030 AGENDA

(a) Implementation Framework for the 2030 Agenda in India

11. The Committee noted from the Audit Report that India has been pursuing a
comprehensive development agenda which has encompassed the economic, social and
environmental dimensions and cuts across sectors and levels of Government. India’s
Voluntary National Review (VNR) Report has noted that India’s national development
agenda is mirrored in the SDGs. Thus, identification of national targets and indicators
and mapping of existing development schemes, programmes, interventions and
Ministries/ Departments with SDGs targets were important for adapting SDGs into the
national context.

12. The Committee noted that in September, 2015 Government of India entrusted
NITI Aayog with the responsibility of coordinating and overseeing the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda. NITI Aayog was specifically given the task of identifying national
targets and assigning them to concerned Ministries/Departments for implementation of
SDGs in India. Further, in May, 2016 it has been tasked to formulate, a longer vision of
15 years keeping in view the social goals and SDGs, a Seven Year Strategy document
as part of “National Development Agenda” and a Three Year Action Agenda for goals to
be achieved. NITI Aayog advised State Governments to undertake mapping of Goals
and Targets and sought inputs for formulation of a Vision document for the country.
Subsequently, States were asked to take up budgeting for SDGs and organise capacity
building activities. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has
been entrusted in September 2015 with the task of preparing a National Indicator
Framework (NIF) in consultation with all the Central Ministries for the monitoring of
SDGs. Further Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was assigned the responsibility of
Goal-3 of the SDGs i.e. "Good Health and Well being" which is intended to ensure
healthy living promote well-being of people of all ages.

13. The Committee find that India is a signatory to the UN General Assembly
Resolution on SDGs and Government of India has affirmed its commitment to the 2030
Agenda and SDGs. To a query regarding adaptation of 2030 Agenda in the national
context NITI Aayog in it’s written reply mentioned that in the run up to the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda a meeting was taken by the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister of


India on 1% September, 2015. Two action points emerged for NITI Aayog (1)
Identification of national targets and assigning them to the Ministries/ Departments
concerned for implementation, (2) share details of the commitments undertaken by India
under the Post 2015 with the State Governments and seek their participation in
implementation and monitoring of these goals and targets. Further, NITI Aayog received
a communication from PMO on 7" September, 2015 stating that NITI Aayog will be
“responsible for identification and allocation/ assigning goals and targets to
Ministries/Departments in the matter in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs and
M/o Statistics & Programme Implementation.

14. NIT! Aayog had mapped Schemes/Programmes with Goals/Targets. In the
mapping document prepared in August 2017, the NIT! Aayog identified nodal Ministries
with respect to all the SDGs along with Ministries/Departments associated with specific
Targets under each Goal. However, the specific role of the nodal and associated
Ministries was not defined. As a result, it was observed in some cases that Central
Ministries were unaware of their role with respect to specific Targets. In a revised
mapping document issued by the NITI Aayog in August 2018, the designation of a
particular Ministry as nodal for specific SDGs has been removed. As per this mapping
document, coordination and monitoring of achievement of SDGs would be done by NITI
Aayog while individual Ministries would be responsible for specific SDG targets.

15. On being enquired about the reasons for not defining the roles of Ministries with
respect to the relevant SDG targets, the NITI Aayog in their Action Taken Notes on the
C&AG Report stated as under:

"If the ‘Allocation of Business Rules’ for each Ministry is read together with the
SDG Targets assigned to them by NITI Aayog, their roles with respect to the
assigned Targets becomes clear.

Due to the multidimensional and interdisciplinary nature of SDGs, multiple
Ministries and other stakeholders are required to work with convergence.

For example, SDG 2 — Zero Hunger falls under the domain of Ministries of WCD,
Food and Consumer Affairs, Health & FW, Jal Shakti, and Agriculture."

(b) Institutional Arrangements at Central Level

16. NIT! Aayog has been identified as the nodal institution for coordination and
overseeing the implementation of the Agenda 2030 and was entrusted with the tasks of
identifying national targets, assigning the same to Ministries/Departments and


communicating the commitments undertaken by India under the 2030 Agenda, to the
State Governments for seeking their participation.

17. NITI Aayog informed (May 2019) that it has followed a strategy of involving
States/UTs “in improving SDGs by using the framework of competitive as well as
cooperative federalism’. NIT| Aayog has undertaken several multi-disciplinary
stakeholder consultations and issued advisories to various stakeholders. It also
conducted periodic reviews with States and UTs of mainstreaming activities such as
preparation of Vision/Strategy documents; creation of nodal structures; mapping of
targets; capacity building for implementing, monitoring and evaluation; formulation of
State-specific Indicators and orienting budgets with SDGs.

18. The Committee also noted that NITI| Aayog has constituted a Task Force in
August, 2017 with stakeholders drawn from Central Ministries, State Governments and

institutions as Members.

A roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be achieved in the
year 2020, 2025 and 2030, is however, yet to be prepared.

(c) Institutional Arrangements at the State level

While the Committee asked about the steps taken to strengthen the institutional
arrangements created by the States by identifying support departments and defining
roles and responsibilities of officers Niti Aayog in it’s reply mentioned as under :

“During the six monthly consultations with the States, the institutional

structures/arrangements have been reviewed and States/UTs have been urged to

strengthen such arrangements. Institutional arrangements across States/UTs
were analysed, good practices identified and published in 2019 as ‘Localizing

SDGs : Early Lessons from India’. The document was shared widely with

States/UTs and also presented in the regional and global meetings of the United

Nations to promote localization of SDGs. The document was used to advocate the

good practices and encourage States/UTs to strengthen the institutional structures
and arrangements for implementation of SDGs.”

419. In this regard NITI Aayog intimated to Audit (May 2019) that it has strategically
rolled out a number of participatory initiatives to facilitate building of roadmaps at various
levels and undertake all major activities within timelines.

20. When asked as to whether any milestones have now been identified for SDG
targets to be achieved in the year 2020, 2025 and 2030, NITI Aayog in their written
replies submitted as follows:


“Targets to be achieved in the year 2020, 2025 and 2030 are already specified in
the 2030 Agenda which have already been endorsed by India along with other
countries in their entirety. Therefore, identification of separate milestones may not
be necessary."

21. In their vetting comments to the aforesaid reply of NIT] Aayog, Audit stated as
under:
"The reply of NITI Aayog does not address the query of PAC as no road map has

been prepared by NITI Aayog to achieve the defined milestones for SDG targets
(21 targets by 2020, three by 2025 and remaining by 2030) to be achieved."

22. NIT! Aayog in their written submission stated as follows:

"NITI Aayog has been working closely with all the States to create their respective
SDGs roadmaps to achieve the milestones as per the SDG targets. Most States
have already developed their SDG roadmaps/ vision/ strategy documents."

23. The Committee noted that NITI Aayog had constituted (August 2017) a multi-
disciplinary Task Force to analyse and review implementation of SDGs. The Task Force
which was required to meet at least once in each quarter however, held only two
meetings since its constitution.

24. The Committee desired to know as to why the Task Force on SDGs constituted by
NITI Aayog is not having regular meetings as required. In response, NITI Aayog in their
Action Taken Note submitted to Audit stated as under:

"The last meeting of the Task Force on Implementation of SDGs was held during
the preparation of India's VNR Report 2020. In the meeting, as a part of its
agenda, the Task Force discussed and adopted a detailed Action Plan for the
preparation of the VNR Report."

On a query regarding reasons for not integrating the SDG related financial
resources in national budget the Niti Aayog mentioned as follows:

“While Allocation of Business Rules of NITI Aayog is silent about the 2030
Agenda, the PMO’s directives provide the only guidance with respect to the role of
NIT] Aayog in the implementation of SDGs and confer a limited ambit to its
initiatives and interventions in the matter...”

(d) Preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda Documents

25. For the preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda documents for the
country, NITI Aayog had asked Central Ministries in May, 2016 to provide inputs so that
the document adequately reflects the priorities and concerns of various sectors and
regions. In this regard, information on inputs provided was sought by audit from 20


10

Central Ministries of which 19 Ministries responded and confirmed providing inputs to
NITI Aayog. It has not been mentioned which Ministry did not reply.

26. Out of the three mandated documents, NITI Aayog released (August 2017) the
“Three Year Action Agenda” covering the period 2017-20 and in December 2018
released a Strategy document titled “Strategy for New India @75” covering the period
upto 2022-23. The third mandated document i.e., the “15 Year Vision Document” was yet
to be released even though this was supposed to be the basis for the Strategy and
Action Agenda documents. With respect to the Action Agenda, NITI Aayog had explained
(November 2018) that this was taken up on priority as the 12" Five Year Plan was
ending in 2017. The sequencing of the documents was however, not in accordance with
the extant directions. NITI Aayog stated (May 2019) that the Vision document will be
finalised by March 2020.

27. Asked about the reasons for delay in finalisation of 15 year Vision Document, the
NITI Aayog in their written replies submitted as under:

"NITL Aayog was given the mandate in 2016 to develop the 3 year short-term
Action Plan, 7 year mid-term strategy and 15 year long-term vision. NITI Aayog
followed an extensive consultative process with multiple stakeholders including
the Ministries and State/ UT Governments to develop these documents. The 3
year action plan was released in 2017 and the 7 year strategy was released in
2018. Currently, NITI Aayog is working with a vast array of stakeholders to
prepare the Vision document by March 2020."

28. On being asked as to whether vision document/Policy documents by States have
since been prepared, NIT! Aayog in their written replies stated as follows:

"(1) NITI Aayog intends to make the Vision Document broad based and integrally
focused on States’ expectations and priorities. So inputs from Ministries and
States have been given importance. Considerable inputs have been received in
course of time. NITI Aayog is in the process of reviewing and finalizing the draft
document and has assigned the work to a multi-disciplinary team. It will be
completed by March 2020.

(2) Regarding the States drafting their own vision documents, 23 States have
vision documents/ action plans on SDGs already.

(3) NITI Aayog hosts consultations with all States/ UTs once in every six months
on their progress on adopting, implementing, and monitoring SDGs. In these
consultations, their status/ progress on their vision documents/ action plans is also
discussed."


11

29. In their vetting comments on the aforesaid reply of NITI Aayog, Audit stated as
under:

"The reply does not specifically answer the query from PAC about prescribing any

timeframe for the preparation of various policy documents by the States. Facts

remains that there have been delays in preparation of Policy documents for SDGs

implementation since, even after advising the States on as long back as July

2016, there are still 13 States/UTs who are yet to prepare their policy documents."
30. On being asked about the present position of finalisation of the same, NITI Aayog
in their written replies stated that "On account of the exigencies created by the COVID-
19 pandemic, the process of preparation of the Vision Document has been severely
affected.

(e) Adapting SDGs in selected States

31. | The Committee noted that in a National Conference of the Chief Secretaries and
Planning Secretaries of the States (July 2016), NITI Aayog asked each State to have its
own Vision, Strategy and Action Plan. Prior to this in April 2016, NITI Aayog had advised
the State Governments to undertake a mapping exercise similar to the one carried by it,
to facilitate fast track achievement of the SDGs and related Targets.

32. Audit noted that the work of Vision/Strategy/Action Agenda documents in Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal was at a preparatory stage. Kerala had prepared a
Perspective Plan 2030 in 2014 which was not reviewed and realigned with SDGs.
Chhattisgarh had published its Vision 2030 document in March 2019. The mapping
exercise undertaken in the selected States was not comprehensive. For instance, certain
Schemes/Goals/Targets were not mapped in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. Thus, both at the Central and State levels, the exercise
of formulating policy documents in the context of SDGs was still ongoing.

33. While submitting their justification on the aforesaid Audit observation, NIT] Aayog
in their replies stated as under:

"States have their own sets of schemes and programme to implement in addition
to the centrally sponsored schemes. NITI Aayog has advised the States to do their
own mapping in the light of the mapping done at the central level. The revisions
suggested by the Audit will also be considered and incorporated by the States as
relevant to their situation and context. NITI Aayog has requested the States to
share updates in this regard. Given the federal structure of the country, NITI


12

Aayog, under its mandate, has been persuading the States and UTs from time to
time to accelerate this process.”

34. Audit observed that close monitoring and effective follow up would have ensured
timely completion of tasks, such as, preparation of vision documents, mapping of
departments/schemes etc by States/UTs. In response thereto, NITI Aayog in their Action
Taken Note submitted to Audit stated as under:

"NITI Aayog continuously monitors actions taken by States/UTs to localize and
implement SDGs. Six-monthly reviews are held to provide feedback on past as
well as planned initiatives. NITI Aayog’s developmental indices (health, education,
agriculture, aspirational districts, and water) cover key SDG themes and provide
progress scorecards of States/UTs, and rank them according to performance. NITI
Aayog’s SDG India Index monitors the progress of States/UTs and ranks them
specifically on SDGs. It has built up a healthy competitive ethos among the States
and UTs with respect to the implementation of SDGs."

While the Committee drew the attention of Niti Aayog to the observation of audit
regarding delay in approval of National Indicator Framework (NIF) Niti Aayog
informed in a written reply that as per inputs provided by MoSPI, the delay was
not on part of MoSPI and therefore MoSPI does not have any comment to offer.
Thus, in this case Committee could not know the reasons for delay in approval of
NIF.

(f) Building Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement

The Committee noted that in the United Nations Development Group (UNDG)
Reference Guide titled ‘Mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda’ raising awareness is
one of the key means to achieve the SDGs. This includes Planning, instructions
and action for awareness and IEC (Information, Education and Communication)
activities towards Government Officials and others viz. civil society, general public,
institutions etc.
35. Building awareness of the SDGs and adoption of a participatory multi-stakeholder
approach is aimed at ensuring inclusive, effective and sustainable implementation of the
2030 Agenda. Audit examined measures taken by the Central and State Governments to
raise awareness among Government officials, stakeholders and general public and also
the existence and effectiveness of structures for encouraging stakeholder consultations

and partnerships.

(i) Initiatives at Central Level

36. Initiatives taken for increasing awareness and promoting stakeholder involvement
and key areas of concern relating to these initiatives are discussed in the table given
below:


13

Awareness Raising and Stakeholder involvement

Initiatives

Areas of Concern (Audit)

A. Multi-stakeholder interactions

* NITL Aayog, along with partner
institutions, held national and regional level
workshops/consultations for raising
awareness, exchanging ideas. and
experiences and assisting preparedness in
States.

+ .Gol partnered with Civil Society
Organisations in areas such as preparation
of Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) material and taking
up research and documentation on SDGs.

* Multi-disciplinary Task Force facilitated
stakeholder consultations.

+ ‘Speaker's Research Initiative’ (SRI)
workshops were organised in July 2015,
August 2016, December 2016 and March
2017 to provide SDG-related insights to
Members of Parliament.

+ There were delays in finalising outcome
of these consultations and placing of the
reports in public domain.

+ In case of most consultations, definite
outcomes and recommendations for
time-bound follow up action were not
identified. Thus, there was limited
assurance that deliberations shaped
roadmap/policies for SDGs.

* According to its website, SRI
workshops on SDG related issues have
not been held post March 2017.

B. Raising public awareness

+ NIT] Aayog’s consultations aimed at
teaching out to stakeholders spearheading
public awareness exercises.

+ These consultations expected to “set off
an iterative process of information
dissemination” across the country.

. Schemes/Programmes of the
Government have provision for outreach
and publicity.

+ Extent and effectiveness of efforts
made by stakeholders to increase public
awareness not ascertainable in the
absence of feedback.

+ No centralised public awareness
campaign envisaged.

+ Absence of dedicated awareness
measures for general public may dilute
objective of making the 2030 Agenda
inclusive and participatory.

C. Capacity Building



14

2017) Central Ministries and State| aspect was reviewed were yet to
Governments to initiate capacity building | initiate/report any capacity building
measures. exercise.

+ Instructions issued for training and
resource centres to incorporate sessions
on 5068 in their training modules/
programmes.

* Test check in 15 Ministries showed that
10 Ministries have taken up capacity
building exercises.

37. _NITI Aayog stated (May 2019) that the primary task of implementing Schemes and
Programmes to achieve to SDGs lies with the States and the relevant Ministries.

38. As regards the shortcomings enumerated in section A of the aforesaid Table, NITI
Aayog in their Action Taken Note furnished to Audit stated as follows:

"Consultations generated awareness and clarity on various SDGs, targets,
implementation strategies and stakeholder roles. These consultations enabled
States/UTs to localize SDGs in terms of developing SDG vision/strategies, and
working out implementation and monitoring structures."

39. In regard to the issues pointed out in section B of the aforesaid table, NITI Aayog
in their Action Taken Note submitted as follows:

"There is general consensus that awareness and communication campaigns are
more successful if they are tailored to the context, language, values and
resources accessible to local stakeholders and audiences. Effectiveness of a
centralised public awareness campaign in a vastly diverse country like India will
be limited. NITI Aayog motivates States/UTs & other stakeholders to take up
specific & targeted awareness initiatives. NITI Aayog is planning a fresh series of
stakeholder consultations in this regard."

40. Further, issues highlighted in section 'C' regarding raising public awareness, NITI

Aayog in their Action Taken Note stated that they are regularly following up on their

earlier communications to the Ministries as well as States/UTs.

41. When the Committee drew attention of Niti Aayog to the observation of the audit
to the fact that no centralized public awareness campaign is envisaged NIT Aayog
opined that Multiple and localized awareness initiatives are likely the best possible


15

options which NITI Aayog has motivated States /UTs, civil society and private sector to
take up.

42. Further, NITI Aayog has mentioned that the SDG India Index has been used as
an effective publicity tool at the national and State levels. The States have executed their
own publicity campaign to highlight their performance and ranking, thereby also
augmenting public awareness on SDGs.

(ii) Initiatives at State Level

43. NITI Aayog intimated that State Governments participating in
consultations/workshops are spearheading public awareness initiatives in their own
domains. NITI Aayog had also advised the State Governments to undertake capacity
building initiatives. Initiatives undertaken for raising awareness, enhancing stakeholder
engagement and capacity building were examined in seven selected States and the
findings are discussed in Table:

Awareness Raising, Stakeholder’s Involvement and Capacity Building initiatives
by selected States

Assam - Awareness programme/workshops organised in 19 out of 33 Districts
for autonomous councils, civil society organizations and district
planning officers.

* 52 inter-departmental meetings organised resulting in a ‘Process
Document on Journey towards SDGs in Assam’.

* State Level Training Institute and four Regional Training Institutes
planned by 2020 but no progress on implementation reported as of
December 2018.

Chhattisgarh | + E-material for publicity of SDGs issued.

* 11 departmental working groups with designated nodal departments
set-up for SDGs. However, workshops for sensitizing officials and
public awareness were not conducted except for Members of
Legislative Assembly (February 2019).

+ Officials trained on preparation of decentralized District plan based on
SDGs at all five divisions (July 2017).

* Sensitization workshop for GPDP (Gram Panchayat Development
Plan) members conducted, who would further disseminate the
information at lower levels.

Haryana * SDG Coordination Centre with responsibility inter-alia, for capacity



16

building and raising awareness has been set up.

+ Seven inter-departmental working groups formed for facilitating
convergence but had not met since adoption of the Vision document.

Kerala

* Workshops, trainings and review meetings held for raising awareness
among Government officials, public representatives, civil society
organizations and other stakeholders but action for raising public
awareness not initiated.

* National Foundation of India (NFI) identified for mobilizing and sharing
knowledge, expertise, technologies and financial resources.

Maharashtra

* Meetings of officials held for sensitising them on 50958 but
sensitisation of departments at the third tier of Government yet to be
conducted.

* Training programmes for Municipal/Zila Parishad members and
District Level Officers planned and training module for continuous
Education and Skill Development proposed.

Uttar Pradesh

+ Awareness programme held only at the State level.

+ Workshops and inter-agency consultations held but proceedings in
many cases were not documented.

+ Working Groups (October 2016) consisting of different departments
constituted but they remained non-functional.

+ Website developed to disseminate information on SDGs was removed
due to lack of technical support.

West Bengal

+ Inter-departmental/sectoral meetings held for mainstreaming of the
2030 Agenda.

« Awareness schemes specifically linked to SDGs not taken up.

From the above it is clearly visible that thou:

some initiatives involving stakeholders and capacity building of officials at

the Centre and States have been taken for raising awareness, these were not comprehensive, focused and sustained. The

audit has expressed its view that the task of engender

inclusiveness and participatory decision making in

implementation of the 2030 Agenda could face constraints.


v7

IV. CHAPTER-III: RESOURCE MOBILISATION FOR THE 2030 AGENDA

44, The UNDG Guide on Mainstreaming SDGs recognizes effective mobilization and
better use of financial resources as an area of primary focus. Keeping _ this in view audit
examined the preparedness in terms of securing financial resources, and their availability
and management of human and infrastructure resources. In the Audit Report it has been
mentioned that Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA) is an integral part of the 2030
Agenda. The Action Agenda draws upon all sources of finance, technology and
innovation, promote trade and debt sustainability, harness data and address systemic

illness.

45. The Committee noted that the VNR Report and the Three Year Action Agenda
highlighted several steps taken for optimizing domestic resource mobilization including
the measures identified in the AAAA. The Three years Action Agenda has a projection
of Union Government expenditure for the period 2017-20. The Committee find that the
basis on which these projections were made was not clear and no specific linkage with
Goals and Targets was made. The Strategy document viz. “Strategy for New India @75”
sets targets for expenditure as percentage of GDP in the case of some sectors to be
achieved by 2022-23, but does not make year to year expenditure projections for
implementing the strategy for various sectors.

46. In the 500 India Index: Baseline Report (December 2018) and the Strategy
Document, NITI Aayog recognises that financial resources are a fundamental driver for
achieving the SDGs in time. Audit however, noted that Ministry of Finance had not
undertaken any exercise for assessment of financial resources for implementing the
2030 Agenda. It was also noted that similarly, none of the selected States had
undertaken any concerted exercise for assessing resource requirements for

implementing SDGs.

47. NITI Aayog intimated in July 2018 that it would request all the Ministries to
analyse their budget allocations with respect to achieving relevant SDG targets.
Subsequently, in May, 2019, it advised that financial resources to support various
Schemes/Programmes are identified each year during the budgeting process which in
turn support SDGs.


18

48. With respect to the States, audit noted that NITI Aayog had advised the States in
January-February 2018 to start orienting their budgets to SDGs by linking allocations to
Goals/Targets. Audit examination in the seven selected States showed that four States
viz. Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal had not taken any substantive
action for aligning their Budget with SDGs. Assam had prepared ‘Outcome Budget’ for
the financial years 2017-18 to 2019-20 wherein allocations were linked to specific SDG
targets. In Haryana, a budget document was prepared for financial year 2018-19 where
some of the existing schemes were linked with 15, Goals and allocations were
aggregated Goal wise. In Maharashtra, the software “Maharashtra Plan Schemes
Information System (MP-SIMS)" has been modified to capture assignment of budget
outlays under the State and District Level Schemes with SDGs. As such, most of the
States are only at the preliminary stage of orienting their budgets with SDGs and the
Committee find that there is no uniformity of action.

49. Apprising the Committee about the reasons for not intergrating the SDG related
financial resources in national budgeting and action taken to ensure that
Ministries/Departments analyse their budget allocations vis-a-vis gaps in resources for
achieving relevant SDG targets, NITI Aayog in their written replies stated as under:

"(1) While the Allocation of Business Rules of NITI Aayog is silent about the 2030
Agenda, the PMO’s directives provide the only guidance with respect to the role of
NITI Aayog in the implementation of SDGs and confer a limited ambit to its
initiatives and interventions in the matter. According to the ‘Allocation of Business
Rules’, national budgeting and financial allocations are under the purview of
Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance in collaboration with
Ministries needs to conduct such assessment for integrating the SDGs with
national budgeting, which is prepared by Ministry of Finance.

(2) Since NITI Aayog is not responsible for budgeting and financial allocations,
Ministries and States are expected to weigh in on their respective requirements
and provisioning and work out suitable and demand-driven budget allocations
under the guidance of the Ministry of Finance.

(3) According to the inputs provided by Ministry of Finance, Government of India
has been implementing several Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(CS/CSS) for sustainable development of the country and its people in three
dimensions viz. economic, social and environmental. These developmental
schemes mostly address the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which are
targeted to be achieved by 2030. Under BE of 2019-20 a sum of © 3.31 lakh crore
has been provided for the CSSs.

(4) Further, the Central Sector Schemes include all those schemes which are
entirely funded and implemented by the Central Agencies viz.


50.

51.

19

Ministries/Departments or various agencies of Gol such as the autonomous
bodies and other special purpose vehicles. In some cases, as an exception, and
with the specific prior consent of Finance Ministry (Department of Expenditure) the
central sector schemes may be allowed to be implemented through the concerned
State implementing agencies. Exceptions to this general rule shall apply to those
schemes where specific approval has been given by the Department of
Expenditure. In Budget 2019-20, an outlay of | 8.70 lakh crore has been provided
for CSs.

(5) The CSSs and CSs being implemented by the Central Government are also
meant to achieve the SDGs. Under the CSSs the relevant line
Ministry/Department hold discussions/consultations with the State Governments in
order to achieve the national goals. This also involves discussions on the financial
requirements for the same. The Ministries/Departments based on the sharing
pattern make projections for financial requirements to the Ministry of Finance.
These are appraised and approved by the Ministry of Finance.

(6) The CS/CSS framework provides an opportunity to renew and integrate efforts
in order to meet, to a significant degree, national and global aspirations as
articulated under SDGs in a defined time frame. For example, multi-dimensional
extreme poverty requires action on all fronts of water, energy, food security,
livelihoods creation, securing the health of natural resources on which the
livelihoods of people depend, reducing vulnerabilities, ensuring equity and a just
governance framework. These are also components of the targets in the SDGs.."

To a specific query by the Committee as to how NITI Aayog is ensuring the
budget allocations are prudently aligned against the SDGs and National
Development Goals it replied as follows:

“ According to the ‘Allocation of Business Rules’ making budget allocations are
beyond the purview of NITI Aayog. However, alignment of budget allocation with
SDGs is an important agenda which may be taken up by the Ministry of Finance in
consultation with all line ministries.”

In their vetting comments to aforesaid replies, Audit stated as follows:

"Reply of NITI Aayog does not address the query of PAC on integration of SDG
related financial resources in national budgeting and arrangements put in place to
have consultations/discussions between Ministry of Finance and State
Government in matters of integrating financial resources in national budgeting."

Further, on being apprised about the coordinating mechanism with the Ministry of

Finance to obtain the requisite budgetary allocation for the concerned Ministries so as to

achieve the SDG targets, NITI Aayog in their written replies stated asunder:

"NIT| Aayog has taken up the matter with the Ministry, NITI Aayog and
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance are conducting a study
jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on estimating the financial
fesources needed to achieve the SDGs in the areas of education, health,
electricity, roads and water and sanitation. This study also gives insights into the


52.

20

current allocation, allocation required to meet the SDGs and associated targets on
time, and the gap between requirement and current allocation. The study report is
currently under finalization."

During evidence representative of NITI Aayog stated that:

"This study by the Ministry of Finance should get completed in the next two
months."


21

V. CHAPTER-IV: MONITORING AND REPORTING

53. The 2030 Agenda envisages systematic follow-up, monitoring and review of
progress at all levels to ensure its effective and expeditious implementation. NITI Aayog
is the nodal institution responsible for coordinating and overseeing the implementation of
SDGs. To enable monitoring and review, MoSPI was entrusted with the task of
developing a NIF which was published only in November 2018. As a result, tasks key to
the institution of a proper monitoring and reporting framework, such as preparation of
baseline data was completed only in March 2019. Audit also observed that Milestones
were yet to be aligned with timeline for targets achievement. In the seven selected
States, action on developing indicators and identification of data sources had not
achieved required level of progress. The creation of a robust mechanism for monitoring,
evaluating and reporting progress on implementation of SDGs therefore, remains an

area requiring immediate and focussed action.

54. Audit further observed that delay in approval of National Indicator Framework
(NIF) held up finalisation of monitoring and reporting framework on implementation of
SDGs. Initiatives undertaken in selected States were still in progress. Again, there is no
proposal to identify milestones for the national indicators. Out of 306 indicators included
in NIF, data for 137 indicators were not yet available.

55... Apprising the Committee about the reasons for delay in approval of NIF, MoSPI in
one of the written replies stated as under:

"However, several initiatives have been taken by the MoSPI after the Cabinet
Approval which inter-alia include release of first Baseline report on SDG-NIF,
release of SDGs Dashboard, preparation of guidelines for States for preparation
of State indicator Framework, Capacity Development on Sustainable
Development Goals for Central and State officials, inclusion of certain SDGs
national indicators for bridging the data gaps by collecting data on those indicators
in the next round of National Sample Surveys.

Cabinet in its meeting held on 24.10.2018 has approved the proposal of the
Ministry on constitution of High-Level Steering Committee (HLSC) to periodically
review and refine the National Indicator Framework. The first meeting of HLSC
was held in June 2019 and certain refinements in the indicators were approved by
the HLSC.

SDG monitoring at the national and sub-national level is undertaken by NITI
Aayog. The SDG India Index, designed by NITI Aayog in partnership with UN in
India, ranks all States/ UTs based on their progress in their journey towards


56.

22

achieving the goal and the targets. The Index will track the progress of the country
and the States/ UTs on an annual basis, using the latest available data.

The monitoring and reporting on SDGs has already been initiated by NITI Aayog
and MoSPI. Some of such initiatives are the SDG India Index released by NITI
Aayog in 2018 to monitor the progress of the States/ UTs; National Indicator
Framework and Baseline Report by MoSPI; and their corresponding dashboards.
Hence, monitoring and reporting on SDGs is being done regularly.

The Global Indicator Framework consists of the global list of 242 suggestive
indicators circulated by the UN. However, according to the UN Resolution on the
Agenda 2030, member states were expected to customize these and design their
own national indicators. Accordingly, the National Indicator Framework (NIF) with
306 indicators were devised by MoSPI in consultation with all stakeholders."

Niti Aayog replied to this query that as per inputs provided by MoSPI, the delay
was not on part of MoSPI and therefore MoSPI does not have any comment to
offer.

Further, attributing the reasons for non-availability of data for as many as 137

indicators, MoSPI in their written replies submitted as follows:

"(1) Regarding data availability for national indicators in NIF, at present 191
National indicators are included in SDGs NIF Baseline Report, 2015-16 released
on National Statistics Day 29th June, 2019. Efforts are being made to collect data
for remaining 115 indicators through Inter- Ministerial meetings and official
correspondences.

(2) Further, MoSPI has initiated the new surveys in order to cater to data need of
SDG indicators. Some of these surveys are Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS),
Time Use Survey (TUS), Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) on Agricultural
Households Conditions, etc.

(3) The first progress report on SDGs with time-series data is likely to be released
by December 2019 followed by regular release of progress report every year.
MoSPI has also released an SDG Dashboard based on NIF, developed in
collaboration with United Nations in India. The dashboard provides an aggregated
overview of all goals, targets and maps data for national indicators. It is a unified
data repository on SDG Indicators as per the National Indicator Framework.

(4) The deadlines by which specific targets are to be achieved are already in-built
in the target statements. Some targets are to be achieved by 2020, some others
by 2025, and others by 2030."

In a written question the Committee asked Niti Aayog whether it is going to
constitute some enforcement agency for monitoring compliance of SDGs by
various institutions, Niti Aayog replied as follows:

“ It is not within the mandate of NIT! Aayog to enforce compliance with SDGs by
various institutions. However, NITI Aayog will continue to monitor the
performance of States/UTs using the SDG India Index and help improve their
performance within the framework of cooperative and competitive federalism.”


23

57.  MoSPI intimated to Audit (July 2018) that no milestones for the indicators have
been proposed. Thus, Audit observed that non-identification of milestones may affect the
preparation of an effective road-map/policy for achieving the related Targets.

58. As regards the absence of the milestones for indicators, representative of Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation apprised the Committee during evidence as
under:

"Right now, we do not have a milestone because for some of the indicators, we
are too early at that stage but we all are working day and night to ensure that all
the indicators are captured. We will ensure that these are aligned through our NIF
and the NIF architecture is aligned with the GIF framework. At the earliest, when
we get that confidence level that by this time, we will be able to achieve these
many indicators and framework, then we will take it forward."

59. Asked about the existing mechanism to monitor efficacy of coordination among

the three concerned Ministries/Departments and whether this was effective enough, NITI

Aayog replied as follows :

“With respect to monitoring of progress on the implementation of SDGs the
Ministries share information on a regular basis . This facilitates the
preparation and publication of the SDG India Index Report which provides
an SDG Progress snapshot at the national level. The existing coordination
among the three Ministries is functional and smooth.”
60. When the Committee enquired how Panchayat Raj Institutions are being
empowered for attaining NITI Aayog simply mentioned that the Ministry of Panchayat Raj
deals with the empowerment of Panchayat Raj Institutions. Further, to know the actual
implementation on the ground the Committee asked about the programs planned in the
112 Aspirational Districts. From the written reply from NITI Aayog it was found that the
progress is measured through the 49 indicators in the index. These are monitored
periodically and also the third party validation is done periodically to keep the competition
fair. The Committee could not find any inkling of implementation of SDGs in the
Aspirational District programme which include some important index viz. health and
nutrition, education, agriculture and water resources, financial inclusion and basic

infrastructure.


24

INVOLVEMENT OF PRIVATE SECTOR

The Committee enquired about the role and involvement of private sector in
achieving the SDGs. NITI Aayog mentioned that it has been continuously partnering with
various stakeholders in public and private sector to achieve the SDGs.

Emphasizing the role of private sector in achieving SDGs NIti Aayog in a written
reply mentioned that the comprehensive framework of the SDGs require that the growing
might of the private sector in terms of finance, technology, skills, innovation and outreach
is harnessed to fructify the SDG implementation efforts. The ways business source,
invest, employ and spend, have significant influence on sustainable development. They
can become key SDG implementers by transforming their entrepreneurship and profits
into enablers of sustained economic growth, social inclusion and environmental
protection. Thus, it is imperative to enable the private sector to go beyond its core
business activities by not only creating wealth and employment, but also helping in
technology transfer, capacity development, creation of public goods for the poor and
efficient implementation of policies and programmes to achieve to achieve the SDG
targets.

The Committee further enquired about the envisaged role for the Non-
Governmental Organization/ charities and non-profit organisations on way to achieve the

SDGs. Niti Aayog further informed in a written reply as follows:

“ The NGOs of charity/non-profit organisations have been an important partner in
implementation of SDGs. They have all along been part of the sensitization and
awareness development work of NIT! Aayog. Niti Aayog has also supported them
in their own awareness and capacity development work on the SDGs of the
grassroots and other levels. Those working with disadvantaged communities
directly or indirectly are contributing to the work of social inclusion so that ‘no one
left behind’. Niti Aayog partnered with a number of such organisations and their
networks in 2019-20 to hold nation-wide consultations on all SDGs with various
vulnerable social groups, such as, children, women, farmers, people from
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, migrant labour, elderly, people with
disabilities, people with HIV, etc. The outcome of the consultations were
incorporated in the VNR Report.”


25

VI. CHAPTER-V: GOAL 3: GOOD HEALTH AND WELL BEING

61. Audit has selected Goal 3 of SDGs i.e Good Health and Well Being for detailed
examination. This covers the Health Sector and it’s preparedness to achieve the
targeted goals. The importance of this goal is that it is key to protection of individuals,
families, and societies. The new National Health Policy(NHP), 2017 was set keeping in
view the SDGs.

62. Audit followed the same procedure in it’s detailed examination of the sector viz.
institutional arrangements at the Central and State level, planning to achieve the
targeted goals, policy coherence, resource mobilization and reviewing and Monitoring.

63. As per the NITI Aayog's mapping document released in August 2017, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW) has been identified as the nodal Ministry along
with nine other implementing Ministries with respect to Goal 3. In the revised mapping
document (August 2018), Targets across Goal 3 along with related interventions and
schemes to be undertaken by these Ministries, had been delineated.

64. While providing details of the Goal-3 i.e. "Good health and well being" of SDGs
which is intended to ensure healthy living and promote well-being of people of all ages,
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their written replies furnished as under:

"SDG 3 “Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well Being at all ages” has nine key
targets.

° Four targets relate to the Millennium Development Goals- (the precursor to
SDGs) namely:
o reduction in maternal mortality,
o reduction in new born, and child deaths,
० ending epidemics of selected infectious diseases/combating
waterborne and other communicable diseases, and
० improving access to sexual and reproductive health services.
. The second set of targets address
© reductions in deaths from non-communicable diseases/promoting
mental health,
० reduction in road traffic accident deaths, injuries and accidents,
० strengthening prevention and treatment for substance abuse,
o addressing health effects of pollution, chemicals and contamination.
न The overarching target of 506 3 is SDG 3.8 which reads as “Achieving
universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality
and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all”.


26

Besides the above, SDG 3 has four means of implementation related
targets, on the strengthening the implementation of the
o Framework convention for tobacco control,
o access to medicines and vaccines,
o health financing and workforce and
o strengthen capacity for early warning, risk reduction, and
management of health risks.

For effective monitoring of SDG-3, there are 13 identified targets i.e. target 3.1 to
3.9 and target 3.a to 3.d. These are:

1.
2.

10.

11.

Target 3.1: By 2030, reduce the global Maternal Mortality Ratio to less than
70 per 1,00,000 live births

Target 3.2: By 2030, end preventable deaths of new-borns and children
under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce Neonatal Mortality
to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and Under-5 Mortality to at
least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births

Target 3.3: By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, Tuberculosis, Malaria and
Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) and combat Hepatitis, Waterborne
Diseases and other Communicable Diseases

Target 3.4: By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from Non-
Communicable Diseases through prevention and treatment and promote
mental health and wellbeing

Target 3.5: Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse,
including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol

Target 3.6: By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from
road traffic accidents

Target 3.7: By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive
health-care services, including for family planning, information and
education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies
and programmes

Target_3.8: Achieve Universal Health Coverage, including financial risk
protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to
safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for
all

Target 3.9: By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and
illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and
contamination

Target _3.a: Strengthen the implementation of the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries,
as appropriate

Target 3.b : Support research and development of vaccines and medicines
for the Communicable And Non-Communicable Diseases that primarily
affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential
medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration which
affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular,
provide access to medicines for all


27

12. Target 3.0: Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment,
development, training and retention of the health workforce in developing
countries, especially in least developed countries and small island
developing States

13. Target 3.d: Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing
countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and
global health risks.”

65. As regards the targets assigned to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
achievement of Goal 3 and progress made therein so far, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in their written replies stated as under:

"National Task Force on SDG-3 was constituted in M/o H&FW under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Health & Family Welfare) on 13.10.2016. As per the
directions of the Task Force, Working Group and Sub-Working Groups were
formed to sensitize different Programme Divisions, stakeholders for effective
implementation of programs and availability of datasets and periodic flow of
information on SDG-3.

. To monitor SDG-3, a list of 73 Health related indicators have been
identified by MoSPI and communicated in the Health Indicator Framework
(HIF) including mortality and other indicators which have direct impact on
the Health.

. Subsequently, in the National Indicator Framework (NIF) prepared by
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), this Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare has been assigned as data source agency for
44 indicators (which is a subset of above mentioned 73 HIF indicators).

. For the remaining indicators which have impact on health, the major data
sources are Office of Registrar General of India (ORGI), Department of
Drinking Water & Sanitation under Ministry of Jal Shakti, National Crime
Record Bureau (NCRB), Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
etc.

India has made substantial progress in major health indicators towards achieving
the SDG Health Goals by or before the stipulated timeline, i.e. the year 2030.It is
informed specifically that for some vital mortality indicators, viz. Maternal Mortality
Ratio (MMR), Under Five Mortality Rate (USMR) and Neo-Natal Mortality Rate
(NNMR), where the past annual trend of data is available in the public domain,
statistical projections has been undertaken which indicates that India is likely to
achieve the respective targets as per the timeline indicated below.

« MMR, released by the SRS (ORGI), has declined to 122 per 1 lakh live
births during 2015-17 from 130 during 2014-16. If india continues to
maintain the present percent change (-6.2%) annually, the country is
expected to achieve the MMR target of 70 by the year 2025.

e US5MR has declined from 39 per 1000 live births in 2016 to 37 per 1000 live
births in 2017 (as per SRS report). India is expected to achieve SDG target
well before by the year 2020-21 if the past trend is continued.


28

NNMR has declined to 23 per 1000 live births as per SRS, 2017. India is
expected to achieve the SDG targets of 12 by the year 2025 if the past
trend is continued.

However, as regards other indicators including incidences of

Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases, this Ministry makes regular
assessment of status and on that basis evolves necessary policy/ programme
interventions towards achieving specific targets by or before the stipulated time.
Thus, the Programme Divisions in the Ministry are actively involved in monitoring
the processes while the Statistics Division of M/o H&FW is monitoring in terms of
performance of health outcome indicators through periodic household surveys,
viz. National Family Health Surveys (NFHS) and Management Information
Systems(MISs)such as Health Management Information System (HMIS) etc."

a) Promoting Awareness and stakeholder involvement
66. Initiatives for raising awareness and enhancing stake-holder engagement in

respect of Goal 3, both at the Central and State levels were not comprehensive, as

discussed below.

At Central Level
67. The MoH&FW organised a national consultation on transitioning from MDGs to

SDGs (May 2016) which was attended by participants from the Central Ministries, States

and Union Territories, international organisations, institutions and experts. In 2017, the

MoH&FW organised five State level conferences on Goal 3. The Ministry has also used

electronic media and social media for increasing awareness about Goal 3.
State Level

Awareness raising initiatives by States in respect of Goal 3

Assam

* The nodal Agency for Goal 3 viz. ‘Health and Family Welfare
Department’ was involved with awareness programme in only one out
of the 17 Districts covered under the awareness programme.

+ In the Health Sector, stakeholders like hospitals, nursing homes,
diagnostic centers were not involved during awareness programme.

Chhattisgarh

* Draft Vision document for Health identifies several initiatives for IEC
activities and awareness programmes against various targets under
Goal 3.

Haryana

* The SDG Coordination Centre has been set up to take action for
increasing public awareness, etc., for SDGs including Goal 3.

Kerala

* The Health and Family Welfare Department had taken action for
raising awareness regarding the 2030 Agenda among Government
officials and other stakeholders through workshops, trainings and



29

review meetings.

* The Information and Public Relation Department will be entrusted with
the responsibility to conduct specific awareness generation programme
for SDGs among general public.

Maharashtra |* The State has not taken any action regarding raising public

awareness.

* The State Government intends to assign funds out of the District
Annual Plan to conduct training programme for the Municipal Councillor
and Zila Parishad members etc., for creating greater awareness of the
importance of SDGs by March 2019.

Uttar Pradesh | * In respect of Goal 3, the State Health Ministry did not undertake public

awareness programmes and workshops/meetings to engage with civil
society organizations and other stakeholders. The Ministry however,
held inter-departmental/sectoral meetings involving different levels of
Government officials.

* The Medical Health & Family Welfare (MH&FW) Department did not
earmark budget for publicity of the 2030 Agenda and did not plan to
incorporate awareness raising issues of the Agenda.

West Bengal | + Although various health awareness programmes were held in the

State, in the absence of sectoral papers on SDGs, their linkage with
SDGs were not established.

As regards the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at

Central and State levels for raising awareness and enhancing stake-holder engagement

in respect of Goal 3, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare submitted as under:

"In May 2016, the M/o H&FW in collaboration with WHO held a National
Consultation on transitioning from the MDGs to SDGs. The consultation
addressed issues such as learning from MDGs to inform SDGs, discussion of
policy options for health SDG, monitoring frameworks and challenges and
solutions to emerging health challenges. The consultation resulted in the adoption
of the Commitment on SDGs.

A National Task Force specific to Goal 3 with representation from MoH&FW, NITI
Aayog and MoSPI, States, agencies and experts, has been constituted along with
working groups/sub-groups on specific items of work. The Task Force was
reconstituted in January 2020 and includes representatives of Ministry of Women
& Child Development, Rural Development, Housing and Urban Affairs, Home
affairs, AYUSH, Tribal Affairs, Social Justice & Empowerment, Railways and Jal
Shakti.

In January 2020, a meeting of the Task Force Members was held on 227 January
2020.


30

As per the reconstituted National Task Force, all the nine ministries as per the
CAG report have been involved.

Regular Meeting with the related Ministries and meeting of the National Task
Force and Working Groups besides, the Joint Video Conferences held with the
related Ministries are used for enhancing stakeholder engagement besides raising
awareness. "

b) Mapping of Schemes

69. NITI Aayog had undertaken an exercise of mapping SDGs and Targets with
Ministries, schemes and initiatives, mapping the National Health Mission with Goal 3
which the MoH&FW has identified as the primary vehicle to achieve this Goal. The
MoH&FW intimated (March 2018) that after undertaking a review, the Ministry has
specifically aligned different interventions/initiatives/schemes and targets with Goal 3 in
the 2017-2020 phase of NHM. Nineteen Ministries are involved with MoHFW towards
achieving SDG - 3. MoHFW is coordinating with these Ministries. It was however
noted that, Ministry of Railways which implements road safety measures at railway
crossings, had not been mapped with Target 3.6 dealing with road safety.
Adapting Goal 3 in selected States

70. Audit observations on adapting Goal 3 in selected States are given below:

Adapting Goal 3 in selected States

| State | Vision/Strategy/Action Plan Audit Observation

Assam The Health and Family Welfare | Four State sponsored Health
Department prepared (December | Schemes not mapped with
2017) the Departmental Strategic Plan | the Goal 3.

and Action Plan targeting
implementation of the SDG in three
phases.

Chhattisgarh | Draft Strategy and Action plan for | Six departments viz.
Goal 3 prepared but not sent for | AYUSH, Medical Education,
approval (March 2018). Public Health Engineering,
Home, Commerce & Industry
and Environment though
linked were not mapped with
Goal 3. Besides, four State
Health Schemes were not
mapped with Goal 3.

Haryana Vision document deals only with | No separate mapping
Health department and — seven | document was prepared and
targets/interventions under Goal 3 | mapping was done through
whereas the budget document shows | the vision and __ budget



31

linkage with 88 schemes of 12
departments under Goal 3.

documents which were not in
sync.

Kerala

The nodal department for Goal 3
conducted a review of strategies plans
and schemes keeping in view SDG
targets, so that gaps could be
identified.

The Expert Groups
constituted to develop State
specific targets had identified
indicators and performed
responsibility mapping.

Maharashtra

The State’s Vision 2030 document did
not address Targets 3.6, 3.9, 3.a, 3.c
under Goal 3.

Two departments (Women
and Child, Water Supply and
Sanitation) and two State
schemes though linked with
Health were not mapped with
Goal 3.

Uttar Pradesh

The State Government was yet to
formulate any new policy/plan as per
SDG targets. Preparation of a State
Health Policy aligned to SDG targets
and the National Health Policy 2017

Eight schemes though
connected to health were not
mapped with it.

was reported to be underway.
West Bengal | Sectoral plan documents for the | Sectoral Report for Health
Sectoral Groups covering Goal 3 had | and Welfare aligned Goal 3
been submitted in July 2018 but was | with Goals 1, 2,4,5,8 and 16
awaiting approval. for achieving health targets.
Target 3.6, 3a and 3d were
not included and aligned with
Key Performance Indicators
and the scheme ‘Safe Drive
Save Life’ was not aligned
with the Target 3.6 in the
absence of measurable
indices.
71. The above table indicates that mapping in respect of Goal 3 was not

comprehensive in selected States. The Committee, therefore, desired to be apprised of

the steps taken to make the mapping comprehensive in the States. In response the

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their written replies stated as under:

“With reference to the CAG report 8 of 2019, the comments have been received
from the States of Haryana, Maharashtra, Assam and West Bengal.

Status of Haryana:



32

The State has initiated the process of mapping with various programme divisions
and their schemes linked with SDGs in sync. with the budgetary allocations for the
respective programmes.

. The data is being taken for year wise targets for the listed indicators along
with the budgetary expenditure, future allocations for the achievement of
the specified targets.

. Assessment is being done for financial requirements for resource
mobilization to achieve the specified SDG targets (both immediate and long
term).

. The budgetary expenditure/allocation includes both the central as well as
state funds.

Haryana has already mapped the various departments of health sector as per the
listed indicators of SDG. For this, meetings and follow-ups are being done on
regular basis.

न To ensure robust monitoring and evaluation of the SDG implementation in
the State, data w.r.t. numerator, denominator, outcome indicators, touch
points for data verification, detailed write-up for the listed indicators is being
taken from the concerned departments.

. State is liasioning with the other departments viz. AYUSH, Women and
Child Development, Medical Education and Research etc. for monitoring
the achievement of the listed schemes related to SDGs and for mobilization
of financial resources as per their requirement.

न The State is also in process of preparing sector specific plan for better
implementation of SDGs.

Status of West Bengal:

Inter-sectoral co-operation is in vogue at all levels in service delivery. Efforts are
being made to link the health awareness programmes with SDG.

“Safe Drive Safe Life Campaign” has been launched in the state in 2016-17 with
an aim to focus towards greater road safety and it is fully aligning to the
commitment to SDG. Fund to the tune of around Rs.50 crore has been allotted
only in 2016-17 to different Police Authorities for procurement of traffic and road
safety equipment and CCTV cameras. Besides, extensive campaigning has also
been made to create awareness among the citizens. Transport Department is the
nodal agency in implementation of this campaign and this programme is being
implemented with active participation of Transport, Home, PWD, Health and
Education Departments.

° Role of Health Department relates to a) implementation of Good Samaritan
guideline; b) treatment of patients within the ‘Golden Hour’; c) Management
of trauma patients through trauma care centres; d) Building of infrastructure
for the same and e) prompt transportation of trauma victims through ‘toll
free’ ambulance network — at present Transport Department is in the
process of implementation of this project.

न Since submission of the 506 document, Department of Health has
implemented ‘PathaBandhu’, a project for training on local volunteers in


33

vulnerable accident prone spots, for prompt first aid of road traffic accident
cases and early transportation to the nearest trauma care facility and
starting management within the ‘Golden Hour’.

Also initiative has been taken for training of medical officers and nursing
personnel of trauma care facilities in basic and advanced life saving
support along with handling of road traffic accidents in the emergency of
the hospital.

The department has also notified 47 trauma care centres vide notification
no HF/SPSR/21/2013/17 dated 15/01/2019.

Status of Maharashtra:

Liaison of Health Department with other Department:

1.

At village level, Health Services are provided with coordination of Health
workers (Female), Anganwadi workers and ASHA. This implementation is
according to GR no PHD-2017/P.K.76/Health-7dated 7 Dec 2017

In Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) implementation,
Anganwadi worker (AWW), under the ICDS scheme, acts as promoters for
registration of Primigravida mothers.

Anganwadi Workers (ICDS scheme) helps in conducting the village Health
Nutrition Days and also during Pulse Polio Immunization activities.

National Deworming Day Drive is conducted in Anganwadi centres with the
liaison of Anganwadi workers.

Village child Development Centre (VCDC) is conducted by women and
child department at Anganwadi level. The Children who does not show
improvement at VCDC are admitted in Health Institutes and they are
treated and monitored by Health Department.

The Core Committees are established for monitoring the various programs
at block, District and State level which includes Women and Child
Department as member of Committee.

The Health Department has liaison with Water Supply and Sanitation
Department for water quality in the State. Block, District and State level
Water Supply and Sanitation Committees have to be established with
Health Department as member of committee.

The State has taken following steps to increase public awareness:

State has prepared Programme-wise Annual Action Plan for general
awareness in the general public by using mass media, mid-media IEC and
Social media and implementing year-wise in consultation with DGIPR Govt.
of Maharashtra.

State has prepared IEC Policy document for the State of Maharashtra.
State has started following public awareness campaign on social media
platforms — a. Facebook b. Instgram c. Twitter d. You Tube e. Linked in
State has prepared District wise guidelines to conduct the awareness
programme in the District. From this year i.e. 2020-21, State has created
IEC plan for Tribal Districts.

State is implementing special IEC package for Ayushman Bharat Health
and Wellness Centres to cover the rural area.


34

. State has developed "Annual Health Days Calendar’ including 106 Health
Days. According to this calendar, all public health facilities are instructed to
do health promotion activities on the specific days and display it at their
institute and do IEC / SBCC activities in their area.

. All health institutes were instructed to develop "Arogya Patrika Corner"
(Arogya Patrika is State's newsletter magazine in Marathi published
monthly) to their institute in which 12 issues of Arogya Patrika may be
displayed.

. Monthly reporting System has been developed by State and following
activities were included in it. These activities were reported by Sub Health
Centre, PHC/ RH/ SDG, Block and District Hospitals.

o Advocacy & Meetings

Capacity Building

Social Mobilization Work

Mid Media

Mass Media and

o Other Activities

0000

Status of Assam

National Health Mission, Assam has prepared and implemented comprehensive
State Programme Implementation Plan (SPIP) based on guidelines issued from
various divisions of M/o H&FW to achieve SDG Goal - 3 “Ensure healthy lives
and promote well-being for all at all ages”.

. In addition to that, gap analysis has been done to identify the shadow areas
and accordingly area / community specific special plans developed and
implemented with support from Govt. of India as well as from State Govt.
fund.

न Various guidelines have been received from Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India regarding implementation of NHM
programmes which are directly linked with the SDG goals.

Mapping in the States was reinforced during the meeting of the working group on
the roll out of SDG-3 in states/UTs held on 28" January 2020. Mapping in respect
of Goal 3 will be facilitated through ensuring regular support and monitoring.In
respect of those targets that require multi-sectoral action, the role of the MOFHW
is to monitor indicators that are directly within its purview.

In India, States are constitutionally mandated to deliver on most of the socio-
economic sectors that constitute the SDGs. Therefore, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) and all other stakeholder Ministries, under the overall
guidance of NITI Aayog and MoSPI, are continuously providing support and
enhancing capacities for monitoring all the SDG goals, including SDG Goal-3, at
the State and sub-state levels.

a. Moreover, in the course of national and regional consultations, it emerged
that the detailed examination of programs, strategies and implementation
designs at sub-national levels is critically important. Accordingly,
States/UTs are encouraged in developing their own State Indicator
Frameworks (SIFs), in sync with the National Indicator Framework (NIF),
under the guidance of NITI Aayog, MoSPI and all the stakeholder


35

Ministries. States are advocated to prepare State-level Vision Documents
and SDG Action Plans.

b. NITI Aayog, in partnership with UN India, developed the SDG India Index
Baseline Report and Dashboard, which document comprehensively and
measure the achievements made by States and UTs by ranking them ona
select set of indicators. The SDG India Index has enabled States and UTs
to keep a real time watch on the trajectory of progress towards the Goal.

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is proactively working with all states for
helping the States to complete the mapping."

72. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written replies further submitted as
under:

"(1) The key Ministries associated with Goal 3 such as M/o Women and Child
Development, M/o Health and Family Welfare, M/o Tribal Affairs, and M/o Ayush
have been regularly involved in the consultations/ review meetings held by NITI
Aayog.

(2) To enhance policy coherence among various ministries:

a) The National Health Mission under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is
supporting States for mainstreaming AYUSH. Provision of comprehensive primary
health care through Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centre (AB-HWCs)
envisage prevention and health promotion through lifestyle changes, exercise,
yoga, etc. for which M/o H&FW is engaging with Ministry of AYUSH.

b) M/o H&FW has been engaging with Ministry of Tribal Affairs and many
measures/initiatives have been taken by the M/o H&FW.

0) All tribal majority districts whose composite health index is below the state
average have been identified as High Priority Districts (HPDs) and these districts
are to receive more resources per capita under the NHM.

d) A committee has been recently constituted under the Ministry to develop
immunisation strategy for tribal population."

73. — In their vetting comments on the aforesaid replies of Ministry of Health and Family

Welfare, Audit observed as follows:

"The reply does not address the PAC query about exclusion of key ministries viz.
AYUSH, Tribal Affairs, and Home Affairs from national Consultation organised by
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in May 2016 and their exclusion from the Task
Force, Working Groups, and Sub-Groups constituted by the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare for the implementation of Goal-3."

74. Providing details about the National Task Force constituted for specific items of

work, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their written replies stated as follows:

"National Task Force on SDG-3 was constituted in M/o H&FW under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Health and Family Welfare) on 13.10.2016 and the
Terms of References(ToRs) of the National Task Force are as under.

1. Develop the monitoring Framework for SDG-3 in India with a roll out plan:


36

¢ 1.1) Map all the proposed indicators under each target and identify the
key domains and data elements that are being collected and those that
may be challenging to collect;

* 1.2) Identify indicators/areas requiring further deliberations;

¢ 1.3) Agree upon the equity stratifies to capture (age, sex, urban/rural,
wealth, education) and how to maintain this in current information
systems and compatibility with future planned health surveys; and

¢ 1.4) Recommend data flow and management — who collects and reports
what data, at what level, using what methodology, with what
periodicity/frequency.

2. Support the States with roll out of the SDG health agenda

¢ 2.1) Plan for State/regional levels consultations involving key
stakeholders to build a shared understanding, approach and vision;

* 2.2) Develop the package of technical and resource material for
conducting regional workshops; and

* 2.3) Provide technical support to the States in development of State
specific operational and M&E plans for the SDG-3.

3. Set up review mechanism

* 3.1) Put in place mechanisms for periodic review and progress in the
SDG implementation; and

* 3.2) Guide the analysis of data for feeding into policy/programmatic
action.

Since its constitution, the task force has constituted a Sub Group of National Task
Force, on 31.1.2017 and its meeting held on 3.2.2017. Two working groups were
constituted by this Sub Group of NTF on 20.2.2017 and meeting of Working
Group on SDG Monitoring Framework was held on 30.3.2017. Further, Sub
Working groups were constituted under the Working Group on Monitoring
Framework on 30.3.2017. The task force contributed in finalization of SDG 3
related indicators in the National Indicator Framework. So far, two meetings of
National Task Force had been held on 13.10.2016 and 22.1.2020.

Related Ministries are meeting for coordination of various national programmes on
regular basis, besides the formal meeting of National Task Force. This ensures
the smooth coordination among all, resulting in better performance in the national
programmes, which result in expected outputs in the Indicators under SDG-3.
Coordination and collaboration with the related Ministries and Departments is one
of the key factors for the achievement and progress mentioned above.

As all the concerned Ministries are part of the Task Force, the necessary
coordination and other collaborative activities is facilitated and thus, the Task
Force is equipped to carry out the required monitoring of the indicators under
SDG-3.

Mapping in the States was reinforced during the meeting of the working group on
the roll out of SDG-3 in states/UTs held on 28" January 2020. Mapping in respect
of Goal 3 will be facilitated through ensuring regular support and monitoring. In
respect of those targets that require multi-sectoral action, the role of the
MOH&FW is to monitor indicators that are directly within its purview.

In India, States are constitutionally mandated to deliver on most of the socio-


37

economic sectors that constitute the SDGs. Therefore Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) and all other stakeholder Ministries, under the overall
guidance of NIT] Aayog and MoSPI , are continuously providing support and
enhancing capacities for monitoring all the SDG goals, including SDG Goal-3, at
the State and sub-state levels.

a. Moreover, in the course of national and regional consultations, it emerged
that the detailed examination of programs, strategies and implementation
designs at sub-national levels is critically important. Accordingly,
States/UTs are encouraged in developing their own State Indicator
Frameworks (SIFs), in sync with the National Indicator Framework (NIF),
under the guidance of NITI Aayog, MoSPI and all the stakeholder
Ministries. States are advocated to prepare State-level Vision Documents
and SDG Action Plans.

b. NITI Aayog, in partnership with UN India, developed the SDG India Index
Baseline Report and Dashboard, which document comprehensively and
measure the achievements made by States and UTs by ranking them ona
select set of indicators. The SDG India Index has enabled States and UTs
to keep a real time watch on the trajectory of progress towards the Goal.

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is proactively working with all States for
helping the States to complete the mapping."

०) Policy Coherence

75. MoH&FW informed audit (April 2018) about several initiatives taken by it that
supported both vertical and horizontal coherence with respect to Goal 3. These include
adoption of “Delhi Commitment on SDG for Health” after a National Consultation of
Health secretaries; constitution of an Inter-Ministerial committee to support the Full
Immunization Programme; approval of State Programme Implementation Plans (PIP)
under NHM and convergence between Central agencies with respect to targets relating
to non-communicable diseases and the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram. However,
audit examination of the aspect of policy coherence with respect to Goal 3 disclosed that
important agencies such as Indian Council of Medical Research and Central Health
Education Bureau were not formally associated with the implementation of Goal 3. In
addition, three Ministries linked with Goal 3 viz. AYUSH, Tribal Affairs and Home Affairs
were not associated during the National Consultation on Transitioning from MDGs to
SDGs. Moreover, as pointed out in Para 5.2, other Ministries connected with Goal 3 had
not been made part of the Task Force constituted by the MoH&FW. With respect to
vertical coherence, a Working Group set up by the MoH&FW for implementing Goal 3 in
the States and UTs had not held any meeting. Observations on policy coherence in
_States in respect of Goal 3 are given in Table:

Policy coherence in selected States

Assam Nodal Department had not identified other associated departments
under Goal 3 such as Public Health Engineering Department (PHED),
Transport Department, Environment and Forests, etc.

Chhattisgarh | As reported under para 5.3.3, six departments viz. AYUSH, Medical
Education, Public Health Engineering, Home, Commerce & Industry,



38

Haryana In the Vision document, only one department has been linked with

Goal 3 even though 11 other departments viz. Ayush, Medical
Education and Research, Rural Development, Women and Child
Development, etc. are also linked with this SDG. The nodal
department (SDGCC) stated that, detailed sector wise plan will be
prepared for better implementation of SDGs.

The Department of Health and Family Welfare had taken up issues
relating to road safety and deaths due to road accidents; health
education and pollution, with the concerned departments.

Maharashtra There was no evidence on any specific steps having been taken with

respect to Goal 3 for horizontal mapping and_ identifying
interconnections between SDGs.

Uttar Pradesh |The State Government had selected (October 2016) MH&FW as a

nodal department for Goal 3 but specific roles for related entities and
for different levels of administration had not been defined. Department
(MH&FW) explained (May 2018) that these aspects would be
addressed in the proposed State Health Policy and Gram Panchayat
Development Plan after the approval of the Department's Vision
Document.

West Bengal No institutional links at the local/district/block levels for promoting

vertical coherence and integration were identified in the absence of
approval for sectoral plans.

Asked about the reasons for aforesaid Audit observations, the Ministry of Health &

Family Welfare in their written replies stated as under:

"(1) ... the Ministry has been engaging with various Ministries associated with
Goal 3 and a host of measures/ initiatives has been taken.

a) All tribal majority districts whose composite health index is below the State
average have been identified as High Priority Districts (HPDs) and these districts
are to receive more resources per capita under the NHM as compared to the rest
of the districts in the State. These districts also receive focussed attention and
supportive supervision. Norms for infrastructure, Human resources, ASHAs,
MMUs etc. under NHM are relaxed for tribal and hilly areas.

b) An expert committee set up jointly by M/o H&FW and Ministry of Tribal Affairs is
presenting its report on 9th August 2018.

c) An MOU is being signed with Ministry of Tribal Affairs for fostering objective of
Ayushman Bharat including through School Ambassador initiative.

d) A Committee has been recently constituted under the Ministry to develop
immunisation strategy for tribal population.

e) The Ministry is also engaging with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on
regular basis.


77.

39

f) As part of contribution towards the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, M/o H&FW, has
under the NHM undertaken initiative such as Kayakalp Award Scheme in 2015,
Swacch Swasth Sarvatra as joint initiative with MDWS in December 2016 and
VISHWAS- Village based Initiative to synergise Health Water and Sanitation in
July, 2017. Approval of * 276 crore has been accorded under NHM to States for
Kayakalp in the last three years and " 58 crore under Swacch Swasthya Sarvatra
last year. The VISHWAS Campaign is aimed at strengthening community level
convergent action on health water and sanitation. The yearlong campaign has
been designed which is to be carried out by each VHSNC in its area, to focus on
building awareness and social mobilisation, developing community for action on
water, sanitation and health, and a platform for building synergies between
various Government programmes. Training of trainers have already been
completed in 10 States.

g) Kayakalp is also being implemented for tertiary care hospitals and institutions.
(2) Horizontal coherence pertains to different Ministries and departments working
together, channelizing their efforts towards achieving the same outcomes. Vertical
coherence pertains to various levels of the government administration - centre,
state, district, and local, playing their respective roles effectively in a collaborative
manner to bring about the intended outcomes."

Further on the issue of Policy coherence, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

stated as follows:

78.

“There exists adequate policy coherence between Centre and State Governments
on the intended objectives of the National Programmes including the initiatives
towards achieving SDGs. On-going dialogue and discussions with States enable
specific issues relating to policy coherence to be taken up on immediate basis and
subsequent resolution with the State Governments concerned as and when the
issue arises."

Audit observed that with respect to vertical coherence, a working group set up by

the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for implementing Goal 3 in the States and UTs

had not held any meeting.

79.

Apprising the Committee about the reasons thereof, the Ministry of Health &

Family Welfare in their written submission stated as follows:

५)

"It is to submit that the Working group of the National Task Force under the
chairpersonship of JS Policy met on 28" January 2020.

National Task Force meeting held on 22.1.2020 has reiterated the conduct of
regular meetings of the working groups and required instructions have been
communicated to all the concerned officials."

Mobilisation of Financial Resources and Budget Allocation
Expenditure under National Health Policy


40

80. Goal 3 envisages substantial increases in health financing to meet various targets
under the Goal. NHP, 2017 released by the MoH&FW proposes raising public health
expenditure in a time bound manner from around one per cent (2015-16) to 2.5 per cent
of GDP (at current price) by 2025. The Ministry affirmed its commitment to audit to
increase the public health expenditure in a time bound manner and intimated (September
2018) that under NHM, States are mandated to increase health spending on primary
care by at least 10 per cent every year. It also highlighted steps taken at a policy level for
augmenting resources for the health sector such as levy of a combined four per cent
health and education cess and provision of funds for health education infrastructure
through the Higher Education Financing Agency. Though Public Health Expenditure as a
percentage of GDP has been increasing since 2015-16, it has remained within a narrow
band of 1.02- 1.28 per cent of GDP. A study of data on trend of spending in the States
and budget allocations at the Central level as given in subsequent paras would show that
concerted efforts would be needed to reach the target levels of spending on Public
Health by 2025.

Budget Allocation for Health Sector at the Centre
i) Financial allocation for Health at Centre
81. Following projections of the Three Year Action Agenda (2017-20) to increase the
Central allocation for the health sector to ~ one lakh crore by 2019-20, Gol allocated |
54,852.00 crore in 2017-18 (RE), © 57,671.60 crore in 2018-19 (RE) and * 65,037.88
crore in 2019-20 (BE) to the MoH&FW24 and AYUSH, which is far short of the target.

ii) Allocation for National Health Mission

82. The MoH&FW intimated that NHM is the primary vehicle for achieving Goal 3. The
budget projection and allocation for NHM during 2017-18 and 2018-19 is depicted in
Table and shows a shortfall in allocations in both the years:

Budget Allocation for NHM (" in crore)

Financial Projection Allocation Shortfall

Year
Amount Percentage

2017-18 34,315.7 26,690.7 7,625.0 22.2



41

2018-19 34,882.3 30,129.6 4,752.7 13.6

83. The Standing Committee of Parliament on Health while examining the allocations

had observed that these shortfalls would affect strengthening of Health facilities.

84. On a further enquiry about the target of public health expenditure Niti Aayog has
informed the Committee National Health Mission commits to increasing health spending
to 2.5% of GDP by 2025. Under NHM States are mandated to increase health spending
on primary care by at least 10% every year.

85. Audit has commented on this that against the targeted allocation of Rs. One lakh
crore by 2019-20 the actual allocation was Rs. 65,037.88 crore (BE) falling short by 35%.
While the target of spending by States only in primary health care is 10% of the GDP
their total expenditure on health sector ranged from 3.29 to 5.32 percent.

Mobilisation of Funds and allocation for Health Sector in States
86. The National Health Policy prescribes increasing health spending to more than
eight per cent of State’s Budget by the year 2020. Audit examination of records in the
seven selected States revealed that the achievement ranged between 3.29 to
5.32 per cent as detailed in Table:

Average Health Expenditure in selected States

State Assam | Chhattisgarh | Haryana | Kerala | Maharashtra | Uttar West
Pradesh | Bengal

Average §.32 4.78 3.29 5.24 4.15 4.74 4.47
Health
Expenditure
(As
percentage
of average
State
Expenditure
for the
period
2012-17)



42

87. In respect of action taken for assessment and mobilisation of financial resources
for Goal 3, audit noted that none of the States except Assam had undertaken an
assessment of financial requirements for the medium to long term. Assam had prepared

an Outcome Budget for three years linked to SDGs including Goal 3.

88. Asked about the steps taken to ensure the availability of required central
allocation for health, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is their written replies stated
as under:

"M/o H&FW regularly pursues with Ministry of Finance on Demands for Grants.
M/o H&FW also follows up with States on submission of Demands for Grant.
Continuous efforts are being undertaken to converge the resources mobilization of
resources to strengthen health systems in the States by liaisoning with the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Minority Affairs and other Ministries."

89. Further in regard to the steps taken to ensure the augmentation of health
spending in States, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their written replies
submitted as under:

"Following Steps are taken to nudge States to augment health spending in States:

e Under the flagship programme of National Health Mission(NHM), funds are
shared in the ratio of 60:40 (Centre: State) and 90:10 (for NE and hilly
States), and 100% for UTS without Legislature.

e To monitor the contribution of matching State share under NHM against
Central releases, it is mentioned that no releases are proposed unless the
matching State shares against previous releases are met out.

« Further, while proposing the 2nd tranche of release under NHM, it is
ensured that the State has increased its health budget by 10% over the
previous year. Where the increase over the previous is less than 10%, the
average of last three years in considered. Trends in States’ expenditure on
health are assessed by National Health Accounts (NHA), which compiles
the health expenditure by the States from RBI Bulletins.

States’ Health expenditure as proportion of total budgetary expenditure is one of
the indicator in NITI’s State Health Index (SHI). The NITI’s SHI has significant
weightage in the NHM Conditionality Framework to incentivize States to spend
larger proportion of their budget on health."

e) Physical Infrastructure and Human Resources in Health Sector

90. NHP, 2017 focuses on closing of infrastructure and human resource gaps,
optimum use of existing manpower and infrastructure as available in the health sector.

Examination of budget items that support physical infrastructure and human resources in


43

the health sector shows augmentation in financial allocations in the last three years for
ensuring availability of required infrastructure and human resources. MoH&FW
(September 2018) has highlighted initiatives to upgrade existing Sub-Centres and
Primary Health Centres to Health and Wellness Centres so as to ensure comprehensive
primary care. In addition, it intimated that several measures such as increased
recruitment of medical personnel and augmenting capacity of medical educational
institutions were being undertaken to improve availability of human resources in the

health sector.

91. The Performance Audit Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(Report No. 25 of 2017), on National Rural Health Mission (NRHM26) which seeks to
strengthen the delivery of public health services in the rural areas, highlighted shortfalls
(ranging between 24 and 38 per cent) in the availability of SCs, PHCs and Community
Health Centres in 28 States/UTs. The report also disclosed shortages of doctors and
paramedical staff in almost all centres selected by audit. The annual report of the
MoH&FW (2016-17) also accepts that health care service delivery requires intensive
human resource inputs. The position with respect to availability of physical infrastructure
(PHCs) and human resources (doctors) in selected States is provided in Table:

92.

Distribution of Health Resources (Infrastructure and Human)

States Infrastructure Human
PHCs PHCs Shortfall Total Availability of
required as oo number of | Doctors per
per Functioning Doctors in | PHC
population PHCs
norms

A | 8 | Cc D= (B-C) E F =(E/C)

Assam 1,112 1,014 aa 1,048 1.03

Chhattisgarh | 870 785 aaa 341 0.43

Haryana 501 366 135 429 1.17

Kerala 1,141 849 292 1,169 1.38

Maharashtra | 2,461 1,814 647 2,929 1.62

Uttar 5,183 3,621 1,562 2,209 0.61



44

[ Pradesh

West Bengal | 3,046 914 2,132 918 1.00

93. Thus, Audit found that despite existence of plans/policies and increased
allocations for augmenting physical and human resources, significant shortages persist
in physical resources in all seven States. In respect of human resources, there were

considerable shortages in the States of Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh.

94. When asked about the reasons for persisting shortages in physical resources in
all the seven States and steps contemplated to augment the same, the Ministry of Health
& Family Welfare in their written replies stated as follows:

“Public health and Hospitals is a State subject and the primary responsibility of
strengthening the healthcare delivery systems lies with the respective States.
However, under National Health Mission (NHM), technical and financial support is
provided to the States to strengthen the public health systems based on the
proposals submitted by them in the form of Programme Implementation Plans
(PIPs), which are appraised in the National Programme Coordination Committee
(NPCC) meetings and approvals are accorded in the form of Records of
Proceedings (RoPs) according to the resource envelope of the State. Ministry also
provides support through capacity building, dissemination of good practices, etc.

The inputs received from the State to enhance the human resources is given
below:

Reply from the State of Uttar Pradesh as sent by the State are given below

The steps taken by the State of Uttar Pradesh to enhance the human resources
are as follows:

* Introduction of transparent and fair recruitment process by hiring Gol
empanelled recruitment agency for facilitating in selection of contractual
staff at State/Division/ District/Block level.

+ Innovative Bidding Model has been introduced for hiring of Specialists
(Obs&Gynaecologist, Anaesthetist and Paediatrician) under NHM, UP. This
model has been helpful in fulfilling the gaps of Specialists Doctors in the
rural areas.

* To enhance the outreach for hiring of Specialists & MBBS Doctors,
following two models has been introduced under NHM, UP:

1.State Walk in Interview

2. District Walk in Interview


45

Selection Status of Specialists and Medical Officers (FY 2017-18) under
NHM, UP
Selection
1 . Total \Total of Selection of
Selection Through (Vacancies [SelectionsMedical |Specialist
Officer
wae . 1407 [Medical 102 (Pediatrician-
District Walk-in S
1 \(Specialists & किक हु ५ 475 373 ५७ Gynaccologist
Medical Officers) [SPecialists~ and
(Obs.&Gynae.- \Anaesthetist-28
152,
. Anaesthetist- 1123 (Pediatrician-
2 Bidding round ist 125, 423 (49, Gynaecologist-
(November-2017) |Paediatrician- 39 and
(225, General Anaesthetist-35)
Physician-62
‘Specialists under
National Mental
8 Health Program e? 27
NMHP’
[Total FY 2017-18 [1434 1625 373 225,
[Selection Status of Paramedical Positions (ANM, Staff Nurse, Lab Technician|
, Lab Attendant & PRO etc) and rest Positions under NHM, UP
St va | Total
res Position Name \Total Vacancies Selections
1 NM —“—SOSSCSCSCSCSCSCS 2683 2364
2 Staff Nurse 1290 1042
3 Lab Technician 373 326
4 Lab Attendant 64 64
5 Public Relation Officers (PRO) 18 18
6 | Community Health Officer (CHO) 1166 1054
Psychiatric Nurse and Clinical
हि Psychologist [89 (89
\Various District & State Level Positions
* including Consultants, BCPM, RSKM, 345 345
RSKO, District Counsellor etc.
\Total FY 2017-18 be43 sd 262,

Selection Status of S

ecialists and Medical Officer under NHM, UP.

. Total
Selection through Vacancies

Selection Status of Specialist under NHM, UP (For FY 2018-19 & 2019-20

Total Selections

Bidding Model lo49 «3800



46

Selection Status of Specialists and Medical Officer under NHM, UP.
४ Total न
sino. | Selection through Vacancies Total Selections
2 State Walk-in
3 District Walk-in 119
Total [oso si‘ [5899 /_______ CO

Selection Status of Medical Officers under NHM, UP (For FY 2018-19 & 2019-

20
1 State Walk-in | 843 125

2 District Walk-in | 470

Total [848 [55 _ |
[| [

Selection Status of Paramedical Positions (ANM, Staff Nurse, Lab Tech. ,
Lab Attendant & PRO etc.) and rest Positions under NHM, UP (For FY 2018-
19

Total Vacancies|Total Selections

Position Name
Staff Nurse, Lab

Technician, Microbiologist 817 802
Various District & State
2 Level Positions 534
Community Health Officer
3 CHO 1275 1275
Total FY 2018-19 [2646 ——“( sid कि
Recruitment status under Process at NHM,UP for FY 2019-20
iti Total Selections |
3.1०. | Position Name acancies Selections
Paramedical Positions (Nursing Sister, Staff
4 Nurse, Lab Technician & OT Technician) 1365 1358
under MCH Wing.
Paramedical Positions (ANM, Staff Nurse, Lab}
2 Technician, Pharmacist, OT Technician etc.) 1097 10575
40000+
State, Division and District level Positions
3 including Consultants, Counselor, Audiologist [1054 1791
letc. 1100+
4 Community Health Officer (CHO 16000 5889
irtual Training 154 153
Total FY 2019-20 19550 48766
Recruitment drive under process for contractual vacancies under NHM, UP
for FY 2019-20
ag: Total Total
(3. १० no|Position Name Vacancies |Selections Remarks |
1 [Backlog 1622 Advertised on 06" Oct 2019



47

Recruitment drive under process for contractual vacancies under NHM, UP
for FY 2019-20
Ss. no noPosition Name Weal neies 52 कांड Remarks नि
ivacancies(Division & land last date for submission
District level) lof application was 06" Nov
2019.
INew vacancies
Sarre ROP Advertised on 050 Jan 2020
2 backlog vacancy shared|2735 and last date or su mission
b ae lof application was 04" Feb
y Program Divisions 12020
(State, Division & .
District level,
Total FY 2019-20 4357

Reply from the State of Chhattisgarh as sent by the State are given below

The steps contemplated by the State to enhance the human resources in the
State of Chhattisgarh are as follows

Every Monday, Walk-in-Interview is conducted for Specialist and Medical Officers
at NHM office. Health facilities have been categorized into three zones according
to levels of ‘difficulty’ and ‘accessibility’ - Difficult, Most Difficult and Inaccessible.
According to the Health facilities, differential salary package has been
implemented for Specialist and Medical Officers. At District level, some posts are
recruited through District Minerals Fund (DMF) like Specialists posted in District
Hospitals and Medical Colleges and Medical Officers posted in DHs, CHCs,
UPHCs and UCHCs.

Chhattisgarh Rural Medical Corps (CRMC) scheme has been implemented. Its
aim is to improve availability of human resources in rural and remote areas of the
State. Health facilities have been categorized into three zones according to levels
of ‘difficulty’ and ‘accessibility’ — Difficult, Most Difficult and Inaccessible.
Provisions of differential financial incentives and extra marks for PG admission are
provided for health staff at each level

[ Name of the | om Most Difficult | Inaccessible
Post

Specialist 30000 40000 | /
PGMO 25000 35000 [|
EMOC / 22000 30000 | |
1555

|_४0 | 20000 25000 30000
RMA 3000 5000 10000



48

Staff Nurse 2000 3000 5000
ANM | | 1000 2000

न 43 Transit Hostels have been sanctioned in tribal blocks for
accommodation of health staff

. 3126 residential staff quarters have been sanctioned in all 27 districts for
accommodation of health staff

. Group Insurance (accidental death) for all NHM employees through Bank of
India

. 180 days Maternity leave sanctioned for female employees

. Ex-gratia payment on accident death of NHM employees."

95. Asked about the specific reasons for shortage of doctors in Wellness Centres, the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their written replies submitted as follows:

"Under Ayushman Bharat, it is envisaged to transform 1.5 lakhs Sub Health
Centres (91109), Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Urban Primary Health
Centres (UPHCs) into Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) by December
2022.

e In this regard, a total of 30,574 PHCs in rural and urban areas and
1,32,674 lakhs SHCs are to be transformed into AB-HWCs. It is not
envisaged to post a doctor at the SHC level AB-HWC.

e SHC level AB-HWCs will be lead by a new cadre of Community Health
Officer (CHO).

o CHOs are B.Sc Nursing graduates or Ayurvedic Practioners, who
are trained in six-month course in Certificate Programme for
Community Health, with core competencies in public health and
primary health care.

०. This six month course is offered by IGNOU and State Universities in
States such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, etc.

o Further, in coordination with Indian Nursing Council (INC), B.Sc
Nursing curriculum has been updated with the above six month
course content so that the nursing graduates passing out, need not
undergo six months course and they can be directly appointed as
CHOs by a due process.

०. This will address all the requirement of CHOs to be posted at SHC
level AB-HWCs.

As per Rural Health Statistics (RHS) 2019, the number of MBBS Doctors in-place
at PHCs is 29,799 against the requirement of 24,855. However, there are state-
wise disparities leading to a shortfall of 1484 posts of doctors, which is only 4.98
% of the total requirement at PHCs.

Action taken by the Government in this regard to ensure availability of doctors in
the rural areas:

¢ Provision for additional allowance to staff posted in rural and remote areas


49

* Higher remuneration for staff posted in rural areas compared to those
posted in urban areas

* Providing weightage for rural/ remote posting in PG and diploma courses
for MBBS doctors

* Providing scope for professional growth and continuous professional
learning

M/o H&FW is confident that the requirement of one doctor at each PHC level AB-
HWCs will be achieved by 2022 as envisaged comfortably."
96. During evidence, one of the representatives of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
deposed that some of the measures for overall supply situation of doctors have been
taken in terms of the medical education reforms.

97. She further submitted during evidence that:

"We are hopeful that over the course of next three to five years, the supply
situation of doctors in the country should be much better than what we have
currently"

f) Framework and Data for Monitoring at Central Level
98. The MoH&FW set up a Working Group for formulating a monitoring framework,

identifying data sources, developing metadata for indicators, recommending targets for
each indicator and development of a dashboard for Goal 3. In addition, two sub-groups
were set up for fixing Universal Health Care indicators and strengthen the Health
Information Systems for SDGs.

99. With regard to the monitoring framework, audit noted that the MoH&FW
commenced (November 2016) developing the Health Indicator Framework (HIF) and in
August 2017 identified 47 health indicators out of 232 indicators from the Global Indicator
Framework (GIF). After deliberations and refinements, this was expanded to 73
indicators and also included health related indicators pertaining to other SDGs. In
comparison, the NIF prepared by the MoSPI consists of 50 indicators relating to
Health/MoH&FW.

100. The difference in the number of indicators covered by the two frameworks i.e., HIF
and NIF was due to exclusion of 23 indicators from NIF due to non-availability of
data/data sources. Despite this, MoSPI included five indicators in the NIF, for which data
were not available and some important indicators such as maternal mortality ratio, under-


50

five child mortality rate and neonatal mortality rate, for which according to MoH&FW,
data were not regularly or uniformly available.

101. Explaining the reasons for not maintaining such data and action taken to ensure
maintenance of the data, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their replies stated as
follows: है

"The National Task Force of M/o H&FW prepared a zero draft containing 48
indicators for internal discussion on 16.11.2016. This indicator framework had
undergone multiple changes through its various versions. In view of definitions,
country specific relevance and scope of collecting information etc. these changes
were incorporated based on stakeholder consultations. Finally, the Health
Indicator Framework (version 0.6), containing 73 health related indicators was
approved by HFM on 05.08.2017 for draft Cabinet Note.

However, subsequently, in November’ 2018, Ministry of Statistics Programme
Implementation (MoSPI) prepared a National Indicator Framework (NIF) for
monitoring the progress of country w.r.t. SDGs. In this NIF, a detailed list of
indicators against the targets of SDG goals was prepared wherein M/o H&FW was
assigned the responsibility of maintaining and supplying of information on 44 NIF
health related indicators.

Data for SDG Monitoring

While evolving the framework before finalization of NIF, the robust data was not
directly available for some of the health related indicators. Subsequently, some
modifications in the NIF indicators have been done keeping in mind the country
specific requirements. Also, for the purpose of initial assessment, close proxy
indicators were identified for which the data was not directly available.

M/o H&FW has provided SDG baseline (2015-16) data for 42 out of the assigned
44 Health indicators. For two indicators, ie Viral Hepatitis (including A & 8)
incidence per lakh population and Number of deaths due to Cancer, robust
datasets were not available. However, Hepatitis has been included in NFHS and
steps are being taken to assess baseline values based on NFHS-4 dried blood
spots. Several possibilities are being explored for having data on deaths due to
cancer.

. In order to provide comprehensive datasets in respect of majority of the
SDG health indicators, M/o H&FW is now conducting National Family
Health Surveys (NFHS) once in three years as envisaged in the National
Indicator Framework.

. It is worthwhile to clarify here that earlier the MMR estimates for major
States were provided once in three years by Office of Registrar General of
India (ORGI). Since 2015, ORGI has started giving annual estimates of
MMR. However, MMR estimates obtained through sample surveys are
available only for major States and not for smaller States & UTs of India.
This is because maternal/child mortality is a ‘rare event ‘and it is difficult to
estimate it through surveys for smaller populations.


51

However, to resolve this issue, a Committee of Experts was also constituted by
M/o H&FW under the Chairmanship of Shri Jayant Kumar Bhanthiya, former Chief
Secretary of Govt. of Maharashtra. This Committee will evolve a system based on
Civil Registration System (CRS) and Medically Certified Causes of Death (MCCD)
for getting timely and reliable data on MMR, U5MR, Disease burden etc.,
especially for smaller States/UTs.

Maintenance of Data

Data maintenance and availability is an evolving process and it has been
improving over time. Statistics Division of Ministry has been actively involved in
various Sectoral Committee Meetings and High Level Steering Committee
Meetings towards this end. In these forums, all stakeholders are involved in
discussions on maintenance of datasets. On the above mentioned 44 SDG health
indicators, the data is being maintained regularly as per the latest available
information from the data sources and as per the prescribed periodicities as
envisaged under the NIF.

Present Status

M/o H&FW regularly provides updated information on 44 NIF health indicators to
MoSPI for the unified data repository on maintenance and monitoring of SDGs in
India.

. In addition, inter-agency and inter-ministerial consultations, workshops and
training programs are being regularly organized towards developing more
comprehensive data system on SDG-health in India.

बढ The Sectoral Meetings and High Level Steering Committee Meetings are
also organized by MoSPI with stakeholders/Ministries/Agencies (National &
Inter-National) to review and evolve better utilization and capturing of data
for SDG indicators.

Efforts are also made to utilize the available Administrative datasets to monitor the
process at more frequent intervals." है

102. Details of 44 indicators under SDG-3 assigned to Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare are given as under:

"Details of 44 Indicators under SDG-3 assigned to M/O H&FW

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF | india
(Goal 1) 1.3: Implement] (1) (1.3.1) Percentage of 28.7
nationally appropriate social | Households with any usual
protection systems and | member covered by a health

measures for all, including | scheme or health insurance
floors, and by 2030 achieve | (%), NFHS-4

substantial coverage of the poor
and the vulnerable



52

44 INDICATORS assigned to M/o H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

| india

(Goal 2) 2.1 : By 2030, end
hunger and ensure access by all
people, in particular the poor
and people in vulnerable
situations, including infants, to
safe, nutritious and sufficient
food all year round

(2) (2.1.1) Percentage of
Children who are
underweight (Weight-for-
Age(below - 2SD) %, NFHS-
4

35.7

(Goal 2) 2.2 : By 2030, end all
forms of malnutrition, including
achieving, by 2025, the
internationally agreed targets on
stunting and wasting in children
under 5 years of age, and
address the nutritional needs of
adolescent girls, pregnant and
lactating women and older
persons

(3) (2.2.1) Percentage of
Children who are stunted
(Height-for-Age), NFHS-4

38.4

(4) (2.2.2) Percentage of
children who are wasted
(Weight-for-Height (below -
2850) %, NFHS-4

21.0

(5) (2.2.3) Percentage of
women(age 15-49) whose
body mass index (BMI) is
below normal (<18.5 kg/m2),
NFHS-4

22.9

(6) (2.2.4) Percentage of
pregnant women age 15-49
years who are anaemic
<11.0 g/dl) NFHS-4

50.4

(7) (2.2.5) Percentage of
children age 6-59 months
who are anaemic (<11.0 g/d),
NFHS-4

58.5

(Goal 3) 3.1 : By 2030, reduce
the global maternal mortality
ratio to less than 70 per 100,000
live births

(8) (3.1.2) Percentage of
births attended by skilled
health personnel (5 years
preceding the survey),
NFHS-4

81.4

(9) (3.1.3) Percentage of
births attended 0५ skilled
health personnel (last one

ear,

Not available

(10) (3.1.4) Percentage of
women aged 15-49 years
with a live birth, for last birth,
who received antenatal care,
four times or more (5 years),
NFHS-4

51.2



53

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF | india

(Goal 3) 3.2 : By 2030, end| (11) (3.2.3) Percentage of 62.0

preventable deaths of newborns | children aged 12-23 months

and children under 5 years of | fully immunized (BCG,

age, with all countries aiming to | Measles and three doses of

reduce neonatal mortality to at | Pentavalent vaccine), NFHS-

least as low as 12 per 1,000 live | 4

births and under-5 mortality to at

least as low as 25 per 1,000 live

births

(Goal 3) 3.3 : By 2030, end the | (12) (3.3.1) Number of new 0.08 in 2015

epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, | HIV infections per 1,000 0.07 in 2017

malaria and neglected tropical | uninfected population

diseases and combat hepatitis, | (Incidence Rate) (NACO)

water- borne diseases and other| (13) (3.3.2) Tuberculosis 2015 = 217

communicable diseases incidence per 100,000 2017 = 204
population (NTEP
(14) (3.3.3) Malaria incidence 2015 = 0.92
per 1,000 population 2016 = 0.85
(NVBDCP) 2017 = 0.64

2018 = 0.32
2019 = 0.18 (P)

(15) (3.3.4) Viral Hepatitis Not available
(including A & B) incidence
per 100,000 population
(16) (3.3.5) Dengue Cases 2015 = 99913

(NVBDCP)

2016 = 129166

2017 = 188401

2018 = 101192
2019 = 91457 (P)

(16.a) (3.3.5) Dengue: Case 2015 = 0.2%
Fatality Ratio (CFR) 2016 = 0.2%
(NVBDCP) 2017 = 0.2%
2018 = 0.2%
2019 = 0.1% (P)
(17) (3.3.6) Number — of 2015 = 27553
Chikungunia cases 2016 = 64057
(NVBDCP) 2017 = 67769
2018 = 57813

2019 = 54033 (P)



54

44 INDICATORS assigned to M/o H&FW

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF | India|
(18) (3.3.7) Number of new 2015 = 8500
cases of Kalaazar/V 2016 = 6249
Lieshmaniasis (NVBDCP) 2017 =5758
2018 = 4380
2019 = 2539(P)
(19) (3.3.8) Number of new 2016 =16746
cases of Lymphatic Filariasis 2017 = 6979
(LF) (NVBDCP) 2018 = 26324

(20) (3.3.9) The proportion
of grade-2 cases amongst
new cases of Leprosy
detected (NLEP)per 10 lakh
population

4.6 in 2015-16
3.74 as on 31.5.201i

(21) (3.3.10) : HIV Adult
Prevalence Rate (NACO)

0.23 in 2015
0.22 in 2017

(Goal 3) 3.4 : By 2030, reduce
by one third premature mortality
from non-communicable
diseases through prevention
and treatment and promote
mental health and well-being

(22) (3.4.1): Number of
deaths due to cancer

NA

(Goal 3) 3.5 : Strengthen the
prevention and treatment of
substance abuse, _ including
narcotic drug abuse and harmful
use of alcohol

(23) (3.5.1) : Percentage of
adults (15+ years) who have
had at least 60 mililitre or
more of pure alcohol on at
least one occasion weekly
(approximately) equivalent to
standard alcoholic drinks

NA

Percentage of Women age
15-49 who drink alcohol
about once a week out of
total (figures given against
indicator 3.5.3) who drink

35.0

Percentage of men age 15-
49 /15-54 who drink alcohol
about once a week out of
total (figures given against

Men 15-49 = 40.7
Men 15-54 = 40.6



55

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

| __iindia

indicator 3.5.3) who drink
alcohol (NFHS-4)

(24) (3.5.3) Percentage of
population men 15-54 and
women 15-49 years who
consume alcohol

(24) (3.5.3)
Percentage of men (15-54)

29.5

who drink alcohol, NFHS-4
(24) (3.5.3) Bis eiCAatOr :
Percentage of men (15-49)
who drink alcohol, NFHS-4

29.2

(24) (3.5.3) Indicator
Percentage of women (15-
49) who drink alcohol,
NFHS-4

1.2

(Goal 3) 3.7 : By 2030, ensure
universal access to sexual and
reproductive health-care
services, including for family
planning, information — and
education, and the integration of
reproductive health into national
Strategies and programmes

(25) (3.7.1) Percentage of
currently married women (15-
49) who use any modern
family planning methods,
NFHS-4

47.7

(26) (3.7.2) Percentage of
women aged 15-19 years
who were already mothers or
pregnant, NFHS-4

7.9

(27) (3.7.3) Percentage of
institutional births (5 years),
NFHS-4

78.9

(Goal 3) 3.8 : Achieve universal
health coverage, __ including
financial risk protection, access
to quality essential health-care
services and access to safe,
effective, quality and affordable
essential medicines and
vaccines for all

(28) (3.8.1) Percentage of
currently married women (15-
49 years) who use any
modern family __ planning
methods, NFHS-4

47.7

(29) (3.8.2) Percentage of

TB cases successfully

treated (cured plus treatment

completed) among TB cases

notified to the national health

authorities during a specified
eriod (NTEP

2015 = 67%
2017 = 65.25%

(30) (3.8.3) Percentage of

2015-16 62%



56

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

किक पर

people living with HIV

2017-18 70%

currently receiving ART
among the detected number
of adults and children living
with HIV (NACO)

2018-19 82%

(31) (3.8.4) Percentage of
population in age group 15-
49 years who are currently
taking antihypertensive
medication among age group
15-49 with systolic blood
pressure > 140 mmHg, or
with diastolic blood pressure
90 mmH

NA

ieee 3.8.4
Prevalence o

hypertension- Women (15-
49), NFHS-4

imate 3.8.4) ५
- Prevalence of

hypertension - MEN (15-49
years), NFHS-4

14.8

(32) (3.8.5) Percentage of
population in age group 15-
49 years who are currently
taking medication for
diabetes (insulin or gycaemic
control pills) among number
of adult 15-49 years who are
having random blood sugar
level - high (>140 mg/dl

NA

(32) (3.8.5)
Percentage of women (15-
49) who reported that they
have diabetes , NFHS-4

17

(32) (3.8.5) Pre f
Percentage of men (15-49)
who reported that they have
diabetes, NFHS-4

1.7

Percentage of women (15-
49) who reported sought
treatment (out of total who

81.3



57

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

[| india

reported they have diabetes),
NFHS-4

Percentage of men (15-49)
who reported sought
treatment (out of total who
reported they have diabetes),
NFHS-4

72.5

(33) (3.8.6) Proportion of
women aged 30-49 years
who report they were
screened for cervical cancer
and the proportion of women
aged 30-49 years who report
they were screened for
cervical cancer during the

NA

Percentage of women age
15-49 who have ever
undergone Cervix
examinations, NFHS-4

22.3

(34) (3.8.7) Prevalence of
current tobacco uses among
men and women aged 15-49
years

NA

(34b) (3.8.7) Modified by
MoSPI : Percentage of men
(15-49) who use any kind of
tobacco, NFHS-4

44.5

eee 3.8.7)

: Percentage of
Women (15-49) who use any
kind of tobacco, NFHS-4

oe

(35) (3.8.8) Total Physician,
nurses and midwives per
10000 population (CBHI)

2015 = 35.8
2016 = 36.4



58

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

| __india |

(Goal 3)3.9 By 2030,
substantially reduce the number
of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air,
water and soil pollution and
contamination

(36) (3.9.2) Proportion of
men and women reporting
Asthma 15-49 years :

NA

(36) (3.9.2) Percentage of
women (15-49) reporting
Asthma, NFHS-4

1.9

(36) (3.9.2) Percentage of
men (15-49) reporting
Asthma, NFHS-4

1.2

(Goal 3) 3.a : Strengthen the
implementation of the World
Health Organization Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control
in all countries, as appropriate

(37) (3.a.1) Prevalence of
current tobacco uses among
men and women aged 15-49
ears

NA

aaa (3.a.1) j

: Percentage of men
(15-49) who use any kind of
tobacco, NFHS-4

44.5

Saree (3.a.1)
of

Percentage
women (15-49) who use any
kind of tobacco , NFHS-4

|. |

(Goal 3) 3.b Support the
research and development of
vaccines and
medicines for the communicable
and non-communicable
diseases that primarily affect
developing countries, provide
access to affordable essential
medicines and vaccines, in
accordance with the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health,
which affirms the right of
developing countries to use to
the full the provisions in the
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights regarding flexibilities to
protect public health, and, in
particular, provide access to
medicines for all

(38) (3.6.1): Total net official
development assistance to
medical research and basic
गा sectors (DHR

allocation for
of Health

Budgetary
Department
Research.

2015-16 = 1018.17
Crores
2017-18 = Rs.1800
crores



59

44 INDICATORS assigned to M/o H&FW

SDG Targets

Indicators under NIF

| __india |

(Goal 3) ३.6 : Substantially
increase health financing and
the recruitment, development,
training and retention of the
health workforce in developing
countries, especially in least
developed countries and small
island developing States

(39) (3.¢.1) Total Physician,
nurses and midwives per
10000 population (CBHI!)

2015 = 35.8
2016 = 36.4

(Goal 5) 5.2 : Eliminate all forms
of violence against all women
and girls in the public and
private spheres, _ including
trafficking and sexual and other
types of exploitation

(40) (5.2.6) Percentage of
currently partnered girl and
women aged 15-49 who
have experienced physical or
sexual violence

NA

Percentage of ever married
women age 15-49 who have
experienced Physical or
sexual violence committed by
their husband, NFHS-4

30.9

(Goal 5)5.3 : Eliminate all
harmful practices, such as child,
early and forced marriage and
female genital mutilation

(41) (5.3.2) Percentage of
women aged 20-24 years
who were married below age
18 years

Gael 5.3.2) |
: Percentage of

women aged 20-24 years
who were married by exact
age 18, NFHS-4

26.8

(Goal 5) 5.6 : Ensure universal
access to sexual and
reproductive health and
reproductive rights as agreed in
accordance with the Programme
of Action of the International
Conference on Population and
Development and the Beijing
Platform for Action and the
outcome documents of their
review conferences

(42) (5.6.1) Percent
distribution of — currently
married women age 15-49 by
contraceptive method
currently used- any modern
method (NFHS-4

47.7

(43) (5.6.2) Percentage of
currently married women age
15-49 with unmet need for
family planning (NFHS-4)

12.9

(44) (5.6.3) Proportion of
population aged 15-24 years
with correct knowledge of

NA



60

44 INDICATORS assigned to Mio H&FW

SDG Targets Indicators under NIF | india

HIV/AIDS

(44) (5.6.3) Percentage of 21.7
Women aged 15-24 who
have comprehensive
knowledge about HIV/AIDS,
NFHS-4

(44) (5.6.3) Percentage of 31.5
Men aged 15-24 who have
comprehensive knowledge
about HIV/AIDS, NFHS-4

g) Framework and Data for Monitoring at State Level

103. State wise observations on formulation of monitoring framework and data
identification with respect to Goal 3 are given in Table 5.7:

Monitoring of Goal 3 in selected States

Chhattisgarh | No separate framework was designed for monitoring and evaluation of
data collection, transmission and coordination.

Kerala Health and Family Department stated that it had initiated action
regarding mainstreaming of the 2030 Agenda by identification of
agencies for development of indicators, production of disaggregated
data, collection, monitoring, follow-up, reporting and reviewing the
progress achieved in implementation of SDGs.

Maharashtra | Data sources for 13 global health indicators were not available with the
State Government.

Uttar Pradesh | MH&FW neither took any action for identification of agencies- for
indicators development, data collection, and production of
disaggregated data and for reviewing the progress of SDGs nor
assessed gaps in the existing monitoring mechanism for corrective
actions.



61

West Bengal | Department of Planning, Statistics and Programme Monitoring set 80

Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for measuring health targets.
However, in respect of 25 KPls, data source was not mentioned. In
respect of four KPls, baseline data were outdated and the data
availability /data source/methodology was yet to be devised by the
H&FW department.

In response to the abovesaid Audit observations, Ministry of Health & Family

Welfare submitted as follows:

"As Public Health and Hospitals being the State subject, there are focussed efforts
at the State level and the achievement of MDGs by India show the sufficient and
concerted efforts of Centre and States. Similar and more focussed efforts by both
Centre and States are being streamlined towards achievement of SDG targets as
well.

In the National Indicator Framework (NIF), for 42 out of 44 health indicators
assigned to M/o H&FW, the metadata and data are available at National and State
level.

न Moreover, individual States are now preparing State Indicator Framework
(SIF) in sync with the NIF to monitor & assess the progress w.r.t. SDGs at
Sub-State level.

. Half of the States have already finalized their State Indicator Framework
(SIF) and monitoring the progress at Sub-State level. This is being done in
close coordination with all the Central Ministries concerned including M/o
H&FW.

As far as M/o H&FW is concerned, for about 21 indicators, district-wise
information is available from NFHS data. Also, in NFHS-5 (presently the fieldwork
of which is in progress), data items have been modified to make them co-terminus
with the SDG indicators in NIF and GIF. The scope of the survey has also been
expanded by considering target population groups to align with SDGs, for e.g.
expanded age range will be considered for collecting information on the incidence
and risk factors of non-communicable diseases viz; diabetes, hypertension etc.

It may be seen from the above that substantial efforts are being made for putting
in place a comprehensive indicator framework, identification of data sources, and
production of disaggregated data for SDG Goal 3."

ऋडऋऋऋऋऋऊ


62

PART II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

India’s Commitment to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

4. The 70" Session of the UN General Assembly held on 25" September, 2015
adopted the document titled "Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development" comprising 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and 169 associated targets. The SDGs seek to address not only the root causes of
poverty but also the universal need for development to provide a life of dignity to
all and are the most comprehensive list of global goals integrating the Social,
economic and environmental dimensions of development both for present and
future generations. It also endeavours to create conditions for inclusive and
sustained economic growth, shared prosperity and decent work for all. It
envisages achievement of 21 Targets by 2020, three targets by 2025 and remaining
Targets by 2030. Countries have the primary responsibility for follow-up and
review, at the national, sub-national and lower levels with regard to the progress
made in implementing the goals and targets over the next 15 years. Though not
legally binding, the SDGs have become defacto international obligations and will
re-orient domestic spending priorities during the next fifteen years.
Implementation of SDGs and their success will rely on countries own sustainable

development policies, plans and programmes.

In this Assembly, Government of India affirmed its commitment to the 2030
Agenda and SDGs. In regard to implementation of 2030 Agenda in India,
Government of India entrusted (September 2015) National Institution for

Transforming India (NITI Aayog) with the responsibility of coordinating and


63

overseeing the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. NITI Aayog was specifically
given the task of identifying national targets and assigning them to
Ministries/Departments concerned for implementation of SDGs in India. In
addition, it has been tasked (May 2016) to formulate, a longer vision of 15 years
keeping in view the social goals and SDGs, a Seven Year Strategy document as
part of "National Development Agenda" and a Three Year Action Agenda for goals
to be achieved. NITI Aayog involved the States and UTs Government in the
preparedness exercise by associating them with the formulation of the Vision and
Strategy documents and advising them to undertake mapping of Goals and
Targets with various departments, while building their institutional capacities for
implementing, monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs. Further, Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPl) is responsible for the
development of the National Indicator Framework (NIF) for measuring the progress
of the SDGs and associated targets. MoSPI is also making efforts to ensure that
State Governments and UTs have guidance and capacities to monitor the SDGs at
the State and Lower levels. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare was given the
responsibility of Goal-3 of SDGs i.e. "Good Health and Well being" which is

intended to ensure healthy living and promote well-being of people of all ages.

The Committee's examination of the subject is based on the Audit review of
the preparedness of the Government for the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goals. Audit selected seven States (Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) on the basis of ranking (both
high and low) of Health indices for 2015-16. The purpose of the review, as stated,
is to ascertain the extent to which the Government adapted the 2030 Agenda into

its national context, extent to which the Government identified and secured


64

resources and capacities. needed to implement the 2030 Agenda, to assess the
robustness and accuracy of procedures put in place to track the allocation of
resources against targets within the SDGs and the extent to which the
Government established a mechanism to monitor, follow-up review and report on
the progress towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Examination of the
subject by the Committee in detail has revealed that there have been certain
deficiencies in the preparedness for implementation of SDGs. The Committee have
dealt with the various aspects of the preparedness for the implementation of

Sustainable Development Goals in the subsequent Paragraphs.

Efforts towards mainstreaming activities pertaining to SDGs

2. The Committee note that NITI Aayog has undertaken several multi-
disciplinary stakeholder consultations and conducted periodic reviews with States
and UTs for mainstreaming activities such as preparation of vision/strategy
documents; creation of nodal structures; mapping of targets; capacity building for
implementing, monitoring and evaluation; formulation of State-specific indicators
and orienting budgets with SDGs. However, a preparation of a roadmap with
defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be achieved was not initiated till
the time of presentation of the Audit Report. Apprising the reasons for not
initiating measures towards drawing up the roadmap initially, NITI Aayog stated
that as these targets have already been specified in the 2030 Agenda which was
endorsed by India along with other countries, it was felt that identification of
separate milestones may not be necessary. Further to this, NITI Aayog informed
that they have been working closely with all the States to create their SDG

roadmaps to achieve the milestones as per the SDG targets and most of the States


65

have already developed their SDG roadmaps. The Committee, in this regard, note
that milestones for the SDGs have been a part of the 2030 Agenda. For achieving
these milestones, comprehensive and co-ordinated efforts of all stakeholders is a
necessity. What the Committee find to be surprising to note is that the nodal
institution, NITI Aayog pursued the matter with the States for developing the
roadmaps only after the issue was pointed out by Audit. The Committee, in this
regard, express the view that the apparently inappropriate attitude displayed at the
initial stage towards a commitment made by India in the United Nations may have
a bearing on the good standing the country has in the pursuit of SDGs. The
Committee, therefore, exhort NITI Aayog to take suitable measures to compensate
for the delayed action. Also, it may be preferrable to clearly specify NIT] Aayog’s
role in implementation of SDGs in the Allocation of Business. The Committee
would also like to have details of the current status of development of roadmaps
by all the States/UTs and remedial measures taken against the defaulting

States/UTs.

Meetings of the Multi-Disciplinary Task Force

3. The Committee find that apart from directly reviewing the work on SDGs in
the State and Central Ministries, NIT| Aayog had constituted in August 2017 a
multi-disciplinary Task Force to analyse and review implementation of SDGs.
Though the Task Force was required to meet at least once in each quarter, the
Committee find that it has held only two meetings since its constitution. It has
been merely informed to the Committee that the last meeting of the Task Force
was held during the preparation of VNR Report 2020 and no explanation has been

given for not holding the meetings at quarterly intervals. The Committee, while


66

expecting a suitable explanation in this regard also impress upon NITI Aayog on
the need for arranging meetings at quarterly intervals so that the suggestions/
feedback may become available more frequently, and consequently boost the
monitoring process. The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the

sitting(s) of the Task Force.

Designation of Nodal Ministries for SDGs

4. The Committee find that in the revised mapping document issued by the
NITI Aayog in August, 2018, the aspect of designating a specific Ministry as being
the nodal Ministry for specific SDGs has been done away with. The Committee are
of the view in this regard that this may lead to lack of proper accountability, and

monitoring by NITI Aayog only may not help in achieving the desired results.

Preparation of “15 Year Vision Document”

5. The Committee are concerned to note that the "15 Year Vision Document"
which is to serve as the basis for the Strategy and Action Agenda document is yet
to be released although five years have passed. The Committee are appreciative of
the intention of NITI Aayog to make the Vision Document broad based and
integrally focused on States expectations and priorities owing to which
importance has been given to obtain inputs from the Ministries and the States. As
informed, NITI Aayog is in the process of reviewing and finalizing the draft
document and has assigned the work to a multi-disciplinary team. While the Vision
Document was expected to be finalized by March, 2020, the process of preparation
of the Document is said to have been severely affected due to COVID-19
pandemic. What the Committee find to be intriguing in this regard is that it was

only after the Audit pointed out this issue, that NIT! Aayog took the initiative of


67

assigning the work to a multi disciplinary team. The reply of NITI Aayog is also
silent on the date on which the multi-disciplinary team was constituted and by
when the Vision Document is now likely to be finalised. The Committee would

await conclusive details in this regard.

Preparation for achieving the SDG Goals

6. So far as the preparation for achieving the goals at the State level is
concerned, the Committee feel perturbed to note that the work on
Vision/Strategy/Action Agenda documents in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were
at preparatory stage. Kerala had prepared a Perspective Plan, 2030 in the year
2014 but the Plan has not been reviewed and realigned with SDGs. Chhattisgarh
had published its Vision 2030 document in March 2019. The Committee also regret
to observe that the mapping exercise undertaken in the selected States was not
comprehensive. For instance, certain Schemes/Goals/Targets have reportedly not
been mapped at all in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttar
Pradesh. The Committee have been informed that NITI Aayog has advised the
States to do their own mapping in the light of the mapping done at the Central
level. NIT] Aayog has also been persuading the States and UTs from time to time
to accelerate this process. The Committee are constrained to observe that NITI
Aayog has not explained the reasons for slow progress at the State level and the
obstacles the States may have been facing in adopting/implementing the SDGs.
The Committee are appreciative of the stance towards localizing the SDGs.
However, as the monitoring agency, NIT] Aayog needs to identify and recognize
the difficulties faced by different States, assist in addressing them and apprise the

Committee of the same. The Committee also desire that NIT] Aayog pursue the


68

matter with the defaulting States for expeditious completion of the required
documents and put in place an effective co-ordinating/monitoring mechanism in

order to fast track the achievement of the SDGs and related targets.

Public Awareness Programmes

7 The Committee note that as per the United Nations Development Group
(UNDG) Reference Guide titled ‘Mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda’, raising
awareness is one of the key means to achieve the SDGs. This includes Planning,
issuing instructions and action for awareness and IEC (Information, Education and
Communication) activities for Government Officials and others viz. civil society,
general public, institutions etc. The Committee have noticed in this regard that the
awareness programmes on SDGs have not been extended to educational
institutions, students and youth organisations. The Committee are of opinion that
there is a need to share the commitments for the future with the younger
generation. The Committee would, therefore, expect to be apprised of the

measures taken in this direction.
Consultations with Stakeholders

8. The Committee also note that building awareness of the SDGs and adoption
of a participatory multi-stakeholder approach is aimed at ensuring inclusive,
effective and sustainable implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Committee are,
however, concerned to note that (i) there have been delays in finalising outcome of
these consultations and placing the reports in public domain; (ii) in case of most
consultations, definite outcomes and recommendations for time-bound follow up
action were not identified owing to which there was limited assurance that the

deliberations enabled in shaping the roadmap/policies for SDGs; (iii) according to


69

its website, SRI workshops on SDG related issues have not been held post March
2017; (iv) extent and effectiveness of efforts made by stakeholders to increase
public awareness is not ascertainable in the absence of feedback; (v) no
centralised public awareness campaign has been envisaged; (vi) absence of
dedicated awareness measures for general public may dilute the objective of
making the 2030 Agenda inclusive and participatory; and (vii) five out of the 15
Ministries where this aspect was reviewed were yet to initiate/report any capacity
building exercise. The Committee are also constrained to observe that efforts to
raise public awareness about SDGs and initiatives undertaken in the seven
selected States have not been comprehensive, focussed and sustained. On this
aspect too, NIT] Aayog has averred that the onus of implementing schemes and
programmes to achieve SDGs rests with the States and the relevant administrative
Ministries. The Committee, in this regard, also express the view that awareness
and communication campaigns would be more effective if they are tailored to the
context, language, values and resources accessible to the local stakeholders and
audiences. To this end, NITI Aayog is reportedly taking measures towards
motivating the States/UTs and other stakeholders to take up specific and targeted
awareness initiatives. Also, public awareness programmes that are being
undertaken being of a subdued nature, do not seem to be very effective in terms of
outreach. The Committee desire that NIT] Aayog should have an interactive web
page to reach out to the States and the general public. The Committee, in this
regard, would also like to know whether fresh series of stakeholder consultations
have been conducted. The Committee would await the details of the outcome of

these consultations.


70

Participation of the private sector and NGOs

9. The Committee have also looked into the possible role, the private sector
and NGOs could play in achieving the SDGs. The means by way of which
Businesses source, invest, employ and spend, have a significant influence on
sustainable development. The comprehensive framework of the SDGs necessitate
that the growing strength of the private sector in terms of finance, technology,
skills, innovation and outreach is appropriately harnessed so as to ensure that the
SDG implementation efforts are fructified. The Committee note in this regard that
in the view of NITI Aayog, the Private sector can become a key factor in
implementing SDGs and enabling sustained economic growth, social inclusion
and environmental protection. Thus, it would be imperative to enable the private
sector to go beyond its core business activities and start helping in technology
transfer, capacity development, creation of public goods for the poor and efficient
implementation of policies and programmes to achieve the SDG targets. Similarly,
the Committee have also enquired about the role of NGOs and noted that the
NGOs involved in charity work/not-for-profit organisations are also an important
partner in implementation of SDGs. They have all along been part of the
sensitization and awareness development work of NITI Aayog. NITI Aayog have
informed the Committee that NGOs have also supported them in their own
awareness and capacity development work on the SDGs at the grassroots and
other levels. Those working with disadvantaged communities directly or indirectly
are contributing to the work of social inclusion so that ‘no one is left behind’. NITI
Aayog partnered with a number of such organisations and their networks in 2019-
20 to hold nation-wide consultations on all SDGs with various vulnerable social

groups such as, children, women, farmers, people from Scheduled Castes and


71

Scheduled Tribes, migrant labour, elderly, people with disabilities, people with
HIV, etc. The outcome of the consultations have been incorporated in the VNR
Report. The Committee desire that NITI Aayog frame detailed guidelines for the
Private Sector to enable the sector to channel their resources and activities
towards achievement of SDGs. Businesses need to be invited to apply their
creativity and innovation towards solving sustainable development challenges and
engaged as partners in the development process. The Committee further desire
that NGOs and similar Organisations involved in charity work are apprised of
SDGs through various means and they may be encouraged to participate in the
awareness programme on SDGs. The Committee would await details of the action

taken in this regard.
Mobilization of Resources for Implementation of SDG Agenda

10. The Committee further observe that the 2030 Agenda lays stress on
identifying and securing all means, including the financial resources required for
implementation of the Agenda. The Voluntary National Review Report and the
Three Year Action Agenda have highlighted several steps taken by the
Government for optimizing domestic resource mobilisation. However, no
comprehensive exercise for assessing and identifying the financial resources
required for implementing SDGs has been undertaken either by the Ministry of
Finance at the Centre or by the selected States. No steps have been initiated at the
Central level for integrating SDGs in national budgeting and most of the selected
States were only at the preliminary stage of orienting their budget with SDGs even
after 5 years following the General Assembly Resolution. According to NITI Aayog,
under the Central Sector Schemes, the relevant line Ministry/Department hold

discussions/consultations with the State Governments in order to achieve the


72

national goals which also involves discussions on the financial requirements for
the same. The Ministries/Departments, based on the sharing pattern make
projections of financial requirements to the Ministry of Finance which appraise
and approve the desired financial assistance. The Committee find that NITI Aayog
has not been able to apprise the Committee of the steps taken towards integration
of SDG related financial resources in national budgeting. It was only after the
Committee took up the subject for examination, that NITI Aayog took the initiative
of conducting a study by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for estimating the financial
resources needed to achieve the SDGs in the areas of education, health,
electricity, roads and water and sanitation. The study Report is currently stated to
be under finalization. The Committee trust that the study would be completed
expeditiously. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of the
study and follow up action taken thereon by the NITI Aayog and Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs). The Committee are of the view in this
regard even in the likelihood of harmonizing the SDGs with the Central Sector
Schemes, the benefit towards achieving SDGs should be clearly delineated so that

India can showcase the country’s achievement.

National Indicator Framework (NIF)

11. The Committee note that for enabling monitoring and review, the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has been entrusted with the
task of developing a National Indicator Framework (NIF) which was published only
in November 2018. As a result, tasks that are a key to the institution of a proper

monitoring and reporting framework such as preparation of baseline data were


73

completed only in March 2019. Milestones have not been aligned with the timelines
for achieving the targets. In the seven selected States, action on developing
indicators and identification of data sources has not achieved required level of
progress. The Committee have been apprised in this regard that the NIF, with 306
indicators was devised by MoSPI in consultation with all stakeholders. Further,
data in respect of 250 indicators is currently said to be available and for collecting
the data for rest of the indicators, new surveys have reportedly been initiated.
Some such surveys include the periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS), Time Use
Survey (TUS), Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) on Agricultural Households
Conditions etc. The Committee, while appreciating the steps initiated by MoSPI, in
this regard would like to know as to when these surveys were initiated and the
time frame by which the surveys would be completed. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the results of these surveys and desire that data in respect
of the remaining milestones be compiled and made available expeditiously. The
Committee also note the fact that some of the indicators which are a part of the
General Assembly resolution are treated as new in the Indian context for which, as
informed by the Secretary, MoSPI, milestones have not been delineated as of now,
and would be worked out in course of time. The Committee feel that non-
identification of milestones may affect the preparations of an _ effective
roadmap/policy for achieving the related targets. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that MoSPI should initiate effective steps expeditiously so as to
identify the milestones for all the indicators and commence working on these

indicators in right earnest.


74

Goal 3 - Good Health and Well Being

12. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is
responsible for Goal-3 of SDGs i.e. "Good health and well being" which is intended
to ensure healthy living and promote well-being of people of all ages. To monitor
SDG-3, a list of 73 Health related indicators have been identified by MoSPI and
communicated in the Health Indicator Framework (HIF). These include, ‘mortality’
as also other indicators which have an impact on health. As per the National
Indicator Framework (NIF) prepared by MoSPI, the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare is to serve as the data source agency for 44 indicators (which is a subset
of above mentioned 73 HIF indicators). Further, as for the remaining indicators
which have an impact on health, the major data sources are the office of Registrar
General of India (ORGI), Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation under
Ministry of Jal Shakti, National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB), Ministry of

Environment, Forests and Climate change etc.

The Committee note that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are
optimistic of the country achieving the following targets as per the timelines
indicated :

° MMR, released by the SRS (ORGI), has declined to 122 per 1 lakh live births
during 2015-17 from 130 during 2014-16. If India continues to maintain the
present percent change (-6.2%) annually, the country is expected to achieve
the MMR target of 70 by the year 2025.

° U5MR has declined from 39 per 1000 live births in 2016 to 37 per 1000 live
births in 2017 (as per SRS report). India is expected to achieve SDG target

well before by the year 2020-21 if the past trend is continued.


75

० NNMR has declined to 23 per 1000 live births as per SRS, 2017. India is
expected to achieve the SDG targets of 12 by the year 2025 if the past trend
is continued.

The Committee trust that the goals would be within reach despite the
challenges posed by the ongoing pandemic, for tackling which a significant
amount of resources are being utilized. The Committee would like to know the
present status of achievement of the said targets and steps taken to achieve the
same within the stipulated time.

Consultative Process - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

13. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
organized consultations on transitioning from MDGs to SDGs and also held a
State Level Conference on Goal 3. However, three Ministries/Departments, namely
AYUSH, Tribal Affairs and Home Affairs that are associated with Goal 3 of the
SDGs have not been involved in such consultations; and it was only after the
matter was pointed out by the Audit as well as the Committee that the
representatives of these Ministries were included in the National Task Force. The
Committee also note with dismay that specific and sustained measures for
promoting awareness and stakeholder involvement in regard to Goal-3 have not
been seen in the States. The Committee have been informed in this regard that
besides regular meetings that are held with related Ministries as also the National
Task Force and Working Groups, Joint video conferences with the related
Ministries are used as a means for enhancing stakeholder engagement and raising
awareness. Expanding the scope of public awareness from boardrooms to the
ground level SDGs may not be easy to achieve. The Committee, therefore, desire

that besides the meetings of Ministries concerned and the Task Force, Members of


76

Parliament, MLAs, Chairman, Zila Panchayat, District Health officer, Officers at the
Block level etc. may also be associated with the task of raising awareness and

thereby enable in effective participation in achievement of SDGs.

Monitoring by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare

14. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare specifically
aligned different interventions/initiativesischemes and targets with Goal 3 in the
2017-2020 phase of NHM. It was, however, noted that mapping in respect of Goal 3
was not comprehensive in the selected States, and several State sponsored Health
Schemes were also not mapped with Goal 3. The Committee, in this regard, are of
the view that cases of gaps could have been filled if proper Audit of all the
States/UTs had been done. As informed to the Committee, mapping in the States
has been reinforced as a result of the meeting of the Working Group on the roll out
of SDG-3 in States/UTs that was held on 28 January, 2020. Mapping in respect of
Goal 3 will be facilitated by way of ensuring regular support and monitoring and
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is proactively working with all States for
helping them to complete the exercise of mapping. As per the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare, States are constitutionally mandated to deliver on most of the
socio-economic sectors that constitute the SDGs. Yet, the Committee are of the
view that primarily on account of the fact that the Country is committed to
achieving certain specific goals, the aspect of monitoring and providing support to
the States would ideally rest with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and other
relevant Ministries concerned. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should develop an effective mechanism for

monitoring the various programmes/schemes at the Block, District and State level


77

so as to enable in achieving the target of mapping by all the States. The
Committee would also emphasise on continuing with persuading and
understanding the problems faced by the States and the implementing agencies at

the ground level so that the goals envisaged can be achieved.

Integration of Policy Framework

15. From the information furnished, the Committee note that the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare has initiated several measures that are supportive of
achieving horizontal and vertical policy coherence. However, coherent policy
initiatives have either been absent or inadequate in the States. As per the
submission of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, however, there is
adequate policy coherence between the Centre and the State Governments. The
Committee find this contention of the Ministry to be untenable, as in all the seven
States, the Centre and the States have not been playing their respective roles
effectively in a collaborative manner for achieving the intended outcomes. The
Committee also feel anguished to note that with regard to the aspect of vertical
coherence, a working group set up by the M/o H&FW for implementing Goal 3 in
the States and UTs has not held any meeting. It was only after the issue was
pointed out by the Committee in their sitting on 23 January, 2020, that the Working
Group of the National Task Force held a meeting on 28 January, 2020. It has also
been informed by the Ministry that the National Task Force reiterated the need for
conducting regular meetings of the working groups and that necessary
instructions have been communicated to all the officials concerned. The
Committee are of the view in this regard that mere issue of instructions would not

produce the desired results unless these are complied with both in letter and


78

spirit. The Committee therefore, recommend that the meetings of the Working
Groups be held at regular intervals so as to suggest ways and means to achieve
vertical as well as horizontal coherence on policy measures between the Centre
and the State Governments. The Committee would also desire to be apprised of
the sittings of working groups held so far, the steps suggested by them to

maintain policy coherence and the action taken by the Centre/States thereon.

Public Health Expenditure

16. The Committee note that NHM envisages to increase the Public Health
expenditure from around one percent (2015-16) to 2.5 percent of GDP (at current
price by 2025). As per the Audit observation, however, though Public Health
Expenditure as a percentage of GDP has been increasing since 2015-16, it has
remained within a narrow band of 1.02 to 1.28 per cent of GDP. The Committee
also find that the National Health Mission was being allocated comparatively less
funds during the years 2017-18 and 2018-19. Inadequate allocations may hinder
achieving the laudable targets set. Considering the need to achieve the SDGs in
health sector, the Committee recommend that there should not be any inadequacy
of funds that may hamper in reaching the target level of achievement of Goal-3.
Additionally, the Centre as well as the States should make proper assessment of
their financial requirements and availability of financial resources for the
implementation of Goal-3. Further, steps also need to be taken to integrate SDGs
into the accounting and budgeting framework both at the Centre and the States.
The Committee are also unhappy to note that though the NHP prescribed
increasing States health spending, records of seven selected States reveal that the
allocation for health care has been inadequate. Although several steps are stated

to have been taken to nudge the States to augment health spending, the


79

Committee are of the considered view that the expenditure on health must receive
earnest consideration and priority.

Adequacy of Public Health Care Facilities

17. The Committee are concerned to find that despite the prevalence of
Plans/Policies as well as increase in allocations for augmenting Physical and
human resources, significant shortages continue to persist in regard to the
physical resources in all seven States. As for human resources, there were
considerable shortages in the States of Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee, in this regard are not in agreement with the plea taken by the MoH&FW
that Public Health and Hospitals is a State subject and the primary responsibility
of strengthening the healthcare delivery systems lies with the respective States.
This argument does not absolve the Ministry from the responsibility of being the
nodal Ministry in the health sector, which can create the intended healthcare
facilities across the country. The Committee are of the considered view that the
primary responsibility for attaining Goal-3 in an efficacious manner within the
given timeframe lies with the MoHFW. Further, in regard to the large difference
between the PHCs required as per population norms and PHCs actually
functioning in the selected States, the Committee have been apprised that under
Ayushman Bharat Scheme, it is envisaged to transform 1.5 lakh Sub Health
Centres (SHCs), Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Urban Primary Health Centres
(UPHCs) into Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) by December, 2022. These
centres are proposed to be headed by a new cadre of Community Health Officers
(CHOs) who would be B.Sc. Nursing Graduates or Ayurvedic Practitioners trained
in six-month course in certificate programme for core competencies in Public

Health and Primary Health Care. The Committee in this regard feel that it would be


80

advisable to post at least one MBBS Doctor in these Wellness centres as para-
medical personnel cannot prescribe medicines to the patients. Effective utilisation
of the services of MBBS Doctors in the health care delivery system of India right
from Wellness Centres, can possibly make a big difference in achieving the SD
Goals. The Committee are also of the view that to prevent doctors from going
abroad, suitable facilities and encouragement may be given to them to serve the
people in the country. The Committee, therefore desire that with a view to
improving health services in remote areas, at least one Allopathic doctor along-
with paramedical staff should be posted in each Wellness Centre. The Committee
feel that there is also an imperative need to constantly monitor the functioning of
Wellness Centres at regular intervals besides ensuring regular attendance of
Doctors there so that the goal of providing affordable, effective and reliable health

care, especially for the poor in the rural areas is achieved.
Data on Health Parameters

18. The Committee observe that both at the Central and State levels, there is
evidence of insufficient efforts at putting in place a comprehensive indicator
framework, identification of data sources, and production of disaggregated data
for Goal 3 which are essential for creating a robust monitoring and reporting
framework. The Committee are also astonished to find that for some important
indicators such as Maternal Mortality Rate, Under-five Child Mortality Rate and
Neonatal Mortality Rate, data was not uniformly or regularly available. The
Committee are constrained to observe in this regard that the absence of relevant
data would obviously hamper the Ministry in monitoring such cases and

combating the same. The Committee, therefore recommend that the M/o H&FW


81

needs to collect and collate authentic data on various health parameters. The
database so compiled also needs to be digitalized and constantly updated so as to
enable in taking effective steps for addressing issues relating to mortality rates.
The Committee further find that in the National Indicator Framework (NIF) the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare was assigned the responsibility of maintaining
and supplying information on 44 NIF health related indicators. The Committee
have been apprised that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has provided SDG
baseline data in respect of 42 out of the assigned 44 Health indicators. For two
indicators i.e. viral Hepatitis (including A&B) and number of deaths due to cancer,
robust datasets were not available. Presently, however, Hepatitis has been
included in the National Family Health Surveys (NFHS), and the possibility of
having authentic data on deaths due to cancer is being explored. The Committee
note that substantial efforts are being made for putting in place a comprehensive
indicator framework, identification of data sources and production of
disaggregated data for SDG Goal 3. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the details of the indicators that have actually been mapped and those that remain

to be mapped following the validation by the C&AG establishment.

Addressing the shortcomings highlighted

19... For addressing the deficiencies in regard to Goal 3 of SDGs, as highlighted,
the Committee feel that the best practices for achieving the SDGs as followed by
various States should be studied in depth by the M/oH&FW and wherever feasible,
replicated in the States where deficiencies are noticed. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry should also conduct a study of the best healthcare

systems prevailing in other countries - both developed and developing, so that the


82

health schemes could be restructured accordingly to make the achievement of
Sustainable Development goals a grand success. In particular, the Ministry should
study the Cuba model, which is considered to be one of the best health care

system in the world.

Corrective steps for timely achievement of SDGs

20. The Committee have noticed several deficiencies/Shortcomings in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals in India. The facts stated in the foregoing
Paragraphs clearly identified certain shortfalls in each area, which require
immediate attention and remedial action. Both at the Central and State levels, the
exercise of formulating policy documents in the context of SDGs is still underway.
A roadmap with defined milestones aligned with UN spc Targets is yet to be
prepared. Greater efforts also appear to be necessary for localising and
publicising the SDGs to ensure inclusiveness. With respect to resource
mobilisation for achieving the SDG targets, a financial gap analysis has not yet
been undertaken. Further, integration of SDGs into the accounting and budgeting
framework remains to be done at the Centre and in most States. With respect to
Monitoring and Reporting, the delay in publication of the National Indicator
Framework (NIF) had held back several key tasks such as development of
indicators and monitoring frameworks in the States and identification of baseline
data and milestones. The Committee express serious concern over the facts
narrated above and desire that in the light of the Committee's suggestions, the
NIT 29४०५ and Ministries/Departments concerned — should take

adequate/corrective steps with a view to effectively achieving all the Sustainable


83

Development Goals within a prescribed time limit. The Committee also feel that

there is a need for scrutiny in other sectors as well.

thee

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
१७ March, 2021 Chairperson,

\9 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee