46

GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
POWER IN LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No. 2274
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

हि::::7777:7:/ AND DISTRIBUTION OF
POWER IN LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2022/ Phalguna, 1943 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE | (CIVIL) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE (2021-22)
INTRODUCTION
REPORT
PART-|
1. INTRODUCTORY

I Electrification of Lakshadweep Islands
I. Audit Findings.
IV. Inadequate Justification for Excess Capacity of DG sets.

V. Non-Commissioning of Bulk Oil Storage Facilities and Transit
Losses.

Vi. Discrepancies between Issue and Consumption of Diesel.
Vil. Diesel Consumption in Excess of Norms.

Vill. Avoidable Expenditure due to High Transmission and Distribution
Losses.

IX. Unfruitful Expenditure on Solar Photovoltaic Plants.
X. Energy Audit not Conducted Despite Requirement.
XI. Need to Explore Alternative Methods for Electrification.
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

APPENDICES

(iii)

(iv)
(vi)

2-4
4-8

9-10

10-13
14-15
15-18
18-19
19-20

21-32

1. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee-I (Civil) of Public 23-34

Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 01.09.2021.

Ih. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee-I (Civil) of Public 35- 36

Accounts Committee (2021 -22) held on 07.10.2021.

Uh. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) of Public 34-38

Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 08.02.2022.

IV. Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) held 39- eo

on 10.02.2022.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE COMMITTEE

(2021-22)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri T. R. Baalu

3 ‘Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

4. Shri Sudheer Gupta

5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

6 Shri Jagdambika Pal

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwarat
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi®

SECRETARIAT
1. ShriT. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Siba Sankar Pradhan ‘- Executive Officer

ee
* Blected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f, 07.07.2021.

1 Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

+ Blected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev CFandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
5 Blected w.e.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

7AM)


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I (CIVIL) OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

1. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor
3. Shri T. R. Baalu ~ Member
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta - Member
5. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi’ - Member
6. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale - Member
है Vv)
ee

* Elected w.e.f, 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2021-22), having been
authorised by the Committee, do Present on their behalf this Forty-Sixth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Generation and Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep
Islands” based on Para 2.13 of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2017 relating to the Ministry of Home
Affairs.

2. The C&AG Report No. 8 of 2017 was laid on the Table of the House on 24.03.2021.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) selected the aforesaid subject and
allocated the same to Sub-Committee-! (Civil) for examination and Report.

4. The Sub-Committee-I (Civil) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) took
briefing by Audit on 01.09.2021. Thereafter, Sub-Committee took the oral evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the aforementioned subject on
07.10.2021.

5. The Sub-Committee-I (Civil) of PAC first considered and adopted the draft Report
on the aforementioned subject at their sitting held on 08.02.2022. Then the draft Report
was placed before the Main Committee for consideration and adoption. The Committee
adopted the same at their sitting held on 10.02.2022. The Minutes of the sittings are
appended to the Report.

6. For facility of reference .and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-ll of the
Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Sub-Committee-| (Civil) in connection with the examination of the
subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__March, 2022 Chairperson,

Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vy)


-1-

PART -।
REPORT
Introductory
1. Lakshadweep, a Union Territory (UT) with an area of 32 square Kilometers

comprises thirty-six small islands (Ten inhabited islands, 17. uninhabited islands, four
newly formed islets and five submerged reefs) located in the Arabian Sea. These
islands are isolated from the Mainland as well as from each other. The islands lie about
220 to 440 Kilometers from the coastal city of Kochi, Kerala. The condition of the
Lakshadweep Islands is unique and different from any other part of the country. The
main constraints of the islands is the geographic isolation and access to the mainland.

Electrification of Lakshadweep Islands

2. Electrification of Lakshadweep Islands was initiated during the second Five Year
Plan. Round the clock Power Supply is provided in all the islands since 1983.
Lakshadweep Electricity Department (LED) is an integrated utility. As defined in
Regulation 2(9) of the JERC (Terms and conditions for determination, of. Tariff)
Regulations, 2009, LED is responsible for Generation, Transmission and Distribution of
electricity in the Union Territory. Owing to the distance from the mainland, Lakshadweep
is entirely dependent on its own generation for supply of power, mainly (95 per cent)
through Diesel Generator (DG) sets and partly through grid interactive Solar
Photovoltaic (SPV) power plants. Due to the geographical and topographical
peculiarities of these islands including separation by sea over significant distances,
there is no integrated power grid. Instead a power house at each location caters
independently to the power requirements of different islands. The total installed capacity
in 2015-16 was 24,010 KW (46 DG sets of 21,860 KW and 11 SPVs of 2,150 KW). The
installed capacity of the DG sets ranged between 60 KW and 1,600 KW. Kavaratti is the
headquarters of LED, and is headed by an Executive Engineer.

3. This Report is based on Para 2.13 of the Report number 8 of 2017 of the C&AG
of India on the subject “Generation and Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep Islands’.

4. The PAC (2021-22) selected the subject for detailed examination and'Report. For
this purpose a sub-committee was constituted to examine the issue in detail: The sub-
Committee obtained background materials and written replies from the Ministry of Home
Affairs. They had a briefing by the officers of the C&AG of India on the subject on 1*
September, 2021. The sub-Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Home Affairs on 7" October, 2021 on the said subject. Based on these
oral and written depositions by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the sub-Committee
examined the subject in detail.


-2-

Audit Findings
5. Audit had brought the following shortcomings in examination of this subject.

(i) Excess generation capacity (47% - 89%) in all islands.

(ii) Sharp decline in demand in some of the islands.

(iii) | Non-Commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities completed at Kavaratti
(December 2014) and Minicoy (March 2016) at a cost of = 7.37 crore and
₹ 10.48 crore respectively.

(iv) The absence of bulk storage facilities and transportation of diesel in
barrels from Beypore, Calicut due to non-availability of oil barge, resulted
in transit losses of % 2.65 crore.

(v) In contravention of the standards of DPR (0.28 to 0.30 litres of fuel per KW
hours, as per Detailed Project Report), LED has consumed fuel (0.31 to
0.38 litres of fuel per KW hours) to the tune of = 2.84 crore.

(vi) The DPR of 2004 recommended major thrust to reduce T&D losses from
10.8 per cent to 8 per cent by the end of the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-
2007). Failure to achieve this target led to a T&D loss of ® 10.38 crore in
respect of four islands alone.

(vii) Out of the 12 SPV Plants, four SPVs have not been working for more than
three years and two were under renovation.

(viii) In contravention of JERC Tariff Regulations, 2009, no energy audit
conducted by LED to substantiate its estimation of T&D losses, and
furnish six monthly reports to JERC.

(ix) ° Central Electricity Authority (CEA) had requested (June 2006) the Ministry
of Renewable Energy Sources to explore avenues for adoption of eco-
friendly and cheaper modes of generation in UTL.

6. The Committee have examined in-depth the aforesaid issues raised by the Audit
in their Report. The.same have been discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs:

1. Inadequate justification for excess capacity of DG sets excess capacity of DG sets

7. LED estimates demand through the Power Generation and Distribution
Management System (PGDMS) software developed by the National Informatics Centre
(NIC) of the Government of India.

8. It was observed by the Audit that all the islands had excess capacity, with
maximum ranging between 47 per cent (Kiltan) and 89 per cent (Bitra). It was also
observed that against normal expectation of increasing trend of demand, some islands
showed sharp reduction in some years. LED informed that the variations arose due to
varying climatic conditions at the site and parallel run of two DGs at the time of
changeover from one DG to another. LED also informed that the National Informatics
Centre (NIC) was in the process of modifying the software to record maximum demand


-3-

on the basis of consumption instead of generation as at present. Regarding the excess
capacity, LED explained that additional machines were required. to avoid blackout due
to power failure; also failure of DG sets was frequent due to climatic conditions, etc.,
and their repair is difficult due to non-availability of spares locally. Audit found that the
reply is not satisfactory. LED does not maintain centralised record of downtime of DG
sets due to repairs, etc., and these are available only with the sub-divisions. Further,
climatic conditions and requirements of changeover do not vary from year to year. It
would appear that LED’s decisions to procure and installation of DG sets on different
islands are independent of the downtime record of such sets and there is no system in
place to ensure that DG sets are installed based on actual requirement.

9. In response to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry of Home Affairs in
their written reply (dated 09-08-2017) to Audit stated as under:

« Audit observation did not take into account the unique geographical situation
of Lakshadweep compared to other State/UTs.

= The figures under Real Power (KW) is as per name plate details of the
engines.

« Department is never allowed to load the engine beyond the capacity noted in
the LOA (Letter of Award) issued by NTPC to supplier.

* Installed capacity of DG at Kavaratti& Minicoy is 1000 kW instead of 1600
kW. For Agatti & Kiltan 400kw, for Kalpeni, Chetlat and Kadmat 250kw each _
and for Androth and Amini 750 kw.

= Total installed capacity is 21,860 kW only and not 27,565 kW as noted ‘in
name plate. है

Additional machines were required to avoid blackouts due to power failure, न
As failure of DG sets were frequent due to climatic conditions and their repair —
is difficult due to non-availability of OEM services engineers and OEM spares
locally.

« Further, on being asked about the reasons for procuring DG-sets with
significantly higher capacities than the capacities mentioned in LoA, the
Ministry of Home Affairs in their written replies stated that the Procurement of
DG sets was based on approved norms/guidelines’ and procurement was
done through NTPC.

10. | While asking as to whether the excess capacity procurement was based on any
approved norms/guidelines, the Ministry replied as under: ,

“The augmentation of generating capacity is done on the basis of project report
approved by Central Electricity Authority (CEA) and sanction was also accorded


11.

12.

A
by the M/o Power vide letter No.39/4/2004-R&R dated 02.08.2005, available on
record.”
In this regard, the Ministry further submitted as follows:

“Some of the DG sets proposed could not be phased out due to administrative
reasons and it was not updated in Power Generation and_ Distribution
Management System (PGDMS).

Department was compelled to operate some of phased out DG sets in
unforeseen situations due to breakdown of DG sets, which resulted in excess
capacity in some of the islands.”

Apprising the Committee about the current position of the action taken to avoid

excess capacity of DG sets, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as follows:

13.

. “Power sector reforms in UT of Lakshadweep are underway. These include
privatisation, use of renewable & new energy, smart meters etc.

. Ministry of Power approved augmenting DG capacity in August 2005 &
NTPC executed the project. The supply terms/conditions was continuous
running at variable load with 10% overload for 1 hr. in any 12 hr. period. To
meet the clause, bidder quoted higher rating to ensure output over entire life
of DG set.

. Audit wrongly considered name plate details as installed capacity, thereby
making it seem that department had installed excess capacity.

" “Daily Wise Demand” modification from KWh has been carried out now.”

i. Non-Commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities and transit losses

Audit observed that LED uses about 139 lakh litres of diesel annually in its DG

sets. Diesel is transported on barges in 200 litre barrels from Beypore & Calicut to the

islands are often leaking when they reach the islands, due to multi-point handling and

transportation. the barrels. Though bulk oil storage facilities have been completed at
Kavaratti (December 2014 for Rs.7.37 Cr) and Minicoy (Mar 2016 for Rs.10.48 Cr) they

have not been commissioned till date due to non-availability of oil barge. Absence of

Bulk storage facilities and transportation of diesel in barrels has resulted in transit

losses. Loss through theft cannot also be ruled out.


-5-

14... 005 in this regard are given below:
ity Dispatched [Qty Received Loss in transit Cost per Loss
Year Ltr in Lakhs) Ltrin Lakhs) (Ltrin Lakhs) flitres (Rs) | (Rsin
6७) .
2013-14 | 133.37 131.73 [164 sd 9.15 0.97
2014-15 | 147.24 145.55 - 1.69 हे 3.16 £0.90. |
2015-16 _| 147.95 146.25 1.7 45.80 0.78...
Total 428.56 fase 5.03 26 |
15. Explaining the reasons for delay in commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities at

Kavaratti and Minicoy the Ministry of Home Affairs (reply dated 09-08-2017) stated as

under:

“The reason for delay in commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities at Kavaratti
and Minicoy is due to non-availability of oil Barge suitable for Island conditions.
As per the initial agreement dated 06.04.2004 executed between M/s IOCL and
UTL Administration for construction of storage facility for petroleum ‘products, the
movement to the islands is the responsibility of the Administration. As such Pott ©
department was entrusted with the acquisition of 1000 KL capacity oil tanker
while electricity department took up the installation of facility at Minicoy .and
Kavaratti. 1000 KL oil barge exclusively for Lakshadweep was in the perspective
plan has not yet materialized due to various administrative: reasons including
failure of tender. The department is in the process of retendering the same with
change in specifications.

Also at present Indian Oil Corporation Limited forwarded temporary services of

two offers namely ETHIHAD 0-88 and MT SHUNTO MARY-88 which is, having
more than 2.5 meters draft. The Director of Port vide their letter F.No. 13/6/2015-'
Port (OP1) (1) dated 18.05.2017 confirmed that drafts of the above two vessels

are exceeding the safe limit i.e 2.5 Mts and informed 1001 accordingly. After that _
1061 retendered and offered three vessels namely MT.ETIHAD, MT TBN (ex- °~
name MT Shunyo Maru No.8) and MT Hai Yin having more than'2.5 meters’
drafts and which can be operated by reducing the Tonnage and to maintain the
draft at 2.5 mtrs. Director Port again replied vide their letter F.No. 13/6/2015-Port
(OP1) dated 12.06.2017 that vessel can be operated at western side jutties, if.
draft is maintained at 2.5 mtr. and IOCL was informed accordingly. In the,
meantime one offer of vessel having 0.5 mtr. draft with 750 MT directly receive
vide letter No. IJS/LEB/192/2017 dated 15.05.2017 form Indo Shipyard,
Tripunithura, Cochin for the consideration for the transportation of POL products
from Kochi to Kavaratti & Minicoy. Offer with specifications of above said barge


16.

-6-

forward to the Director Port though file land Director Port informed that it is within
the safe limit and suitable with respect to port parameters for operation/berthing
in western side jetties at Kavaratti & Minicoy. Offer has been forwarded to the
1001 with comments of Director Port vide this office letter F.No. 66/8/1/2015-Ele
dated 15.06.2017 for further examination and consideration from their end.
Further one more offer of a small vessel having 200 MT & draft 2 Mtrs from Tisha
Navigation also received and matter is under examination. Department is
expecting that matter will be finalized within the short span of time period.”

Further, in regard to transit losses, the Ministry submitted as follows:

“The transportation loss in the case of HSD oil will be there as long as
department is forced to rely on transportation through barrels. It is a matter of fact
that transportation of HSD oil is a very tedious process involving multiple action
at mainland, deep sea and in Islands. Moreover, storage of diesel in barrels in
Islands poses a major threat due to high corrosive nature of atmosphere. Action
in transporting and storage of HSD oil in a scientific way is on hand for more than
10 years. It is possible that the transportation loss will come down drastically
once the transportation takes place in suitable ships and it is stored in bulk
storage tanks built up at Kavaratti and Minicoy. Efforts of Indian Oil Corporation
in getting suitable ships for the transportation is yet to yield any result.

Year Quantity Quantity received | Loss in transit | Loss in
dispatched from | at various Islands | (Itr) हु
Beypore to | (Itrs) Transit
various islands (%)
(ltrs)

2013-14 | 13336800 13173378 163422 1.22

2014-15 | 14724000 14554722 169278 1.07

2015-16 | 14795400 1462467! 170729 1.15
42856200 42352771 503429 1.17

Total 26484617

Cost

As shown in the above table loss is below 1.3% which is permissible limit as per
standards. To reduce transit loss following steps are being taken.

a) Procurement of barrels is done on yearly basis.


-7-

b) The replacement of empty barrels is mandatory at the usage of 4
cycles/barrels.

c) The handling of barrels at Jetty and by using Peacock arrangement through
fork Lift. .

d) To avoid theft and pilferage a proper polymer sealing arrangements are
provided at Beypore after filling the barrels.

e) At present the leakage and transit losses are within the permissible limit as
per the guideline of Petroleum companies considering the various handling at
different location.

Considering the bottle necks, the department is forced to operate using of
unscientific method of transportation of oil from mainland to Island through
barrels so that un-interpreted power supply is maintained to vital installations in
Lakshadweep.

From the above explanation it is obvious that UTL Administration has made all
possible efforts for commissioning of Bulk Oil Storage facilities at Kavaratti &
Minicoy. Similarly, it is also obvious that the loss in transportation is presently
within the permissible limit and action is already taken to further reduction of
transportation loss.”

17. In regard to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry (vide ATN dated
25.12.2019) submitted as under:

“The Electrical Department has approached the Department of Port to provide
facilities for transportation of HSD oil from mainland to bill the bulk storage as the
other options explained have not materialised. As stated earlier, departrient of
Port has invited Expression of Interest from the vessel operators for
transportation of HSD oil. It is intimated that positive response has been received
from some of the vessel operators and it has to be finalised through discussion
by the authorities concerned. The Port department also informed that-they have
initiated action to build suitable barge for transportation of HSD oil. It was also
informed that technical bid has been opened and subsequent formalities are
under process. Hence, it is expected that storage facility can be commissioned
with reasonable time.”


-8-

18.  Apprising the Committee about the current position of Commissioning of bulk oil
. storage facilities, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted as follows:

« “Administration has handed over the oil storage facilities (bulk Storage Depot
and Retails Outlets) at both Kavaratti and Minicoy islands to Indian Oil
Corporation (1061) through a sale deed executed between both the parties in
June 2021.

« Bulk oil storage depot & retails outlets at both islands, including building &
other installations, handed over to IOCL in August 2021.

«All statutory clearances and licenses for functioning of the outlets have been
taken.

« Depots at Kavaratti & Minicoy are completely ready for operations & are
expected to be commissioned within the next few weeks.

On same lines 1001 has started the ground work to set-up retail outlets in other 7
islands for which the process of identification of sites has already been started.”

19. In regard to the present status of building a barge for transportation of HSD oil,
the Ministry submitted as follows:

“MV Thilakam, a 700 MT Oil Barge, which is a dedicated vessel for oil
transportation, was delivered during February, 2021. Subsequently Port
Department, UTLA has got mandatory certification. Trial loading & discharging
was done, where minor leaks were observed which have now been rectified. Now
the barge is ready for operation. Discussion is being held between UTLA, Indian
Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) and Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) for
operations & chartering of barge.”

20. Further, as regards the measures taken to eliminate transit losses, the Ministry
apprised as follows:

= 700 MT Oil Barge for oil transportation MV Thilakam was delivered in
February 2021.

= Trial load testing & discharging was done. Minor leaks observed have been
rectified.

«The 700 MT Barge, MV Thilakam will be handed over to 1061 on charter
basis for supplying petroleum products.

Transportation of oil by IOCL through dedicated barge MV Thilakam will reduce
the transit losses substantially.”


21.

-9-

Hl. Discrepancies between issue and consumption of Diesel

Audit review of island wise system statistics and stock registers revealed

discrepancies between issue of fuel by sub-divisions and consumption by power
stations as below:

22.

Year Diesel Diesel Difference | Cost per | Loss (Rs|
issued by | Consumed by | (Litre in litre(Rs) | in Crore)
SD (litres in | PH (Litres in Lakh)
Lakh Lakh
2013-14 135.55 132.69 2.86 59.15 1.69
2014-15 139.36 137.57 1.79 53.16 0.95
2015-16 146.72 146.48 0.24 45.80 0.14
Total 2.75

LED has informed Audit that reconciliation details were awaited. LED is required
to examine the reasons for the discrepancy and confirm that the difference is not
due to factors like fuel theft.

In response to the aforesaid audit observation, the Ministry replied as follows:

« Island wise issue, Consumption of HSD oil for Power Generation & fuel.
issued for other purpose has been reconciled with reference to records in the
islands

« Issues/supply were made for power generation & for other Government
departments in the Administration on loan (on returnable basis) such as
Fisheries, Port, Sub-Division office etc. for bona fide purposes with approval
of Competent Authority

=» The quantity of HSD oil used for power generation is as per prescribed limit
(i.e. 3.5 units per litre)”

Year wise reconciled figures are as below:

Year Diesel issued by | Diesel Consumed at PH | Diesel issued to
SDs (in Ltrs) (in Ltrs) other purposes
_ _ in Ltrs)*
2013-14 1,34,77,363 1,33,25,123 1,52,240
2014-15 1,39,28,498 1,37,83,113 1,45,385
2015-16 1,46,17,946 1,45,29,639 88,307



-10-

23. On being asked by the Committee regarding the current position of reconciling
the discrepancies between issue and consumption of diesel, the Ministry of Home
Affairs replied as under:

= “The discrepancies between issue and consumption were reconciled.

= Department now monitors the online inventory with actual figure in all sub
Divisions and discrepancies are corrected then and there.

«Consolidated report of issue and consumption are generated on monthly
basis.

« At present there is no issue of discrepancy and figures of consumption and
issue of HSD are tallied.

* A Cell has been created at Head Quarter office in May 2020 with two-newly
recruited staff having IT qualification to look after the duties of software and
inventory management. Main duties of these staff are:

+ “To examine the issue/consumption of fuel used for running power DG
sets and other purposes separately and record the same in online
application under separate work name

+. To monitor that indent and sanction of the same are on the same date

+ Reconciliation of inventory and Power Generation and_ Distribution
Management System (PGDMS) without error.”

IV. Diesel consumption in excess of norms

24. Audit scrutiny revealed that LED had estimated that new DG sets would
consume between 0:28 to 0.30 litres of fuel per KW hour, whereas DG sets which had
outlived their useful lives and subject to frequent breakdowns/repairs/maintenance
would consume between 0.31. and 0.38 litres per KW hour. Applying the standards
depicted in the DPR, Audit has estimated that LED has consumed fuel in excess of
norms to the tune of % 2.84 crore during the period from 2013-14 to 2015-16.

LED attributed the difference to operation of old DG sets. The explanation is not
acceptable as the DPR included norms applicable to old DG sets also. LED is therefore
required to examine the reasons behind the fuel costs in excess of norms and confirm
that the excess of % 2.84 crore is not due to factors like fuel theft.


-11-

Apprising the reasons for consumption of diesel in excess of norms, the Ministry
of Home Affairs in their reply to Audit on 09.08.2017 stated as under:

“Hostile climatic condition is one of the reasons for high fuel consumption.

Islands are small & Power Houses are near to sea shore leading to poor
cooling efficiency & resulting premature failure of DGs.

Mistakes in data entry in PGDMS contribute to a portion of errors in these
figures.

Delay in major overhauling and continuing operation of inefficient, old and

outdated DG sets make things worse.

= Measures are already taken to improve efficiency.

= Department
recovered).

invoked clause for

Liquidated Damage (% 3,79,18,644/-

Explanation shows that diesel consumption is more than prescribed norms due to
peculiar geographic conditions and penalty clause is already imposed on supplier
for not maintaining due performance.”

26. On being pointed out by Audit during the course of vetting that final reply on the
basis of action taken in this regard is awaited, the further comments of the Ministry are

given as under:

“Diesel consumption is more than the prescribed value in some islands 008 to the
poor performance of the DG sets oe

All possible measures are taken to reduce the excess consumption. Results that have
been achieved are shown below:

aa Diese! Consumption Energy Generated Specific fuel consumption
Ltr. per KWh

| Minleoy 21,80,845 87,47,837 0.24

Kavaratti 31,21,213 1,12,42,365 0.27

| Amini 15,27,308 51,32,822- 0.29

| Andrott | 21,17,555 72,30,078 0.29

Kalpeni 10,67,907 35,70,601 0.29



-12-

[feat] 18,091,825 66,27,103 0.28
~~ Kadmat 12,36,799 43,89,088 ~ 0.28
| Kite] 8,26,601 27,34,476 0.30

27. While apprising about the current position in this matter, the Ministry submitted
as follows:

. “No fuel theft is reported in islands so far.

. Augmentation of DG capacity in islands is being taken up based on the
roadmap document prepared by CRISIL (an S&P Global Company),
Infrastructure Advisory to the Ministry of Power, Gol.

. At island level, Assistant Engineer is responsible to ensure that the data
entry is correct and factual.

. Each Sub Division has to furnish data of HSD consumption in Power
House & quantity issued to other department to Division Office.

A Cell has been created at Division Office in May 2020 with two newly recruited
staff having IT qualifications to look after the duties of software and inventory
management.”

28. When asked about the steps initiated to improve the efficiency of DG sets in ail

islands, the Ministry replied as under:

“A roadmap document aiming to meet the objective was prepared by M/s CRISIL
(an S&P Global Company), Infrastructure Advisor to the Ministry of Power, Gol.
As the islands are not inter-connected, the agency carried out island-wise
estimation of demand and assessment of network adequacy. Energy requirement
& peak demand were projected up to the year 2019 based on the actual increase
in both since FY 2011 to 2015. DG capacity available in each island and de-rated
capacities that will be available up to 2019 were calculated. Based on the
aforesaid calculations, new DG and year of requirement was recommended for
each island. है

At present procurement & installation of DG sets is being carried out based on
the recommendation of the said report. Lakshadweep Electricity Department is in
the process of replacing the older DG sets with new sets. Further, department
makes all possible efforts to carryout overhauling of engines regularly on time.



29.

-13-

Now, UTLA has also decided to go for 100% privatization of power Generation & -
Distribution. A draft RFP has been prepared by UTLA. The privatization of power
distribution and generation will enhance efficiency,. lower T&D losses and
address other issues in the power sector in Lakshadweep.”

Since the climatic conditions of the Union Territory are different, the Committee

desired to know as to whether the Electricity Department made any efforts to conduct
research for developing DG sets which consume less fuel. and work -better in such
conditions. In response thereto, the Ministry replied as under:

30.

“The matter is being taken up with Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of
Power. Distribution Planning and development Division of Central Electricity
Authority was requested to advise UT of Lakshadweep in identifying island
specific DG sets so that cost of generation can be brought down and to suggest
DG sets which consume less fuel and work better in island conditions.”

The Committee further desired to know as to whether major overhauling of

engines is being carried out on time and whether the LED has. prepared any: plan for.
phasing out inefficient, old and outlived DG sets. In their written replies, the Ministry
stated as under: wt

“Department makes all possible efforts to carryout overhauling of engines _
regularly on time. Normal periodical maintenance is also, being carried out. on
time. However, in the case of major overhauling of the engines, some delay
happens due to reasons, associated with unique’ geographic. conditions - of
Lakshadweep including the following:

(a) Difficulty in getting spares and service personnel in time from Authorized
Workshop/Dealers a : me

(b) Inability of service dealers to carry out servicing of engines/alternators at the’
island site due to lack of infrastructure : a

(c) In some cases where dismantling of engine is required for major overhauling
repair at mainland, transportation and loading/unloading facilities are not
readily available in the islands ह

Most of the inefficient DG sets have been phased out and replaced with new
ones, however, 7 DG sets which have outlived their life by more than 15 years
are still under operation in some islands to meet the peak demand during
season.” .


-14-

Vv. Avoidable Expenditure due to High Transmission and _ Distribution
Losses

31. | Audit observed that the DPR of 2004 recommended major thrust to reduce T&D
losses from 10.8 per cent to 8 per cent by the end of the Tenth Five Year plan (2002-
07). This target has not been achieved till date. The cost of T&D loss in excess of 8 per
cent during 2013-14 to 2015-16 works out to % 10.38 crore in respect of 4 islands alone.

LED informed Audit that it had identified three main impediments in achieving desired
results, viz., non-installation of package transformers, non-installation of ring main units,
and conversion/laying of underground cable for consumers, and that it was hopeful of
further reduction on the completion of these works.

32. As regards the action taken/being taken by the Ministry to reduce the T&D
losses, the Ministry stated as under:

= “Infrastructure facilities have been improved to reduce T&D losses in most of
the islands.

« The average T&D loss in respect of Minicoy, Kavaratti, Amini, Andrott,
Kalpeni, Agatti comes to 6%.

«Action is on hand to improve the facilities in the remaining islands also

= Department is planning to implement Smart metering to get actual T&D
losses.”

33. The current position. of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard is as
follows:

« “Out of. 108 substations, 69 substations have been either converted to
packaged substation (40) or provided with ring main units (29).

«Under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS), which aims to
improve the quality, reliability and affordability of power supply to consumers
through a financially sustainable and operationally efficient distribution sector,
smart meters would be installed in the UT.

« Intellismart Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd., a joint venture company of Energy
Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) & National Investment and Infrastructure
Fund (NIIF), has been given responsibility of implementation of the smart
metering program in Lakshadweep.

®  Intellismart has submitted their proposal which is being processed.”


-15-

34. On being asked about the present status of implementing smart energy meters in
the distribution transformer to get actual T&D losses, the Ministry replied as under:

“At present the Distribution Transformers in UTL are having normal energy mete=
However, UT of Lakshadweep is in the process of installing Smart Meters for
consumers under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme of Ministry of Power,
Gol. MoP has entrusted Smart Energy Meter Programme in Lakshadweep to
EESL on nomination basis. As such Intellismart Infrastructure Private Limited, a
joint venture company of Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) and National
Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF), a Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance
backed Fund, has been given responsibility. of implementation of the Smart
Metering programme in Lakshadweep including preparation of project proposal.
Intellismart had submitted their proposal to the department, which is under
process. They will implement the project within 1 year after the approval by the
department/MoP. They will use Radio Frequency/Cellular Communication\VSAT
as communication technology depending upon the availability. In the islands of
Kavaratti, Agatti, Kiltan, Chetlat and Bitra, where BSNL network ‘is available,
Smart Meter will be installed to communicate with Cellular network, whereas. in
remaining islands VSAT will be deployed for data communication. Smart Meter
service provider will implement the project in DBFOOT (Design, Build, Finance,
Own, Operate and Transfer) mode. Service provider will do the operation &
maintenance for 10 years including project execution period, after which it will be
transferred to UTLA.” धर

VI. -Unfruitful Expenditure on Solar Photovoltaic-Plants

35. Audit scrutiny revealed that based on Ministry of Non-Conventiohal Energy

Sources release (March 2001) of = 12.27 crore (with balance to be met from budget of °
UTL) for a total cost of = 18.41 crore, LED installed Grid interactive Solar Photovoltaic

(SPV) power plants. In addition, SPV plant was installed in Suheli (uninhabited island,

but tourist based), at a cost of = 0.64 crore. Audit observed that, of the SPV plants (8°
purchased in 2001; year of purchase of 2 plants presumed to.be before 2005 and that of
2 plants before 2000 since details not available) installed in the 12 islands.

36. Audit observed that of the SPVs installed, four have not been working for more
than three years and two were under renovation. To ascertain the causes for the same,
Audit selected the records of the plant at Amini for detailed scrutiny. It was noticed that
land was acquired only after three years from delivery of equipment and thereafter,
completion of civil works were delayed by a further four yea® By this time, some of the
photovoltaic modules were in poor condition due to the delay in installation. The primary
cause for this situation was due to LED not ensuring mandatory coastal regulatory zone
clearance and land acquisition before placing the purchase order for the SPV plant.


-16-

There was also the issue of poor maintenance compounding the problem. LED has
informed (August 2016) that presently, LEDA, a society under UTL Administration has
been entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring that all the plants function at full
capacity.

37. On being asked about the reasons for non-functioning of the four SPV plants, the
Ministry submitted as follows:

“These SPV Power Plants were supplied, installed and commissioned by M/s.
BHEL Bangalore. In case of these plants, operation & maintenance for five years
since commissioning, was entrusted to the supplier i.e. M/s. BHEL.

The process to identify suitable land for the plants at Amini & Chetlat started
during June, 2001. Since the identified site was coming in “No construction
Zone”, process was initiated for obtaining permission from Lakshadweep
Pollution Control Committee. Further, UT Administration wrote a letter to the
Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forest, Govt. of India on 20.09.2000 for
environmental clearances so that it could go ahead with the project.
Lakshadweep Pollution Control Committee issued ‘No objection Certificate’ on
15.11.2001. Subsequently, Ministry of Environment & Forest, New Delhi made
required amendments in the provisions to accommodate generation from solar
power from non-Conventional sources as a permissible activity in the CRZ area
through Gazette Notification dated 19.10.2002 and issued CRZ clearances for
the projects on 31.12.2002.

UT administration made efforts to get the land on lease basis from land owners to
avoid delay in implementation of projects but the land owners were reluctant to
provide land on lease and were agreeable only for acquisition of their land.
Accordingly, Administration initiated acquisition of land and land acquisition
process was completed in March 2005.

Subsequent to that, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) engineers visited
the site for marking & commencing the civil works. Lakshadweep Electricity
Department (LED) completed the civil works (cement pedestals & control room
works) during May, 2007 & immediately after monsoon, BHEL had commenced
installation at both the sites (Chetlat & Amini) in Sept. 2007. Installation was
completed in December, 2008 and the plants were commissioned in March, 2009
at Amini & May, 2009 at Chetlat. BHEL had agreed to takeup regular O&M of
SPV Power plants at Amini & Chetlat for a period of 5 years after commissioning.

In 2013 it was observed by LED that BHEL was not attending to any
maintenance work during the O&M period and plants were kept idle without any
operation. A ‘Show Cause Notice’ for O&M was issued to BHEL in December,


38.

-17-

2013 and they were directed to make necessary arrangements to take'up the
O&M work.

It was stated by BHEL that the material was supplied by them in year 2002-2003
and it was in the custody of LED. The equipment/material could not be installed
immediately due to delay in Environmental clearances and acquisition of land etc.
Further, BHEL stated that several PV modules were not performing well enough
to yield the required output as expected due to water collection on modules,
which were highly prone to corrosion, and some of these were found in damaged
condition. The material was exposed to about 5 to 6 monsoon seasons which
could have resulted in their moderate output.

SPV Plant at Suheli island, which is an uninhabited island was set up especially
as an effort to provide some relief to fishermen, who visit the island during fair
weather season (for a period of only 7 to 8 months a year). During the monsoon
period, Suheli island is inaccessible due to rough weather and turbulent sea and
is cut off from other major islands for a period 4-5 months, which was major
cause of non-functioning of SPV. है

In view of the concerns raised by the Committee during the meeting held on
07.10.2021, a team comprising of representative of MHA and officers with
technical background from the Ministry of Power has been directed to visit
Lakshadweep and look into issues raised by the Committee, including delay in
commissioning of SPV plants at Amini and Chetlat, and submit a report to this
Ministry suggesting corrective action in this regard.” है है

Apprising the Committee of the current position in this regard the Ministry

submitted as under:

* “Department of Electricity had signed MoU with Solar Energy Corporation of
India (5561) for repowering of existing ground mounted solar PV system in
August 2018, in which capacities of the plants were proposed to: be
augmented. .

« Work for the Solar Power plant including O&M for 10 years awarded by SECI
in July 2020.

= In first phase 5501 proposed plants in Kavaratti having capacity 1.4 MW with
1.4 MWh BESS, Agatti 0.3 MW, Bangaram having capacity 0.15 MW and
0.450 MWh BESS and Thinnakara having capacity 0.1 MW with 0.3 MWh
BESS - a total of 1.9 MW with 2.15 MWh BESS.

In view of the ongoing power sector reforms review of SECI projects is
underway.”


-18-

39. As regards the action taken by the Lakshadweep Energy Development Agency
(LEDA) to ensure that वी the Solar Photovoltaic Plants function at full capacity, the
Ministry stated as under:

“During the period when BHEL was carrying out the O&M of SPV plants, some
power plants had broken down and LEDA requested BHEL to extend the period
of O&M. LEDA had taken action for extension of the period of O&M contract in
the islands of Agatti (7 Months), Minicoy (20 Months), Androth and Kadamath
(for one month each) at BHEL’s cost and risk.

During the O&M period, LEDA has deducted an amount of हैं 1.3 crores from
BHEL's claim towards penalty on various defaults as per the contractual terms
such as loss in guaranteed power evacuation and delay in commissioning the
plants. On completion of O&M period of M/s BHEL, plants were taken over by
LEDA. At present plants are being maintained by LEDA except at Bitra where
period of O&M contract is up to 01/2023.

However, UTLA has now decided to go for 100% privatization of power
Generation-& Distribution. A draft RFP has been prepared by UTLA. One of the
key features of the draft RFP is to de-diesetise the Islands and shift from diesel
based generation of Electricity to 100% Renewable Energy in a time span of
two years, issues of efficiency, optimal utilization of installed capacity etc. will
also be addressed in the aforementioned reforms.”

Vil. -Energy Audit not conducted despite requirement

40. . JERC Tariff Regulations, 2009, require LED to conduct regular energy audits to
substantiate its estimation of Transmission and Distribution (T&D) losses, and furnish
six monthly reports to JERC. Audit observed that LED has not conducted any energy
-audits. till date. LED attributed this to non-availability of technical expertise locally. LED
is advised to explore measures to ensure implementation of energy audits, as these are
mandatory.

41. in response to the aforesaid Audit Para, the Ministry of Home Affairs on August,
2017 informed the Audit that they had conducted a detailed energy audit on the
Generation and distribution system in the year 2013-14. Energy audit in line with JERC
Tariff Regulations 2009 will be carried out in future.


-19-

42. Apprising of the current position in regard to’ conducting energy Audit, the
Ministry stated that they had awarded the contract of conducting Energy Audit to M/s.
RSA & Co. in September, 2018 The study has been completed and report submitted in
February, 2021. Action has been taken on the recommendations of the audit report
such as: .

“4) Periodical testing & Calibration of various meters in the Power Houses is
being carried out.

2) All 11 KV feeders are provided with meters.
3) Feeder wise consumer indexing is done.

4) Sub-Divisions have been directed to regularly take reading of the meter
provided at sub-stations. Under the Revamped Distribution Sector
Scheme of the MoP, LT feeder metering will be carried out.

5) Street poles have been numbered.

6) CMRI and Standard Reference Meter are used to test the accuracy of the
electronic energy meters installed at consumer premises and download
the data from the meters.”

Vill. Need to explore alternative methods for electrification

43. Audit observed that generation of power in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep is
expensive, with the average cost of = 30.76 per KWh in 2015-16, in comparison to the
market price of = 2.85 per KWh estimated by the Indian Energy Exchange (IEX). As the
average revenue realisation by LED is only = 2.64 per unit, the revenue gap in supply of ©
power amounted to % 91.99 crore as approved by the JERC. Central Electricity Authority .
(CEA) had also requested (June 2006) the Ministry of Renewable Energy Sources to
explore avenues for adoption of eco-friendly and cheaper modes of generation in UTL.

It is therefore necessary for LED to explore and adopt non-conventional energy . .
sources in terms of the National Electricity Policy.

44. As regards the current status of exploring alternative methods for Electrification
the Ministry submitted as follows

«= The Lakshadweep Electricity Deptt. signed a MoU With Solar Energy
Cooperation of India Limited (SECI) to set up floating solar PV project: with
energy storage system, along with repowering of existing ground mounted solar
PV system and rooftop solar PV system.


45.

-20-

In first phase 5501 proposed plants in Kavaratti having capacity 1.4 MW with 1.4
MWh BESS, Agatti 0.3 MW, Bangaram having capacity 0.15 MW and 0.450
MWh BESS and Thinnakara having capacity 0.1 MW with 0.3 MWh BESS - a
total of 1.9 MW with 2.15 MWh BESS.

Power sector reforms in UT of Lakshadweep are underway _ including
privatisation, use of renewable & new energy, smart meters etc.

In view of the ongoing power sector reforms, review of 5501 projects is
underway.”

On being asked as to whether floating PV project along with rooftop solar

installation has since been set up, the Ministry replied as under:

“Tender was floated by SECI and pre-bid meeting was conducted at
Lakshadweep on 01/03/2019. Some queries were raised in the meeting
regarding Environmental clearances, and later the tender was cancelled in the
absence of Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) study, which would have
taken more time to be conducted in all the islands. Later on 22/04/2019, a
meeting was convened at Lakshadweep under the chairmanship of Hon'ble
Administrator in the presence of Joint Secretary MNRE, and it was decided to
consider Kavaratti & Agatti as first islands to have the study of EIA to enable
SECI to commission the projects including land based SPV plants at these two
islands. Joint Secretary, MNRE also spoke to National Centre for Sustainable
Coastal Management (NCSCM) to complete the study at least on the
aforementioned two islands on priority. Completion of EIA study for these two
islands was delayed due to the various reasons including Covid pandemic and
hence the projects implementation was delayed. Subsequently, SECI tendered
land-based projects having capacity of 1.95 MW with 2.15 MWh BESS in the
aforementioned islands in the absence of EIA study, and to consider the Floating
solar projects on receipt of EIA from NCSCM.

However, UTLA has’ now decided to go for 100% privatization of power
Generation & Distribution. A draft RFP has been prepared by UTLA. One of the
key features of the draft RFP is to de-dieselise the Islands and shift from diesel
based generation of Electricity to 100% Renewable Energy in a time span of two
yea® UT Administration has decided to put on hold the remaining solar power
projects, which have not yet commenced, in view of the ongoing privatization
process.”


PART-II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Lakshadweep is an archipelago of thirty-six small islands located in the
Arabian Sea. The islands are isolated from the main land as well as from each
other. The condition of the Lakshadweep Islands is unique and different from any
other part of the country. The main constraint of the islands is the geographic
isolation and access to the mainland. Due to the geographical and topographical
peculiarities of these islands including separation by sea over significant
distances, there is no power grid. Instead a power house at each location caters हि

independently to the power requirement of different islands.

Lakshadweep Electricity Department (LED), an integrated utility, is
responsible for Generation and Distribution of electricity in the Union Territory.
Owing to the distance from the mainland, Lakshadweep is entirely dependent on
its own generation for supply of power, mainly through Diesel Generator (DG)
sets (around 95 percent) and partly through Grid Interactive Solar Photo Voltaic
(SPC) Power Plants. The total installed capacity in 2015-16 was 24,010 kw (46 DG
sets of 21,860 kw and 11 SPVs of 2,150 kw). The installed capacity of the DG sets
ranged between 60 kw and 1,600 kw.

2. The records of Lakshadweep Electricity Department for the period, 2013 to
2016 were examined by Audit in 2016. During the course of Audit review, issues
of concern that came to light inter-alia included: excess generation capacity
ranging between 47% to 89% in all the islands, sharp decline in demand in some
of the islands, non-commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities and transit losses,
diesel consumption in excess of norms, avoidable expenditure due to high
transmission and distribution losses, unfruitful expenditure on Solar-Photovoltaic
(SPV) plants, non-collection of dues from NTPC, Energy Audit not having been ,
conducted despite requirement, and need to explore alternative methods for
electrification etc. These issues have been examined in detail by the Committee

and commented upon suitably in the succeeding paragraphs.


Excess capacity of DG sets

3. The Committee are concerned to note that all the islands had excess
installed capacity ranging between 47 percent (Kiltan) to a maximum of 89
percent (Bitra). Further, against the normal trend of increasing demand, some
islands showed sharp decline in demand at certain times. The Committee are
perturbed to find that Lakshadweep Electricity Department (LED) did not maintain
a centralized record of ‘downtime’ of DG sets owing to factors such as repairs
etc. The data in this regard is available only with the sub-divisions. Moreover,
there is no system in place to ensure the procurement of DG sets as per actual
requirement. The reasons attributed for procuring DG sets with significantly
higher capacity in some of the islands have been cited as: frequent failure of DG
sets due to climatic conditions, difficulty in carrying out repairs due to non-
availability of OEM service engineers and OEM spares locally and non-updation
of some of the DG sets in Power Generation and Distribution Systems (PGDMS).
As such, the Department was compelled to operate some of the phased out DG
Sets in unforeseen situations due to breakdown of the operational DG sets, etc.
The. Committee feel that the Union Territory Administration has not made any
earnest effort to procure the DG sets as per actual requirements. The Committee
are of the view that lack of foresight and proper planning are probably the main
reasons behind the above cited problems. Further, the Committee are of the firm
view that these problems could have been very-well prevented by taking timely
remedial action. The Committee are also surprised to note that while
implementing PGDMS, the UT Administration has failed to update the data of DG
sets available/phased out which is again indicative of lack of proper planning.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons behind the delay in updation
of some of the DG sets in PGDMS and recommend that officials responsible for
the delay may be suitably warned and appropriate action taken on the errant so
that such lapses do not recur. The Committee also recommend that henceforth,
the Lakshadweep Administration should follow a systemic planning and exercise

effective foresight by taking into consideration all variables like climatic


-23-

conditions, availability of OEM service engineers/spare’ parts, credibility of:
agency providing DG sets based on past performance etc.:at ‘the planning stage.

Considering the aspect of difficulties faced in carrying out repairs of DG
Sets due to non-availability of spares, the Committee desire that the UT
Administration, through the Ministry, should work out a means for regular
monitoring of the DG sets so as to ensure timely repair and procurement of
spares. The Government should also undertake a comprehensive programme to’
renovate and modernize old DG sets located in different islands. As regards the
current status of the steps taken in this regard, the Committee have been
informed that Power Sector reforms in UT of Lakshadweep are underway. These
include, promoting private participation in power generation and distribution, use
of renewable and new energy, implementation of smart meters etc. The

Committee welcome such initiatives and will await the results of these measures.

Bulk oil storage facilities and transit losses

4, The Committee are concerned to note that. though: the bulk 01 storage
facilities were completed at Kavartti (December 2014) and-Minicoy (March 2016) at

a cost of & 7.37 crore and = 10.48 crore respectively,. they were. not been
commissioned till the time of Audit Scrutiny of the subject in 2016. This has been
attributed to non-availability of oil barge. The absence. of bulk. storage, facilities . .
and transportation of diesel in barrels from Beypore, ‘Calicut to. the islands. had .,
resulted in transit losses. The Committee are unable. to., understand, what:
prevented LED from going ahead with the commissioning. of. bulk oil storage
facility when the Department was forced to follow. non-conventional methods of
transportation of oil from mainland to UTL islands in barrels. The Committee are
dismayed at the flippant attitude of the Lakshadweep -Administration., in
undertaking the work of commissioning of bulk oil storage facility. The Ministry .
had, in 2019 informed that the Department of Ports had initiated action to build .,
suitable barge for transportation of HSD oil and: the storage facility would be .
commissioned within a reasonable period of time. But to:their utter surprise, :the :

Committee have come to understand that this ४४३9-1० done. The:Committee have ,


-24-

now been informed that bulk oil storage depot and retail outlets at Kavaratti and
Minicoy islands, including the building and other installations have been handed
over to Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) in August, 2021. The Committee are
perturbed to note that despite this issue being pointed out by Audit in 2016, the
commissioning of bulk oil storage facility has not been carried out. The
Committee deplore this lackadaisical attitude on the part of the Ministry/UT
Administration in not taking up this important matter with the required amount of
seriousness. Apparently, the Ministry have taken the right initiatives only when
the matter was taken up for consideration by the Committee. The Committee
would, therefore, desire that the General Administration should sensitise the
officers concerned to be more careful in taking urgent and important action and
prevent any eventualities in future. The Committee have also been informed that
bulk oil storage depots at Kavaratti and Minicoy are completely ready for
operations and are expected to be commissioned very soon. 1061. has also
started the ground work to set up retail outlets in other 7 islands for which the
process of identification of sites has been started. During the course of taking
evidence on the subject, it was informed that this work would be completed by
the end of October 2021 and IOCL too had been informed of it. The Committee
feel that the delay in progress of works resulted in further adding to the time and
cost overruns. The Committee would, therefore, emphasize the need to take
effective steps for stricter monitoring and control over the commissioning of bulk
oil storage depots and retail outlets in all the islands at Lakshadweep so that
these can be commissioned without further loss of time. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the status in this regard within one month of the

presentation of this Report to Parliament.

5. As regards the present status of building a barge for transportation of HSD
oil and eliminating transit losses, the Committee have been informed that MV
Thilakam, a 700 MT oil Barge was delivered during February, 2021. During trial
loading and discharging, minor leaks were observed which have now been
rectified. Discussion is being held.between UTLA, IOCL and Shipping Corporation
of India (SCl) for the operation and chartering of the barge. The Committee regret


-25-

to know that though the oil Barge was delivered during February; 2021. and five *
years have elapsed since the matter was pointed out by: Audit in’ 2016,
discussions are still on-going in regard to the operation:and chartering of the
barge. The Committee, thus strongly deplore the delay in operation of the barge
and desire that urgent measures be initiated for operationalizing the barge. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status of.operationalizing. -
the barge, the basis on which an oil barge for capacity of 700 MT. was built, and :
whether this capacity is sufficient to cater to the need of providing electricity. in

the Lakshadweep Islands.

Issue and consumption of Diesel

6. The Committee observe that during the period, 2013-14. to.2015-16, there ,
were discrepancies between the figures of HSD oil.issued. by. the sub-divisions : ;
and consumption by Power stations resulting ina. huge difference..of. 4.89. lakh, *
litres of HSD oil worth €2.75 crore. In this regard, the Committee have been
informed that besides Power Generation, HSD oil was utilized for other purpose a
which included usage by other Government Departments..such: as Fisheries;
Ports, Sub-Division offices etc. with the approval -of competent. authority for
bona fide purposes on returnable basis. The Committee would. like to be, apprised, :
of the ‘other purposes’ for which Diesel has been issued to: other, Departments...
and whether this was a necessity during the years,.2013-14.:to,.2015-16., The, .

Committee would like to be apprised of the segregated figures of Diesel issued,,
for ‘other purposes’ to the Government Departments.-on; loan. basis,and received. ...
back from them during the year 2013-14 to 2015-16. The Committee. would-also.. -
desire to be apprised of the corrective measures initiated by-the Ministry to avoid. :
such lapses so that the consumption of Diesel is kept within the. limits stipulated

by the sub-divisions. As informed by the Ministry, a Cell was. created:at the Head; _
office in May, 2020 with two newly recruited staff having IT qualification to.attend ;
to the duties of software and inventory management.. The Committee are..of the.
view that the Ministry have not taken this issue seriously till the: lapse. was.

+

pointed out by Audit, and that too after a significant. time. gap. .The.Committee.


-26-

deplore the tardiness of the UT Administration in dealing with this important
matter which led to loss of = 2.75 crore as on 2016. The Committee would,
therefore, desire that the Ministry constantly and regularly monitor and reconcile
the figures so that the HSD Oil is used for the purposes of power generation in
Lakshadweep only and recommend taking necessary measures to revamp the

Lakshadweep Electricity Department (LED).

7. The Committee find that in contravention of the standards of DPR (Detailed
Project Report), LED has consumed fuel in excess of norms to the tune of 2.84
crore from 2013-14 to 2015-16 due to poor performance of the DG sets. The
peculiarity of geographic conditions is also said to have led to excess
consumption. The Committee’ are constrained to observe that delay in
overhauling and continuing operation of inefficient, old and outdated DG sets
made things worse. As regards the steps taken for developing DG sets which
consume less fuel and work better in such climatic conditions, the Committee
have been informed that distribution, planning and development division of
Central Electricity Authority was requested to advise UT of Lakshadweep in
identifying island-specific DG sets, which consume less fuel and work better in
the geographic condition of the islands. However, the reply of the Ministry is
silent about the date on which they sought the suggestions of CEA and whether
these have been received or not. The Committee have now been apprised that
LED is in the process of replacing the older DG sets with new sets and most of
the inefficient DG sets have been phased out and are replaced with new ones.
The Committee are unable to understand as to why this action has been initiated
belatedly. Also, 7 DG sets which have outlived their life by more than 15 years are
still being used to meet the peak demand in season. While the Committee
appreciate the steps initiated by the Ministry in this regard, they consider it
unfortunate that no sincere efforts were made with a view to ensuring
consumption of fuel as per the standards of Detailed Project Report. If such
issue had been noticed by the Internal Audit Wing of the Ministry, the loss of
22.84 crore, incurred for consuming fuel in excess of norms, could have been

avoided. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to review the functioning


-27-

of their Internal Audit Wing so that such mistakes could be detected and rectified
in a timely manner. However, keeping in view the steps taken to phase out the old
and inefficient DG sets and replace the sets with new ones, the Committee desire
to know about the current status of achieving efficiency in fuel consumption as
per the DPR in all islands. The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to
take all corrective measures, at least now, with a view to ensuring that the
electrification in all the Lakshadweep Islands is achieved without further loss of

time.

High Transmission and Distribution Losses
8. The Committee note that the DPR of 2004 recommended major thrust to

reduce T&D losses from 10.8 percent to 8 percent by the end of the Tenth Five
Year Plan (2002-2007). This target was not achieved till 2016, leading to T&D loss
of %10.38 crore in respect of four islands alone. The reasons attributed by the
Ministry for this lapse are, non-installation of package transformers, ring main
units, conversion/laying of underground cable for consumers etc. However, out
of 108 sub-stations, 69 sub-stations have either been converted to packaged
sub-stations (4) or provided with ring main units (29). The Committee would like
to be informed of the present status of conversion of remaining sub-stations. The
Committee have been informed that the Department is planning to implement
smart metering to get.details of actual T&D losses. For this purpose, Intellismart
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd, a joint venture company of Energy Efficiency Services
Limited (EESL) and National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF) has been
given responsibility for implementing Smart Metering Programme in
Lakshadweep and the proposal submitted is said to be under process. They
would implement the project within one year after approval by the
Department/Ministry of Power. The Committee are dismayed to note that the reply
of the Ministry is again silent about the date on which the responsibility of
implementation of Smart Meters in Lakshadweep was given to Intellismart and
whether the approval by the Department/Ministry of Power has since been
obtained and by when the process would be completed. The Committee would
desire to be apprised of these details at the earliest. The Committee fail to


-28-

‘understand as to why no advance action was taken for awarding the work for
implementation of Smart Meters Programme to Intellismart, which was badly
required for bringing about improvement in power sector in Lakshadweep. Now,
the Committee would expect that immediate action is taken to finalise the
proposal with Intellismart so that the programme for implementation of Smart
Meters does not suffer. The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs
deposed before the Committee that through Intellismart they would procure
machines immediately and would complete it in another six months. Since, the
installation of smart meters is an essential tool to control T&D losses, the
Committee emphasize that the Ministry should closely monitor the procurement,

installation and maintenance of Smart Meters in a time bound manner.

Solar Photovoltaic Plants

9. -- The Committee are perturbed to note that out of the 12 SPV plants, four
were non-operational for more than three years while two were under renovation.
The Committee also find that in case of the plant at Amini, land was acquired only
after three years following delivery of equipment and thereafter, completion of
civil works was: delayed by further four years due to which the condition of the
“SPVs had worsened. The Committee cannot but express their displeasure over
“the lackadaisical approach of: the Ministry/Lakshadweep Administration in
handling this: issue: which resulted in non-installation of SPV plants for several
years. The Committee desire ‘that the Ministry should examine critically the
reasons responsible for such a. dismal situation and take urgent measures for
operationalizing the SPV plants. The Committee are dismayed to note that though
the LED was responsible for ensuring mandatory coastal regulatory zone
clearance and land acquisition before placing the orders for purchasing the SPV
plant, the LED failed to do so. Moreover, poor maintenance of SPVs also
aggravated the problem. The Committee wonder as to how, in the absence of
- allotment of land, ‘the SPVS were procured by the Ministry, which ultimately
worsened the condition without the SPVs being installed. While strongly

disapproving: the failure of the Ministry in this case, the Committee recommend


-29-

that the matter should be inquired into and responsibility: fixed for aforesaid
lapses. Since installation of SPV panels would play an essential role in the
generation of ‘non-diesel electricity’ in Lakshadweep, the Ministry should
henceforth take all measures for timely procurement, installation and upkeep of
the SPVs in the island.

Now, when the Committee have taken up the subject for examination, the
Department of Electricity chose to sign an MoU with Solar Energy Cooperation of
India (SECI), in August, 2018 for empowering of existing ground mounted Solar
PV system. Work for the SPV plant including O&M for 10 years has been awarded
to SECI in July, 2020. In first phase, SECI has proposed setting up plants in
Kavaratti, Agatti, Bangaram, and Thinnakara having capacity of total 1.9 MW with
2.15 MWH BESS. However, UTLA decided to go for 100% privatization of Power
Generation and Distribution and a draft RFP was prepared by UTLA. One of the
key features of the draft RFP is to ‘de-dieselize’ the islands and enable generation
of Electricity from 100% Renewable Energy in a time span of two years. The
Committee would await details of implementation of these measures. The
Committee also desire to be apprised of the current status of the exercise of
privatizing Power generation and supply as well as the plants proposed to be set
up by SECI in the first phase. The Committee would also desire that these
measures ought to be implemented earnestly in letter and spirit, which would
surely go a long way in eliminating the problems associated with power supply in
Lakshadweep islands in future. The Committee may be kept apprised of the

results achieved therefrom.

Energy Audit

10. The Committee observe that JERC Tariff Regulations, 2009 require LED to
conduct regular energy audits to substantiate its estimation of T&D losses and
furnish reports to JERC on 6 monthly basis. The Committee find that LED had not
conducted any energy audit till 2016. In the absence of Energy Audit, the
objectives of improving efficiency in power sector and the follow-up action taken
thereon by the Ministry could not be ascertained. This also dis-enabled the


-30-

Ministry to monitor the status of implementation and bringing about requisite
improvements in the systems and procedures. The Committee have now been
informed that the Ministry had awarded the contract of conducting Energy Audit
to M/s RSA & Co. in September 2018. The study has been completed and report
submitted in February, 2021. Action has been taken on the recommendations of
the Energy Audit such as periodical testing and Calibration of various meters in
the Power Houses, providing meters to all 11 KV feeders, doing feeder-wise
consumer indexing, taking reading of the meters regularly, numbering of street
poles, using CMRI-and Standard Reference Meters to test the accuracy of the
electronic energy meters installed at ‘consumer premises’ and downloading the
data from the meters, etc. While appreciating the steps taken in this direction, the
Committee desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to monitor the status of
implementation -of the recommendations of Energy Audit and bringing about
requisite improvements in the.system and procedures so as to achieve the

objective. of total electrification of Lakshadweep islands at the earliest.
Alternative Methods for Electrification

141... The Committee observe that generation of power in the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep is expensive, with the average cost of = 30.76 per kwh in 2015-16, in
comparison to the market price of हैं 2.85 per kwh estimated by the Indian Energy
- Exchange (६2९). As the average revenue realization by the LED is only & 2.64 per
unit, the revenue gap in suppiy: of power amounted to हैं 91.99 crore as approved
by JERC. The: Committee are astonished to note that despite requesting the
Ministry of Renewable Energy Sources in June, 2006 for exploring avenues for
adoption of eco-friendly and cheaper modes of generation in UTL and severai
steps being taken by the Ministry later on, the project of floating of Solar
Photovoltaic ‘Panels system along with repowering of existing ground mounted
solar PV system and roof top solar PV system are still underway. The Committee
are perturbed to know that the Ministry have not elaborated convincingly the
causes for the ‘delay of more :than 15 years in exploring/establishing the
alternative methods for electrification except for citing the disruption caused due

to the covid pandemic. The Committee cannot but express their displeasure over


-31-

the lackadaisical approach displayed by the Ministry on this issue. As the delay in
installation of SPV Panels had forced the Lakshadweep administration to
generate power, through DG sets at an expensive cost, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Home Affairs/UT Administration should critically
examine the reasons for such a dismal situation. The Ministry should work out a
strategy to bridge the energy gap'in generation and supply of power in Union
Territory of Lakshadweep. Now, the Committee have been informed that in view
of the ongoing exercise of privatization of power generation and distribution in
Lakshadweep, the UT Administration has decided to put on hold the remaining
solar power projects which have not yet commenced. The Committee would
desire the Ministry to vigorously follow up the matter of privatisation of electricity
in Lakshadweep so that this Process is completed without any further delay. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

12. To sum up, the facts stated in the foregoing paragraphs revealed several
shortcomings in Generation and ‘distribution of power in the Lakshadweep
Islands. The primary objective of providing electricity to Lakshadweep Islands at
affordable prices has not been achieved. No system was in place to assess actual
requirement of DG sets. Bulk storage facilities have not been commissioned and
diesel consumption is also in excess of norms, transmission and distribution
losses are in excess of eight percent, installed SPV plants have not been working
and no follow up action has been taken on JERC directives, etc. Alternative
methods for electrification have also not been explored. The Committee regret to
note that the Lakshadweep Administration did not succeed fully in achieving the
objectives of electrification of their islands. The Committee have now been
informed that UTLA has decided to go for 100% privatization of Power Generation
and Distribution which will enhance efficiency, lower T&D losses, enable the shift
from diesel based generation of electricity to renewable energy and address other
issues pointed out by Audit. ‘

Electrification of Lakshadweep Islands was initiated during the Second

Five Year Plan, but several matters relating thereto are yet to be addressed. The
Committee take a serious view of the failures of the Ministry/Lakshadweep


-32-

Administration in fully achieving the objectives of this crucial programme of
generation and distribution of power in the Islands. The Committee desire that in
the light of the facts brought out in the Report and the suggestions made,
Government should take corrective action now, avoid such lapses in future and
strengthen the internal control mechanism in order to achieve effective

Generation, Transmission and Distribution of electricity in the Union Territory of

Lakshadweep.
अफ#अअऋ जज अर
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
March, 2022 Chairperson,

Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


—34-

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE- | (CIVIL) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 47 SEPTEMBER, 2021.

The Sub-Committee sat on Friday the 015" September, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to
1630 hrs. in the Committee Room-ll, Extension of Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.

PRESENT :
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

3. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE GOMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

Dy C&AG (Comm. Coord & Local Bodies)

1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan
and Chairman, Audit Board

2. Shri L.A.C. Singh - Dy C&AG (Report Central)

3. Smt. Geeta Menon - Director General (Commercial)-I

4. Smt. Ritika Bhatia - Director General (Commercial)-I!

5. Shri Ashok Sinha - AGA (Home Affairs)

6. Shri S. V. Singh - , Principal Director (PC)

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-I (Civil) welcomed the Members

and the officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting
of the Sub-Committee convened to have briefing by Audit on the subjects-(i) “Pradhan
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana” based on C&AG’s Report No. 14 of 2019, (ii) "Generation and
Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep Islands” based on Para No. 2.13 of C&AG’s Report
No. 8 of 2017, and (iii) “Non-deduction of Tax at Source” based on Para No. 10.1 of
C&AG’s Report No. 2 of 2021.


“Bye

3. Thereafter, the Officials of C&AG of India made a Power Point Presentation and
briefed the Sub-Committee about the Audit observations contained in the Audit Report No.
14 of 2019 on -“Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana”. Further, the officials informed that
Ministry has accepted all the 12 recommendations made in the Audit Report.

4. Members sought certain clarifications and the status of action taken by the Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the audit findings. Further, Members sought information
about the actions initiated by the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) after the Audit made
its observations; details of seeding of Aadhaar numbers by the distributors of LPG
cylinders to avoid multiple connection in the name of a women; exercise of de-duplication;
delay in delivery of cylinders; compliance and overseeing of safety measures by the
OMCs; use of App like digital platform for better delivery of services; and issue of non-
transfer of subsidy to PMUY consumers.

5. Thereafter, Audit officers briefed the Sub-Committee on important observations
made in Para No. 10.1 of Report No. 2 of 2021 on "Non-deduction of Tax at Source”.
Audit pointed out that non-deduction of tax at source from the payments aggregating to
27.21 crore from three PSUs which make the Ministry of Rural Development liable for
payment of interest in terms of Section 201 of the Income Tax Act.

6. Members sought information about the failure of the Ministry of Rural Development
to ensure compliance with the laid down provisions and the actions initiated for fixing
responsibility against the official of the Ministry responsible for such lapse.

7. Thereafter, Audit officers briefed the Sub-Committee on important observations
made in Para No. 2.13 of Report No. 8 of 2017 on "Generation and Distribution of
Power in Lakshadweep Islands”. Audit pointed out on the issues like installation of
excess capacity of DG sets, non-commissioning of bulk oil storage facilities at Kavaratti
and Minicoy that resulted in transit loss amounting to 2.65 crore, consumption of diesel
in excess of norms and avoidable expenditure due to high transmission and distribution
losses etc.

8. Members desired to seek information about the actions initiated by the Authorities to
check the transmission and distribution losses; storage and theft of diesel; commissioning
of the bulk oil storage facilities and status on availability of barge at mainland etc.

9. Thereafter, considering the suggestion of Audit, the Sub-Committee decided to hold
their next sitting on 137" September, 2021 to have oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas/ Oi! Marketing Companies on the subject
“Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY)” based on C&8AG’s Report No. 14 of 2019.

10. The Convenor then thanked the officials of the C&AG for briefing the Sub-
Committee on the aforementioned subjects.

The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.



-35 °°

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE- | (CIVIL) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 07" OCTOBER, 2021.

The Sub-Committee sat on Thursday the 07' October, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to

4640 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja : - Deputy Secretary

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA

1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan, Dy C&AG (Comm. Coord & Local Bodies) and
Chairman, Audit Board

2. Smt. Geeta Menon, Director General (Commercial)-|
3. Shri S. V. Singh, P.D. (PC)

OFFICERS OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Secretary

Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri, JS (UT)

Shri A. Anbarasu, Adviser to the Administrator, Lakshadweep
Shri Sushil Singh, Secretary (Power), UT of Lakshadweep

PONS

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-| (Civil) welcomed the Members
and the officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting
of the Sub-Committee convened to have oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs on the audit findings on the subject “Generation and
Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep Islands” based on Para 2.13 of C&AG Report
No. 8 of 2017.


-3 be-
3. The Convenor, then, asked the Deputy C&AG to brief the Sub-Committee on the
shortcomings pointed out and suggestions made by the Audit on the aforesaid subject.

4. After briefing by Audit officers on the subject, the representatives of Ministry of
Home Affairs were called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting. Impressing
upon the witnesses to treat the proceedings of the Sub-Committee as confidential, the
Convenor asked the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs to brief the Sub-Committee on the
audit findings and shortcomings on the subject “Generation and Distribution of Power
in Lakshadweep Islands” based on Para 2.13 of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2017 and action

taken thereon by the Ministry.

5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs explained about
deployment of more DG sets, non-functioning of 4 SPV plants, non-commissioning of bulk
oil storage facilities and transit losses, present status of building a barge for transportation
of HSD oil, diesel consumption in excess of norms, measures taken to have bulk storage,
avoidable expenditure due to high Transmission and Distribution losses, exploring
alternative methods for electrification and non-conducting of Energy Audit etc.

6. Thereafter, the Convenor and other Members raised certain issues pertaining to the
subject like excess generation of power, reasons for decrease in demand of power, steps
taken to reduce T&D losses, non-use of barge facility, non-completion of bulk-storage
facility and its operation, loss due to theft of diesel, action plan to have alternate source of
energy, fixation of responsibility for the lapses, action taken against the agency for
providing high consumption diesel generator sets, action taken by the Ministry on the
Energy Audits’ recommendations and online management of DG sets etc.

7. The representatives of the Ministry replied to some queries raised by the Members.
Thereafter, Hon’ble Convenor asked the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs to
furnish the information that was not readily available with them alongwith the replies to the
List of Points being handed over to them by the Committee Secretariat within fifteen days.

8. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and sharing valuable information. He also thanked
the officers of the Office of C&AG of India for briefing the Sub-Committee on the said
subject.

The witnesses, then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.


-3t—

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE- | (CIVIL) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 087 FEBRUARY, 2022.

The Sub-Committee sat on Tuesday the 08" February, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to
4530 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘D’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil - Convenor

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

RON

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE'COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDIA a

1. Shri Pravir Pandey : - DG
2. Ms. Geeta Menon - DG
3. Shri S.V. Singh - DG

2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-| (Civil) welcomed the Members
and the officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the Sitting
of the Sub-Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on the
subject “Generation and Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep Islands" based on Para
2.13 of the C&AG Report no. 8 of 2017. After giving background of the Draft Report, he
highlighted the major findings of the Sub-Committee and important recommendations

given in the Draft Report on the abovementioned subject.

3. The Sub-Committee, after some deliberations, adopted the Draft Report without any
changes/modifications. The Committee also authorized the Convenor to finalise the Report
on the basis of factual verification done by the Audit and place it before the Public
Accounts Committee. The Convenor appreciated the Committee Secretariat for drafting a
good Report. 4

4. The Convenor then informed the Sub-Committee that since the Sub-Committee
have examined all the three subjects allocated to them, the following two more subjects
have been allocated to the Sub-Committee for examination and Report during the


- 38 शा
remaining term of the Committee ending 30" April, 2022:
(i) “Non-utilisation of Solar Thermal Power Plant” based on Para 9.1 of C&AG
Report No. 2 of 2018 pertaining to the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy.
(i) “Irregular payment of ad-hoc Bonus” based on Para 8.1 of C&AG Report No.
2 of 2021 pertaining to the Ministry of Education.
5. Thereafter, the Convenor stated that in regard to examination of these subjects, the
Sub-Committee may first have briefing by Audit on both the subjects. Thereafter, the

representatives of the concerned Ministries may be called for evidence.

The Convenor then thanked the Members and the Officers of the Office of C&AG of
India.

The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

I


-39~

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 10" FEBRUARY, 2022.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 107" February, 2022 from
1500 hrs. to 1555 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

Members
LOK SABHA
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Dr. Satyapal Singh
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

© O2NAAAYWN

RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
41. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri C.M.Ramesh
13. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
4. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3... Shri S.R. Mishra - Director
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri Rakesh Mohan - Dy. C&AG

2. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy C&AG

3. Smt. Ritika Bhatia - Director General
PART-A

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the
Officers of the C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. He then apprised the
Members of the following three agenda items before the Committee:


yo

i. XXXX XXXX XXXX
ii. | XXXX XXXX XXXX
iii. Consideration and adoption of 4 draft reports.
3. XXXX XXXX 2000५
4. XXXXK XXXX XXXX

5. Draft Report on “Generation and Distribution of Power in Lakshadweep Islands”,

6. XXXX XXXK XXXX
7. XXXX XXXXK XXXX

8. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Reports:

i. XXXX XXXX XXXK
ii, XXX XXXX XXXX
ili, 2000 XXXX XXXX

iv. Draft Report on action’ taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourteenth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “The Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme”.

9. १९ XXXX XXXX

40. Following some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four Reports
without any change/modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the aforesaid Reports on the basis of factual verification and present the same

to the Hon'ble Speaker/ Parliament.

; PART-B
41. XXXXK XXXX XXXX
42. XXXX 20000 XXXX
13... XXXX XXXX XXXXK
14. XXXXK XXXX XXXX
15... XXXX XXXK XXXX

The witnesses then withdrew.

The Committee then adjourned.

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has
been kept on record.