10

PREPAREDNESS FOR’ IMPLEMENTATION OF
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Third Report
(160 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

TENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2191

TENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS FYBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PREPAREDNESS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT. 2013

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Third Report
(160 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION)

सत्यमेव जचते

Presented to Lok Sabhaon: |), -04-2°O0

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: \b-o 3-26

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2020 /Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER!

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2019-20) held on
12.03.2020

Analysis of the Action Taken by the

Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public

Accounts Committee contained in their Thirty
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .....

PAGE

(iii)

(iv)
1-18


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury ss - ~——s Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri_Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
11... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

६0 9 "4 9 ७ # ०० ७

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
17. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Shri P. Bhattacharya’

20. Shri C. M. Ramesh

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar Joint Secretary

Shri M.L.K Raja Director

Smt. Anju Kukreja Deputy Secretary

Shri Ashikho Alemo Assistant Executive Officer

* Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar
Kalita from Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Thirty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Preparedness for
implementation of National Food Security Act, 2013" relating to Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and
Public Distribution.

2. The One Hundred and Thirty Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 211 December, 2018. Replies of the Government
to all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were
received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Tenth
Report at their sitting held on 127" March, 2020. Minutes of the sitting are
given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the
body of the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-/l.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY,
March, 2020 Chairperson,

Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Thirty-third Report (16" Lok Sabha) on the subject “Preparedness
for the implementation of the National Food Security Act, 2013" based on the C&AG
Report No. 54 of 2015 relating to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution).

2. __The One Hundred and Thirty-third Report (167 Lok Sabha), which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 217 December, 2018 contained 18 Observations
and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) and are broadly
categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-18 Total: 18

Chapter - II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil

Chapter - Ill

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil

Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil
Chapter — V


3. A detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed delays in the
identification of beneficiaries under National Food Security Act, incomplete coverage of
beneficiaries, instances of wrongful identification of beneficiaries, irregular extension of time
for identification of beneficiaries, bogus and ghost ration card holders, non-compliance to
the provision of issuing ration cards to the eldest woman as head of the household, non-
extension of maternity benefits under the Act, consistent shortage of rakes in transportation
of foodgrains, non preparation of a National Movement Plan, non completion of adequate
and quality storage facilities, incomplete end-to-end computerisation of Public Distribution
System (PDS) operations, misinformation on the Act and its implementation, non-existence
of a robust grievance redressal mechanism, non-setting up of independent State Food
Commission and Central Monitoring Committee etc. The Committee had accordingly given
the Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred and Thirty-third Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) in respect of all the
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the Original Report
which either need reiteration or merit comments.

(Recommendation Para No. 1)

5. In regard to the non-identification and delay in identification of beneficiaries of
NFSA, 2013, the Committee noted that the reasons as given to them were non-
availability of complete data, time taken to conduct survey/verification, completion of
requisite preparatory activities for implementation of NFSA, formation of new State (in
the case of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana), imposition of Model Code of Conduct due
to General Elections, etc. The Committee found the reply of the Ministry untenable as
the Committee observed that Section 10 of the Act enjoins upon the State Governments
to identify the eligible households to be covered under Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) in
accordance with guidelines applicable to the scheme and the remaining households as
priority households in accordance with such guidelines to be specified by the State
Government. The Committee viewed that since the beneficiary data of AAY, a
Government of India sponsored scheme to provide highly subsidized food to millions of
the poorest families, which was under implementation since December, 2000, was
readily available with the Ministry and the State Governments, non identification of
beneficiaries was not acceptable as a bona fide reason for the inordinate delay. The
Committee believed that the identification and registration of eligible beneficiaries under
the NFSA ought to have been completed efficiently within the stipulated time of 365
days from the commencement of the Act. They were astonished to note that a majority
of the States/UTs had not adhered to the deadline for identification of beneficiaries and
a number of States had included existing AAY households under the NFSA without
carrying out any fresh exercise for identification of AAY households under the Act. The
Committee were disheartened to see the non-committal attitude of the State
Governments/UTs which goes not only against the spirit of the Act but also against the
residents of their own respective States. The Committee felt that there was conspicuous
lack of systematic planning, coordination and integration of data in the implementation



of NFSA. The Committee therefore, recommended punitive action against the erring
officials at all levels who were responsible for the lapses that hindered efficient and
timely implementation of the Act.

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

6. The Committee noted that the initial timeline for identification of the eligible
households under the Act was within one year, i.e., upto 4th July, 2014. However, they
were disconcerted to note that after a prolonged period of more than 3 years, the Act
was implemented in all 36 States/UTs covering 80.57 crore beneficiaries out of the total
estimate of 81.34 crore, thus bringing the coverage to 99.05%. The Committee opined
that the States cannot keep such a section deprived of food security which is the very
-basis of this Act. They, therefore, recommended that all-out efforts should be made
under strict monitoring of the Ministry to achieve cent per cent coverage of the
beneficiaries.

(Recommendation Para No. 3)

7. The Committee, while drawing comparison with the earlier Targeted Public
Distribution System (TPDS) with that of NFSA, noted that against 99.22 crore
beneficiaries coverage under TPDS, only about 81.34 crore beneficiaries as per Census
2011 had been covered under NFSA. The Committee also noted that out of the 99.22
crore beneficiaries under TPDS, 63.22 crore were Above Poverty Line beneficiaries.
Since coverage of beneficiaries under NFSA was more towards reducing the
unintended beneficiaries, the Committee impressed upon the Department that all out
effort be taken towards ensuring rightful targeting of beneficiaries and recommended
necessary measures to bring all eligible beneficiaries of NFSA under TPDS
immediately.

8. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of
Food and Public Distribution) in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“The National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides that entitlements
of the persons belonging to the eligible households at subsidised prices shall
extend upto 75% of the rural population and upto 50% of the urban population at
the all India level for receiving subsidized foodgrains. As per provisions of the
Act, corresponding to this all India coverage, State/UT-wise coverage was
determined by the then Planning Commission. As per Section 10 of the Act,
within the coverage determined for each State, the State Governments shall
identify the eligible households to be covered under Antyodaya Anna Yojana in
accordance with guidelines applicable to the scheme and the remaining
households as priority households in accordance with such guidelines as the
State Government may specify. State Governments were required to prescribe
the criteria for identification of priority households and also to identify the eligible
households.



Delay in identification of eligible households: While the identification of
Antyodaya households under the Act was to be in accordance with the guidelines
applicable to the existing scheme, in case of Priority Households, States/UTs
were required to specify fresh guidelines for identification of beneficiaries. It
appears that delay in formulation of guidelines for identification of Priority
Households beneficiaries delayed the identification process in some States/UTs.

Lapses by officials: The delay in identification of eligible households in
States/UTs was due to various administrative reasons and cannot wholly be
attributed to lapses on the part of specific officials. However, lapses were noted
on the part of officials in case of Karnataka where action has been initiated
against 41 erring officials.

Coverage under NFSA vis-a-vis TPDS : At present, the Act is being
implemented in all the 36 States/UTs covering around 80 crore beneficiaries out
of the total intended coverage of 81.35 crore. The coverage under NFSA is such
that it not only completely covers the Antyodaya households of erstwhile TPDS,
but also the BPL households and a major section of the APL household
categories. Under NFSA, these get covered as Priority Households. Priority
households (erstwhile BPL/APL households) also stand to gain under NFSA as
they now have to pay the same lower Central Issue Price of हैं 3/2/1 for
rice/wheat/coarse grains as that applicable for AAY. Under TPDS, the Central
Issue Price (CIP) for BPL/APL was higher than that of AAY. Further, as
envisaged in Section 3 of the National Food Security Act, 2013, if annual
allocation of foodgrains to any State under the Act is less than the average
annual offtake of foodgrains for the last three years under normal TPDS (2010-11
to 2012-13), the same has been protected as “tide over allocation”. Therefore, no
State/UT stands to lose under NFSA.

Rightful targeting of subsidies: In order to ensure rightful targeting of
subsidies, all States/UTs have undertaken stringent measures to clean up their
beneficiary data base through a process of identification and weeding out of
duplicate/ineligible beneficiaries. This is a continuous process and involves
exclusion of ineligible/ fake/ duplicate ration cards and inclusion of new names on
account of birth/migration and other genuine left-out households. States conduct
verification/re-verification exercise from time to time to weed out ineligible
beneficiaries and include eligible beneficiaries. This may also in some cases
result in numbers falling short of the levels mandated under NFSA. In order to
ensure that all eligible beneficiaries get covered, and that no gaps remain in the
mandated coverage under NFSA, the Ministry has advised States/UTs with
relatively low coverage to take necessary steps to improve coverage and if
required to re-examine their eligibility criteria to fill up the gaps so that no rightful
beneficiaries get excluded.

Government has taken various steps to ensure rightful targeting of
beneficiaries, which include 100% digitisation of beneficiary database and
aadhaar seeding in Ration Card database in all States/UTs in a proactive


10.

manner. At present overall seeding at ration card level stands at 85.8% (at least
one member in a family). The beneficiary data base is now completely digitised.
Electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices are being installed at Fair Price Shops
(FPSs) for distribution of foodgrains through authentication and electronic record-
keeping of the sale transactions. Till May 2019, 4.10 lakh FPSs out of total 5.34
lakh FPSs in the country had ePoS devices. As a result, State/UT Governments
are able to reduce ghost lifting, and are able to achieve rightful targeting of food
subsidies by authentication of eligible beneficiaries, improvement in service
delivery, weeding out bad FPSs, etc.

Directions have been issued vide Notification dated 08.02.2017 that under
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services) Act, 2016, each individual beneficiary may get his/ her ration card
authenticated to receive subsidies under NFSA. The notification provides that till
the Aadhaar is assigned to the beneficiaries under NFSA, the entitlements shall
be given to such individuals on production of ration card and either Aadhaar
Enrolment ID slip or copy of his/her request made to the State/UT Government
for Aadhaar Enrolment, along with some other identification documents.
Department has issued instructions directing all State/UT Governments not to
delete any person/ household from the list of eligible households and not to deny
subsidized foodgrains or cash transfer of food subsidy under NFSA only on the
ground of not possessing Aadhaar number. To ensure full coverage, the deadline
for obtaining Aadhaar has been extended upto June 30, 2019.

As an outcome of digitization of Ration Card/beneficiary records, de-
duplication due to Aadhaar seeding, transfer/migration/deaths, change 11
economic status of beneficiaries, a total of 2.98 crore ration cards have been
deleted/cancelled by State/UT Governments during the years 2013 to 2018.

Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“As per the details furnished in Annexure-l, 79.65 crore persons have
been identified under NFSA. It may be stated whether this figure includes the
persons appearing in 2.98 crore bogus/ineligible ration cards. If not, kindly furnish
a detailed statement showing the number of deleted beneficiaries from the total
eligible beneficiaries. Further, the timelines fixed by the Ministry for completing
the seeding of Aadhar card,-installation of ePoS in FPSs and introduction of intra-
state portability in all the states may be intimated to PAC.”

In reply to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry have stated as under:-

“As an outcome of digitization of RC/beneficiary records, de-duplication
due to Aadhaar seeding, transfer/migration/deaths, change in economic status of
beneficiaries, and during the run-up to and implementation of NFSA, a total of
2.98 crore ration cards have been deleted/cancelled in States/UTs (during 2013-
2018). The deleted/cancelled ration cards are being replaced with eligible
beneficiaries identified by respective States/UTs. This Department has requested


laggard States/UTs to expedite the seeding of Aadhaar in RCs and installation of
ePoS devices at all FPSs at the earliest. However, as per the Notification (as
amended from time to time) issued by the Department under Section-7 of
Aadhaar Act, 2016 a timeline of upto 31.12.2019 has been given to the
States/UT to complete the Aadhaar seeding with ration cards. In respect of
installation of ePoS devices in FPSs, it is expected that upto 5 lakh FPSs shall be
covered by 31-03-2020 and all 5.35 Lakh FPSs in the country shall be covered
by 31-12-2020. To expedite the expansion of the intra-state portability,
Department has requested all States/UTs already having completed
the installation of ePoS devices at all FPSs, to enable the intra-state portability of
ration card holders by 31-03-2020. A_ statement showing _ state-wise
deleted/cancelled Ration Cards is at Annexure IA”.

11. The Committee note that statedly the delay in identification of eligible
households in States/UTs was due to various administrative reasons and cannot
wholly be attributed to lapses on the part of specific officials. However, action
against erring officials was initiated only in one State, i.e Karnataka. It is
irrefutably obvious that none of the other States/UTs want to take action against
the erring officials, which can be inferred as shielding inefficient officialdom. The
Committee desire that the Ministry take a serious note in this regard and
convince the State Governments/UT administrations not to shy away from
initiating disciplinary and other action against such erring officials, lest the evil of
corruption will continue unabated and the poor and down trodden continue to
suffer. The Committee also note that the Ministry had advised States/UTs with
relatively low coverage of beneficiaries to take necessary steps to improve the
coverage and, if required, to re-examine their eligibility criteria to fill up the gaps
so that no rightful beneficiaries get excluded. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should periodically take up the matter with the
States/UTs to ensure 100% coverage of eligible beneficiaries and ensure Aadhaar
Card seeding of all eligible beneficiaries and furnish details of redrawn eligibility
criteria in order to cover 100% of eligible beneficiaries, State-wise. Noting that the
deadline for obtaining an Aadhaar Card was extended upto June 30, 2019, and the
Department had requested the States/UTs concerned to expedite and complete
the seeding of Aadhaar with Ration Cards by 31.12.2019, the Committee desire to
be apprised of the present status in this regard. Further, in respect of installation
of ePoS devices in FPSs, the Ministry expected that up to 5 lakh FPSs shall be
covered by 31.03.2020 and all the 5.35 lakh FPSs in the country shall be covered
by 31.12.2020. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take all necessary
steps to get the work completed by the stipulated time. They also desire that
status of progress in this regard, State-wise be furnished.

(Recommendation Para No. 10)

12. |The Committee noted that as per Section 22(4) (e), the Central Government shall
create and maintain required modern and scientific storage facilities at various
locations. Further, in terms of obligation of State Government for Food Security, Section
24(5) (a) of NFSA enjoins upon every State Government to create and maintain


required number of modern and scientific storage facilities. Such facilities at various
levels should be sufficient to accommodate foodgrains procured under the TPDS, for
ensuring uninterrupted supply of foodgrains to the entitled beneficiaries. However,
NFSA did not fix any timeline for upgradation of storage facilities and there has been
consistent shortage of storage capacity from 2011-2015. To bridge the storage gap the
Ministry had introduced the Private Entrepreneurship Guarantee (PEG) Scheme for
non-DCP (Decentralized Procurement Scheme) States in 2008 and then extended to
DCP States in 2010 to augment the storage facilities in the country. In addition to the
PEG, the Ministry was also implementing a Central Sector (CS) Scheme for
construction of godowns with a focus on the North Eastern States with a budget outlay
of % 455.72 crore for construction of 2,25,330 MT storage capacity in three years (2017-
2020). The Committee, however, found that the DCP Scheme was only operational in
21 States and a storage capacity of 138.51 lakh MT has been completed around the
country as on 31 July, 2017. The Committee also noted that physical verification of FPS
and godowns in the test checked States, revealed shortfalls like inadequate storage
Capacity, storage of foodgrains in damp condition and in open area, damage godowns
and construction of godowns in remote location rendering it unfit for use, incomplete
construction of godowns etc. The Committee viewed that the Ministry ought to have
undertaken a survey to assess the requirement for storage and godowns, fixed a target
and a timeline for completion of construction/upgradation of required storage facilities in
each State/UT at the time of introducing the Act. The Committee desired to be apprised
as to whether the Ministry along with FCI had undertaken a survey to assess the
progress of construction and upgradation of storage facilities as well as the quality of
existing storage facilities across the country. The Committee recommended that the
Ministry and FCI undertake a survey to assess the requirement of storage facilities so
as to ensure adequate and quality storage of foodgrains in every State/UT. The
Committee also recommended that a strict timeline be fixed for completion of storage
facilities and also ensure completion of construction of storage facilities under the
Central Sector Scheme within the timeframe under intimation to the Committee.

13. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of
Food and Public Distribution) in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“Besides creating own storage capacity under Central Sector Scheme,
FCl/Government promote private investment in storage space creation through
Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme. Under the scheme,
investment is made by private sector and FCI hires these godowns for a fixed
period on guarantee basis. As per the guidelines, a predefined period after the
award of contract is provided for completion of the construction of godowns and
non-adherence to these timelines leads to imposition of penalty on the private
party. Regular monitoring and assessment of the storage requirements is done in
various States / regions based on storage gap and storage facilities are planned
and created. Assessment of storage requirement in case of PEG Scheme is
done regularly through High Level Committee (HLC) and State Level Committees
(SLCs). Details of these schemes are summarised below:


Central Sector Scheme: The 12th Five Year Plan Scheme for construction of
godowns with focus on North East region is being continued as Central Sector
Scheme from 2017-18 to 2019-20. Under the ‘Central Sector Scheme’,
Construction is undertaken by FCI after getting land from the concerned State
Governments and after obtaining other statutory clearances. Further, in North
East States, local disturbance, accessibility to site, geographical terrain are few
reasons due to which deviation from scheduled completion may take place. From
the stage of inception upto final handing over of the godown for storage may
require a span of 2-3 years. In addition, construction of intermediate godowns are
undertaken by State Governments of NE through Grant-in-Aid under this
Scheme. Under this State Governments are required to furnish Utilization
Certificates (UCs) within one year of disbursement of funds. Further, funds are
released to the respective State Governments only after receipt of pending UCs.

Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee’ (PEG) scheme: Under ‘Private Entrepreneurs
Guarantee’ (PEG) scheme, as per the guidelines, a period of 2 years after the
award of contract is given for completion of the construction of godowns.

Quality of construction: Regarding the quality of construction, the Central
agencies namely FCI and CWC follow Prescribed construction design for
godowns under PEG/CSS Scheme and silos in order to ensure that foodgrains
are protected from natural calamities like rains and floods. FC] & CWC
continuously keep upgrading their existing godowns to ensure scientific storage
of foodgrains.

Assessment of storage needs: A study has been conducted by FCI through M/s
Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC) to assess requirement of storage facilities
State/UT wise and also district wise. The final reports of the study were
submitted in 2018. Further, action is being taken for construction of storage
facilities based on the findings of the Report.

Monitoring: Progress of construction and upgradation of storage facilities is
reviewed periodically with the FCI by the Department of Food & Public
Distribution. Regular monitoring to assess the Progress of construction of
godowns is also done at appropriate levels of Ministry and FCI to ensure timely
completion of the projects.

14. — Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“Ministry may apprise the PAC about the details of the recommendations
made by PwC and action on the same by the Ministry.”

15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid Audit observation
stated as under:-


“The PwC submitted its report titled “Long Term Storage Requirement for
Food Grains in the Country” in 2018. The Report states that the total storage
capacity for central pool stock of food grains was around 724.74 lakh MT in India
(Total covered capacity available with 701 as on June 2018) and that in the
future, with the increased production and procurement, the need of additional
requirement of storage infrastructure to manage the increased quantum of food
grains was foreseeable. In order to assess the total storage requirement of the
country for food grains, PwC have calculated month wise stock position of food
grains (wheat and rice separately) based on the projection of procurement,
allocation and minimum stock to be maintained in a state. In addition to the
overall projection of food grains, the movement of food grains from surplus
regions/state to deficit region/state has also been taken into account to arrive at
the month wise stock position in different states. The Report concludes that at all
India level, currently the overall storage capacity available in the country was
adequate to store the food grains procured by FCI. Although the overall storage
capacity seems to be adequate enough but when we compare the requirement of
storage capacity with the available storage capacity in respective states, it was
observed that certain states like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Kerala & Punjab are
deficit in terms of overall storage space.”

16. The Committee note that National Food Security Act (NFSA) enjoins upon
Governments at both Central and State levels to create and maintain modern and
scientific storage facilities at various locations. In order to fill the gap between
the required and available modern and scientific facilities, FC! / Government
promote private investment in storage space cretation through Private
Enterprises Guarantee (PEG) Scheme apart from Central Sector Scheme with
special focus on the North-East. So far as creation of storage facilities under PEG
Scheme, a predefined period after the award of contract, that is a period of two
years, is provided for completion of the construction of godowns and, non-
adherence to the timelines leads to imposition of penalty on the private party. The
Committee would like to know about the progress made under PEG Scheme so
far and number of cases where the private parties have faltered in ensuring timely
construction of the facilities and action taken by Government in this regard. Also,
assessment of storage requirement in case of PEG Scheme is done regularly
through High Level Committee (HLC) and State Level Commitees (SLCs). The
Committee desire that number of meetings held by both the Committees during
the last five years, up to the year 2019, along with the outcomes of such meetings
be furnished to them. The Committee further note the 12th Five Year Plan Scheme
for construction of godown with focus on North East region from 2017-2019-20
and the apprehension conveyed by the Ministry about possible deviation from
schedule of completion under the Central Sector Scheme in the North-Eastern
states due to the peculiar reasons like local disturbance, accessibility to site,
geographoical terrain etc. The Committee desire that the Ministry furnish the total
number of facilities sanctioned during the period and the actual number
completed, along with the reasons for delay and action taken thereon, if any.
Further, it was stated that construction of intermediate godowns are undertaken


10

by State Governments of North-East through Grants-in-Aid that are released by
the Center only after the concerned States furnishing Utilisation Certificate of the
previously released Grants-in-Aids. In this regard, data on number of Grants-in-
Aid released along with the performance of the states in completion of
construction of the facilities along with defaults and delay caused may be
furnished to the Committee. It is also noted by the Committee that FCI and
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) follow prescribed construction design
for godowns under PEG/CSS Schemes and silos in order to ensure that
foodgrains are protected from natural calamities. The Committee further note that
Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC) had submmitted reports on the requirement of
storage facilities, State/UT-wise and also district wise, and though currently the
overall storage capacity available in the country seems to be adequate, there are
certain states like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, kerala and Punjab that are running
short of storage facilities with the individual requirements of those States. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the measures that are being taken to ensure
adequate provision of storage space in those states. The Committee, taking stock
of variety of measures taken by the Center to achieve provision of optimum
number of storage facilities, feel there has been ad-hocism in dealing with the
matter and there is a need for a comprehensive and long-term perspective plan
and action is the need of the hour. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry may take immediate and time-bound steps in achieving the targets,
both at the national and each State level.

(Recommendation Para No.12)

17. The Committee observed that the Ministry, in close coordination with the
States/UTs, had given emphasis on complete digitization of beneficiary data along with
other essential parameters like online allocation of foodgrains, computerization of
supply chain management, Aadhaar Seeding, installation of e-Point of Sale (PoS)
devices etc. While the Ministry had achieved 100% digitization of ration cards and
online grievance redressal facility with toll free number has been set up in all 36
States/UTs, the Ministry had fallen short on other parameters like online allocation of
food-grains, computerization of supply food chain management, Aadhaar seeding,
installation of PoS devices etc. The Committee also noted that one of the components
of the scheme was computerization of supply chain, under which entire movement of
foodgrains from the designated depots of the FCI in the State upto the fair price shop
can be tracked online. However, computerization of supply chain had been
implemented only in 20 States/UTs and was at different stages of implementation in the
remaining States/UTs. The Committee viewed that successful and efficient
implementation of NFSA can be guaranteed only after ensuring complete end-to-end
computerization of all other relevant parameters. Moreover, educating the beneficiary of
the benefits of digitization and dissemination of information regarding the grievance
redressal facility and fair price shops in the locality etc. is an important component in
ensuring smooth and successful implementation of the Act. The Committee, therefore,
desired to be apprised of the latest status of computerization of the supply chain. In this
regard, the Committee recommended that the Ministry, in close co-ordination with the



11

States/UTs, undertake immediate steps for completion of computerization of all other
parameters without any further delay. The Committee also recommended that the
Ministry impress upon all States/UTs to maintain and provide complete and updated
information in the online monitoring system to facilitate efficient implementation of the
Act. Here, it is important to mention that the computerized system should be as secured
and foolproof as it should be to disable the hackers from penetrating into the website
and siphoning off the data for their benefit as has appeared in the recent news.

18. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of
Food and Public Distribution) in their action taken notes have stated as under:-

“One of the vital components of the End-to-End Computerization Scheme
is Computerization of Supply Chain Management which ensures timely
availability of food grains to intended beneficiaries at FPS, check
leakages/diversion. So far the Computerization of Supply Chain Management
has been implemented in 25 States/UTs. The Computerization of Supply Chain
Management is still to be completed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu &
Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Punjab. Since some of
the States/UTs could not complete all of the activities under the scheme within
the timelines of the plan scheme, therefore, the Government has extended the
validity of the scheme up to 31* March 2020, without any escalation in the project
cost of the scheme. Alll efforts are being made to complete the Computerization
of Supply Chain Management within the extended period.

The transparency portals have been established in all States/UTs and
digitized details of PDS beneficiaries, Ration card is available on transparency
portal of all States/UTs. Under “End-to-End Computerization of TPDS
Operations” scheme; one of the mandatory conditions for release of 2nd
installment of Central share to States/UTs is that the Security Audit of State’s
portal through STQC or any agency empanelled by CERT-In is undertaken.
Thus, adequate safeguards have been taken to ensure that the system is
secured & foolproof.”

19. The Committee note that Computerization of Supply Chain Management is
still to be completed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Punjab and the time-line for completion has
been extended up to 317 March 2020, without any escalation in the project cost of
the scheme. The Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons behind the
inability to complete the computerization of Supply Chain Management in the
aforementioned States. Noting that the deadline for completion of all activities
under the End-to-End Computerization scheme is extended upto 31% March, 2020,
the Committee desire to know whether the work is on track for completion within
the targeted deadline and seek to be apprised of the present status of the
implementation of the Scheme.


12

(Recommendation Para No.13)

20. The Committee found that the Central Government was funding 90% of the
subsidy in the implementation of the NFSA and the State Governments were entrusted
the responsibility of implementing the Act. However, the Committee were surprised to
note that State Governments had been projecting the schemes under NFSA as their
own project. The Committee desired that the information on the subsidy share of the
Central Government should be clearly advertised on each bag of foodgrains distributed
under the Act and it be ensured that the State Governments do not project the schemes
under NFSA as their own and thereby misuse of the Act is avoided. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the Ministry issue necessary instructions and guidelines to
the State Governments in this regard. In this sequel, the Committee desired that
information boards on the NSFA, price of foodgrains, fair price shop dealers etc. be
installed at each and every Fair Price Shops (FPS). The Committee also recommended
that the Ministry along with States/UTs should undertake an awareness and information
dissemination campaign to educate the beneficiaries of their tights and benefits under
the Act by all possible means including print, audio-visual aids, especially radio, and
social media fora.

21. 118 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of
Food and Public Distribution) in their action taken notes have stated as under:-

“In pursuance of the provisions contained in Targeted Public Distribution
System (Control) Order, 2015 (clause 10), all States/UTs have been directed to
display information regarding (ji) entitlement of foodgrain, (ii) scale of issue, (iii)
retail issue price, (iv) timings of opening and closing of Fair Price Shops (FPS)
including lunch break, if any, (v) stock of foodgrain received during the month,
(vi) opening and closing stock of foodgrain, (vii) the mechanism including
authority for redressal of grievances with respect to quality and quantity of
foodgrain under the TPDS, and (viii) Toll Free helpline number, on a Notice
Board at a prominent place in all Fair Price Shops.

Department of Food & Public Distribution, disseminates information
regarding rights and entitlements of the beneficiaries under National Food
Security Act including the subsidy burden shared by Government of India through
advertisements in English/Hindi/Vernacular languages in leading newspapers of
all States/UTs. The matter of printing of the subsidy share of the Central
Government on each bag of foodgrain was reviewed and it was felt it may not
serve the purpose, as foodgrains are distributed by the FPS dealer to the
beneficiaries in loose form and these bags are retained by the FPS dealers
themselves. Therefore, the purpose of disseminating the information to the
beneficiaries by printing it on the bags may not get served.

Pilot Project on Social Audit and Awareness campaign was successfully
rolled out in 6 selected Gram Panchayat/Urban Ward in Khandwa Distt. of
Madhya Pradesh from 1-6 March, 2019. In this regard, this Department has
sanctioned 80% financial support to Madhya Pradesh to conduct this pilot


13

programme. The best practices will be shared with other States to send their
proposals for similar kind of publicity-cum-awareness generation program with
financial support from Government of India.”

22. The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Targeted Public
Distribution System, the Department of Food and Public Distribution have
directed all the States/UTs to display information regarding entitlement of
foodgrain, scale of issue, retail issue price, timings of opening and closing of Fair
Price Shops (FPS) including lunch break, if any, stock of foodgrains received
during the month, opening and closing stock of foodgrains, the mechanism
including authority for redressal of grievances with respect to quality and
quantity of foodgrain under the TPDS, and Toll Free helpline number, on a Notice
Board at a prominent place in all Fair Price Shops. The Department also
disseminates information on the rights and entitlements of the beneficiaries
under the Act including the subsidy burden shared by the Government of India,
through advertisements in English/Hindi/Vernacular languages in leading
newspapers of all States/UTs. The Committee also observe that a Pilot Project on
Social Audit and Awareness campaign was successfully rolled out in 6 selected
Gram Panchayats/Urban Wards in Khandwa District of Madhya Pradesh from 1-6
March, 2019. The Department had sanctioned 80% financial support to Madhya
Pradesh for conducting this pilot programme. The Department have stated that
the best practices will be shared with other States to send their proposals for
similar kind of publicity-cum-awareness generation programme with financial
support from Government of India. The Committee, while appreciating the
measures taken by the Department in respect of raising awareness and
disseminating information on the rights and entitlements of the beneficiaries
under the Act, desire to be apprised of the outcome of the Pilot Project conducted
in Madhya Pradesh. The Committee also desire to know as to how many more
States such Pilot Projects have been rolled out since March, 2019. The Committee
also seek to know as to whether the best practices have already been shared with
the other States/UTs and such publicity-cum-awareness generation programs
have been conducted in other States/UTs.

(Recommendation Para No.15)

23. | The Committee noted that to ensure transparency and proper functioning of the
TPDS and accountability of the functionaries, every State Government was to set up
Vigilance Committees (VCs) at the State, District, Block and FPS levels as per the Sub-
clause (6) under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order 2015. The State Governments had
to send a report annually to the Central Government on the functioning of Vigilance
Committees. The Committee, however found that no State Government out of the test
checked States, had submitted annual reports to the Ministry under the aforesaid
Control Order. Moreover, the Ministry issued online formats to States for submission of
such reports in September 2015 only and information from most of the States/UTs on
functioning of Vigilance Committees as per the prescribed format under the TPDS
(Control) Order, 2015 was still awaited. In addition, the Committee found non-functional
VCs, irregular vigilance meetings, non-maintenance of records etc. even in those States


4

where VCs had been constituted. The Committee desired to be apprised of the
mechanism put in place by the Ministry to ensure timely submission of annual reports
on the functioning of the Vigilance Committee and the course of action taken against
those States/UTs that have not complied to the Control orders, 2015. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry should issue necessary instructions to impress upon all
States/UTs to urgently set up the Vigilance Committee and submit a report on the
functioning of the same within three months of presentation of the Report.

24.

The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of

Food and Public Distribution) in their action taken notes have stated as under:-

25.

“NFSA does not mandate preparation of annual teports on the functioning
of the Vigilance Committee. It contains provision for setting up Vigilance
Committees at State, district, block and FPS level. Provision regarding Vigilance
Committees (VCs) has been reiterated in the TPDS Control Order, 2015.

States/UTs are advised from time to time to constitute the VCs at all levels
and to hold regular meetings and submit a report on the functioning of the same
urgently to this Department. VCs are required to periodically review the
functioning of the TPDS at all levels.

The NFSA (2013) provides that for ensuring transparency and proper
functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System and accountability of the
functionaries in such system, every State Government shall set up Vigilance
Committees as specified in the Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001,
made under the Essential Commodities Act, 1995, as amended from time to
time, at the State, District, Block and fair price shop levels consisting of such
persons, as may be prescribed by the State Government giving due
representation to the local authorities, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes, women and destitute persons or persons with disability. The Vigilance
Committees are required to regularly supervise the implementation of all
schemes under this Act, inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in
writing, of any violation of the provisions of this Act; and inform the District
Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any malpractice or misappropriation of
funds found by it.

Vigilance Committees have been set up at 4 levels in 28 States/UTs while
in 5 States they are at 3 levels. UTs like Lakshwadeep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
are too small to have VCs at 4 levels. These have been set up at 2 levels in
these UTs. Action has been initiated in Chandigarh which is operating the Direct
Benefit Transfer (DBT) in cash pilot under PDS. The state-wise status of
Vigilance Committees is given at Annexure-V.”

Audit in their vetting comments on the aforesaid reply of the Ministry stated as

under:-

“Sub-clause (6) under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order 2015 stipulates
that State shall send a report annually to the Central Government on the


15

functioning of Vigilance Committees in the prescribed format on or before 30th
June of the next financial year. As desired by the Committee, the Ministry may
apprise the PAC of the mechanism put in place by it to ensure timely submission
of annual report on the functioning of the Vigilance Committee. The Ministry may
also intimate PAC the list of States/UTs who have furnished the Annual return for
the year ending March 2019 to it and the action taken against those States/UTs
that have not complied.”

26. The Ministry in their updated action taken replies to the aforementioned Audit
observation have stated as under:-

“Sub-clause (6) under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order 2015 stipulates
that State shall send a report annually to the Central Government on the
functioning of Vigilance Committees in the prescribed format on or before 30th
June of the next financial year. State Governments are instructed from time to
time to submit a statutory report annually to the Department on the functioning of
the VC in the prescribed format prescribed under the TPDS Control Order, 2015.
States like Assam, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been submitting the annual report in the
prescribed format to the Department. Advisory is issued from time to time to all
States/UTs to submit their annual reports to the Department. Management
Information System (MIS) has been developed by Department to facilitate easy
submission of Reports.”

27. The Committee feel that the Ministry has not understood the spirit of their
earlier recommendation. It does not suffice to just create and form structures. It
needs to be ensured that the most important aspect of continuous monitoring of
implementation of programmes and adapting to the unique situation and
environment that exists in different parts of the country, has been missing in the
whole programme which needs to be ensured. In this regard, the Committee note
that the State Governments are instructed from time to time to submit the
statutory report annually to the Department of Food and Public Distribution on
the functioning of Vigilance Committees (VCs) in the prescribed format stipulated
in the TPDS Control Order, 2015. The Committee have been informed that
State/UT Governments of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Sikkim,
Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been submitting the annual report in
the prescribed format to the Department. The Department has also issued
advisories from time to time to all States/UTs to submit their annual reports. A
Management Information System (MIS) has also been developed by the
Department to facilitate easy submission of Reports. While observing that a
number of States/UTs are compliant to the provision of the TPDS Control Order,
2015, the Committee recommend that the non-compliant States may be pursued
aggressively to annually submit the statutory report to the Department on the
functioning of Vigilance Committees (VCs) in the prescribed format stipulated in
the TPDS Control Order, 2015, failing which, appropriate measures may be taken


16

against them, for not following the advisories issued in this regard. Moreover, the
Department should monitor the MIS to ensure timely submission of reports from
all States/UTs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action
taken in this regard.