DERAILMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SECOND REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

132


PAC NO. 2362
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SECOND
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

| DERAILMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS |

(Ministry of Railways)

Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on: 202.2024
Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Phalguna 1945 (Saka)


Contents

Introduction

Inspections and Track Related Issues

(i) Monitoring by Track Recording Cars (Para 2.2) i
(ii) | Outsourcing of track maintenance activities (Para 2.3) वि
(iii) |Mechanization of track maintenance activities (Para 2.4) 42
{iv) Introduction of wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete sleepers (Para 2.5) 14
(v) | Alumino Thermit and Flash Butt Welding (Para 2.6) 17
(vi) Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Testing (Para 2.7) 18
(vii) Maintenance of ‘Yard Lines’ (Para 2.9) 20
(ix) Inspections by Higher Authorities (Para 2.11) 24
(x) Training of track maintenance officials(Para 2.13)
| Accident Inquiry Reports
(i) Accidents/Derailments in Indian Railways (Para 3.1&3.2) 26
{ii) Timeliness in completion of inquiries/investigations (Para No.3.4.1) 45
1५ | Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK)
(i) Funding of RRSK (Para 4.2) 47
(ii) Utilization of RRSK(Para 4.3) 48
Other Safety Issues 52
Vv IW Fire accidents in coaches (Para 6.2) 54
(ii) Elimination of Manned Level Crossings (Para 6.3) 56
(iii) | Accidents involving Animals (Para 6.4)
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 58-72

Cy)



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
2... Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri BhartruhariMahtab
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
6... Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Shri Brijendra Singh
11... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman
18. Shri Derek O' Brien’
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Partha Goswami - Director
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad - Under Secretary

1 Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.

a)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Hundred-First Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Derailment in Indian Railways” based on C&AG Report number 22 of
2022 relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the
Parliament on 21 December 2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report during their current term i.e. 2023-24. The Committee took oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) at their
sitting held on 17.07.2023. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05.02.2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the
Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the
Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

titi)


PART-I

Introduction

Genesis of Indian Railways and issues involving Derailments/Accidents

1) The first railway proposals for India were made in Madras in 1832. India's first
railway line was named Red Hill Railroad and was built by Arthur Cotton to transport
granite for road-building. It ran from the Red Hills in Chennai to the Chintadripet bridge
in Madras and was opened on 12 September 1837. India's first 33.79-km railway line
passenger train service was inaugurated between Bori Bunder, Bombay (now Mumbai)
and Thane in 1853.The Indian Railway (IR) is one of the world's largest railways. It
functions as a vertically integrated organization providing Passenger and Freight
services. It is a single system which consists of 67,956 route km of track that traverses
the country. More than 21648 number of trains ply on IR carrying about 22.15 million
passengers and hauling nearly 3.32 million tonnes of freight every day. Despite its vast
size and complexity, the Indian Railway has a good safety record. However, accidents
do occur from time to time. Accidents tarnish image and question safe and sound
working procedures of Indian Railway. Accidents occur on account of acts of omission
or commission, evasion of rules, unsafe practices, etc. Out of various categories of
accidents, most serious consequences are witnessed in collisions, derailments, fire in
running trains and level crossings accidents etc.

2) The C&AG Report No. 22 of 2022 for the year that ended in March 2021 contains
significant results of the performance audit of Derailment in Indian Railways by the
Ministry of Railways of the Union Government from 2017-18 to 2020-21.

3) Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid C&AG Report
for examination and report.

4) The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), considered the subject for detailed
examination, took oral evidences of the representatives and other officials of
Ministries of Railways and Civil Aviation on 17 July, 2023 and obtained written replies
on the same. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Committee
examined the subject in detail.

INSPECTIONS AND TRACK RELATED ISSUES
A. Monitoring by Track Recording Cars (PARA 2.2)

5) Audit analysis revealed that there were shortfalls in inspections by Track
Recording Cars. It was observed that the shortfall ranged between 30 per cent and 100

1


per cent in TRC inspections. The shortfall in TRC inspections had adverse
consequences on the quality of assets with implications on safe operation of trains on
these routes. In one of the inquiry reports, it was noticed that a derailment of
Seemanchal Express occurred in February 2019 in ECR wherein it was stated that the
TRC run over the.section was overdue by four months, which could have given vital
inputs for defects in track. The main reasons assigned for the shortfall in the inspections
was non-receipt of the programme for the running of TRCs to be prepared and finalized
by Research Designs & Standards Organization (RDSO), Lucknow. Thus, non-
deployment of TRCs over planned sections, as per schedule, led to non-checking of
track parameters having implications on overall safety of train operations including
derailments.

6) In their Action taken note, the Ministry have stated as under:

“Track recording car is a means to carry out super check of track parameters,
which are measured and monitored by P. Way Gang, JE, SSE and test checked
at ADEN level. To carry out this super check, there were total 5 (five) Track
Recording Cars in Indian Railways during 2017-2021. Due to limited number of
Cars, required frequency of track recording could not be achieved. In case of non
availability of TRC, alternative means i.e. Oscillation Monitoring System is
deployed and attention to track is given based on the result. However, two more
TRCs have been commissioned thereafter and another one TRC is under
commissioning. This will enhance the capacity of track recording. Further
sanction of 7nos. TRC has been taken in Works programme and procurement is
under process.”

7) When the Committee asked to clarify with regard to the number of Track
Recording Cars, the Ministry representative, during evidence before the Committee,
replied, as under:

“Sir, there were five earlier and two more have been commissioned. So, we
already have a fleet of seven track recording cars. So, in the past, there were
some constraints because of shortage of track recording cars. This has been
pointed out by the C&AG also that they prescribed that periodicity was not
adhered. So, that is why, we have already procured and commissioned two more
such cars and more such cars are being commissioned so that we have sufficient
fleet.”

8) When asked about the desirable ratio of total length of Railway network and the
number of Track Recording Cars (TRCs), the Ministry official replied as under:

“Sir, on an average the annual recording done by one TRC is approximately
35000-40000kms. Hence the total requirement of TRC for year 2024-25 is 7-8
numbers. Therefore, the desirable ratio is one TRC per 15000 kms of BG main
line track.”

9) When asked as to how many track recording cars are appropriate for maintaining
the 67,000 route kilometers, the Ministry representative replied as under:

2


10)

“Sir, the track recording is required to be carried out depending upon the quantity
of traffic running and the importance of individual route. So, we have different
periodicity depending upon the categorization of the route. That periodicity
ranges from 2 months to one year depending upon the importance and traffic
carried. The specific information about our requirement of track recording cars for
adhering to prescribed periodicity that we will submit to the Committee.”

When asked about the reasons attributed for not carrying out timely inspections

by Track Recording Cars (TRCs) and non-deployment of TRCs in a timely manner, the
Ministry, in their written reply stated as under:

11)

“Annual planning of track recording by TRC is being done by RDSO and the
same is issued to all zonal railways at the beginning of every financial year.
Monthly track recording plans by each TRC are issued in advance. There has
been shortfall of available recording capacity by TRC due to old machines
requiring maintenance. The problem was aggravated due to break down,
schedule maintenance of Track Recording System, non-availability of path in
congested traffic sections etc. Due to this, priority was given for track recording
on higher speed routes on Group A and B routes, which resulted in non-recording
of certain sections on Group D and Group E routes at stipulated periodicity. Two
new Track recording cars have since been commissioned in year 2022-23,
thereby adding to the recording capabilities by TRCs. Two more TRCs have been
procured.”

In response to further query as to whether there has been any shortage of

permanent way staff, the Ministry, in their written reply stated as under:

12.

“The Permanent way staff associated for operation of TRC is deployed by RDSO.
Operation of TRC was not affected any time due to non-availability of Permanent
way staff. In order to meet the requirement of Permanent way staff for new TRC,
22 nos. of new Senior Section Engineers and Junior Engineers have been posted
in last 2 years for operation of TRC. As such, there is no shortage of permanent
way staff for operation of TRC.”

On being enquired about the consequences ‘of not deploying Track Recording

Cars (TRCs) on the planned sections, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

13.
in Gro'

“No unsafe situation has been observed in past on shortfall of track recording, as
sufficient safeguards are available in this regard.”

When asked as to why there has been a shortfall in TRC inspections particularly
up A and B Broad Gauge lines, the Ministry in their written reply furnished the

following data and stated as under:

P| Group | Zone | Number of | Frequency as | Number of | Number of | Shortfall | %
inspections | per IRPWM inspection | inspections Shortfall
due as per s due as} done
CAG per
Report IRPWM



वे. TA | | 48 Once in 3 P| 20 P| P|
months. &
Once in 4
months
2. | cR | 16 Once in 4| 24 je | | 38
months
3. ECR [| Once in 4] 12 7 5 42
months
4. NCR | Once in 4 | 24 1 13 54
months
| =| SCR es Once in 4] 36 7 [0 | 53
months
| | SER | 32 Once in 4 | 12 fo | | 67
months
7. WR | 16 Once in 4] 24 13 4 46
months
“The reason for shortfall was due to old machines requiring maintenance. The
problem was aggravated due to break down, schedule maintenance of Track
Recording system, non-availability of path on congested traffic sections etc. Now,
2 new TRCs have been commissioned and 2 new TRCs have been recently

procured.”

14, | When enquired about reasons for non-preparation of programmes for running of
TRCs by Research Designs & Standards Organization (RDSO), Lucknow, the Ministry
explained in a written reply as under:

“Every year in the month of February, yearly Master Plan for forthcoming year
including a monthly recording programme by each TRC is prepared by RDSO
and issued to all Zonal Railways. Detailed programme of recording to be done by
each TRC based on the above Master Plan is issued and circulated to concerned
Zonal Railways. The preparation of the programme for running of TRCs by
RDSO, Lucknow has been done timely. However, due to requirement of
maintenance of TRC machines, entire network could not be covered. Now, 2 new
TRCs have been commissioned and 2 new TRCs have been recently procured.”

15. When the Committee desired to know as to what steps have been taken by the
Ministry to ensure that RDSO, Lucknow invariably submit the roadmap for running
TRCs in time, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“With 2 TRCs commissioned during 2022-23 and 2 more procured recently, the
situation has improved. RDSO has already issued the master plan for
deployment of TRC for 2023-24.”

16. On being enquired about the measures initiated to prevent negligence in carrying
out TRC programmes, the Ministry, in their written reply stated as under:

“There has not been any negligence in carrying out the TRC programmes, as it
got deferred due to maintenance of old Track recording cars. Now, 2 new TRCs
have been commissioned and 2 new TRCs have been recently procured.”

4



17. On being asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry and Zonal
Railways to ensure that the frequency for track recording, as mandated in the Indian
Railway Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM), is strictly adhered to, the Ministry replied as
under:

“The network of Indian Railways is expanding at much faster pace and sectional
speed of existing network is also being increased. Considering the expansion of
network, 2 new TRCs have been commissioned, 2 new TRCs have been recently
procured and 7 more (04 additional TRCs and replacement of 03 old TRCs) have
been sanctioned.”

18. On being enquired about the variations in the monitoring frequency based on
the speed bands justification thereof in terms of safety and operational
requirements and the steps being taken to improve the compliance with the
recommended monitoring frequency for each speed band, the Ministry explained in
a written reply as under:

“The rate of deterioration of track geometry parameters and maintenance efforts
are on higher side for tracks under high speed band with respect to tracks on
low speed band. Therefore, tracks having higher speed are required to be
monitored more frequently for assessing the requirement of maintenance inputs
to be given. For the compliance with the recommended monitoring frequency for
each speed band, the Indian Railways annual liability of Track Recording by
TRCs is calculated and master chart is prepared and circulated to all Zonal
Railways. Further, the monthly recording program of TRCs are prepared based
on the annual master chart."

19. | When asked as to how does the current ratio of one TRC per 15,000 kms
align with international best practices or standards for railway track inspection
and whether there are plans to reassess or revise the desirable ratio based on the
evolving needs and challenges in track maintenance and safety, the the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

“There is no specified international standard for recording frequency by TRC.
Different Railways follow different practices based on their experience and
maintenance needs. The current ratio of one TRC per 15,000 kms is calculated
based on Indian Railways current track speed bands, their respective
frequencies and proportion of track in different speed bands. The ratio shall be
reassessed time to time to incorporate the increasing speed of the track
sections and increase in track length due to completion of new projects.
Keeping in view in future requirement, 04 additional TRCs will be added and 03
old TRCs will be replaced with new TRCs, tender of which has already been
invited.”


20. When asked to provide detailed data on the frequency of track recording
undertaken vis a-vis the requirement mandated in the IRPWM during the last five years
and whether there has been any shortfall noticed by the Ministry in this regard and the
action taken against the officials responsible for the shortfall, the Ministry in their written
reply furnished the following data and stated as under: ह

“Detailed data on the frequency of track recording undertaken vis-a-vis the
requirement mandated in the IRPWM during the last five years is as follows:

Y%age Recording

Year Requirement as_ per | Recording done
IRPWM (Km Km

2018-19 198817 101222 51%

2019-20 222401 90390 41%

2020-21 232646 179442 77%

2021-22 241342 144720 60%

2022-23 248358 218218 88%

There has been shortfall due to shortage of available recording capacity and
maintenance of old TRCs. However, the gap between required testing as per
IRPWM and actual testing done is narrowing down over the years, as is evident
from above data. To wipe out the shortfall in the inspection by TRCs, following
steps have been taken: a) 2 new TRCs have been commissioned and 2 new
TRCs have been recently procured. b) 7 more TRCs (04 additional TRCs and
replacement of 03 old TRCs) have been sanctioned. It is also submitted that for
monitoring the health of the track, additional runs of Oscillation Monitoring
System (OMS) have been carried out, which is also one of the systems for
inspection of track and gives acceleration peaks and ride index in lieu of track
recording by TRCs. As a result, the track was maintained to the desired

standards. Details of 5 years of OMS run are given below:

Year Planned (km Progress (km % increase
2018-19 711461 747924 5

2019-20 770208 873685 13
2020-21 786263 41087161 51
2021-22 825665 1108648 34
2022-23 869243 1064797 22

21. | When asked as to what is the preset mechanism applied by the Indian Railways
now to ensure that optimum inspections by Track Recording Cars are carried out and to
make sure that no inspection gap recurs and what is the present status of number of
inspections being carried out, the Ministry replied as under:

“Comprehensive review has been done for recording capacity requirement and
action has been taken to have recording capacity commensurate with the
requirement..2.new.TRCs have been commissioned, 2 new TRCs have been
recently procured and 7 more TRCs (04 additional TRCs and replacement of 03



old TRCs) have been sanctioned. The monthly programme issued by RDSO is
being regularly monitored. There is improvement in track recording in year 2022-
23 in which the Track recording liability for the year was 2,48,358 Km and actual
recording carried out was 2,18,218 km.”

22. On being asked as to how much fund has been allocated by the Indian Railways
to conduct TRC inspections in the last five years and whether there is sufficient fund to
achieve proper monitoring of tracks by TRCs, the Ministry in their written reply
responded as under:

“There is no separate fund allocation for TRC inspections. The consumables and
fuel are arranged by concerned Zonal railways for running of TRCs with the
available funds of track maintenance with divisions. However, for procurement of
TRCs, work is sanctioned in Rolling stock programme and commensurate funds
are allotted. As on date, procurement of additional 7 TRCs (4 additional and 3 on
replacement account) has been sanctioned at approximate total cost of Rs 170
crores. There has been no shortage of funds.”

23. When the Committee sought response of the Ministry in relation to the inquiry
report on Seemanchal Express derailment which stated that TRC run over the section
could have given vital inputs for defects in the track which could have averted the
derailment, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“As per Commissioner of Railway Safety Inquiry report, derailment of
Seemanchal Express 12487 UP on 03.02.2019 was primarily caused due to
fracture of rail & classified as failure of Railway equipment due to poor
construction & maintenance. The responsible officials have been suitably taken
up under Indian Railway Disciplinary and Appeal rules. It is brought out that TRC
is meant for recording the track geometry parameters and does not detect any
rail flaws. Therefore, shortfall in TRC recording has no bearing on this accident.
However, the observation of CRS has been taken in a positive way and following
steps have been taken to wipe out the shortfall in the inspection by TRCs:

a) 2 new TRCs have been commissioned and 2 new TRCs have been

recently procured.

b) 7 more TRCs (04 additional TRCs and replacement of 03 old TRCs)

have been sanctioned.”

Para No.2.3: Outsourcing of track maintenance activities

24. The Railway Board had specified regular exercise for working out the required
strength of Trackman for maintenance by all Zonal Railways every year and institute
necessary mechanism for timely filling up of vacancies. It was also specified that track
maintenance activities are to be organized either through departmental resources or
through outsourcing or a combination of both to meet the entire requirement of track
maintenance. Audit had highlighted a number of deficiencies in this regard. The status

7


of outsourcing was found to be insufficient against the required number of work force of
the Civil Engineering Department. The percentage of vacancies in Indian Railways for
Civil Engineering Department ranged between 9 to 36 per cent. No outsourcing was
done in East Central Railway against the shortage of work force in divisions selected for
review. Accident Inquiry reports of the zone revealed that in 23 per cent of the total
derailments (40 out of 172) in East Central Railways, one of the factors responsible for
the derailment was due to improper track maintenance. In three Zonal Railways, North
Central Railways, North Frontier Railway, and West Central Railway, the percentage of
vacancies was more than seven percent; however, no outsourcing was done in any of
these Zonal Railways.

25. On being enquired about the present status of vacancies of Civil Engineering
Department in Indian Railways and necessary action to augment the work force of the
Civil Engineering Department taken by the Ministry and concerned zonal railways, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The total Non-gazetted Group ‘C’ (including level - 1) vacancies in Civil
Engineering department of Indian Railways as on 01.07.2023 are 68619. During
2018- 2019 to 2022-2023, 11784 (Provisional) candidates have been empanelled
in Civil Engineering Department (for Group ‘C’ posts excluding Level 1) by 21
Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs).”

26. On being asked about the reasons attributed for the shortage of work force in the
civil engineering department, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Non-gazetted Group ‘C’ (including level — 1) vacancies in Track Maintainer
Cadre of Indian Railways as on 01.07.2023 are 42189. The vacancies of JE/SSE
(P-Way) as on 01.07.2023 are 2141. Occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a
continuous process on Indian Railways considering its size, spatial distribution
and criticality of operation. The vacancies are filled up primarily by placement of
indents by Railways with Recruitment agencies as per operational requirements.
During the process, vacancies may arise and these are filled subsequently.”

27. When enquired about the procedure followed by the Indian Railway to outsource
work relating to track maintenance, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“During March 2006, 20 activities of track maintenance have been identified for
outsourcing and communicated to Zonal Railways. Quantum of work based on
the field requirement is worked out by the respective units of the division and
estimates are prepared. Based on these estimates, contractual agencies are
fixed through open tenders. For assets, which have outlived their prescribed life,
works of renewal/replacement viz. Complete Track Renewal (CTR), Through Rail
Renewal (TRR), Through Sleeper Renewal (TSR), Through Turnout Renewal
(TTR), Through Fittings Renewal (TFR) etc are sanctioned and executed through
the outsourced agencies.”


28. When asked as to how the railway ensures that the outsourced agency is
deploying sufficient number of trained manpower, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:

“Condition for deployment of required qualified manpower forms part of the

contract agreement as per General Conditions of Contract. Railway Permanent

way engineers posted at different sections of the division ensure skilled/trained

manpower as per requirement of work. Large numbers of agencies that have

developed the expertise over the years are deployed. Relevant conditions of
' GCC are reproduced below:

26. Provision of Efficient and Competent Staff at Work Sites by the
Contractor:

26.1 The Contractor shall place and keep on the works at all times efficient
and competent staff to give the necessary directions to his workmen and to
see that they execute their work in sound & proper manner and shall
employ only such supervisors, workmen & labourers in or about the
execution of any of these works as are careful and skilled in the various
trades. Regular checks of worksites are being done by officers and
supervisors during execution of track works to ensure safety and
deployment of adequate trained manpower.”

29. When the Committee asked as to what percentage of the track maintenance has
been outsourced during the last five years, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
under:

“On Indian Railway network, majority of regular Track Maintenance activities are
done by Track machines owned by Railways and operated by permanent staff of
Railway. These are supplemented by Railway's Track Maintainers who carry out
works of immediate attention, urgent repairs, patrolling and sundry maintenance
activities. 20 activities of track maintenance, mainly related to track renewal
works, have been outsourced over Zonal Railways. Only limited work of track
maintenance is outsourced to make good the deficiency on account of shortage
of manpower. As the outsourcing is being done activity wise (which varies over
different sections of Railways) and not manpower based, the actual percentage
of outsourcing cannot be accurately expressed.”

30. On being asked as to how does the railway ensure that the quality has not been
compromised with regard to track maintenance by outsourced agencies, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

“The track renewal and maintenance works are to be executed by agencies to
fixed stipulated standards in presence of Railway Supervisors/Officers. Railway
Permanent way engineers posted at different sections of the division ensure the
quality of the work. Outsourcing agencies also deploy graduate/diploma
engineers, as per conditions of the contract, for planning, execution and quality
control of the works. Different track parameters are regularly checked during


execution of work. Regular test check of worksites is being done by higher
officers for any deficiencies before releasing the payment for work.”

31. | When asked about the difficulties in outsourcing of track maintenance work, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“There are no major difficulties in outsourcing of identified activities. Outsourcing
of activities is being done through work contracts based on the quantities of each
item involved in scope of work and not as manpower supply contracts. Minor
issues as and when arise are addressed by the field officials.”

32. On being enquired as to how does the Ministry ensure the continuous
training and skill development of both permanent and outsourced staff and what
mechanisms are in place to regularly assess and verify the competence of the
deployed workforce in track maintenance, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
under:

“For training of permanent staff, there are well laid down training modules and
periodicity for various Permanent way officials for induction as well as refresher
courses. Regular training to P. way staff is imparted through various Zonal
Training Centre (ZTC) and Divisional Training Centre (DTC). Apart from the
regular trainings, training courses for improved technologies to senior
supervisors is organized by Supervisors Training Centre under ambit of IRICEN
pune. Specialized courses for welders and USFD operators are being arranged
through RDSO/Thermit welding training centers. The competency is issued to
welders and USFD operators after training with specified validity period. The staff
having valid competency certificate is only allowed to undertake these safety
critical activities, which automatically ensures that training of such officials is up
to date. Similarly, the staff directly involved in safety critical activities such as
gateman, trolleymen etc are also issued competency certificates with specified
validity period after requisite training and judging the knowledge. Details of
training are fed in TMS and exception report is generated, which is being
monitored to ensure that the due training is imparted timely. Outsourcing work is
awarded to agency who have adequate experience of track maintenance works.
Provisions are kept in the contracts for deployment of skilled manpower by
agencies for specialized track works. Deployment of trained manpower is
ensured by Railway Supervisors. Penal actions as per General Conditions of
Contract are imposed on the agency, in case of default. Further, various
training/counseling sessions are also being conducted periodically for the
outsourced staff by Railway. The outsourcing agencies deploy workers
specialized for P.Way works as a result of their long association with such type of
works, These workers execute the works under trained Supervisors & Railway
Supervisors. Whenever any outsourced person is deployed as patrolman or in
gate, training is imparted and only after completion of training, he is allowed to
work.”

10


Para No. 2.4: Mechanization of track maintenance activities

33. Audit noticed idling of Track machines on account of blocks not given by the
Operating Department (32 per cent), blocks not planned by Divisions (30 per cent),
operational problems (19 per cent), non-availability of staff (five per cent) and no scope
of work (three per cent). Audit observed that idling of track machines due to ‘block not
given by the Operating Department’ and ‘Stabled due to operational problems’ was
found in all the twelve Zonal Railways; in eleven Zonal Railways, the track machine was
kept idle for 13 to 1881 days due to ‘non-availability of track machine staff’ and the idling
of track machines due to ‘block not planned by divisions’ and ‘programme not planned
by Track Machine Office’ was noticed in ten Zonal Railways.

34. On being asked about the mechanization of track maintenance activities, the
Ministry representative submitted during his evidence before the Committee as under:

“Sir, at present, 1,560 track machines are available with us. | want to inform the
Committee that even in track renewal work, we are using track machines. There
are apprehensions of hon. Members about the quality of laying of track. We are
doing mechanization in the track renewal itself. The quality of the work is ensured
by laying the tracks with the help of track machine. For maintenance of
machines, we have inducted a good number of machines. So, the maintenance
is being carried out with the help of automatic machines which ensures the
quality of maintenance.”

35. When asked as to how they ascertain the strength of rail tracks, the Ministry
representative submitted during his evidence before the Committee as under:

“Sir, we have got track recording cars. This is a machine which is used for
barrage screening. This is one of the very important track maintenance
operations that we are doing. The track is laid on stone ballast. With the passage
of time, this stone ballast gets polluted due to the earth and dust. It is required to
be cleaned periodically so that we can maintain that track.”

36. On being asked about the measures taken by the Ministry and the zonal railways
to ensure timely preparation of plan and notify block hours well in advance by the
operating departments to facilitate timely track maintenance, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

“There is a concept of corridor block which is inbuilt in the working time table
issued by Zonal Railways. Further, to streamline the implementation, the rolling
block concept with 2 weeks advance planning has been enforced, which is
reviewed every week by the Divisions and Zonal Railways.”

37. | When asked as to what action has been taken by the Indian Railways on the
recommendations of the National Academy of Indian Railway, Vadodara on optimum
utilization of track machines, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

a1


38.

“The recommendations of the National Academy of Indian Railway, Vadodara on
optimum utilization of track machines issued in May 2017 are being
implemented. The action taken is as follows:

(i) The RB needs to ensure that the distribution of track machines shall be made
after judicious assessment of the requirement of the ZRs so as to avoid holding
of track machines in excess of requirements.

Action taken: Based on the recommendation of NAIR/provision in Track machine
manual, the requirement of Track machine has been worked out zone wise
based on workload.

(ii) Quality of maintenance of track machines shall be the focus areas.

Action taken: To improve the reliability and quality of track machines, 2 additional
periodic overhauling workshops (Vatva near Ahmadabad and Kachrapara near
Howrah), besides the existing 2 (Prayagraj and Secunderabad), have been
developed and made functional. Besides this, Zonal Track machine maintenance
depots have also been set up at strategic locations. Satellite Track Machine
Maintenance Depots (STMMD) are being set up in each division to ensure timely
maintenance of machines with improved quality.

(iii) Pre/post block preparations shall be done properly and in advance to avoid
loss of working time of machine during block.

Action taken: This is a pre-requisite for effective machine utilization. Accordingly,
the instructions have been reiterated to Zonal Railways.”

(iv) Action shall be taken on priority to fill-up vacancies in supervisory and track
machine staff.

Action taken: There has been increase in track machine staff from 2017-18
onwards.

(v) To avoid breakdown time of machines, sufficient inventory of spares shall be
maintained in depots.

“Instructions for ensuring sufficient inventory of spares in depots have been
reiterated”

(vi) Track machine staff shall be given stipulated trainings.

Action taken: Track machine staff are trained regularly at Indian Railway Track
Machine Training Centre (IRTMTC). Besides Railway instructors, Experts of
Original Equipment manufacturer (OEM) are also engaged in this training. In
support with OEM, track machine simulator is also established at IRTMTC for
learning the operation of tamping machines.”

When asked as to what actions are proposed by Railway Administration to

ensure optimum utilization of Track Machines for maintenance activities, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under: ~

12


“|. Induction of High Output Integrated machines on IR.

ii. Advance planning of two weeks Rolling Block Plan at Division level and critical
review of implementation at Division and Headquarter level.

iii, Augmentation of two new Central Periodic Overhauling Workshop (CPOH),
one each in Eastern & Western region, in addition to the two existing in Northern
& Southern regions, for machine maintenance & upkeep of machine health in
good fettle to get quality output.

iv. Satellite Track Machine Maintenance Depots (STMMD) are being set up in
each division to ensure timely maintenance of machines and improved quality.”

39. | When enquired as to whether sufficient fund had been allotted for mechanization
of track maintenance activities and the details of fund allotted and utilized for the
purpose during the last 5 years, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Sufficient fund had been allotted for procurement of track machines utilized for
mechanization of track maintenance activities. Details of fund allotted and utilized
for the procurement of track machines during the last 5 years is given below:

Year Initial Fund allotted (Rs. In| Actual Expenditure/ Final Grant
Cr.) (Rs. In Cr.)
2017-18 410.07 665.00
2018-19 736.66 875,00
2019-20 476.34 1000.00
2020-21 1394.67 1766.15
2021-22 2284.24 2548.70
2022-23 3150.39 2683.42

Expenditure on track maintenance activities is incurred under Sub-Major Head 02-
Repair and Maintenance of Permanent Way & Works under Major Head 3002-3003 in
Revenue Grant. Apart from this, expenditure is also incurred under Minor Head 31-
Track Renewal under Major Head 5002-03 in Capital Grant. There has been no
shortage of funds for track maintenance activities. Funds utilized for the purpose during
the last five years is shown in the following table -

(Rs in cr)
Year Revenue Capital
2018-19 14788 9690
2019-20 16067 9391
2020-21 15993 13523
2021-22 16593 16558
2022-23 (Prov. 18119 16325

13



40. On being asked about the percentage of mechanization in track maintenance
work and the steps initiated/contemplated to minimize human intervention in Railway’s
operational aspects and maintenance, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Percentage of mechanization in track maintenance work as of 31.10.2023 is
detailed as under: (i) 81.9% for Deep Screening of plain track. (ii) 74.3% for Deep
Screening of Turnouts. (iii) 70.6% for Plain Track Renewal (TSR) (iv) 28.6% for
Turnout Renewal. The steps which have been initiated/contemplated to minimize
human intervention in Railway's operational aspects and maintenance are: (i)
Instructions have been issued for carrying out track renewal and maintenance
activities through complete mechanization by 2024 (ii) More and more track
machines are being introduced for mechanized track maintenance.”

Para No.2.5: Introduction of wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete sleepers

41... Audit noticed that Research Design and Standard Organization (RDSO) had
developed a new wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete sleeper (RT-8527) for Indian
Railways to keep pace with the increased freight traffic by allowing higher axel load on
existing track. Accordingly, Railway Board had issued directives on use of RT-8527
sleepers from 2019-20 onwards. However, audit found that RT-8527 sleepers, in
sanctioned patches above two kilometre length from 2019-20 onwards, has not been
used by some zonal railways at the time of track renewal due to non-availability of the
tate reference in Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM), web
based application, for RT-8527 sleepers at the time of preparation of detailed estimates.

42. When enquired about the usage of wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete
sleepers, the Ministry official replied during submission before the Committee as under:

“The normal wide based 60 kg PSC sleepers with elastic fastening on plain track
and PSC sleepers on turnout are used while carrying out primary track renewal.
Almost 98 per cent of PSC sleeper on the plain track is now concrete PSC
sleeper and, similarly, on the turnout also, almost 98 per cent sleepers are PSC
sleepers. We were earlier using the wooden sleepers on bridges. Old wooden
sleepers on bridges are being replaced with steel channel or H Beam sleepers
while carrying out the primary track renewal work. The cumulative number of
steel channel or H Beam sleepers has increased to around ten lakhs. During
further evidence, the Ministry official stated that the progress during current
financial year up to October, 2023, is almost 63,000 and that takes the total to
10.6 lakhs.”

43. 116 Ministry in their written reply on the same issue stated as under:

“Key advancement in the technology takes time, as it involves change in mould,
design, fittings (rubber pads, liners), arrangement for fittings for transition period
etc. There are three main reasons for which utilization of the wider and heavier
pre-stressed concrete sleepers (RT-8527) in Zonal Railways could not pick up as
detailed below:-

14


1. The existing stock of normal sleeper (RT-2496) and its matching fittings were
required to be utilized by the Zonal Railways to avoid wastage of resources.

2. Initially, the matching fittings of wider sleeper (RT-8527) were not available
with Zonal Railways. Hence, few Zonal Railways produced normal sleepers (RT-
2496) to continue critical track renewal and construction works.

3. The wider sleeper (RT-8527) was not designed to accommodate 52 kg rails,
hence Zonal Railways kept on producing normal sleepers (RT-2496) for
requirement of 52 kg rail routes.

Utilization of the wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete sleepers (RT-8527)
has now picked up. The production of RT-8527 has increased from zero in 2017-
18 to ninety five lakh five thousand nine hundred and fifty eight whereas the
production of normal sleepers has declined from ninety four lakh fifty six
thousand four hundred ninety six to five lakh eighteen thousand two hundred
seventy six.”

44. On being enquired as to whether necessary changes have now been made in the
Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM) application, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as below:

“Yes, necessary changes for incorporation of rates of wider sleepers have been
made in IRPSM by concerned Zonal Railways. Further utilization of the wider and
heavier pre-stressed concrete sleepers (RT-8527) has now picked up.”

45. . On being asked about the measures taken by the Ministry and concerned Zonal
Railways to remedy the error and the action taken against the officials responsible for
non- adherence to the Board directives, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
below:

“Railway Board vide letter dt. 17.10.2018 has communicated the approval of
Railway Board to all Zonal Railways regarding use of wider and heavier sleeper
(RT-8527) from financial year 2019-20 onwards. Tender for procurement of wider
sleepers (RT-8527) was finalized by Board in May'2019 with provision of
mobilization period of 4 months for shifting to production of wider sleepers.
Accordingly, Zonal Railways started production of wider sleepers from
September 2019 onwards. Zonal Railways have started using wider sleeper RT-
8527 based on availability of wider sleepers & its matching fittings. Zonal
Railways also kept on using normal sleepers (RT2496) till stock of normal
sleepers and matching fittings were available, so as to avoid wastage of
resources. Further, wider sleeper (RT-8527) were not designed for 52 kg rail,
hence Zonal Railways were compelled to use normal sleeper (RT-2496) only for
52 kg rail category, which have got sufficient residual life. In view of above
systemic issue, no individual was considered responsible for time taken in

15


switching over to new technology. Accordingly, there was no necessity to take
any punitive action against officials.”

46. On being asked whether any financial constraint has been experienced in the
process of such replacements, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“No financial constraints were experienced in the usage of wider sleepers (RT-
8527) as provisions for sufficient funds were made available in concerned plan
heads.”

Para No.2.6: Alumino Thermit and Flash Butt Welding

The rail joint is an important part of the track system. Alumino Thermit (AT) welding and
Flash Butt (FB) welding processes are used for welding of rail joints in the Indian
railways. The preferred process of FB welding involves an automated tracklaying
machine running strong electrical current through touching ends of two un-joined pieces
of rail to form a strong weld. The Corporate Safety Plan of IR (2003-13) emphasized
that as the AT welds are weak links in track, it would be gradually reduced and replaced
by FB welds. Audit noticed that while the targets in respect of the less preferred AT
welding (manual process) were achieved, there was shortfall in achievement of targets
for the preferred FB welding. In reply concerned zonal Railways have listed reasons like
unavoidability of use of AT welds for regular maintenance, use of AT welding where FB
welding is not economical, non-fixation of targets for removal of AT welds and isolated
welding as reasons for opting the less preferred AT welding. In reply to the
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Railways, the Ministry had stated that
technology upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is being carried out
continuously, switching over to mobile FB welding technology in place of AT welding to
carry out weld renewals.

47. On being enquired about the steps being taken to encourage all Zonal Railways
to adopt the preferred FB welding process, the Ministry representative replied during his
submission before the Committee as under:

“The Indian railways are reducing the population of alumino thermit belt gradually
by using the longer rail panel of 123 flash butt belt from rail manufacturing plants.
These flash butt belts are of higher quality with least chance of internal defect
and they improve safety. The percentage of long rail supply to Indian railway has
increased to almost 83 per cent of the total supply in the year 2022-23. Sir, |
would just like to explain here that in the past, the rails that we were procuring
from SAIL, they were of the order of 13 metre long or 26 metre long or 39 metre
long etc. These rails when laid in the.track, they were welded by what is called
alumino thermit welding. But the alumino thermit welding is not as strong as the
original rails. So, we have been constantly making several efforts to reduce the
population of alumino thermit belts in the track. One of the measures taken is that
we are procuring longer rails directly from the steel plants. Currently, we are
procuring 260 metre long rails which are transported in special rakes from the
steel plans and directly unloaded at the site where the renewal work is to be
carried out. These rails also are directly rolled in 130 metre or so of length and
have got maximum one, two or three flash butt welded joints. A flash butt welded

16


48.

49.

joint is a superior joint which is as good as the quality of parent rail. This has
substantially helped us in reducing the breakage of rails, what we call, ‘weld
failure during service’, which is also a hazard for safety. Sir, on most of the busy
tracks, short-welded rails of 39 metre length and single rail have been converted
into the long-welded rail. As on 31st March, 2023, 88.55 per cent of busy track is
long-welded rail. Shortwelded rail of 39 metre length and single rail are limited to
the location where longwelded rails are not permitted on technical ground. ”

In reply to the same question, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The Road Map for reduction of AT Welding on Indian Railways (IR) had been
prepared in 2019 and being followed by IR since then. Accordingly, following
steps have been taken to adopt the preferred FB welding and minimize AT
welding: -

1. For all New Line/Gauge conversion/Doubling Projects, initial track laying is
being done by using Second hand service rails. These service rails are being
replaced by Long rail panels of 260m with one/two/three Flash Butt weld (FB)
supplied from rail manufacturing plant. As maximum proportion in the form of
long rails is being supplied to the field, therefore, number of AT welds
requirement is reducing.

2. In all New Line/Gauge conversion/Doubling Projects, FB Welding by Mobile
FB plant is being used to convert 260m rail panels into continuous welded rails.
3. Rails of different lengths are being used by cutting long rail panels for use in
Points and Crossings (P&C) area, so as to reduce AT Welding.

4. For loop lines and sidings, FB welding by Mobile Plants is being used for
welding.

5. Older AT welds are being replaced with FB welds through weld renewal works
with Mobile Flash Butt Plant. However, AT welding is inevitable for certain
locations like attention to rail/weld failures, isolated SEJ renewals, point and
crossing approaches, glued joints etc.” :

When the Committee desired to know whether all weld renewal work in the

railway track is being done through FB welding method now, the Ministry in their written
teply stated as under:

50.

“Through AT welds renewal works are being done with FB welds with Mobile
Flash Butt Plant. However, at certain isolated locations such as attention to
rail/weld failures, isolated SEJ renewals, point and crossing approaches, glued
joints etc., AT welding is being done, where mobile FB is not practical.”

When enquired as to what measures have been taken by the Ministry and Zonal

Railways to provide sufficient FB welding machinery and equipments for railway track
maintenance staff, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“IR has achieved supply of 83% of total rails in the form of long rails in FY 22-23
and targeting for 90% of its total requirement in the form of long rails in FY 24-25
from manufacturing plant with one/two/three Flash Butt weld. IR has also

17


upgraded its Stationary Flash butt plants. Sufficient numbers of Mobile Flash Butt
Welding Plants (121 nos.) of various agencies, have been approved so far for
carrying out in-situ FB welding works on IR.”

51. When asked about the present timeline for completion of replacement of AT
welds with FB welds and whether there is any mechanism to oversee and ensure the
objective of 100 % replacement, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“100% replacement of AT welds with Flash Butt welds is not practically possible
as AT welding has to be done for certain isolated locations such as for attention
to rail/weld failures, removal of USFD defects, Scabbed rails, isolated SEJ
renewals, point and crossing approaches, glued joints etc. Road Map for
reduction of AT Welding on Indian Railways (IR) had been prepared in 2019 and
is being followed by IR. Accordingly, older AT welds are being replaced with FB
welds by through weld renewal using Mobile Flash Butt Plants. Technology
upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is being carried out continuously,
switching over to FB welding in place of AT welding. All efforts are being made to
reduce AT welds & to provide FB welds. As such, there is no time line for
replacement of existing AT welds with FB welds.”

52. When the Committee asked whether the use of AT weld is relevant in view of
availability of better technology in the form of FB weld and use world class standards of
the AT welds is done, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“IR has adopted to use long rail panels to reduce population of welds. IR has
achieved supply of 83% of total rails in the form of long rails in FY 22-23 and is
targeting for 90% in FY 24-25. IR is planning to increase long rails to 95% of its
total requirement by FY 26-27. So, use of AT weld will be reduced considerably
by FY 26-27. Though, FB Welding is better technology, however, certain
minimum quantity of AT Welding needs to be done where mobile FB is not
practicable. IR is using world class standards for AT welds. IR specification for
AT welding (IRST-19-2021) is at par with European code for AT welding (BSEN
14730-1: 2017) and in some cases more stringent than European Code.”

Para No.2.7: Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Testing (USFD)

53. The USFD testing was to be carried out at the prescribed frequency. There was
shortfall in USFD testing. Timely testing by USFD may help in early detection of
vulnerable points and initiating necessary remedial measures to reduce the probability
of accidents. Audit observed that there were shortfalls in USFD testing in rails and
welds during 2017-2021); in Northern Railway, in respect of USFD testing in rails, there
was shortfall of 50 per cent; in North West Railway, the shortfall was 11 per cent and in
South West Railway, the shortfall ranged between 4-41 per cent and in South East
Railway, the shortfall in USFD testing on welds ranged between 04 and 42 per cent. In
Western Railway, the shortfall ranged between 10-37 per cent. In North Frontier

18


Railway, the shortfall ranged from 4-23 per cent and in East Coast Railway, the shortfall
was up to 100 per cent.

54.

When asked about the usage of USFD, the Ministry representative replied during

evidence before the Committee as under:

55.

“Sir, ultrasonic flaw detection system is used in Indian Railways in detection of
flaws in railways to enable timely removal of defects. This has increased over the
years. Now, we are doing the USFD testing in the range of 305 thousand track
kilometer per year. Similarly, USFD testing is being done for weld and the number
has increased to 2533 thousands welds per year. Sir, this is a very important
activity for safety. The Committee would recall that there have been instances in
the past when derailments have taken place because of rail breakage. So,
ultrasonic testing of welds helps in detecting any flaw which is developing in the
rail or in the weld. So, we have laid lot of emphasis in improving the ultrasonic
testing of rails.”

On being enquired as to what actions have been taken to ensure adherence to

frequencies of Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Testing (USFD) of rails and welds, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as under:

56.

“Indian Railway has a set system of testing of rails and welds by Ultrasonic Flaw
Detection Testing (USFD) machines at prescribed frequencies. These testing are
being monitored at field, division and Zonal Railways regularly. Indian Railway
has already adopted a web enabled Track Management System (TMS) to ensure
monitoring of the track inspection and maintenance activities at various levels of
Railway working. Alarm/Reminder is provided by TMS for any locations of rails &
welds due for USFD testing, based on which planning and deployment of USFD
testing team is done efficiently. 641 number of departmental USFD machines for
Rail testing and 620 number of departmental USFD machines for Weld testing
are available to ensure adherence of testing at prescribed frequencies. Further,
new USFD machines in lieu of old Machines whichever complete their codal life
and for additional work load due to change in GMT/additional line, are being

“procured. 282 number of USFD machines for Rail testing and 258 number of

USFD machines for Weld testing have been procured in the last three years.”

On being further asked about the efforts being made to ensure availability of

sufficient equipments and manpower for undertaking adequate USFD and difficulties
being faced in undertaking USFD, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Requirement of resources is reviewed annually based on traffic density and
addition of railway network. 641 number of departmental USFD machines for Rail
testing, 620 number of departmental USFD machines for Weld testing and
manpower, commensurate with workload, are available on IR. Outsourcing
agencies are made available over and above the departmental workforce to meet
the shortfall over and above the departmental resources. Generally, no major
difficulties are being faced in undertaking USFD.”

19


57. When asked about the allocation made and utilized by the Indian Railways for
carrying out USFD testing in the last five years and whether funds available have been
sufficient for the purpose, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The cost of USFD testing is being charged to revenue and track renewal works.
No separate allocation is made for USFD testing. However, approximate
expenditure incurred for procurement of USFD machines, consumables,
outsourcing etc is Rs. 358 Crores in the last five years on Indian Railway. There
is no problem of funds for carrying out USFD testing.”

58. On being asked by the Committee about the status of induction of self-propelled
ultrasonic Rail testing car by the Indian Railways, the Ministry informed that tenders for
19 SPURT Cars have already been opened and are under finalization and the details in
this respect will be furnished to the Committee in writing.

Para No. 2.9: Maintenance of ‘Yard Lines’

59. Audit was of the opinion that shortfalls in maintenance activities may lead to
unsafe track, adversely affecting the safe movement of trains. As against the demand of
7339:28 hours for Yard line maintenance, only 4667:56 maintenance block hours were
granted by the Zonal Railways during 2017-2021. The reasons for the shortfalls were
attributed to (i) the agencies not turning up to execute the work in time, (ii) less block
granted against those demanded and (iii) non-availability of material, etc. Because of
shortfalls in maintenance activities, the conditions of track would become unsafe,
adversely affecting the safe movement of trains.

60. When asked about steps taken to ensure that agencies responsible for carrying
out track maintenance activities execute the work in a timely manner, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

“Execution of works in yard lines sometimes suffers due to stabling of goods
trains on loop line for operating requirement, frequent movement of trains in yard
affecting availability of block, lack of working space etc. However, since the
speed of operation on loop line is always less (up to 30 kmph), the block granted
is adequate for required maintenance effort. For timely execution of works,
conditions are kept in the contract agreement for execution of all items in the
scope of work. Works are executed by the outsourcing agency based on detailed
planning for supply of men and machinery etc required for the work. Regular
monitoring of progress is being done by Railway officials linked with the
execution of works. Action in terms of conditions of contract is taken in case of
delay on contractor's account.”

61. On being asked about the actions taken against those agencies who have not
turned up to execute the assigned work in time, the Ministry in their written reply stated
as under:

“Some of the operational reasons for non turning up of agency for assigned work
in time, is due to the uncertainty in clearing of occupied line from stabled goods
trains and loss of labour involved due to frequent occupation of lines for operating

20


reasons like precedence, stabling etc. However, in case of contractual default,
Penal provisions exist in Maintenance and renewal contracts for non-execution of
works by the agencies. Accordingly, actions viz. imposition of penalty, termination
of contract etc. are taken against the defaulting agency.”

62. On being enquired about the present ratio of grant/utilization of maintenance
blocks against the blocks demanded by Zonal Railways, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

“The blocks granted were fully utilized as per planning. Though, the %age block
availability is less in 2022-23 w.r.t. 2021-22, it may be noted that there is 23%
increase in absolute block hours demanded & 17% increase in absolute block
hours granted in 2022-23 w.r.t. 2021-22. It may also be appreciated that the
block granted in terms of percentage remains around this limit only due to
various operational reasons.”

63. On being asked as to how does Railway Administration plan to bridge the gap
between blocks demanded and that granted for important maintenance activities, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“There is a concept of corridor block which is inbuilt in the working time table
issued by Zonal Railways. Further, Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs) from the
Engg. & Traffic Dte. have been issued to Railways for advance planning of traffic
blocks for maintenance of assets. Recently, system of Rolling Block Plan (RBP)
have been introduced at Divisional level for advance two week block planning for
maintenance of assets by different departments working in same block to avail
maximum benefits of traffic blocks, which is reviewed every week by the
Divisions and Zonal Railways.”

Para No. 2.11: Inspections by Higher Authorities

64. Regular inspections by higher officials, may lead to enhanced overall safety in
the operations of the trains. Audit observed differences in the ratio of route kilometer
with average number of inspections. In two Zonal Railways, the ratio was more than
2400 km for one inspection. For seven Zonal Railways, the ratio was more than 220 km
for one inspection, and the ratio ranged from 223 to 674. In three ZRs, the ratio was
141, 123 and 14 respectively. In South East Central Railway, higher officials did not
carry out any inspection, though the zone has 2348 route km (around 4 per cent of total
of Indian Railways) Broad Gauge line. As no standard criterion was set for number of
inspections to be conducted by higher authorities, there is no accountability for meagre
number of inspections.

65. When asked as to how the Ministry and the concerned Zonal Railways ensure

that regular and thorough inspections are being carried out by the higher officials, the
Ministry representative replied during submission before the Committee as under:

“Firstly, our complete system of operation and maintenance of the railway
infrastructure and operation is at the level of Railway Division. The officers and
the staff, who are posted in the Railway Division -the officers and the supervisors

21


66.

representative replied as under:

67.

— carry out the operation and maintenance. For them, we have got the laid down
schedules for carrying out the inspections. For a Senior Section Engineer, who
has got a particular section under his charge, there is a schedule laid down for
carrying out inspection. Above them, there is an Assistant Engineer who has got
a schedule for carrying out various types of inspections for various assets. Above
him, there is a Senior Divisional Engineer, who is the highest officer of the
technical department at the Division level. For him also, a schedule is laid down
for carrying out the inspection. | think, what Audit has pointed out is inspection by
the headquarters’ officers and said that there is no laid down schedule for the
senior officers. In this regard, the role of the officers posted in the Zonal
Headquarter is not day-to-day operation and maintenance. Their job is to provide
resources in terms of Budget sanctions to the requirement of the Divisions, to
provide them technical drawings and specifications, and to provide them
instructions, circulars etc. on the working. However, the officers of the
headquarters also periodically go to the Divisions and carry out random
inspections to see how the instructions of the headquarters as well as provisions
of manuals etc. are being implemented in the field. So, there is no requirement or
as such system of laying down a periodicity of inspection of officers who are
posted in zonal headquarters. For the divisional officers, we do have the system.”

When further asked by the Committee about the annual inspection, the Ministry

“Sir, there is a system of annual inspection by the General Manager in which one
section of every Division is selected every year for a thorough inspection by all
the concerned principal heads of the department. From the zonal headquarter
they go to a particular section and then they carry out a thorough inspection of
each and every aspect during this inspection. They see whether the laid down
provisions of the manuals and the instructions given by the headquarter and the
required safety works are being properly carried out in the Division. Based on
that review, the Divisions are advised whatever corrective actions are to be
taken.”

In reply to a further query by the Committee about the range of inspections, the

Ministry representative replied as under:

“Sir, | will just request you to see the third and fourth paras of this particular para
2.11. It says: “Audit observed that though periodical or special inspections such
as that of territorial head of the department, the Chief Engineer, etc., have been
mentioned in the IRPVVM, no target in terms of inspections to be conducted by
the higher officials has been fixed by IR. Audit also observed that there was wide
variation in the number of inspections conducted over various zonal railway by
the higher officials.” So, Sir, this particular para where Audit has mentioned about
this, they have talked about the inspection by officers of the zonal headquarter.
This is what | was trying to explain. | also want to supplement that we have a
system which is called Track Management System which is used for monitoring
entire inspection of track. Now, it is. mandatory for all the divisional supervisors
and officers to upload their inspections in the Track Management System. It is a

22


68.

very comprehensive system where complete online tracking of the inspections
and maintenance is carried out. However, the same thing is not being done
regularly at the headquarter level. If we refer to the data of the TMS, we will not
find the complete details of inspections done by headquarter officers on the TMS.
So, that gap is also there.”

When enquired about the role being played by the Chief Commissioner of

Railway, Safety insofar as inspection is concerned, the Ministry representative replied
as under:

69.

70.

“Sir, CCRS will supplement whatever | am saying. | will give you the first
information. The Commission of Railway, Safety role is whenever we are
commissioning a new asset which may be a new line, or doubling a line, or a
gauge conversion project, before opening any new asset, a thorough inspection
is carried out by the Commission of Railway Safety. Besides, whenever we are
doing a major modification to our assets, like altering a yard, or doing an
alteration to the signaling system of a station, such things also require sanction of
the Commission of Railway Safety. | will request CCRS to supplement what |
have said.”

In response to the same question, the CCRS supplemented by stating as under:

“The Commission of Railway Safety works under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation and dealing with the matters pertaining to the safety of
rail travel and train operations and is charged with certain statutory functions as
laid down in the Railway Act, 1989. These functions are inspectorial,
investigatory, and advisory in nature. The Commission functions according to
certain rules framed under the Railway Act. The functions of Commission of
Railway Safety are: authorization for the opening of new railway lines which also
include gauge conversion and doubling of existing railway lines; sanction for the
execution of minor works which includes additional major bridges and remodeling
of yards; introduction of new rolling stock and increase in the speed of existing
tolling stock; condonation of infringement to the Schedule of Dimensions; and
investigation into serious railway accidents. When | say serious railway
accidents, it means whenever there is a casualty or there is a serious grievous
injury or there is damage to the property worth more than Rs. 2 crore. These are
treated as serious railway accidents. A dedicated safety department operates as
an internal auditor in the Railways at three tiers: Railway Board level; Zonal
Railway level; and the Divisional level. During the period from 2017-18 to 2022-
23, a total of 292 accidents have taken place on Indian Railways. The
Commission of Railway Safety has inquired 32 cases. That is something around
11 per cent. It pertains to serious accidents happened.”

On being further asked by the Committee as to whether it only depends upon the

loss of property worth Rs. 2 crore or also upon the number of deaths, the CCRS replied
as under.

“No, Sir. Even if there is one death or there is a grievous injury, the CRS has to
carry out the inquiry. It is mandatory to have inquiry. If there is no death but

23


71.

property loss is more than Rs. 2 crore, then also it has to be done. Other
accidents are inquired by the Railways. In the 32 accidents which are inquired by
the Commission of Railway Safety, we have given around 302 recommendations
and the Action Taken Report from the Railways have been received for 23
inquiries which is around 72 per cent. Two inquiry reports have been submitted
recently in the month of April and June. In the last few years, there has been a
considerable improvement in the compliance of ATRs. As of now, only seven
ATRs are pending. As regards recommendations, in the 23 inquiry reports which
we have submitted, 92 per cent recommendations have been accepted, balance
18 recommendations are under consideration of the Railways. As of now, nil
report is pending in the Commission for the inquiry. We do not have any pending
inquiry to be carried out by the Commission.”

When pointed out by the Committee about the activities of the Commission of

Railway Safety and the reason for drastic decline in the number of periodical
inspections during 2017-18 to 15,565 and now reduced to 5,145, the Ministry
representative replied as under:

72.

“Sir, those periodical inspections are by our Operation and Maintenance officials.
Those are not by CRS.”

In reply to the question by the Committee regarding regular and thorough

inspections being carried out by the higher officials, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:

73.

“Detailed schedule of inspection of field officials (JE/SSE/ADEN) have been
stipulated in IRPWM and in addition, the guidelines for inspection by Divisional
officers have been issued by Railway Board. Monitoring of inspection is done by
the senior officers at Divisional and Head quarter level during their inspection.
Higher officers in Headquarter are normally entrusted with duties of arranging
sanction, funds, approved drawings and guidelines etc. As such, no inspection
schedule is stipulated for them. However, Headquarter officers carry out the
technical inspections suo motu and also during the safety drives launched from
time to time, which are scrutinized on completion of such safety drives. Safety
inspections are carried out by Railway officers over and above the large numbers
of inspection of assets and operations that are carried out by Railway officers
during their regular course of work, which include many aspects directly related
to safety in train operations. During these safety inspections, officials, including
senior officers, intensively inspect different areas of Railway working in the field.”

When asked whether the Track Management System (TMS) provides for real

time notification of deficiencies during such inspections, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:

“Inspections of higher authorities are accompanied by field officials responsible
for attending the deficiencies observed during the inspection. The Deficiencies
are noted then and there by the field officials and necessary attention is given.
After attending, the compliance is reported to higher officials, who monitor the
same.”

24


74. On being asked whether standard criteria have been set for conducting regular
inspections in all-the Zonal Railways by higher officials and the details including the
number of Kilometers to be inspected over a fixed period of time and other
parameters/criteria of inspection, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Detailed schedules of inspection of field officials (JE/SSE/ADEN) have been
stipulated in IRPWM and in addition, the guidelines for inspection by Divisional
officers have been issued by Railway Board. The type of inspection and the
frequency has been stipulated for each official. The inspection of track involves
inspection of various track features viz. turnouts, SEJ, Level crossing, track on
bridges, etc apart from the trolley inspection. As such, the kms of inspection is
not true representation of the inspections done by higher officials. The monitoring
is accordingly done with respect to inspection of various track features. For
safety inspections, Indian Railways has not specified criteria of number of
kilometers to be inspected per inspection by higher officials (HQ Officers). There
are multiple kinds of safety inspections. The inspecting officers are usually
directed to do footplate inspections of a given section, inspect a given station,
yard or station, or look for certain particular occurrences, faults or issues over a
given stretch in special drives. Care is taken to ensure that all relevant assets
and operations are inspected regularly. At the same time certain critical areas in
terms of assets and operations are inspected more intensively than others.”

Para No.2.13: Training of track maintenance officials

75. Audit noticed that 794 officials dealing with track maintenance activities were not
given training in seven ZRs. Induction/initial training was not given to 240 officials and
refresher training was not imparted to 518 officials of the different ZRs. Shortfall in
imparting training to ‘Track Maintenance officials’ either at their induction level or at
refresher course level had been reported by seven divisions; and shortfalls in trainings
at supervisory level, such as, SSE/JE/P. Way were also seen in two Divisions. The
reasons for the shortfall in imparting training at various levels were mainly attributed to
Covid-19 situation, staff not being spared due to special work and other assignments,
non-receipt of training schedule in the units and non-updating of information of
employees in Track Management System (TMS), etc.

76. ‘In their background note, the Ministry have replied as under:

““All safety category railway employees are given structured training at various
stages of their career.

*Simulator- based training is being imparted for improving the driving skills and
reaction time of Loco Pilots.

*Training module has been formulated for running staff on Fire Fighting & use of
fire extinguishers.

*There is regular counseling of running staff and interaction with their families.

25


77.

*It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources.
During the year 2022-23, around 5,00,833 non-gazetted employees were given
different types of training viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.”

When asked as to how the Ministry and Zonal Railways ensure that all track

maintenance officials are adequately trained and are qualified to handle the work, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

78.

“There are well laid down training modules and periodicity for various P. way
officials for induction as well as refresher courses. Revised Training Modules of
non Gazetted staff of Civil Engineering Department have already been issued
Regular training to P. way staff through various Zonal Training Centre (ZTC) and
Divisional Training Centre (DTC). Apart from the regular trainings, training
courses for improved technologies to senior supervisors is organized by
Supervisors Training Centre under ambit of IRICEN Pune. Specialized courses
for welders and USFD operators are being arranged through RDSO/Thermit
welding training centres. The competency is issued to welders and USFD
operators after training with specified validity period. The staff having valid
competency certificate is only allowed to undertake these safety critical activities,
which automatically ensures that training of such officials is up to date. Similarly,
the staff directly involved in safety critical activities such as gateman, trolley men
etc are also issued competency certificates with specified validity period after
requisite training and judging the knowledge. Details of training are fed in TMS
and exception report is generated, which is being monitored to ensure that the
due training is imparted timely.”

On being asked the details of whether periodic refresher courses and training are

conducted to impart/enhance the technical knowledge of the officials, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

79.

“To achieve the target of safe and customer centric train operation, the role of
training is considered very essential. A comprehensive and robust system of
training has been developed in Railways. There is whole range of Training
Courses viz. Initial Courses, Promotional Course, Refresher Course, Specialized
Course etc. conducted for various categories of Safety and Non-Safety Staff. To
upgrade the skill and technical knowledge of the staff and to keep them abreast
with introduction of new technologies from time to time, periodic refresher
courses are conducted for various categories of Safety and Non-Safety Staff. It is
mandatory especially for Safety Categories of Staff to undergo periodic refresher
courses.”

Replying on the same subject, the Ministry representative stated as under:

“We provide initial training. After that, periodically, regular training is being
imparted, which we call as refresher course, and in the refresher course, all the
important instructions are repeated or reiterated to them so that their knowledge
is refreshed. Besides that, we are also conducting promotional courses. When
any employee is promoted and he is given a higher responsibility, we are

26


conducting promotional courses. We also conduct special courses which are
targeted. Whenever we identify a particular area of railway working which
requires more training, then we are giving specialized training courses. So, these
are the four categories of courses which we are imparting to our employees. We
have constantly laid emphasis on more and more training. So, while in 2010-11,
the number of employees trained per year was of the order of three lakhs in a
year, this has now been increased to five lakhs employees trained per year to
intensify the training being imparted to the employees. The second thing, which
one of the hon. Members pointed out, was regarding the training of loco pilots.
So, for that purpose, we have got simulators. So, we have installed simulators,
and the loco pilots are sent on simulator. A simulator simulates the condition of a
train operation, and the loco pilot is trained on that simulator so that before he
actually goes on the train, he is trained on a simulator. They are also trained on
practices like what is right and what is wrong in train operation. Also, we are
imparting training to our onboard staff regarding firefighting and use of fire
extinguishers so that in the case of an event of fire, they can immediately
respond in the situation and provide the golden hour reaction to the fire situation.
Also, stress is an important factor in railway operation because the staff
members are continuously concentrating on operation. So, we are also imparting
training in yoga and meditation to our employees so that their mental well-being
is improved. This is about the important aspect of training that we are imparting.”

Accidents/Derailments in Indian Railways (Para 3.1&3.2)

80. Audit revealed 23 factors responsible for derailments in the selected 1129
cases/accidents over 16 ZRs. The factors causing maximum derailments (395) were in
‘Engineering Department’ followed by ‘Operating Department’ (173). Out of 23 factors,
the major factor responsible for derailment was related to ‘maintenance of track’ (167
cases), followed by ‘deviation of track parameters beyond permissible limits’ (149
cases) and ‘bad driving/over speeding’ (144 cases). From the review of the derailment
cases, the cascading factors of series of failures have been identified which includes (i)
Rules and Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs), (ii) Training/Counseling of staff, (iii)
Supervision of operations, (iv) Coordination and communication between staff of
different departments and (v) Scheduled-Inspections, in the IR System.

81. 116 Ministry in their background note replied as under:
“Measures taken to reduce derailments:

Track Renewal and Maintenance: During the year 2022-23, 5,227 kms of track
renewal in Complete Track Renewal (CTR) units was carried out.

Track Upgradation: Upgradation to modern track structure, consisting of 60kg, 90
Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails, Pre-stressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC), is
being done (As on 31.03.2023, 65.63% BG Track have been completed in this
regard). Normal/Wide base sleepers with elastic fastening, fan-shaped layout
turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers on girder bridges are
used while carrying out primary track renewals.

27


Welded Rails: On most of BG tracks, Short-welded rails of 39m length and single
rails have been converted into long welded rails (As on 31.03.2023, 89.63% BG
Track is LWR). Short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails are limited to
locations, where welded rails are not permitted on technical grounds.

Indian Railways is reducing population of Alumino-Thermit ( AT ) welds gradually
by using longer rail panels with one/two/three Flash Butt weld (FB) from rail
manufacturing plant. The percentage of Long Rail supply to IR has increased
from 21% during 2015-16 to 83% of the total supply in 2022-23.

Track Recording: Supercheck of track parameters is done through regular runs of
Track Recording Cars (TRC). Two additional TRCs have been added to the
earlier fleet of 5 TRCs and one is under commissioning.

Regular bridge inspection is carried out for determining the health of bridges .

Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of Railway bridges is undertaken
whenever so warranted by their physical condition. (There are 711 Important
Bridges, 12,610 Major Bridges & 14,473 Minor Bridges).

Measures taken to avoid collisions:

Advanced Signaling System - Panel _ Interlocking/Route Relay
Interlocking/Electronic Interlocking (PI/RRI/El) along with Multiple Aspect Colour
Light Signals has been provided at 6,396 Stations out of 6,506 Stations on BG
Routes, upto 31.03.2023.

Block Proving Axle Counter (8280), to ensure complete arrival of train without
manual intervention before granting line clear to the next train, has been provided
at 6,364 Block Sections out of 6,607 Block Sections on BG Routes, up to
31.03.2023.

Another important measure to improve safety in train operation is interlocking of
Manned Level Crossing gates. It directly improves the safety as the train cannot
get the signal to move unless the gate is closed. So, it enhances the safety for
the road passengers as well. Up to 31.3.2023, 11,079 out of 17,720 gates have
been interlocked with signals on BG routes. Further, 143 existing LC gates have
also been interlocked in 2023-24 up to 31.10.2023.

RDSO, along with Indian OEMs, has developed India’s own Automatic Train
Protection (ATP) System named KAVACH (Train Collision Avoidance System).
This state-of-the-art electronic system activates the train braking system
automatically if the Loco Pilot fails to control the train as per the speed
testrictions. In addition, it prevents collision between two Locomotives equipped
with a functional KAVACH system. The system has been provided on 1465
Route Km of Indian Railway on South Central Railway. Contracts have been

28


82.

awarded for installation and commissioning of KAVACH on New Delhi - Mumbai
and New Delhi — Howrah sections (about 3000 route kms).”

Other Safety Measures:

“A GPS- based Fog Pass device is being provided to loco pilots in fog affected
areas which enables loco pilots to know the exact distance of the approaching
landmarks like signals, level crossing gates etc. 19,652 no. GPS based devices
provided during 2014-24 against only 90 during 2004-14.

All Electric locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to
ensure alertness of Loco Pilots.

Retro-reflective sigma (9) boards are being provided on the mast which is
located two OHE masts prior to the signals in electrified territories, to warn the
crew about the signal ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather.

Fencing of tracks at vulnerable locations is being provided progressively.”

Replying to the action taken on the recommendations of Standing Committee on

Railways, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

83.

“Audit noticed that the Railways Administration failed to take corrective steps in
respect of track renewal, as the targets fixed for track renewal work were not
achieved, and there was shortfall in track renewal work. During the period of four
years from 2017-2022, there were 890 derailments in the 16 ZRs; out of these,
track defect was the cause for 216 (24 per cent) derailments. The Standing
Committee on Railways (2016-17), observed/recommended that; “The most
serious form of accidents involved is Collision and Signal passing at Danger
(SPAD) for which particularly loco-pilots are responsible. The Committee had
regretted the lack of technological support to loco pilots for avoiding cases of
Signal passing at Danger (SPAD) and collisions. The Committee had also
advised the Ministry to thoroughly investigate the reasons for the increasing trend
of accidents due to failure on the part of railway staff. Audit noticed that despite
operation of fewer Passenger trains due to the Covid-19 Pandemic, 23 SPAD
cases were reported in 2020-21. As observed from the Accident Inquiry Reports,
the main cause of SPAD cases were due to violation of instructions contained in
IR (Open Lines) General Rules. These violations accounted for 47.66 per cent of
the total SPAD cases.”

When asked as to what actions have been taken to ensure that due priority be

given to the Track renewal works for elimination of accidents because of permanent
way, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Safety of track is accorded paramount importance in Indian Railways. Every
year track renewal works are proposed by Zonal Railways to Railway Board for
sanction. All patches due for renewal based on criteria stipulated in IRPWM are
invariably shortlisted and works are sanctioned without any exception. Sufficient
funds have been arranged for track renewal works. The budget Grant/Revised

29


84.

estimate and expenditure for track renewal plan head has almost doubled from
2017-18 to 2023- 24. With continuous and assured funding from GBS under
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), maintenance of track infrastructure and
track renewal works have been prioritised and carried out in an extensive
manner. new records of rail renewals are being created every year, which
confirms the thrust given by Railways towards renewals. Quantum jump in
execution of track renewal works has resulted in improved safety performance of
track. As a result, the accidents on engineering account has decreased
substantially.”

When asked about the reasons for recurrent accidents/derailments and action

taken to avoid accidents/derailments in future and on the related issue of technological
aids to loco pilots, the Ministry representative stated as under:

“Sir, there are three-four aspects to this answer on the issue of technological
support to the loco pilots. First, | will start with a device which is called the
Vigilance Control Device (VCD). If a loco pilot while operating a train become
inattentive due to any reason, the first thing that is required is that the he should
come to move, and an action should take place. For this, a technological solution
has been devised, which is called Vigilance Control Device. This device is being
installed in all the locomotives. There are number of operations which a loco pilot
has to do while driving a train. If for a continuous period of 60 seconds there is no
operation carried out on the loco pilot controls, then an alarm is generated
immediately to alert the loco pilot. If the loco pilot still does not act, then the
Vigilance Control Device itself switches off the connection supply and applies the
break. This is the first safety device which we are providing on the trains. This
ensures safety at the very basic level. If for any reason, suppose in the night
driving, the loco pilot becomes drowsy or loses attention, and there is no
operation in the train for 60 seconds, the Vigilance Control Device (VCD) acts
itself. This device has been installed in about 15,000 locomotives. The second
thing which | want to mention is related to the visibility of the signal during fog.
This is particularly important in the northern belt like Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, and northeast region. In all these regions there is a problem of fog during
the winter season, and also sometimes in the monsoon season. When the
visibility of the signal reduces sometimes even to less than 50 meters, whereas
the breaking distance of a train is of the order of about one kilometre, unless the
driver is able to see the signal well in time, it is not possible for him to control the
train. So, this is a GPS based device in which all the data of the signals, stations,
level crossings, etc. is available. This device keeps on alerting the loco pilot
about the distance of the next signal ahead so that the loco pilot is always alerted
whenever he is approaching a signal or a level crossing. This device is also
being provided and about 19,742 Fog Past devices have been provided. Since
this initiative has been taken in last few years only, you can see the progress
here. The third thing is the Sigma Board. This is a retro reflective board which is
called Sigma Board. Whenever a train approaches a signal, it alerts the driver.
We provide this sigma board which is a retro reflective board. When he sees this,
he is alerted that he is approaching a signal. We have already taken these three

30


85.

steps. The fourth step is automatic application of brake by way of Kavach which
is now being brought out.”

On being asked about the loco pilots indulging in over-speeding of trains and

causing 154 incidents on account of this, the Ministry representative stated as under:

86.

“Sir, what we do is that every locomotive is provided with a speedograph which
measures the speed. It also records the speed. What is done is that when the
loco reaches the shed after completing the journey, the complete data of the
speedograph is taken down and analyzed, and wherever there are instances of
the loco pilot exceeding the permitted speed, all of them are analyzed. It is a
process of our monitoring the loco pilot. Then, the particular instances are
pointed out and those particular loco pilots, who have exceeded the speed, are
counseled by their supervisors that this is a spot at this place on this particular
train where they have exceeded the speed so that they do correct driving. Sir, we
have ourselves detected these 154 incidents by way of our process of monitoring
the loco pilots. Sir, when a train is being driven, our tracks have got gradients. It
is not a flat territory that you are moving only on a leveled track. It has got down
gradients also. On the down gradients, the train, because of the momentum,
starts gaining speed and the loco pilot is required to control that speed. So,
depending upon his driving skills, sometimes, he may not be able to adhere to
that. Then, it has to be done.”

When the Committee highlighted that the Instances are galore of signal passing

at danger and collisions and asked for an account of it, the Ministry representative
stated as under:

87.

“Sir, firstly, a collision can take place if a driver passes a signal at danger
because if a signal is at a danger, it means that that particular train has not been
provided the route or the path ahead of that and it may be occupied by another
train. So, it can lead to a collision. Sir, instances of drivers passing a signal at
danger are taken very seriously. The moment it is detected, then and there the
train is stopped and that loco pilot is taken off from the duty, and immediately a
high-level inquiry is ordered in that. These instances range from passing the
signal by a few metres, may be from two to three metres, to sometimes 100, 200,
300 or 400 metres, depending upon the cause of signal passing at danger in
individual cases. Sometimes, it is purely a negligence of the loco pilots;
sometimes, there are other reasons. Each and every case of signal passing at
danger is very critically analyzed and this is part of our process of monitoring the
working of the loco pilots.”

When asked about the KAVACH and its coverage in terms of number of

kilometers and the number of trains, the Ministry representative stated as under:

“The RDSO, along with Indian OEMs has developed India’s own Automatic Train
Protection System named as KAVACH. This system activates the train braking
automatically if the Loco Pilot fails to control the train as per the Signal Aspect
and Permanent Speed Restrictions. It prevents collision between two
locomotives equipped with a functional KAVACH system. The system has been

31


provided on 1,465 Route Kms on South Central Railway. Further, contracts have
been awarded for KAVACH System on New Delhi-Mumbai and New Delhi-
Howrah sections for about 3,000 route kms. The Detailed Project Report is under
preparation for 6,274 route kms. Covering Mumbai-Howrah, Delhi-Chennai,
Kolkata-Vijayawada and MumbaiChennai sections. Sir, gradually, we have to
cover the entire route, but it is a very elaborate system in which complete
communication is to be established between the signal and the locomotive. So,
we are implementing it gradually. What we have done is that this 1,465 kms. Was
a pilot section which was taken up on the South-Central Railway. Now, after this
concept was done there, we have taken it up on the New Delhi-Mumbai and New
Delhi-Howrah routes. These are the busiest routes on the Railways. Then, Sir,
further 6,000 route kms. Where we are preparing the DPR that is the next level of
busiest routes which are on what we call the Golden Quadrilateral and its
diagonals. Sir, right now, this has been provided on 121 locomotives. The
number of trains are more or less around seven to ten trains per day, which is on
South-Central Railway.”

88. When asked by the Committee as to whether the Kavach was recommended by

the Commission of Railway Safety, the CCRS replied as under:
“It was not recommended by us, but it is being implemented by the Railways; and
it is a part of the recommendations of the Inquiry of Accident. Adoption of this
technology is at a fast pace. The introduction of new technology is a long-drawn
process, and therefore, old technology assets cannot be pulled back from service
in one go. Human intervention is going to remain for years although they will
continue to decrease. Regular counselling, training of the staff and auditing of
maintenance practices by the Safety Department of Railways should be further
strengthened. Procedure in the execution of work during maintenance and
operation, and also during modification is a must. Thank you, Sir.”

89. When asked whether the KAVACH system works both in front and rear, the
Ministry representative stated as under:

“It will operate on the rear side also. But it is necessary that both the trains
should have KAVACH.”

90. When asked about the action taken on recommendations of the Committee on
Railways regarding technological assistance to the Loco Pilots, the Ministry
representative stated as under:
“Sir, there are few dimensions to the technological assistance to the loco pilot
regarding signal passing as danger. The first and foremost thing, which | would
mention is Kavach. It is specifically designed in such a way that if a loco pilot for
any reason fails to stop the train on a signal which is red, the Kovach device itself
acts and applies the breaks.”

91... Inreply to a similar question, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“There are several measures which have been taken by Indian Railways in form
of Technological Support to Loco pilots for safer train operation:

32


92.

1) Fog Pilot Assistant System of Safety device in Loco: FogPAAS displays on-
board real-time information of next three approaching fixed landmarks in
geographical order accompanied with Audio Alert at 500m on approach.
FogPASS alerts the Loco Pilot about approaching landmarks and Loco Pilots
have to look out for these landmarks. 19,742 devices have been provided till
2022-23. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located
between two OHE masts prior to the signals in electrified territories to warn the
crew about the signal ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather.

2) Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signals : IR used conventional filament lamps
Signals which posed problems of frequent fusing, signal blanking, required
frequent replacement and frequently getting ‘Out of Focus’. As a technological
input on IR, filament type signal lamps have been replaced by LED based
Signals which have greatly improved visibility of signals. LED Signals have been
provided at 6,472 stations.

3) Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) in Loco: A vigilance control device to monitor
the alertness of the Loco Pilot has been provided in locomotives. In case, the
loco pilot fails to acknowledge the alert, it will result in automatic application of
penalty brakes.

4) Double Distant Signals: In order to pre-warn Loco Pilots about signal aspect of
approaching Stop Signals, ‘Double Distant’ permissible signals are also provided
in higher speed section, as an aid to Loco Pilot to convey the information
minimum 2kms in advance and help Loco Pilots to control trains optimally.

5) Simulator based training for improving the driving skills and the reaction time
of Loco Pilots is being emphasized.

6) Besides the above, Running rooms are being improved to provide sound rest
to the crew at out station. Also families of the running staff are sensitized and
counseled the importance of rest at home prior to duty.

7) Indian Railway ATP system KAVACH : Kavach is an indigenously developed
Automatic Train protection system which is an aid to Loco Pilot in train running
within specified speed limits, by automatic application of brakes in case the Loco
Pilot fails to do so and also helps the train run safely during inclement weather.
Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety
certification of highest order. Kavach is being provided progressively over IR.”

When enquired whether it is the same technology that is used in preventing train

accidents in Europe, the Ministry representative stated as under:

93.

“Sir, this is called ‘European trains contro! system’ containing Level-1, Level-2
and Level-3. Similarly, there are different systems in other countries like the
Chinese system in China, the Russian system in Russia and the Japanese
system in Japan. KAVACH has been developed for India.”

When. asked to furnish details of action taken for fulfillment of track renewal

targets and also for checking violation of instructions contained in IR (Open Lines)

33


General Rules which accounted for 47.66 per cent of the total SPAD cases, the Ministry
replied in their written reply as under:

“Following steps are taken for fulfillment of track renewal targets and improve
overall safety:

(i) Mechanisation of track laying activity through use of track machines like
PQRS, TRT, T-28 etc to improve progress of track renewal along with ensuring
quality.

(ii) Improvement in quantum of supply of Rails through close coordination with
SAIL.

(ili) Maximizing supply of 10 Rail/20 Rail long panels for increasing progress of
rail renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby ensuring safety.

(iv) Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino Thermic Welding and
adoption of better welding technology for rails i.e. Flash Butt Welding.

(v) Sufficient funds have been arranged for track renewal works. The budget
Grant/Revised estimate and expenditure for track renewal plan head has almost
doubled from 2017-18 to 2023-24.

As a result, the targets of track renewal have been exceeded over the years,
barring small shortfall during 2017-18 & 2018-19 due to constraint in supply of
rails by SAIL during the period.

Regarding checking violation of instructions contained in IR (Open Lines)
General Rules which accounted for 47.66 percent of the total SPAD cases.

4. Provision of Vigilance Control Device on all locomotives to alert the crew when
the device senses no inputs from the loco pilot or assistant loco pilot on the loco
control for a given duration.

2. Provision of retro- reflective Sigma Boards to alert the crew of approaching
signals in case of poor visibility.

3. Provision of GPS-based Fogg Pass Device to assist the crew in locating
approaching signals in advance during foggy weather.

4. Booking of crew on computerized crew management system with integrated
breathalyzers to ensure that crew being booked have adequate road learning,
having taken rest as per regulations, are not under the influence of alcohol.

5. Ensuring that crew is aware of the latest safety circulars by mandating that
they read and acknowledge the same in the crew lobby.

6. Ensuring training of crew on locomotive simulators,

7. Provision of comfortable air conditioned running rooms for quality rest of crew
at outstation locations.

8. Monitoring and counseling of crew by assigned loco inspectors.

34


9. Regular family counseling of crew.
10. Prohibition on keeping mobile phones in on condition while working trains.”

94. On being enquired about the reasons for recurrent accidents/derailments and
action taken to avoid accidents/derailments in future, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:

“Series of measures taken by Indian Railways over the years has resulted in
improved safety in train operations. Comptroller & Auditor General’s Report No
22 of 2022 brings out that the number of consequential accidents in Indian
Railways has come down from 74 in 2017-18 to 20 in 2020-21. The Annual
Report 2021-22 of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety also states that
number of accidents has come down from 241 in 2012-13 to 35 in 2021-22.
Regarding the increase in the number of train accidents in 2021-22 compared to
2020-21, the Annual Report 2021-22 of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
points out that fewer accidents took place in 2020-21 because of low overall
traffic in view of COVID-19 pandemic related lockdown (and only partial
resumption of 230 pairs of trains) during the year 2020-21. There is a steep
decline in the number of consequential train accidents from 473 in 2000-01 to 48
in 2022-23. The following measures have been taken by the Government to
prevent train accidents over Indian Railways:

“All the accident related data and inquiry findings are entered in the Safety
Information Management System (SIMS) module by the concerned Railway,
which is being monitored intensively. Indian Railways constantly strives to
enhance safety in train operations. Various safety measures have been taken by
the Government to prevent recurrence of accidents/derailments

1. Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) has been introduced in 2017-18 for
replacement/renewal/upgradation of critical safety assets, with a corpus of Rs. 1
lakh crore for five years. From 2017-18 till 2021-22, Gross expenditure of Rs.
1.08 lakh crore was incurred on RRSK works. In 2022-23, the Govt. extended the
currency of RRSK for another period of five years with Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) of Rs. 45,000 crores.

2. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points
and signals have been provided at 6475 stations upto 30.09.2023 to eliminate
accident due to human failure.

3. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Gates has been provided at 11136 level
Crossing Gates up to 30.09.2023 for enhancing safety at LC gates.

4. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety for verification of track
occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6543 stations upto
30.09.2023.

5. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Signalling e.g. mandatory
correspondence check, alteration work protocol, preparation of completion
drawing, etc. have been issued.

6. System of disconnection and reconnection for S&T equipment as per protocol
has been re-emphasized.

35


7. All locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to improve
alertness of Loco Pilots.

8. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located two
OHE masts prior to the signals in electrified territories to warn the crew about the
signal ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather.

9. A GPS based Fog Safety Device (FSD) is provided to loco pilots in fog
affected areas which enables loco pilots to know the distance of the approaching
landmarks like signals, level crossing gates etc.

10.Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS)
tails, Prestressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with
elastic fastening, fan-shaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-
beam Sleepers on girder bridges is used while carrying out primary track
renewals.

11.Mechanisation of track laying activity through use of track machines like
PQRS, TRT, T-28 etc to reduce human errors.

12.Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasing progress of
rail renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety.

13.Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino Thermic Welding and
adoption of better welding technology for rails ie. Flash Butt Welding.
14.Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (Oscillation Monitoring System) and
TRC (Track Recording Cars).

15.Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures.

16.The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossing in turnout
renewal works.

17.Inspections at regular intervals are carried out to monitor and educate staff for
observance of safe practices.

18.Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and
decision support system has been adopted to decide rationalized maintenance
requirement and optimize inputs.

19.Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Track e.g. integrated
block, corridor block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions etc. have been
issued.

20.Preventive maintenance of railway assets (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken
to ensure safe train operations.

21.Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches is
being done.

22.All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route have
been eliminated by January 2019.

23.Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured through regular inspection of Bridges.
The requirement of repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the
conditions assessed during these inspections.

24.Indian Railways has displayed Statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread
passenger information in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so
as to inform and alert passengers regarding various Do’s and Don'ts to prevent
fire. These include messages regarding not carrying any inflammable material,
explosives, prohibition of smoking inside the coaches, penalties etc.

36


95.

25.Production Units are providing Fire detection and suppression system in
newly manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Cars, Fire and Smoke detection
system in newly manufactured coaches. Progressive fitment of the same in
existing coaches is also underway by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. ,

26, Regular counselling and training of staff is undertaken.

27. Concept of Rolling Block has been introduced wherein work of
maintenance/repair/replacement of fixed assets (P Way, Signaling and TRD) is
planned for 12 weeks in advance on rolling basis and executed as per plan.”

On being asked about success of the Safety Information Management System, a

module created by the Ministry of Railways on the portal, for monitoring of
implementation of the accepted recommendations of accident inquiry committees and
the modifications to make it more meaningful and beneficial, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

96.

“The Safety Information Management System (SIMS) has been very helpful and
useful for day-to-day monitoring of accidents and inquiry reports thereon
containing root-cause analysis and recommendations of the committee for further
improvement. A separate tab to monitor the recommendations /suggestions
made by the inquiry committees is being added to the module. The operation of
this tab is under trial/process.”

When asked to furnish the action taken on the reports submitted by the Chief

Commissioner of Railway Safety during the last five years, the Ministry in their written
teply stated as under:

97.

“Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety / Commissioners of Railway Safety of
various Circles carried out inspections either on their own or in company with
General Managers and gave 5425 recommendations/ observations in last 5
years (i.e. from 2017- 18 to 2021-22). Out of these, 5378 recommendations /
observations (99.13%) have already been complied and balance 47
recommendations / observations are under examination / implementation.”

When asked about Balasore incident and the inquiry report submitted on it, the

CCRS replied as under:

“Sir, it was submitted by the Commission of Railway Safety. We have analysed
the cases of accidents. As pointed out earlier also, derailment continues to be the
biggest chunk of railway accidents, which is consisting of around 75 per cent,
followed by fire accidents which are around 12 per cent, collisions six per cent,
and accidents at level crossing are five per cent. Derailments are taking place
due to multiple reasons, which include defect in the track/rolling stock, error in
driving and a combination of other factors. About the human errors, which we
had discussed earlier also, due to railway staff as well as other than railway staff
such as road users, passengers and miscreants are responsible for
approximately 60 per cent of the total train accidents. Commission of Railway
Safety is regularly advising the Railways on various safety related issues. In the
last five years, Commission of Railway Safety has given 302 recommendations
through various accident Inquiry Reports, and also made correspondences for

37


98.

the overall improvement in safety. The recommendations are accident-specific,
and cover short-term and long-term measures to avoid repetition of accidents.
Based on the recommendations of the Commission, the Indian Railways have
taken measures to reduce cases of derailments, collisions, fire in coaches, and
accidents at level-crossings. There has been a substantial decrease in railway
accidents over the years as accidents have drastically come down from 73 in
2017-18 to 48 in 2022-23. However, improvement in safety is a continuous
process; and the ultimate objective of zero accidents and zero fatalities have to
be achieved. A large number of accidents due to human error highlights the
limitation of preventive measures taken by the Railways like counseling, safety
drive and training. Human intervention should be minimized through the use of
technology. Over the years, the Railways have taken various initiatives for the
introduction of new technologies, for the maintenance of assets, signaling,
interlocking, Kavach. LHB coaches, use of fire-retardant materials etc. These
technologies are to be fast-tracked; these are required to be implemented at a
faster pace.”

When enquired about detection of any major lacuna regarding the Balasore train

accident, the Ministry representative replied as under:

“Sir, | would briefly explain it; and then the CCRS can supplement. We are
commonly calling it the Balasore accident. The accident occurred at a station
called Bahanaga Road. The Coromandel Express was to pass through this
Bahanaga Road Station. It was an up direction train. The signals for this train
were given ‘green.’ That means, when the train was approaching the station, we
have a home signal which is provided before the station, and that was green.
Then, there are subsequent stations. The signals were given ‘green’ on the
mainline. So, the train was required to go through the mainline. However, when
the train came to the station, instead of going through the mainline, its route was
set for the loop line, and this train went into the loop line. On the loop line,
already a goods train was stationed; and this train went and collided with that
goods train. Sir, this station is provided with electronic interlocking, which means,
the interlocking between a signal and the route (route means when we set the
point for a particular direction) are interlocked. So, this interlocking is done
electronically at this particular station. Prior to the electronic interlocking, we used
to have less technical systems which were mechanical and panel interlocking
etc. But electronic interlocking is one of the most advanced systems of
interlocking; and it is entirely software based, and nothing can go wrong with this
particular system. What happened at this particular station prior to the passage of
this train was that there was some maintenance work carried out by the signaling
staff in a goomti near a gate. So, near the gate, there was a goomti in which
there were certain circuits. When a signal is sent through these circuits, the
command goes through the point, and they are operated. The signaling staff who
was working there, was not working for any work as. such in the track or in the
point. They were basically working for some modifications to be done in the gate
which is operated from the same goomti. But, Sir, for whatever error, they had
carried out certain wrong wiring during the course of the maintenance which led

38


99.

100.

to this kind of a wrong route setting, and eventually led to this accident. This is
what | would say, basically is behind it. It is something wrong done by the staff
who worked inside the goomti. Now, | think, CCR can supplement what | said.

In reply to the same question, the CCRS supplemented by stating as under:

“Sir, as said by the Chair, the signaling modification work was going on there,
and the signaling staff was working there. During the process of modification, the
standard practices which have been mentioned in the Manuals and Work
Instructions were not followed, and that is why this accident occurred. The green
signal was given although the point was set for the loop line.”

When the Committee enquired about the possibility of the interlocking system

having malfunctioned, leading to the Balasore disaster, the Ministry representative
replied as under:

101.

“Sir, the electronic interlocking by itself cannot go wrong because it is entirely
software based. It is embedded in the system. So, it cannot go wrong. It is not
possible to go inside the electronic interlocking unless there is something, which
is done by way of altering the software. If somebody deliberately alters the
software, then only the electronic interlocking can change. When we install
electronic interlocking, a complete circuit is prepared. It is a very detailed circuit,
and a lot of tables are prepared on how the train will operate in different
combinations and all that is first tested in the factory where the software is
prepared. A mock test is done.”

When enquired as to how far is the goomti, where this tampering or manipulation

of the interlocking system could have taken place manually, from the site of accident
and apprehended that if this is the situation, anything can happen anywhere, the
Ministry representative replied as under:

“Sir, | will answer both the things. Firstly, the location from where the Station
Master sits to the goomti is approximately 700-800 m. distance and from the
goomti to the point where the derailment started is also around 100-200 m.
distance. This is the kind of distance, which is there. The distance is not much
from the goomti to the point, and from the goomti there is a level crossing,
beyond that there was track and then point. This was the site situation. You have
raised a point that if this is a situation, then this could happen everywhere. This is
what | am trying to explain. Firstly, the electronic interlocking by itself is fully
tested in the factory for various combinations of train movement, and after it is
installed at the site and before its commissioning again at site it is tested for
various combination and once it is certified that all the testing are correct, then
only it is commissioned. Since it is embedded software, once it is commissioned
unless the software is altered, this cannot change. In this particular case,
whenever a modification is to be carried out in a signaling system at the site, then
we have to take a disconnection between the interlocking and the actual
operation of the point or the signal, and then after carrying out the work again a
re-connection has to be done. This process -- for certain type of operations -- can

39


be done under traffic and for certain type of operations it has to be done by
stopping the traffic. So, for various types of works there are different rules. Before
restoring the traffic, they have to check that what they have done has been done
correctly, and then only the traffic is to be allowed to pass. If all these protocols
are properly followed, it cannot go wrong. In this particular case, he has carried
out for whatever reason --by error or by negligence --a wrong wiring. He was not
supposed to work at all on the circuit of the point whereas he altered the circuit of
the point. He was to work only on the circuit of the gate, which is a lifting barrier
at the gate. So, instead of the lifting barrier, he worked on the circuit of the point,
which was not required to be done. So, that is how this error crept in. We already
have sufficient protocols, but having learned from this accident, we have further
strengthened these systems keeping in view this particular type of mistake, which
had taken place. A number of instructions have been issued from the Railway
Board and also a lot of precautionary steps have been taken in the field. We are
carrying out an elaborate exercise of rechecking the conformity of the circuits
with the drawing at all the stations. So that exercise is going on at all the stations.
Secondly, we have also initiated a process that the opening and closure of such
goomtis should not be merely at the control of the Signal Maintainer. It should be
a dual control by the Station Master as well as by the Signal Maintainer. So,
instructions have been given for a double locking of such goomtis. Such
instructions already existed for the Relay Rooms, which are located at the Station
itself. They are under the double lock control. Now, that has been extended to
even such goomtis where such maintenance work is to be carried out. Besides
that, we are carrying out an extensive counseling of all the maintenance staff in
respect of following the right procedures because as CCRS also pointed out that
had he followed the laid down instructions, then this incident would not have
taken place. So, that extensive counseling of 100 per cent staff is being carried
out in the field itself so that they follow the right practice. Another step, which we
have taken and one of the observations in the Audit Report is regarding
availability of maintenance blocks, which they have commented in their Report. |
think that the hon. Members will recall that there was an accident at Khatauli
where the accident took place because certain maintenance work was being
carried out on track without taking the proper maintenance block. It led to the
accident and casualties of passengers in that train. | think that was also in the
back of the mind of the audit. They have critically examined the availability of the
maintenance block. | would like to inform the Committee, since 2020, a very
exhaustive exercise has been carried out for review of all the time tables where
assistance of IIT Bombay was taken and we call it ‘Zero Based Time Tabling'
exercise and maintenance corridors have been provided on all the sections so
that a window of two to three hours is available on each section for carrying out
the maintenance. Recently, to further strengthen availability of maintenance time
for the maintenance of particular tracks, signaling and our overhead equipment
etc., we have introduced a system of rolling block programme. We prepare it for
one or two weeks. A day-to-day maintenance programme is being prepared.
Along with that, a maintenance block will be granted and the maintenance works
will be carried out so that all the agencies which are working whether it is P. Way

40


102.

Maintenance Staff or the Signaling Maintenance Staff can take care of it. The
track machines also require maintenance blocks for working. All this is being
programmed on day-to-day basis now under the Rolling Block Programme which
is reviewed on weekly basis so that all the maintenance work are properly
planned and carried out. Besides, we have also initiated an exercise of inter-
divisional and inter zonal safety audits. We already have a system of inter-
divisional and inter-zonal safety audits which we carry out every year for every
division and for every zonal railway. We have carried out a special drive for such
inter-divisional and inter zonal safety audit. We have issued many instructions to
further strengthen the operation and maintenance practices from the safety point
of view.”

When enquired about the overhauling the entire safety mechanism as far as the

interlocking is concerned, the Ministry representative replied as under:

103.

“Sir, | will briefly explain what has been the progress of evolution of interlocking
system on the Indian Railways. Earlier, we used to have mechanical interlocking
which means there used to be cabins where there were levers and a cabin man
will operate number of levers. First, he will set the route and then he will by way
of the lever operate the signal. So, this was mechanical interlocking where the
route was set mechanically, and then the signal was operated. From that, we
have graduated to a Panel Interlocking or Route Relay Interlocking. In this
system, the entire interlocking is by way of relays which are provided in a relay
room. These are large number of switches through which a large number of
circuits are prepared and wiring is done. Because of the large number of wiring
and circuit, it did have certain vulnerability because the more is the number of
wires and the more is the number of connections, the more are the chances of
error or consequent problems. What happens in electronic interlocking is that the
entire interlocking programme is brought on the software and only the operation
part, that is the actual operation of the signal or the point, is then acting through
the relay. So, this leads to a drastic reduction in the number of relays or switches
which are there and the number of wires and connections which are required to
be provided. We are also now studying possibilities of further reducing these
circuits by use of solid-state interlocking. This is a work in progress.”

When enquired as to whether the inquiry report has revealed the reason for the

Balasore disaster, the Ministry representative replied as under:

“Sir, the Commissioner of Railway Safety's inquiry report says that we have
received a technical analysis of the cause of the accident that certain wrong
wiring was done which led to the accident. Was it due to negligence or was a
willful act? That would be beyond the domain of the Commissioner of Railway
Safety. As the hon. Members may be aware, concurrently, an inquiry is in
progress by Central Bureau of Investigation. That inquiry is still in progress. After
the initial investigation, they have arrested three of our employees. When we get
to know about the findings, we will inform you.”

41


104. On being enquired as to what are the areas of operational network where we are
yet to catch up in view of the global expectations of ‘fatality free’ performance, the
Ministry replied in their written reply as under:

“The best global practices in Railways are taken into account and adopted over
the years in improvement of assets e.g. Signaling, Track and Rolling Stock etc.

Improvements in Signalling Systems
+ Electronic Interlocking

« Replacing earlier generation mechanical signals by Panel Interlocking/Route
Relay Interlocking/Electronic Interlocking (PI/RRI/EI) along with Multi Aspect
Colour Light Signals provided at 6,396 Stations out of 6,506 Stations on BG
Routes, up to 31.03.2023.

* Electronic Interlocking have been provided on 3045 stations, up to 31.03.2023.
+ Use of Block Proving Axle Counters

+ Block Proving Axle Counter (BPAC), to ensure complete arrival of train without
manual intervention before granting line clear to the next train, provided at 6,364
Block Sections out of 6,607 Block Sections on BG Routes up to 31.03.2023.

+ Kavach (Automatic Train Protection System)

* RDSO, along with Indian OEMs, has developed Automatic Train Protection
(ATP) System named KAVACH (Train Collision Avoidance System). First field
trials on passenger trains started in February 2016. Based on the experience so
gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by a 3rd party
(Independent Safety Assessor: ISA), Kavach was adopted as a National ATP
system in July 2020.

+ Kavach already deployed on 1465 Route km and 121 locomotives (including
Electric Multiple Unit rakes) on South Central Railway.

+ Tenders have been awarded for Delhi -Mumbai & Delhi - Howrah corridors
(approximately 3000 Route km) and work is in progress on these routes. Includes
KAVACH for 760 locomotives

+ Indian Railways is preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) and detailed
estimate for another 6274 RKm covering Mumbai-Howrah, Delhi-Chennai,
KolkataVijayawada and Mumbai-Chennai routes.

Preventing Collisions: Other Assistive Technology for Crew

+ Vigilance Control Device: All locomotives have been provided with VCDs that
alert the loco pilots in case of inactivity

+ Fog-Pass Safety Devices: These are GPS-based devices that alert the loco
pilot regarding approaching signals, gates etc., and are used during foggy
weather where visibility is reduced. 19,742 fog pass devices provided until the
end of 2022-23.

42


+ Retro reflective sigma Board: These are provided on masts and glow under
locomotive headlight alerting the loco pilot of approaching signal in low visibility.

Improvements in Track Structure

a) Track Upgradation: Earlier the track structure used to be largely 90R (44.5
Kg/m) or 52 Kg (72/90 UTS) rail. This is being gradually replaced with 60 Kg, 90
UTS rail which has higher strength.

b) Welded Rails: Short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails converted into
long welded rails. Short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails limited to
locations, where welded rails are not permitted on technical grounds

c) Population of Alumino-Themit (AT) welds progressively reduced by using
Longer Rail Panels with one/two/three Flash Butt Welds from rail manufacturing
plant. Flash Butt welds are of higher quality with least chances of internal defects
and in turn improve safety.

d) PSC Sleepers: Normal/Wide base 60 kg PSC sleepers with elastic fastening
on plain track and PSC sleepers on turnouts are used while carrying out primary
track renewals

8) Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers Old wooden sleepers on bridges are being
replaced with Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers, while carrying out primary track
renewals. H-Beam sleepers are stronger than Steel channel sleepers and have
better quality control in fabrication.

f) Thick Web Switches: A new design of switches which can handle higher
turnout speed with more life and reliability, as compared to ordinary over-riding
switches. These switches introduced in 2016, improve safety and riding comfort.
g) Weldable Cast Manganese Steel Crossing improves safety by reducing
fracture proneness and elimination of fish plated joints. Planned for routes of
higher speed and heavier axle load.

Improvements in Maintenance

a) Maintenance Block: Zero Based Time Table initiative taken in Sep-2020,
which provides for Corridor Blocks for maintenance. To further reinforce, Rolling
Block Program introduced from 12.06.2023- integrated maintenance of
infrastructure (P Way, TRD & Signalling); prepared for 2 weeks for each traffic
section and each route.

b) Mechanization: Track Machines: IR has a fleet of 1548 modern track machines
for mechanized maintenance and relaying of track. Further 369 Track Machines
will be supplied by March 2025 (Purchase Order placed), and additionally, 1602
are to be procured progressively by 2030.

0) Deep Screening of Ballast- To improve the drainage and resilience of track.
This helps in maintenance of track to required standards.

d) Track Recording: Monitoring of track parameters done through regular runs of
Track Recording Cars (TRC). Two additional TRCs added in the year 2022-23 to

43


the earlier fleet of 5 TRCs and one is under commissioning. 7 more sanctioned
and are under procurement.

e) Oscillation Monitoring System (OMS): Oscillation Monitoring System that
identifies bad running locations to ensure safety of trains & riding comfort of
passengers. Locations where Vertical or Horizontal acceleration recorded
exceeds threshold limit require attention. IR has 116 such systems-
approximately 10 lakh Kms track recorded every year by OMS.

f) Ultra Sonic Flaw Detection (USFD) of Rails: Rail and Weld defects are
identified by using Single Rail Testing (SRT) / Double Rail Testing (DRT) using
A-Scan Analog USFD Machines. To further improve digital capturing of data &
monitoring, IR has adopted improved technology of B Scan 9 channels USFD
testing machines in Feb 23.

Bridges: Technological Intervention in Bridge maintenance

a) An IT application -Bridge Management System (BMS) - adopted, covering
details of all Bridge assets and Inspection modules- visible at all levels.

b) Instrumentation for Bridge health monitoring provided at 25 bridges & planned
for 64 bridges.

c) Under water inspection by Robotic Vehicle done at 175 bridges & planned for
66 bridges in 2023-24.

d) Continuous River Bed Profile Management System adopted at 39 bridges &
planned for 31 bridges in 2023-24.

e) Continuous Water Level Monitoring System provided at 311 bridges & planned
for 97 bridges in 2023-24.

f) Continuous Scour Depth Management System provided at 3 bridges & planned
for 16 bridges in 2023-24.

Improvements in Rolling Stock

a) Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with superior LHB design
coaches: Production Units of Indian Railways are manufacturing only LHB
coaches from 2018-19 onwards. LHB coaches are provided with superior
crashworthy, Fire Safety and anticlimbing features.

b) Maintenance mechanization for timely detection of faults: Non destructive flaw
detection of axles and wheel discs:

i. Ultrasonic testing of axles
ii. Eddy current array testing of wheel discs

c) Wayside Condition monitoring for trains on the run: Mechanized systems like
Online Monitoring of Rolling Stock (OMRS), Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD),
Hot Box Detection Systems (HBDs) and Hot Axle Hot Wheel systems (HAHWs),

44


105.

to detect any incipient defect in components while coaches / wagons are on run,
are being inducted & proliferated.

d) Fire Safety Features:
i. Use of fire retardant furnishing material in coaches
ii, Use of heat resistant E-beam cables for coach wiring

iii. Aerosol- based fire suppression cartridges being provided in all electrical
cubicles in LHB/ ICF coaches and EMU/ MEMU Cars iv. Provision of fire
detection and suppression system in Power Cars and Pantry Cars and Fire and
Smoke detection system in coaches besides Fire Extinguishers.

e) Improved Safety Features in Freight Wagons

i. Improved design Open Wagons: Adoption of open wagons (corrosion-resistant
and stronger stainless steel) for transport of bulk commodities: Total about 1 lakh
such wagons introduced.

ii. Upgraded Bearings: Upgraded bearings having low torque grease seals and
polyamide cage being adopted progressively for reducing online bearing failures.
5,00,000 such bearings already introduced

iii. Upgraded High Tensile Centre Buffer Coupler (CBC): Upgraded CBC having
better mechanical properties introduced for reducing incidence of train parting.
Complete switch over done to this type of CBC since Mar'20 for new
procurement.

Level Crossing Gates
Unmanned Level Crossing gates: All UMLCs eliminated from the BG route.
Manned Level Crossing Gates:

i. Manned Level Crossing gates are being progressively interlocked with signals
ii. Non-interlocked MLCs being equipped with voice recording system

iii. With progressive building of ROBs and RUBs, all technically feasible MLCs
will also get eliminated.”

When asked as to what innovative measures Railway Administration has

taken/proposes to incorporate in the human and physical infrastructure for foolproof
modus operandi of the Indian Railways on international standards, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:

“Innovative measures are regularly being taken by Railways in different fields of
working based on the problems faced with the existing system to improve upon.
Based on the problems faced, problem statements are made and technical
solutions from start-ups, educational institutes and industry partners etc are
asked for, through IR innovation portal for finding effective solution.- Proliferation

45


of in-motion loco simulators is planned for training of the Loco pilots for improving
their driving skills and response time.”

Para No.3.4.1: Timeliness in completion of inquiries/investigations

106. In February 2006, Railway Board emphasized that ZRs should make efforts to
finalize the inquiry reports as early as possible but not beyond the prescribed time limits.
Time taken at different stages of Accident Inquiries was available in 854 cases out of
1127 selected cases over 16 Zonal Railways. Audit noted delays in different stages of
accident inquiries. Audit noted that the inquiry reports were not submitted to the
accepting authority within the time schedule prescribed by Railway Board in 63 per cent
cases. The delay in submission of the inquiry report had a cascading effect of delay in
acceptance of the reports by the accepting authority. Audit also noted that in 49 percent
cases, there was delay in acceptance of the reports by accepting authorities.

107. When the Committee enquired about railway accidents and enquiries made, the
CCRS made the following submission:

“It is mandatory to have inquiry. If there is no death but property loss is more than
Rs. 2 crore, then also it has to be done. Other accidents are inquired by the
Railways. In the 32 accidents which are inquired by the Commission of Railway
Safety, we have given around 302 recommendations and the Action Taken
Report from the Railways have been received for 23 inquiries which is around 72
per cent. Two inquiry reports have been submitted recently in the month of April
and June. In the last few years, there has been a considerable improvement in
the compliance of ATRs. As of now, only seven ATRs are pending. As regards
recommendations, in the 23 inquiry reports which we have submitted, 92 per cent
recommendations have been accepted; balance 18 recommendations are under
consideration of the Railways. As of now, nil report is pending in the Commission
for the inquiry. We do not have any pending inquiry to be carried out by the
Commission.”

108. When asked as to what actions have been taken/proposed to be taken by the
Railway Administration to ensure strict adherence to the scheduled timelines for
conducting and finalization of Accident Inquiries, the Ministry in their written reply stated
as under:

“The focus of accident inquiries is to carry out thorough analysis so as to arrive at
the “root cause” of the accident. As per complexity of an accident case, multiple
witnesses are required to be examined, detailed investigation reports e.g.
Metallurgical, Chemical test reports from Laboratories, RDSO, Forensic
Examination report from state agencies and other external agencies are required
by the Inquiry Committee to arrive at the ‘root cause’ of the accident for taking
corrective and preventive actions. In February 2006 Railway Board had
prescribed the timeline of D+10 days for Departmental Inquiry in Consequential
Accidents. This timeline was revised to D+30 days in view of the above-
mentioned complexities in December 2019. The progress of departmental

46


inquiries for their early finalization is monitored at the highest level at Zonal
Railway Headquarters as well as at Railway Board.”

109. When enquired about Balasore accident, the CCRS stated that the final inquiry
report has been submitted on 20th June to Railways by the Commission of Railway
Safety.

110. When asked about the steps taken for ensuring strict compliance in respect of
recommendations made by the accident inquiry committees, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

“Ministry of Railways has created a module on the portal. Safety Information
Management System, for monitoring of implementation of the accepted
recommendations of accident inquiry committees and relevant necessary
instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways regarding using the module.
The departmental inquiry committees in Zonal Railways are constituted of
officers from different disciplines viz. Traffic, Engineering, Electrical, Mechanical
and Signal & Telecom. The final findings are arrived at after investigation and
deliberation jointly by the members of these committees. The committees’
recommendations are implemented by zonal railways. Further, zonal railways
have been directed to include, inter alia, the actions required on their part to
implement the recommendations from accident inquiry findings in their safety
action plans.”

Para 4.2 Funding of Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK)

111. The Standing Committee on Railways recommended (March 2018) the Ministry
of Railways that “at the time when there is rapid growth in net revenue of Railways and
a lot of funds were needed for capital asset creation, funding to and expenditure from
RRSK for safety purposes should be ensured at highest level in order to accord
paramount to the safety”. In this regard, Audit noted that there has been an assured
funding of Rs.15000 crore out of the ‘Gross Budgetary Support’ and Rs.5000 crore (25
per cent) of the total contribution of Rs 20,000 from 2017-18 to 2020-21 per year to this
fund to be met from Railways internal resources had been falling short of target to the
tune of Rs. 15775 crore constituting 78.88 % during the years 2017-18 to 2020-21.

112. In their background note, the Ministry have stated as under:

“Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) was introduced in 2017-18 for
replacement/renewal/upgradation of critical safety assets, with a corpus of Rs 1
lakh crore for five years, having an annual outlay of Rs 20,000 crore. Gross
Expenditure of Rs.1,08,743 crore has been incurred on RRSK works till the end
of 2021-22. Funds under RRSK are utilized for Safety works relating to Traffic
Facilities, Rolling Stock, Level Crossings, Road Over/Under Bridges, Track
Renewal, Bridge Works, Signal and Telecom Works, Other Electrical Works,
TRD Works, Machinery and Plant, Workshops, Training/HRD, Passenger
Amenities and Other Specified works. On the recommendation of NITI Aayog,
the Government has agreed to extend the currency of RRSK for another five-

47


year term beyond 2021-22, with contribution of Rs 45,000 crore from GBS. In
2022-23, an expenditure of Rs. 11,797.42 crore has been incurred and in 2023-
24, a provision of Rs. 11,000 crore has been made under RRSK.”

113. When asked about the reasons of enormous deficit in generation of internal
resources and the difficulties/challenges in meeting the targets out of internal generation
and whether Railways have analyzed as to how the said deficit is contributing to the
number of rail accidents, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) was created in 2017-18 for execution of
assessed safety works with a corpus of Rs. 1 lakh crore over a period of five
years. RRSK works are to be funded from Gross Budgetary Support and
Railways revenues/resources; including mobilization of resources through Extra
Budgetary Resources (EBR), as per Ministry of Finance’s guidelines through OM
No. 35(06)/PF-II/2016 dated 5.7.2017, Para-I(6) where it has been laid down that
the “Railways may also mobilize resources through other Extra Budgetary
Resources, including market borrowings or Public Private Partnerships wherever
feasible for carrying out safety works.”

During this period, Railways’ internal resource generation was adversely affected
following Covid Pandemic which led to passenger trains completely halting and
freight trains running with only essential commodities. Despite pandemic and
other recessionary conditions, IR provided funds for incurring gross expenditure
of Rs.1.08 lakh crore on RRSK works from 2017-18 till 2021-22. This includes
over Rs.27000 crore in 2020-21. GOI also increased GBS support by Rs.10000
crore in 2021-22.

The resource gap from 2019-20 to 2021-22 was mainly on account of Covid
pandemic. With the improvement in the net revenue position on account of higher
incremental loading and passenger revenues along with astute expenditure
management, MoR is able to supplement RRSK from 2022-23. While in 2022-23,
the Government has extended the currency of RRSK for another period of five
years w.e.f. 2022-23 with total GBS of Rs.45000 crore, against RE 2022-23
provision of Rs.1000 crore to RRSK from internal resources, IR has contributed
Rs.1797 crore considering requirement of funds. In 2023-24, Rs.1000 crore from
internal generation have been budgeted.

In the overall, though IR’s contribution from internal generation fell short of target
in view of position explained above, there has been no deficit of funds for RRSK
works, which have progressed as per their targets in line with MoF guidelines.

NITI Aayog appreciated Railways’ progress on safety and implementation of
RRSK and held that safety indicators have shown improvement after
implementation of RRSK.”

Para 4.3 Utilization of RRSK

114. RRSK was created with a vision to have a single head in order to cater all safety
telated needs. The Railway Administration failed to act in accordance with the

48


observation of the Standing Committee on Railways (2016-17), wherein it was observed
that the physical as well as financial targets in respect of track renewals need to be
enhanced as per the annual requirement for track renewals for safety. Indian Railways
failed to prepare the ‘Detailed Outcome Framework’ for each item of safety work as per
the indicative outcomes suggested by the ‘NITI-Aayog’, to gauge the benefits derived
out of the RRSK funds in conformity with the objectives behind the creation of the Fund.

115. When asked as to why did Railways fail to prepare the ‘Detailed Outcome
Framework’ for each item of safety and by what time does the Railway Administration
propose to come up with the detailed outcome framework/analysis for each item of हे
safety work as suggested by NITI Aayog, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
under:

“Definite outcomes have been targeted and achieved by focused expenditure
and efforts on the same. Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) was introduced
in 2017-18 for replacement/renewal/upgradation of critical safety assets, with a
corpus of Rs.1 lakh crore for five years, having an annual outlay of Rs. 20,000
crore. Gross expenditure of Rs. 1,08,743 crore was incurred on RRSK works in
the 5 years till the end of 2021-22. Currency of RRSK has been extended for
another five- year term beyond 2021-22, with contribution of Rs 45,000 Crore
from GBS. In RRSK, priority is given to track renewal works. Outcome indicators
have been identified and reduction in rail/weld failures has been achieved as a
result of track renewals done with the increased fund allocation.

Type of failure 2017-18 2022-23 Reduction
Rail Fracture 1671 531 68.22%
Weld failure 2604 724 72.19%

There has been sharp reduction in consequential train accidents, including
derailments, LC accidents and causalities and injuries as can be noted from the

table below:
[S.No | Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 [2049-20 | 2020-21
1 Category wise

Consequential
Train Accidents

zz Number of 54 46 40 17
Derailments है

[ii | Number of Collisions | 3 16... 5 1

| | Number of Manned | 3 3 4 1
Level Accident
Crossing

iv Number of Un- 10 3 PY | |

Manned Level
Crossing Accident *

49


v Number of Fire 3 ef eb 3
accidents

vi Misc. Accident 10... [1 1 [o—s«Y
Total 73 [so [55 (22 |

All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route have been
eliminated by January 2019.

Fatality / Injury

Particulars 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 [2020-21 |
Fatalities 58 37 5 4

Injuries 81 29 21 jo ——i<

116. When a description of the factors that are obstructing the fulfillment of the

objectives of the RRSK both in terms of contribution from the budgetary allocation and
internal generation of resources, their utilization and others was sought, the Ministry in
their written reply stated as under:

“Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) was created in 2017-18 for execution of
assessed safety works with a corpus of Rs. 1 lakh crore over a period of five
years. RRSK works are to be funded from Gross Budgetary Support and
Railways revenues/resources; including mobilization of resources through Extra
Budgetary Resources (EBR), as per Ministry of Finance’s guidelines. During this
period, Railways’ internal resource generation was adversely affected following
Covid Pandemic which led to passenger trains completely halting and freight
trains running with only essential commodities. Despite pandemic and other
recessionary conditions, IR provided funds for incurring gross expenditure of
Rs.1.08 lakh crore on RRSK works from 2017-18 till 2021-22. This includes over
Rs.27000 crore in 2020-21 through EBR. GO! also increased GBS support by
Rs.10000 crore in 2021-22. In 2022-23, the Government has extended the
currency of RRSK for another period of five years w.e.f. 2022-23 with total GBS
of Rs.45000 crore. Against RE 2022-23 provision of Rs.1000 crore to RRSK from
internal resources, IR has contributed Rs.1797 crore in view of requirement of
funds. In 2023-24, Rs.1000 crore have been contributed. In the overall, though
IR’s contribution fell short of target in view of position explained above, there has
been no deficit of funds for RRSK works, which have progressed as per their
targets. NIT! Aayog appreciated Railways’ progress on safety and
implementation of RRSK and held that safety indicators have shown
improvement after implementation of RRSK.

Gross Expenditure on RRSK Works

(Rs. in Cr)
Actual | Actual | Actual | Actual | Actual | Total Actual [छह]
2017- | 2018- | 2019- | 2020- | 2021- | 2017- 2022- | 2023-
18 19 20 21 22 18 to 23 24
2021-



22

Traffic 654.02 | 498.23 | 370.78 | 523.49 | 476.93 | 2523.4 591.38 | 700

Facilities 5

Railway 1.00

Research

Rolling 1099.1 | 1637.2 | 1116.1 | 2969.7 | 2798.2 | 9620.5 1812.4 | 1600.0

Stock 0 8 5 3 6 2 3 0

Level 535.99 | 678.60 | 570.25 | 544.92 2329.7 0.15

Crossings 6

Road 3175.2 | 3488.8 | 2334.1 | 4086.4 | 1736.1 | 14820. 1500.8 | 1900

Over/Und | 3 2 5 5 8 83 0

er Bridges

Track 8903.9 | 9697.3 | 8314.3 | 13509. | 16262. | 56687. 4196.7 | 1400.0

Renewals | 9 4 0 49 45 54 1 09

Bridge 451.34 | 516.72 | 752.59 | 730.38 | 1286.1 | 3737.1 1041.3 | 1200.0

Works 3 6 6 9

Signal & 1201.0 | 1461.2 | 1536.6 | 1829.9 | 2058.2 | 8087.1 2200.7 | 2178.1

Telecom | 1 9 0 9 5 4 8 2

Works

Other 18.76 | 47.02 | 301.10 | 460.18 | 488.53 | 1315.5 541.62 | 800.00

Electrical 9

Works

Traction 331.48 | 302.77 634.25

Distributio

n Works

Machiner | 127.10 | 179.82 | 162.94 | 226.33 | 349.48 | 1045.6 195.61 | 240.00
| y & Plant 7

Workshop | 240.96 | 202.67 | 256.08 | 608.95 | 354.82 | 1663.4 317.14 | 380.00

s PUs 8

Customer | 462.55 | 795.09 | 870.12 | 1915.9 | 1176.0 | 5219.7 1093.7 | 1150.0

Amenities 9 2 7 4 0

Other 42.00 | 1414.17 | 235.72 | 329.44 | 748.33 324.67 | 510.00

Specified

Works

Training/ | 58.00 | 48.01 | 73.38 | 71.69 | 58.00 | 309.08 78.45 | 250

HRD

Total 17259. | 19595. | 16799. | 27713. | 27374. | 108742 13894, | 12309.

53 63 61 31 49 57 84 12

In 2021, due to lesser GBS allocation, funds from EBR(S) were also deployed for
RRSK works

Due to assured funding under RRSK, the Budget allocation and expenditure over
lway network for track renewal works has almost doubled from 2017-
18 to 2023-24 as seen below:

Indian Rai

Year Budget Grant/ Revised | Expenditure (Rs. in Cr)
Estimate (Rs. in Cr)

2017-18 9305 8884

2018-19 10112 9690

51


2019-20 10120 9390
2020-21 10599 13523
2021-22 15887 16558
2022-23 15388 16325
2023-24 17297 [i (‘CSé‘s*l

Due to increased allocation and thrust on track renewal works, reduction in
number of rail/weld failures have been achieved, thereby fulfilling the objectives
of RRSK, as given below:

Type of failure 2017-18 2022-2300 Reduction
Rail Fracture 1671 531 68.22%
Weld failure 2604 724 72.19%

Para No.6.2: Fire accidents in coaches

117.

The Standing Committee on Railways stated that the instances of accidents due

to fire in trains are not many yet the casualties in such cases are usually very high.
Audit noticed that out of the identified 44,407 coaches on 12 ZRs, fire extinguishers
have not been provided in 27,763 (62 per cent) coaches. The reasons for non-provision
of fire extinguishers were: (i) delays in tendering processes, (ii) failure of firm to supply
the fire extinguishers, (iii) supply awaited/under progress etc.

118.

119.

The Ministry in their background note replied as under:
“Measures taken to prevent fire in coaches: -

Usage of fire retardant furnishing materials in coaches. Provision of fire detection
and suppression system in Power Cars and Pantry Cars and Fire and Smoke
detection system in AC coaches. Provision of fire extinguishers in all AC coaches
and all newly manufactured Non-AC coaches. Display of statutory “Fire Notices”
for widespread passenger information in all coaches.”

When asked about the status of procurement of fire extinguishers for the

identified coaches, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

120.

“Fire Extinguishers are already provided in all Pantry/Power Cars, AC Coaches
and SLRD coaches. All Non-AC coaches are also being provided with Fire
Extinguishers. The work is in progress and 36663 coaches have been covered.
The balance 389 Non-AC coaches will be completed by 31.03.2024”

On being asked about the plan of Indian Railway to achieve 100 per cent

installation of fire extinguishers in coaches, the Ministry in their written reply stated as

under:

“It is planned to cover all coaches with fire safety system by March 2024.”

52



121. When enquired as to whether financial constraint and shortage of staff have been
factors in the process of procurement and installation of fire extinguishers, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as under:

“No, there has been no financial constraint or shortage of staff in regards to the
process of procurement and installation of fire extinguishers.”

122. When the Committee expressed apprehensions that out of the identified 44,407
coaches on 12 Zonal Railways, fire extinguishers have not been provided in 62 per cent
of the coaches and that this is a serious indictment, the Ministry representative replied
during oral evidence as under:

“It has been installed in 39000 coaches. There were hiccups at the initial stage.
The procurement related problem has been solved and the work is now in full
swing.”

123. When the Committee asked as to how things would move properly if it takes so
long to install the fire extinguisher even after allocation of sufficient funds, the Ministry
representative replied during oral evidence as under:

“There was no scarcity of funds. The problem was in procurement. Besides, we
are moving towards online detection of defects of coaches and wagons. We have
made a beginning and the problem that crops up is that the wheel gets flat which
starts impacting the rail and therefore, it becomes important to detect it. We are
installing wheel impact load detector. The second problem is with the rolling
stock. The bearing gets seized and the axle may break due to heat. It is
important to detect it after heating up and we are getting online hot box detection
system. Till now we have installed 25 online monitoring of rolling stock system,
wheel impact load detector and 321 hot box detectors which will detect the defect
in the running train. There is another important aspect and that is accident due to
human error. We are constantly endeavoring as to how we should train so that
safe operation practices are followed. We have concentrated the most on
training. There are zonal training institutes in the zonal railways. Besides, there
are discipline-wise institutes for technicians working for maintenance and we are
training them for maintenance and training procedures. We provide initial training.
After that, periodically, regular training is being imparted, which we call as
refresher course, and in the refresher course, all the important instructions are
repeated or reiterated to them so that their knowledge is refreshed. Besides that,
we are also conducting promotional courses. When any employee is promoted
and he is given a higher responsibility, we are conducting promotional courses.
We also conduct special courses which aré targeted. Whenever we identify a
particular area of railway working which requires more training, then we are
giving specialized training courses. So, these are the four categories of courses
which we are imparting to our employees. We have constantly laid emphasis on
more and more training. So, while in 2010-11, the number of employees trained
per year was of the order of three lakhs in a year, this has now been increased to
five lakhs employees trained per year to intensify the training being imparted to
the employees. The second thing, which one of the hon. Members pointed out,

53


was regarding the training of loco pilots. So, for that purpose, we have got
simulators. So, we have installed simulators, and the loco pilots are sent on
simulator. A simulator simulates the condition of a train operation, and the loco
pilot is trained on that simulator so that before he actually goes on the train, he is
trained on a simulator. They are also trained on practices like what is right and
what is wrong in train operation. Also, we are imparting training to our onboard
staff regarding firefighting and use of fire extinguishers so that in the case of an
event of fire, they can immediately respond in the situation and provide the
golden hour reaction to the fire situation. Also, stress is an important factor in
railway operation because the staff members are continuously concentrating on
operation. So, we are also imparting training in yoga and meditation to our
employees so that their mental well-being is improved. This is about the
important aspect of training that we are imparting.”

Para No.6.3: Elimination of Manned Level Crossings

124.

Audit noted that except for North West Railway, the shortfall ranged in elimination

of manned level crossings in 15 ZRs ranged from 6 per cent (WR) to 61 per cent
(ECR).The main reasons cited for delay in completion of the work was delay in
finalization of drawing, delay in preparation and sanction of detailed estimates, issues
related to land acquisition and non-finalization of cost sharing issues etc.

125.

On being enquired about elimination of manned level crossings, the Ministry

official during further evidence stated as under:

126.

“One of the achievements of Indian Railways has been that all the unmanned
railway crossing gates on broad gauge route have been eliminated by the year
2018-19. It has remarkably improved the safety in operations. Road under
bridges and road over bridges are being constructed to eliminate the level
crossing gates. Up to the year 2022-23, the number of ROBs and RUBs
constructed has crossed 16,600. In the current financial year, up to October
2023, 423 ROBs/RUBs have been constructed and number of manned level
crossing gates eliminated up to October 2023 is 240.”

When asked about the difficulties coming in the way, the Ministry in their written

reply stated as under:

“Level crossings (LCs) are eliminated by following methods depending upon site
conditions & traffic at Level crossings:-.

i. Direct Closure- Closing level crossing having very less/negligible Train Vehicle
Unit (TVU).

ii, Merger- Merger of level crossing with nearby LC or available subway / Road
Under Bridge (RUB) /Road Over Bridge (ROB), by construction of diversion road
as per requirement.

iii, Provision of ROB/RUBs- ROB/RUB is constructed in lieu of Level crossing.

54


127.

© As on 30.06.2023, total 1782 ROBs and 2308 RUBs have been sanctioned
over all zonal railways, which are in various stages of planning, and execution.

¢ The level crossings on MG & NG section will be eliminated along with gauge
conversion work of the section to BG.

One of the major constraints faced in elimination of level crossings has been
allocation of limited funds by state Government for sanction and construction of
ROBs/RUBs on cost sharing basis. Comprehensive review of policy has been
done by Railway and revised policy dated 02.03.2023 has been issued to remove
bottlenecks in sanctioning and for faster execution of these works. As per this
policy, 100% cost of work of ROB/RUB at LCs shall be borne by Railways except
LCs located on National Highways (NH) and where State Govt /Road Owning
Authority/ Local Authority want to take up the works at its cost. The old
sanctioned works on cost sharing, where work could not commence due to funds
not being arranged by State Government have also been reviewed as per
priority, for sanction on Railway cost. This has fast tracked process of
sanctioning & execution of works. Other major difficulty experienced in
completion and commissioning of ROB is land acquisition at approaches,
wherever required. The land acquisition is to be done with State Government by
State Govt. for which regular follow up is being done to expedite the land
acquisition.”

On being asked about the zone-wise plan of Indian Railway to achieve 100%

elimination of manned level crossings, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

128.

“Elimination of Manned level crossing is a continuous process. Zonal Railways
are undertaking preparation of DPR/feasibility report for elimination of LCs and
works are sanctioned for construction of ROB/RUB depending on the priority,
feasibility etc under sanctioned umbrella works. Construction of ROB/RUB, in lieu
of level crossings on certain LCs located in congested city area/urban
conglomerate, sometimes requires land acquisition in heavy built up area which
also has significant bearing on feasibility/executability of works and affect the
consent of State Government for closure of LC. Priority of elimination of level
crossing (LC) is based on its impact on safety in train operations, mobility of
trains, impact for road users and feasibility etc.”

When asked whether any fund crunch has been experienced in the process of

elimination of manned Level Crossings gates, the Ministry in their written reply stated as

under:

“Umbrella works have been sanctioned for construction of ROBs/RUBs. As on
01.04.2023, the availability of sanctioned umbrella work is Rs 35040 Crore, out of
which funds of Rs. 9947 Crore have been utilized so far for sanction of works.
Sanction of works is a continuous process based on feasibility report for
construction of ROB/RUB to eliminate manned LCs. For the current year (2023-
24), Rs 8000 Cr. (SF- Rs 7400 Cr-SF & EBR (P)-Rs 600 Cr) have been allocated
under ‘Road Safety Work’ Plan Head, out of which Rs 1549 Cr. have been

55


utilized so far. The Outlay has been sufficiently increased over the years and no
funds constraints are experienced in execution of such works.”

Para No.6.4: Accidents involving Animals

129. Audit noticed that the important precautionary measures related to provision of
signage boards, construction of underpasses, provision of fencing and deputation of
forest staff in divisional offices had not been implemented in many sections, even after a
lapse of more than 10 years period from the issue of Joint General Advisories by
Ministry of Environment & Forests, and Ministry of Railways.

130. When asked as to what action has been taken to fix accountability for not
implementing important precautionary measures as stated above, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:
“Various steps have been taken by Zonal Railways in coordination with Ministry
of Environment and Forest to curb the death of animals while crossing railway
track, which include the following:

(i) Imposition of speed restrictions in identified locations,

(ii) Provision of signage board for pre-warning the train crew about animal
crossing zones.

(iii) Sensitization of Train Crew and Station staff on a regular basis,

(iv) Need based clearance of vegetation on the sides of the track within
railway land,

(v) Construction of underpasses and ramps for the movement of wildlife at
identified locations,

(vi) Provision of fencing at isolated locations,

(vii) Forest Department staff deputed in Railway control offices to liaison
with Railway and elephant trackers engaged by Forest Department for
timely action by alerting station master and loco pilots,

(viii) Honey bee sound systems have been installed at locations which are
prone to crossing of elephants.

(ix) Counseling of villagers for avoiding cattle coming near track.

(x) Innovative Intrusion Detection System to detect movement of elephant
across Railway track has been introduced in Lumding — Hawaipur section
(24 Km) of Lumding Division in Assam and in Chalsa — Hasimara section
(60 Km) of Alipurduar Division in West Bengal of North East Frontier
Railway.

56


(xi) One work for “Provision of Intrusion Detection system for detection of
Elephant movement” costing Rs 77.41 crores has been sanctioned for
North East Frontier Railway.

Regular inspections at different levels are conducted to check the above
measures taken in different sections and shortcomings noticed are made
good at the earliest. Necessary instructions to defaulting officials are
issued for immediate compliance. Important measures like following of
speed restrictions are strictly followed by train crew without fail, as directly
related to safety”.

131. On being enquired about the timeframe within which the Indian Railway propose
100% elimination of level crossings in forest passages to reduce the safety hazards for
animals, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“As per latest Railway Board policy dated 02.03.2023, Road Crossing works, in
lieu of Level Crossings (LCs), shall be done at railway cost except those on
National Highways (NH) and where State Govt. /Road Owning Authority/Local
Authority want to take up the works at its cost. To reduce the safety hazards for
animals, during construction of new line/multitracking/gauge conversion projects
in forest area, Railway is taking required wildlife mitigation measures in
consultation with forest authorities.”

जे # जे # है हज # # के कफ

57


PART-II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

Introductory

1. The Indian Railway (IR) is one of the world's largest railways. It functions as
a vertically integrated organization providing Passenger and Freight services. It is
a single system which consists of 67,956 route km of track that traverses the
country. More than 21648 number of trains ply on IR carrying about 22.15 million
passengers and hauling nearly 3.32 million tonnes of freight every day. Accidents
in Indian Railway tarnish the image and raises questions on safe and sound
working procedures. Accidents occur on account of acts of omission or
commission, evasion of rules, unsafe practices, etc. Out of various categories of
accidents, most serious consequences are witnessed in collisions, derailments,
fire in running trains and accidents at level crossings accidents etc. There exist
statutory rules known as Indian Railways (Open Lines) General Rules (GR), 1976
to regulate safe operation of trains. These Rules have been notified as per the
powers delegated by the Railways Act, 1989. These Rules are further
supplemented by Zonal Railways, by way of issuing Subsidiary Rules (SR), to
ensure safety, punctuality and mobility. All new Railway lines for the public
carriage of passengers and major modifications of existing systems require
inspection and clearance by the Commission of Railway Safety (CRS), which is an
independent organization under the administrative contro! of Ministry of Civil
Aviation. A dedicated Safety department operates as an internal auditor in the
Railways at three tiers, viz. Railway Board Level, Zonal Level and Divisional Level.
A number of initiatives and safeguards have been taken continuously in the past
to improve the safety performance, as a result of which the safety of Railways has
been claimed to have improved over the years. Some of the issues contained in
the Audit Report have been examined by the Committee and commented upon
suitably in the succeeding paragraphs.

Monitoring by Track Recording Cars Recording Cars

2. Track Recording Cars (TRCs) are specialized vehicles that inspect the
geometrical and structural conditions of Railway tracks, identifying defects that
could lead to derailment and other accidents. The Committee note from the Audit
observation that there were shortfalls in inspections by Track Recording Cars
which ranged between 30 per cent and 100 per cent in TRC inspections which has
had an adverse impact on the quality of railways assets and also implications on
safe operation of trains on various routes. The Committee also note from one of
the ‘accident inquiry reports’ that the derailment of Seemanchal Express

58


occurred in February 2019 in ECR wherein it was stated that the TRC run over the
section was overdue by four months. Had the TRC run been carried out, it could
have given vital inputs on possible defects in track. The main reason assigned for
the shortfall in the inspections, as informed to the Committee include, non-receipt
of the programme for the running of TRCs to be prepared and finalized by
Research Designs & Standards Organization (RDSO), Lucknow. From the
submissions made by the Ministry, the Committee note that there has been
shortfall in frequency of track recording vis-a-vis, the stipulations due to limited
number of Cars as also faulty planning. Consequently, the target of inspections
by TRCs could not be achieved. Besides, the problem was aggravated due to
break downs, scheduled maintenance of Track Recording system, non-availability
of path on congested traffic sections etc. The Ministry in their submission to the
Committee have stated that in case of non availability of TRC, alternative means
i.e. Oscillation Monitoring Systems were deployed and attention to track
maintenance issues is given based on the result. The Committee however, cannot
endorse the argument that additional runs of Oscillation Monitoring System
(OMS) have been carried out for monitoring the health of the track, as an
alternative to, or in lieu of track recording by TRCs as these systems serve
separate purposes. While OMS assesses the ride quality of the track, the actual
track geometry is recorded by the TRC. The Committee further note from the
submission of the Ministry that to address the shortfall, steps like commissioning
and procurement of 2 new TRCs each and _ sanction of 7 more TRCs have been
done (including 04 additional TRCs and replacement of 03 old TRCs). The
Committee recommend that the Ministry take steps to make sure that TRCs are
put to full utilization and a time-bound utilization certificate reflecting stipulated
periodicity, length of track recording, time taken to complete the given stretch
and consequential action for those falling short of the target be made mandatory.
The Committee are of the view that instead of procuring TRCs in batches, the
required number of TRCs should be estimated well in advance and procured
straightaway in a time bound manner as this would not only put an end to the
recurrent shortage/maintenance issues but would also, at the same time, prevent
accidents/derailments caused on account of shortfall in frequency of track
recording due to limited number/shortage of TRCs. The Committee desire that the
Ministry set a target for 100 percent track recording by the year 2025. The
Committee also desire that a compliance report in the matter regarding
procurement of Track Inspection and Monitoring Systems and Zero Speed
Integrated Track Monitoring Systems be submitted to the Committee.

59


Outsourcing of track maintenance activities

3. From the audit observation, the Committee find that the status of
outsourcing was found to be inadequate as against the required number of work
force of the Civil Engineering Department. Though the percentage of vacancies in
Indian Railways for Civil Engineering Department ranged between 9-36 per cent,
no outsourcing was done in East Central Railway for addressing the problem of
shortage of work force in divisions selected for review. From the submissions of
the Ministry, the Committee note that accident Inquiry reports of the zone
revealed that in 23 per cent of the total derailments (40 out of 172) in East Central
Railways, one of the factors responsible for the derailment was improper track
maintenance. Despite the fact that the three Zonal Railways viz. North Central
Railways, North Frontier Railway, and West Central Railway had more than seven
percent vacancies, no serious efforts seem to have been made for filling up the
vacant posts nor outsourcing was done in any of these Zonal Railways. The
Committee further note from the submission of the Ministry that the total Non-
gazetted Group ‘C’ (including level - 1) vacancies in Civil Engineering department
of Indian Railways as on 01.07.2023 was 68619. During 2018- 2019 to 2022-2023,
11784 (Provisional) candidates had been empanelled in Civil Engineering
Department (for Group ‘C’ posts excluding Level 1) by 21 Railway Recruitment
Boards (RRBs). The Committee are of the view that adequate monitoring
mechanism should be worked out to maintain a ‘Database’ containing the details
of track maintenance by the permanent staff and the extent of shortage of staff
that needs to be met by outsourcing. The Committee are also of the view that the
Ministry need to work out a mechanism preferably in the form of an ‘Outsourcing
Coordination Cell’ to ensure that a viable ‘Stop-Gap’ arrangement to address the
issue of shortage of ‘permanent or regular staff’ is taken care of by way of
engaging qualified contractual staff. The Committee are of the view that the
quantum of work based on the field requirement needs to be worked out by the
respective units of the division well in advance to make good the shortage of
permanent staff and in furtherance of this objective, the ‘Outsourcing
Coordination Cell’ should be entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining the
‘Database’ with a view to eliminating the possibility of staff requirement-gap; and
also to monitor, assess and grade the outsourced staff. The Committee
recommend that recruitment of sufficient permanent staff should be carried out at
the earliest to ensure regular and reliable supply of workforce and also to make
sure that punitive actions are initiated against those found responsible for any
negligence or breaking the established rules which cause accidents/derailments.

60


Mechanization of track maintenance activities

4, The Committee note from the audit observation that idling of track
machines due to ‘block not given by the Operating Department’ and ‘Stabled due
to operational problems’ was found in all the twelve Zonal Railways; in eleven
Zonal Railways, the track machine was kept idle for 13 to 1881 days due to ‘non-
availability of track machine staff’. Also, ‘idling of track machines’ due to ‘block
not planned by divisions’ and ‘programme not planned by Track Machine Office’
was noticed in ten Zonal Railways. From the submissions of the Ministry, the
Committee note that track machines are being used for track renewal work as
well and mechanization work too is being carried out as part of the track renewal
activity. Besides, the quality of the work is ensured by laying the tracks with the
help of track machines and a good number of machines have been inducted for
the maintenance work which is being carried out with the help of automatic
machines which ensures the quality of maintenance. The Committee also note
from the submissions of the Ministry that Satellite Track Machine Maintenance
Depots (STMMD) are being set up in each Division to ensure timely maintenance
of machines and improved quality. The Committee feel that there have been
cases of idling of track machines due to various reasons which has hampered the
process of mechanization of track maintenance activities and are of the view that
the Ministry need to develop an inbuilt mechanism to make sure that track
machines are not kept idle and are put to maximum use. The Committee
recommend introduction of the ground penetrating Radar (GPR) for Ballast Bed
condition evaluation as soon as possible. The Committee also recommend that
human intervention in the activities of track maintenance services be minimized
and mechanized maintenance work be maximized which would not only speed up
the maintenance Process and eliminate the angle of human error in the process
of track maintenance and thereby infuse more confidence on safety issues.

Introduction of wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete sleepers

5. The Committee note from the audit observation that Research Design and
Standard Organization (RDSO) had developed a new wider and heavier pre-
stressed concrete sleeper (RT-8527) for Indian Railways to keep pace with the
increased freight traffic by allowing higher axle load on existing track. The
Committee find that despite Railway Board directive issued vide letter dt.
17.10.2018 communicating its approval on usage of wider and heavier sleepers
(RT-8527) from financial year 2019-20 onwards, the sleepers were not used by
some zonal railways at the time of track renewal due to non-availability of the rate
reference in Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM) and
web based application for RT-8527 sleepers at the stage of preparing detailed
estimates. The Committee further note from the submissions of the Ministry that

61


the tender for procurement of wider sleepers (RT-8527) was finalized by the Board
in May, 2019 with provision of mobilization period of 4 months for shifting to
production of wider sleepers. Accordingly, Zonal Railways started production of
wider sleepers from September 2019 onwards and started using wider sleeper
(RT-8527) based on availability of wider sleepers & its matching fittings. The
Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that Zonal Railways also
continued using normal sleepers (RT2496) till the stocks and matching fittings
were available, with a view to avoiding wastage of resources. In this regard, the
Committee concur with the audit observation that there is a need to upgrade and
standardize the existing track structure for 25 tonne axle load on IR, as the
existing sleepers are slender and lightweight and are less fit for higher impact
load caused by flat wheels which may lead to premature failure of sleepers and
consequently rail disasters in the form of derailment/accidents. The Committee
are not convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry and are of the
view that sleepers that are lightweight and are less fit for higher impact load
should be replaced on war footing with PSC sleepers and a target oriented
working/monitoring group should be put in place to make sure that the
recommendations of the Railway Board for use of PSCS is implemented both in
letter and spirit without further delay. The Committee are of the view that the idea
of ‘avoiding wastage of resources till old stocks last’ should not in any way
override issues of safety. The Committee also desire that the Ministry furnish a
compliance report on use of PSCS as per the advisory of the Railway Board.

Alumino Thermit and Flash Butt Welding

6. The Committee note from the audit observation that while the targets in
respect of the less preferred AT welding (manual process) were achieved, there
was shortfall in achievement of targets for the more preferred FB welding and
that the Railway administration failed in implementing the directives issued on
rail welds in the ‘Corporate Safety Plan of IR’ (2003-13). From the audit
observation, the Committee also note that the Railway Board reiterated (August
2019) that the elimination of AT welding except in emergency shall be the way
forward. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that the
concerned zonal Railways have listed reasons like, unavoidability of use of AT
welds for regular maintenance, use of AT welding where FB welding is not
economical, non-fixation of targets for removal of AT welds and isolated welding
as the reasons for opting for the less preferred AT welding. In response to the
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Railways, the Ministry had stated
that technology upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is being carried
out continuously including switching over to mobile FB welding technology in
place of AT welding to carry out weld renewals. The Committee note that AT

62


welding was given more weightage over FB Welding which is indicative of a
lackadaisical approach practiced towards implementation of Railway Board
directives and also towards the recommendation of the Standing Committee on
Railways which clearly that expressed the view elimination of AT welding except
in cases of emergency should be ‘the way forward’. The Committee opine that
advocacy of use of AT welding, where FB welding is not economical, does not
hold much ground, as safety of human life should be given precedence over
economics of scale. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry need to work
out a timeline for completion of replacement of AT welds with FB welds and a
monitoring mechanism should be put in place to oversee the process on a
regular basis till the objective is achieved. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the timeline fixed in this matter.

Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Testing

7. From the audit observation, the Committee note that there were shortfalls
in USFD testing in rails and welds during 2017-2021. The ultrasonic flaw detection
system is used in Indian Railways for detection of flaws in railways to enable
timely removal of defects. The Committee note with dismay that whereas this
shortfall was 50 percent in the Northern Railways in respect of USFD testing in
rails, it reached as high as 100 percent in the East Coast Railway in respect of
USFD testing on welds. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
Indian Railway has already adopted a web enabled Track Management System
(TMS) to ensure monitoring of the track inspection and maintenance activities at
various levels of Railway working and that Alarm/Reminder is provided by TMS
for any location of rails & welds due for USFD testing, based on which planning
and deployment of USFD testing team is done. The Committee note that there
have been instances in the past when derailments have taken place because of
rail breakage. The Ministry has informed that the USFD testing is being done in
the range of 305 thousand track kilometer per year and USFD testing is being
done for weld and the number has increased to 2533 thousand welds per year and
that to meet the shortfall over and above the departmental resources,
outsourcing agencies are made available over and above the departmental
workforce. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry need to work out a
mechanism advisably in the form of a ‘USFD testing Monitoring Cell’ to make sure
that there is no shortfall in USFD testing in all Zonal Railways and also to ensure
that there is no demand gap in terms of departmental workforce to carry out this
task. The Committee are of the view that the conventional method of using
trolieys for USFD of rails is becoming increasingly difficult as repair window
shrinks due to train speed reaching above 130 kmph. The Committee recommend
that self-propelled Ultrasonic Rail Testing (SPURT) Cars should be inducted at

63


the earliest. The Committee also note that efforts made to introduce SPURT Cars
in the past have not been successful and recommend that the Ministry should
make earnest efforts to procure SPURT Cars as soon as possible and furnish a
compliance report about the procurement of SPURT Cars. The Committee are of
the view that more technologically advanced tools on the pattern of web enabled
Track Management System should be explored and implemented in order to
ensure shielding from human error in USFD testing procedure.

Maintenance of ‘Yard Lines’

8. The Committee note from the observation of the audit that against the
demand of 7339:28 hours for Yard line maintenance, only 4667:56 maintenance
block hours were granted by the Zonal Railways during 2017-2021. The
Committee note from the submissions of the Ministry that the reasons for the
shortfalls were due to the agencies not turning up to execute the work in time,
less number of blocks granted against those demanded and non-availability of
materials, etc. The Committee also note from the submissions of the Ministry that
there is a concept of corridor block which is inbuilt in the working time table
issued by Zonal Railways. Further, Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs) from the Engg.
& Traffic Dte. have been issued to Railways for advance planning of traffic blocks
for maintenance of assets. Recently, system of Rolling Block Plan (RBP) has
been introduced at Divisional level for advance two week block planning for
maintenance of assets by different departments working in same block to avail
maximum benefits of traffic blocks, which is reviewed on weekly basis by the
Divisions and Zonal Railways. Besides, works are executed by the outsourcing
agency based on detailed planning for supply of men and machinery etc required
for the work. Regular monitoring of progress is being done by Railway officials
linked with the execution of works. Action in terms of conditions of contract is
taken in case of delay attributable to the contractor. The Committee feel that there
is a yawning difference in the demand hours and supply hours for maintenance
and there is a need to bridge the gap. The Committee are of the view that there is
a need to increase absolute block hours granted. The Committee are also of the
view that stricter control needs to be exercised over the outsourced agencies
involved in this work and the conditions of contract should be reworked to
ensure complete compliance. The Committee desire that the Ministry furnish a
compliance report to them in the matter.

Inspections by Higher Authorities

9. The Committee note from audit observation the discrepancies in the ratio
of route kilometer with average number of inspections in various zonal railways.
Notably, in South East Central Railway, higher officials did not carry out any
inspection, though the zone has 2348 route km which constitutes around 4 per
cent of total of Indian Railways’ Broad Gauge line. No standard criterion was set
for number of inspections to be conducted by higher authorities and hence, there
is no accountability for the meagre number of inspections undertaken. The

64


Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that detailed schedule of
inspection of field officials (JE/SSE/ADEN) has been stipulated in IRPWM and in
addition, the guidelines for inspection by Divisional officers have been issued by
Railway Board. Yet, no specific inspection schedule is prescribed for higher
ranking officers at the Headquarters. However, as stated by the Ministry,
Headquarter level officers carry out the technical inspections suo motu and also
during the safety drives launched from time to time, which are scrutinized on
completion of such safety drives. The Committee opine that a target based
inspection module needs to be worked out not only for the junior and middle level
officers but also for high level authorities who would not only play a monitoring
role for inspections but also conduct real time inspection at given time intervals
which should be on a monthly basis in place of annual inspection. The Committee
also observe that inspection notes were not uploaded in the Track Management
System(TMS) portal and compliance to the notes was not available in many cases
during field visits to the Senior Section Engineer office. Thus, the in-built
monitoring mechanism including the TMS portal was not found to be properly
operational. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Ministry need to
fine-tune the system to the targeted standards so as to make the inspection
system meaningful and beneficial. The Committee note that in accordance with
the functions laid down in the Railway Act, 1989, a thorough inspection is carried
out by the Commission of Railway Safety only when commissioning is done for a
new asset which maybe a new line, or doubling a line, or a gauge conversion
project, before opening any new asset. The Committee also opine that the office
of Commission of Railway Safety which operates under the control of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation may be directly involved in the inspection process as an
independent and dispassionate agency and the Commissioner of Railway Safety
should carry out safety audit in five Railway divisions every year and submit a
structured safety audit report on which the Indian Railways (Railway Board) may
record their inputs and action taken. The Committee desire that the proposal be
examined and related details furnished at the earliest.

Training of track maintenance officials

10. The Committee note from the audit observation that 794 officials dealing
with track maintenance activities were not given training at various levels be it
the induction level or refresher course level and there were also shortfalls in
conducting training at supervisory level such as SSE/JE/P. Way in many Zonal
Railways. The reasons for the shortfall in imparting training at various levels were
mainly attributed to Covid-19 situation, staff not being spared due to special work
and other assignments, non-receipt of training schedule in the units and non-
updating of information of employees in Track Management System (TMS) etc.
From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that all safety category
railway employees are to be imparted structured training at various stages of
their career which includes, Simulator-based training imparted for improving the
driving skills and reaction time of Loco Pilots; Training module formulated for
running staff on Fire Fighting and use of fire extinguishers; Regular counseling of

65


running staff etc. and that It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to
develop Human Resources. From the information furnished, the Committee note
that during 2022-23, all employees have not been given different types of training
viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized. The Committee take a grim view
of the position and feel that there have been gaps in providing training at different
levels of officers/staff and are of the view that the Ministry needs to develop a
mechanism to ensure that there are no shortfalls in the training programmes at
any point of time and the limitations attributed as reasons for the shortfall are
addressed systematically. The Committee are of the view that officials need to be
encouraged to undergo internationally recognized certification courses to
develop proficiency. The Ministry should also consider examining the feasibility
of collaborating with IITs and IIMs to develop specilised courses aimed at offering
advanced technical and management training to officers. The Committee also
recommend that an independent supervisory body be constituted to formulate
and monitor training schedules and prepare a monthly report containing details
of implementation of training programmes and also to ensure that no untrained
hand is deployed for duty for any reason.

Analysis of Accidents/Derailments in Indian Railways and introduction of safety
measures

11. The Committee note from the audit observation that the factors causing
maximum derailments (395) were in ‘Engineering Department’ followed by
‘Operating Department’ (173). Out of several factors attributed, the major factor
responsible for derailment related to ‘maintenance of track’ (167 cases), followed
by ‘deviation of track parameters beyond permissible limits’ (149 cases) and ‘bad
driving/over speeding’ (144 cases). From the submission of the Ministry, the
Committee note that measures to reduce derailments have been taken like track
renewal and maintenance; track upgradation consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate
Tensile Strength (UTS) rails; Pre-stressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC); Welded Rails
on most of BG tracks wherein short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails
have been converted into long welded rails; reduction in population of Alumino-
Thermit ( AT ) welds gradually by using longer rail panels with one/two/three
Flash Butt weld (FB) from rail manufacturing plant; Track Recording wherein
Supercheck of track parameters is done through regular runs of Track Recording
Cars (TRC) and regular bridge inspection. Besides, Measures have been taken to
avoid collisions through introduction of Advanced Signaling System, Panel
Interlocking/Route Relay Interlocking/Electronic Interlocking (PI/RRI/El) along
with Multiple Aspect Colour Light Signals, Block Proving Axle Counter (BPAC) to
ensure complete arrival of train without manual intervention before granting line
clear to the next train; Development of India’s own state-of-the-art electronic
system Automatic Train Protection (ATP) System named KAVACH (Train Collision
Avoidance System) by RDSO, which activates the train braking system
automatically if the Loco Pilot fails to control the train as per the speed
restrictions. However, the system to be an effective safety measure, all need to

66


have the KAVACH system. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a time
bound programme for installation of KAVACH system in all divisions/Routes
should be taken up by the Ministry. The Committee note from the report of the
CCRS on the accident that not adhering to the standard practices stipulated in
the Manuals and Work Instructions were not followed during the process of
signal modification work, owing to which the accident occurred. The Committee
are also of the view that training programmes of all levels of officers/staff should
be made more vigorous and result oriented. The Committee while taking note of
the measures taken to prevent derailments/accidents/collisions nevertheless also
feel concerned to observe that despite these measures, the system is still not
capable of putting a full stop to such mishaps and loss of lives and property due
to accidents continue to happen. Issues like track maintenance, track
upgradation and Retro-reflective sigma (5) boards and electronic interlocking
system should be accorded greater priority and should cover all routes/sectors at
the earliest and a target should be fixed to achieve a complete makeover towards
a zero error and a flawless and accident free operation. The Committee
recommend that the Indian Railways need to remodel the operational training
programmes keeping in view the five barriers/layers of defense (Swiss Cheese
Slices’ or ‘defense barriers) against accidents/derailments and use this Model as
a reference for strengthening the above barriers to avoid occurrence of similar
incidents. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the implementation status
of this Model and the benefits accruing from it.

Timeliness in completion of inquiries/investigations

12. From the observation of the audit the Committee note that there were
delays in different stages of accident inquiries and that the inquiry reports were
not submitted to the accepting authority within the time schedule prescribed by
Railway Board in 63 per cent cases and also that delays in submission of the
inquiry report had a cascading effect on acceptance of the reports by the
accepting authority. The Committee also note from audit observation that in 49
percent cases, there was delay in acceptance of the reports by the authorities
concerned. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that as per
complexity of an accident case, multiple witnesses are required to be examined,
detailed investigation reports e.g. Metallurgical, Chemical test reports from
Laboratories, RDSO, Forensic Examination report from state agencies and other
external agencies are required by the Inquiry Committee to arrive at the ‘root
cause’ of the accident for taking corrective and preventive actions. The
Committee also take note of the fact that in February 2006, Railway Board had
prescribed the timeline of D+10 days for Departmental Inquiry in Consequential
Accidents which was revised to D+30 days in view of the complexities in
December 2019 and further that the progress of departmental inquiries for their

67


early finalization is monitored at the highest level at Zonal Railway Headquarters
as well as at Railway Board. The Committee observe that delays in stages of
accident inquiries and non submission of inquiry reports to the accepting
authority within the time schedule prescribed by Railway Board have been
playing havoc with the lives and property and are of the view that unwavering
commitment to the timeline for inquiries and submission of report to the
accepting authority must be ensured. The Committee also recommend that
effective steps should be taken to prevent any delay in acceptance of the reports
by the authority concerned within a reasonable timeframe and punitive
mechanism should be put in place to discourage avoidable delays in any respect.

Funding and utilization of RRSK

13. The Committee note from audit observation that there has been an assured
annual funding of Rs.15000 crore out of the ‘Gross Budgetary Support. However,
an annual amount of Rs.5000 crore (25 per cent) amounting to total contribution
of Rs 20,000 from 2017-18 to 2020-21 per year to this fund designed to be met
from Railways internal resources had been falling short of target to the tune of
Rs. 15775 crore constituting 78.88 % during the years 2017-18 to 2020-21. The
Committee also note from audit observation that the physical as well as financial
targets in respect of track renewals need to be enhanced as per the annual
requirement for track renewals for safety. From the submission of the Ministry the
Committee note that during this period, Railways’ internal resource generation
was adversely affected following Covid Pandemic which led to passenger trains
completely halting and freight trains running with only essential commodities.
Further, despite the pandemic and other recessionary conditions, IR provided
funds for incurring gross expenditure of Rs.1.08 lakh crore on RRSK works from
2017-18 till 2021-22. Besides, with the improvement in the net revenue position on
account of higher incremental loading and passenger revenues along with astute
expenditure management, MoR is able to supplement RRSK from 2022-23. The
Committee also note from Ministry’s submission that in 2022-23, the Government
has extended the currency of RRSK for another period of five years w.e.f. 2022-23
with total Gross Budgetary Support of Rs.45000 crore. Against Revised Estimate
2022-23 provision of Rs.1000 crore to RRSK from internal resources, IR has
contributed Rs.1797 crore considering requirement of funds. In addition, in 2023-
24, Rs.1000 crore from internal generation of resources have been budgeted.
Regarding fulfillment of target for renewal of tracks, the Committee note from
submission of the Ministry that due to assured funding under RRSK, the Budget
allocation and expenditure over Indian Railway network for track renewal works
has almost doubled from 2017-18 to 2023-24 and there has been no deficit of
funds for RRSK works, which have progressed as per their targets. The
Committee feel that generation of internal.resources -has seen.an aberrant trend
and has been falling short of the target and the resultant short deployment of

68


funds by Railways from internal resources to the tune of Rs. 15,775 crore (78.88
per cent) out of the total share of Rs. 20,000 crore had defeated the primary
objective of creation of RRSK to support absolute safety in Railways. The
Committee are of the view that funding to and expenditure from RRSK for safety
purposes should be ensured at highest level in order to accord paramount
importance to safety. The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry need to
set up a ‘Financial Task Force’ to trace the reasons causing decline in the
generation of internal resources and find ways to develop the resources to
ensure funding to the RRSK and its use for critical safety works. The Committee
also desire to be apprised of the latest status of the same.

Fire accidents in coaches

14. The Committee note from audit observation that out of the identified 44,407
coaches on 12 ZRs, fire extinguishers have not been provided in 27,763 (62 per
cent) coaches. The reasons attributed for non-provision of fire extinguishers
include delays in tendering processes, failure of firm to supply the fire
extinguishers, supply awaited/under progress etc. The Committee note from reply
of the Ministry that measures like usage of fire retardant furnishing materials in
coaches, provision of fire detection and suppression system in Power Cars and
Pantry Cars and Fire and Smoke detection system in AC coaches, provision of
fire extinguishers in all AC ‘coaches and all newly manufactured Non-AC coaches
and Display of statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread passenger information in
all coaches have been taken and fire extinguishers have been installed in 39000
coaches. Besides, till now, Indian Railways has provided fire detection cum
suppression system in nearly 1775 Power Cars and 800 Pantry Car Coaches. Fire
detection cum alarm system has been provided in nearly 11,000 AC Coaches and
fire extinguishers have been provided in nearly 34700 Non AC coaches and that it
is planned to cover all coaches with fire safety system by March 2024. The
Committee while acknowledging the steps taken by the Ministry observe that
there is still much left to be desired as regards installation of fire extinguishers.
The Committee are of the view that the tendering/procurement process needs to
be reworked to make sure that supply of fire extinguishers and their installation is
not hindered in any way and the target of covering all coaches with fire safety
system by March 2024 is met without fail. The Committee desire that a strict
protocol for inspection, service and maintenance of fire extinguishers should be
put in place. The Committee are of the considered view that a comprehensive Fire
Risk Assessment of trains and stations should be conducted by an independent
agency/Authority to enable the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive Fire Safety
protocol for Indian Railways. The Committee also feel that Fire Safety Audits
should be conducted at regular intervals for assessing the preparedness in
Indian Railways against fire hazards. -

69


Level Crossings on Indian Railway

15. The Committee note from audit observation that except for North West
Railway, the shortfall in elimination of manned level crossings in 15 ZRs ranged
from 6 per cent (WR) to 61 per cent (ECR) and the main reasons cited for delay in
completion of the work was delay in finalization of drawing, delay in preparation
and sanction of detailed estimates, issues related to land acquisition and non-
finalization of cost sharing issues etc. From the submission of the Ministry, the
Committee note that all Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge
(BG) routes on Indian Railways have been eliminated by 31.01.2019. Elimination
of Manned Level Crossing gates is under process, by provisioning for Road
Under Bridges (RUB) and Road Over Bridges (ROB) at these locations, and the
priority of elimination of level crossing (LC) is based on its impact on safety in
train operations, mobility of trains, impact for road users and feasibility etc. The
Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry that one of the major
constraints faced in elimination of level crossings has been allocation of limited
funds by state Governments for sanction and construction of ROBs/RUBs on
cost sharing basis. The Committee note that a Comprehensive review of policy
has been done by the Railways and the revised policy dated 02.03.2023 has been
issued to remove bottlenecks in sanctioning and for faster execution of these
works. As per revised policy, 100% cost of work of ROB/RUB at LCs shall be
borne by Railways except LCs located on National Highways (NH) and where
State Govt /Road Owning Authority/ Local Authority want to take up the works at
their own cost. Besides, the level crossings on MG & NG sections will be
eliminated along with gauge conversion work of the section to BG. While
appreciating the fact that all Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) on BG routes
on Indian Railways have been eliminated and the revision of earlier policy has
been effected with a view to fastening of the process of elimination of remaining
Manned Level Crossings, the Committee observe that there is still much space
left for expediting and completing the left over Level Crossings in the categories
of Broad Gauge, Metre-Gauge and Narrow Gauge. The Committee are of the view
that a special cell may be created to see to it that all bottlenecks in completely
eliminating level crossings are removed and all level crossings are done away
with by the year 2025. The Committee also recommend that chances should not
be taken with Metre-Gauge and Narrow Gauge level crossings either and
elimination of level crossings irrespective of category should be the priority over
anything else particularly in view of the fact that availability of finances has not
been a hindrance. The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest
developments and decisions taken by the Ministry in the matter.

70


Accidents involving Animals

16. The Committee note from the audit observation that important
precautionary measures related to provision of signage boards, construction of
underpasses, provision of fencing and deputation of forest staff in divisional
offices has not been implemented in many sections, even after a lapse of more
than 10 years following the issue of Joint General Advisories by Ministry of
Environment & Forests, and Ministry of Railways. The Committee note from the
submission of the Ministry that to reduce the safety hazards for animals, during
construction of new line/multitracking/gauge conversion projects in forest area,
the Railway is taking required wildlife mitigation measures in consultation with
forest authorities like imposition of speed restrictions in identified locations,
Provision of signage board for pre-warning the train crew about animal crossing
zones, need based clearance of vegetation on the sides of the track within railway
land, construction of underpasses and ramps for the movement of wildlife at
identified locations, provision of fencing at isolated locations, deployment of
forest Department staff in Railway control offices to liaison with Railway and
elephant trackers engaged by Forest Department for timely action by alerting
station master and loco pilots and installation of honey bee sound systems at
locations which are prone to crossing of elephants. Besides, regular inspections
at different levels are conducted to check the above measures taken in different
sections and shortcomings noticed are made good at the earliest and necessary
instructions to defaulting officials are issued for immediate compliance. The
Committee are of the view that Road Crossing works, in lieu of Level Crossings
should exclusively be carried out by the Railways without leaving this job to State
Govt. /Road Owning Authority/Local Authority. The Committee also recommend
that a database be prepared against those held accountable for not implementing
important precautionary measures as issued by Joint General Advisories by
Ministry of Environment & Forests and Ministry of Railways and action be taken
promptly and without fail.

Conclusion

17. Proper maintenance of the railway tracks is a pre-requisite for operating
the trains without the occurrence of accidents. Mechanized maintenance should
be prioritized as far as possible and human intervention should be kept to the
minimum. For this purpose, there is a need for new machines and advanced
technologies like B Scan USFD machine, Phased Array Ultrasonic Testing etc.
Tracks which are of concrete sleepers should normally be maintained by heavy
on-track machines. Provisions of integrated maintenance _blocks/traffic
blocks/corridor blocks for timely maintenance of assets on all routes including
yard lines need to be given greater emphasis to prevent accidents. In October
2018, the Railway Board had directed for usage of wider and heavier PSC

71


sleepers (RT-8527) on all tracks from 2019-20 onwards which is a welcome step in
the direction of safety. Similarly, action plan for gradual replacement of flash butt
(FB) welds in place of Alumino Thermit (AT) welds had been envisaged in
Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) 2003-13. Despite the efforts made in this direction
hitherto, there is much room left for achievement of the final goal and the process
requires to be fast tracked. Training and certification as per International
Standards and as prescribed in manuals, to the officials dealing with track
maintenance, training and certification of welders in particular, and also
conducting regular medical examination at prescribed intervals are some of the
key areas to be given attention to, which would go a long way in developing a
fatality free performance of the Railways.

With a view to ensuring safety and security of the passengers, as also
property including that of the railways, it is imperative that the government takes
the observations/ recommendations made in this report with utmost seriousness.
The Committee ordain that the details of the action taken be informed to the
Committee in clear termswithin a time frame of six months from now.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

अमर

72