ISSUES RELATING TO ACCOUNTING OF

CESS/LEVIES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

SIXTY-NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEER fH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

69


PAC NO. 2298

SEIXTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ISSUES RELATING TO ACCOUNTING OF

CESS/LEVIES

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August 2023/ Sravana 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE’PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE-PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (viii)
REPORT
PART-I
1. INTRODUCTION 1
2. AUDIT FINDINGS 2
A. UNIVERSAL ACCESS LEVY 19
B. NATIONAL MINERAL TRUST LEVY 21
C. NON-TRANSFER OF CESS TO OIL INDISUTRY DEVELOPMENT 22
BOARD
D. HEALTH AND EDUCATION CESS 26
E. ROAD AND INFRASTRUCTURE CESS 31
PART — Il
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 37
APPENDICES

1. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)

held on 11-10-2022.

I Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)

held on 09-11-2022.

lL Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24)

held on 09-08-2023.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

ON OARYN

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

RYONS

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K. Laxman
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Tiruchi Siva
Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Addl. Secretary
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director

Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary

Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

9 1 9 9७ + ० ७

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK ६8814

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Enartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Shri C.M. Ramesh

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
Vacan*’

* Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya
Sabha on 21st June, 2022. हु


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Sixty-ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “issues relating to accounting of Cess/Levies” based on Para no. 2.6 of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) Report No. 7 of 20271 relating to
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The C&AG Report No. 7 of 2021 was laid on the Table of the House on
29.11.2021.

3. PAC (2022-23) selected the aforesaid subject for examination and took oral
evidence of the representatives of Department of Expenditure on the subject under
examination on 9"" November, 2022. Based on the oral evidence and written
replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail in 2023-24.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the Draft
Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 09.08.2023. The
Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- I]
of the Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence
and obtaining information on the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information in connection with the examination of the
subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
097 August, 2023 Chairperson,

18, Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


PART -।

Introduction

1. The C&AG Report No. 7 of 2021 included matters arising from financial audit
of the Finance Accounts and the Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government
for the year ended March 2020

2. Public Accounts Committee (2022-2023), decided to examine Para no. 2.6 of
aforesaid C&AG Report which deal with the subject “Issues relating to accounting of
Cess/Levies”.

ii
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) considered the subject for
detailed examination, took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) and obtained written replies on the same.
Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Committee examined the
subject in detail.

4. The Severith Schedule of the Constitution enumerates fields over which the
Union Government and the State Government enjoy legislative competence to levy,
collect and distrib::te a number of direct, indirect taxes and a range of levies. Further,
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution has no separate legislative entry for a cess.
However, Article 279, which deals with taxes levied and collected by the Union and
distributed between the Union and the States, provides that all taxes and duties
teferred to in the Union List, except the duties and taxes referred to in articles 268,
269 and 269A, respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties referred to in article 271
and any cess levied for specific purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be
levied and collected by the Government of India and shall be distributed between the
Union and the States in the manner provided in clause.

5. Cesses can be divided into two sub-categories: cess taxes and cess fees
which exhibit the respective characteristics of taxes and fees. The funds from a cess
tax are to be credited into the Consolidated Fund of India and are to be earmarked
within it. Once credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, proceeds of a cess tax can
be withdrawn only when the Parliament passes suitable appropriation legislation. On
the other hand, the funds from cess fees are to be credited to a special fund
instituted for the said purpose and not to the Consolidated Fund of India.

6. Government imposes levies/cesses and other charges to raise funds for
specific purposes. Accounting of collection of such receipts is, in most cases,
regulated by legislation and rules which often provide for creation of Reserve Funds
to ensure that these levies/charges/cesses are used for intended purposes. It is the
responsibility of CGA to frame the appropriate accounting procedures for the
monitoring of such receipts, including initiating the operation of appropriate Reserve
Funds in the Public Account. In FY 20, cesses amounting to %1,98,402 crore were
collected and out of this =1,20,026 was transferred to reserve funds.

7. As per Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) Background Note,
such receipts are collected & credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and
subsequently transferred to the dedicated non-lapsable fund, based on the


appropriation approved by the Parliament. The expenditure incurred on related
schemes with due sanction of the administrative Ministry. The equal amount is met
from the dedicated fund.

8. The Controller General of Accounts under Department of Expenditure has
been allocated the subject of General Principles of Government Accounting relating
to Union or State Governments and form of accounts, and framing or revision of rules
and manual thereto (Para 6(a) of the Second Schedule of the Allocation of Business
Rules, 1961 for DOE). The Policy regarding accounting procedures is allocated to
the Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance (Para 33
of Second Schedule of Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 for DEA).

9. The accounting procedure is finalized on the advice of the C&AG of India
under Article 150 of the Constitution of India. The Budget Division, Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance is required to ensure that an amount equivalent
to cess collected is appropriated in concerned grant during the budgetary process for
transfer to related fund.

10. The Report in particular dealt with following cess/levies/funds:

Universal Access Levy
National Mineral Trust Levy

Oil Industry Development Fund
Health and Education Cess
Road and Infrastructure Cess

०9छ०

11... Regarding mechanisms being followed, the provisions pertaining to the
aforesaid designated cesses/levies/funds under the relevant Acts governed for their
creation, duration, operationalization, transfer from Consolidated Fund of India (CFI),
utilization and accounting procedure required, the Ministry furnished the following
information:

1. “General principles/ mechanisms being followed in creation /
operationalization / transfer of sums to reserve funds from cess
collections are detailed below:

« Creation/Operationalization of Reserve Funds in Public Account
pertaining to Cesses /Levies are based on the provisions of the
enabling act (e.g., USOF, CRIF etc.) or based on executive
decision if there arises a need felt for creation of the same (e.g.,
PSK, MUSK, PMSSN).

« Complete transfer of Cess proceeds to the corresponding reserve
Fund is subject to the enabling provisions in the appropriate Act.
Generally, the acts does not explicitly provide for complete.transfer
of cess collection from Consolidated Fund of India to the reserve


fund maintained in Public Account. The discretion for executive is
often built-in in acts for ensuring financial prudence.

e Transfers to reserve funds are made based on the actual
expenditure, performance of the scheme/program and the
absorptive capacity of the Ministry/Department in a year;

e itis important to note that Section 7(2) of FRBM Act 2003 provides
that whenever there is a shortfall in revenue or excess expenditure
over the prescribed levels during any period in a financial year, the
Central Government shall take appropriate measures for increasing
revenue or for reducing the expenditure (including curtailing of the
sums authorised to be paid and applied from and out of CFI under
any Act so as to provide for the appropriation of such sums.

e Incase when the nature of levy is very broad and generic in nature
and not relatable to a specific function of any Ministry, Government
may take a decision not to create the Reserve Fund e.g. Social
Welfare Surcharge.

e The accounting procedure is finalized after due consideration by the.
CGA, C&AG and Budget Division of DEA, Ministry of Finance.

e The purpose of establishing a reserve fund in Public Account is to
‘vansparently demonstrate the flow of funds from CFI and its
utilisation on intended purposes;

e Gap between the actual transfers and due for transfers has been
reduced over a period of time.

Legal Provisions/Rules

. Universal Access Levy:

Section 2 (1A) of the Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003
defines the Universal Service Obligation (USO) as:

“Universal Service Obligation” means the obligation to provide access
to basic telegraph services to people in rural and remote areas at
affordable and reasonable prices”

Thé’ resources for meeting the USO is raised through a ‘Universal
Access Levy' which would be a percentage of the revenue earned by all
the operators under various licensés.


e The percentage of revenue share towards universal access levy is
decided by the Government in consultation with TRAI.

« The Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 giving statutory status to
the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) was passed by both
Houses of Parliament in December 2003.

e Section 4 of the amended Act provides for the insertion of following
Explanation at the end:

‘The payments made for the grant of a licerise under this sub-
section shall include such sum attributable to the Universal
Service Obligation as may be determined by the Central
Government after considering the recommendation made in this
behalf by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India established
under sub- section (1) of section 3 of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997 The Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, 2003’

« Section 9A of the amended Act provides for the establishment of
Universal Service Obligation Fund as under:

fii.

=

On and from the commencement of the Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, 2003, there shall be deemed to have been
established, for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called the
Universal Service Obligation Fund.

The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government
and there shall be credited thereto-

any sums of money paid under section 9B;

any grants and loans made by the Central Government under
section 9C.

The balance to the credit of the Fund shall not lapse at the end
of the financial year. Crediting of sums to Consolidated Fund of
India.

« Section 9(B) of the amendment Act provides for crediting of sums to
Consolidated Fund of India in following manner:

The sums of money received towards the Universal Service
Obligation under section 4 shall first be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if
Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so
provides, credit such proceeds to the Fund from time to time for
being utilised exclusively for meeting the Universal Service
Obligation.


Section 9C of the amendment Act provides for crediting of fund as
below:

The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
* Parliament by law in this behalf, credit by way of grants and
loans such sums of money as that Government may consider
necessary in the Fund.
Section 9D of the amendment Act provides for administration and
utilization of Fund as below:
(1) The Central Government shall have the power to administer the
'. Fund in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under
* this Act.

(2) The Fund shall be utilised exclusively for meeting the Universal
Service Obligation.

(3)The Central Government shall be responsible for the co-
ordination and ensuring timely utilisation and release of sums in
accordance with the criteria as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Act."

The Rules for administration of the Fund known as Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Rules, 2004 were notified on 26.03.2004. As per the
Indian Telegraph Act 1885 (as amended in 2003, 2006 and 2008), the
Fund is to be utilized exclusively for meeting the Universal Service
Obligation.

The Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) has since been
operationalized under the Major Head ‘8235-General and other
Reserve Funds’

. National Mineral Trust Levy:

Sub-section (1) of Section 9C of the Mines and_ Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 provides for National Mineral
Exploration Trust (NMET);

The Rules governing NMET were made vide Gazette Notification
6.5 2.632 (E) dated 14th August 2015. These Rules are effective from
12th, of January 2015, the date MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 came into
force.

Rule 6 of the National Mineral Exploration Trust Rules, 2015 [as
amended on 7" March 2018] provides for constitution of a fund under
the Trust as follows:

(1) The Central Government shall, by order, set up a fund under the


Trust to be called as the “National Mineral Exploration Trust Fund” to be
managed by the Executive Committee of the Trust.

(2) The Fund shall be opened under the Public Account of India which
Shall be a non-lapsable and non-interest bearing account and shall be
administered by the Central Government.

(3) The Fund shall comprise of payment of two percent equivalent of
royalty payable by the holders of the mining lease or prospective
license-cum-mining lease under sub-section (4) of the section 9C of the
Act.

(4) The Fund shall be utilized for carrying out the objects and functions
as specified in rule 9, including carrying out regional and detailed
exploration for minerals under the scheme, namely. ‘Regional and
detailed exploration and related activities under Fund’.]

Rule 7 of the National Mineral Exploration Trust Rules, 2015 [as
amended on 7" March 2018] provides for the Contribution of Fund as
follows:

(1) The holder of mining lease or prospecting license sum-mining lease
shall, while making payment of royalty to the State Gavernment, pay to
the Trust a sum equivalent to two percent of the royalty under sub-
section (4) of section 9C of the Act by depositing the same in the Public
Account of the State under the Head booked for this purpose.

(2) The State Governments shall transfer the amount so collected in the
Public Account of the State under sub-rule (1) to the Consolidated Fund
of India.

(3) The accretions in the Consolidated Fund of India shall be
periodically transferred to the Fund by the Central Government, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law, in the financial year.

(4) The responsibility of collecting and transferring the amount referred
in sub-rule (1) to Consolidated Fund of India and maintaining necessary
accounts in this behalf shall be that of the State Government and it shall
transfer such receipts to the Consolidated Fund of India as early as
possible and in any case, not later than the tenth day of the succeeding
month in respect of the amount collected in any particular month.

(5) The State Government shall provide information regarding the
amount collected under sub-rule (1) and the amount transferred to
Consolidated Fund of India under sub-rule (2) to the Indian Bureau of
Mines on a monthly basis.

(6) The Indian Bureau of Mines shall maintain an updated record of the
amount transferred to the Consolidated Fund of India along with a
database of royalty payments and provide such information to the Trust
on a periodic basis. .


e Sut Rule 1 of the Rule 9 of the National Mineral Exploration Trust
Rules, 2015 [as amended on 7" March 2018] provides for objects and
functions of the trust as follows:

+
The Trust shall carry out regional and detailed exploration for minerals
and.it shall undertake such activities as may be deemed necessary by
the Governing Body to achieve its objects including, - (a) funding
special studies and projects designed to identify, explore, extract,
beneficiate and refine deep- seated or concealed mineral deposits;

(b) undertaking studies for mineral development, sustainable mining
adoption of advanced scientific and technological practices and mineral
extraction metallurgy;

(c) taking up exploration of areas for regional and detailed exploration,
giving priority particularly to strategic and critical minerals;

(d) consulting Central Geological Programming Board to decide the
priorities for exploration of the Trust;

(e) facilitating exploration activities in such a manner that areas
explored can be taken up for grant of mineral concessions in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made
thereunder;

(f) facilitating completion of brownfield regional exploration projects in
obvious geological potential areas (G3) including conducting high-risk
exploration for deep-seated mineral deposits through modern
tecknologies;

(9) promoting completion of detailed exploration (G2 or G1) across
India in the areas where G3 stage exploration has been completed; (h)
facilitating geophysical, ground and aerial, survey and geochemical
Survey of obvious geological potential areas and rest of India;

(i) facilitating a national core repository for encouraging research in
earth sciences and for evaluation of the mineral prospects;

(j) organizing capacity building programmes to raise technical capability
of personnel engaged in or to be engaged in exploration; and

(k) using the Trust Fund for such other purposes that the Governing
Body may decide, or authorise the Executive Committee, to be
necessary or expedient in the interest of conservation, development
and exploitation of mineral resources of India, not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Act.

e National Mineral Exploration Trust Fund has since been operationalized
under the Major Head ‘8235-General and other Reserve Funds’

e Ministry of Mines is the administrative Ministry for managing the fund.


c. Cess on Petrol and Crude Oil:

In the context of Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, the Cess is
leviable on Crude Oil and Natural Gas [and not on Petrol]. Section 15
of the Act accordingly provides for Cess on Crude Oil and Natural Gas
as below:

(1) There shall be levied and collected, as a cess for the purposes of
this Act, on every item specified in column 2 of the schedule, which is
produced in India (including the continental shelf thereof) and- (a)
removed to a refinery or factory; or (b) transferred by the person by
whom such item is produced to another person, a duty of excise at such
rate not exceeding the rate set forth in the corresponding entry in
column 3 of the Schedule, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify: Provided that until the
Central Government specifies by such notification the rate of the duty of
excise in respect of crude oil (being an item specified in the schedule)
the duty of excise on crude oil under this sub-section shall be levied
and collected at the rate rupees sixty per tonne.

(2) Every duty of excise leviable under subsection (1) on any item shall
be payable by the person by whom such item is produced, and in the
case of crude oil, the duty of excise shall be collected on the quantity
received in a refinery.

(3) The duties of excise under sub-section (1) on the items specified in
the Schedule shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on those
items under any other law for the time being in force. ? of 1944

(4) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt, Act, 1944 and the
rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and
exemptions from duties shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the
levy and collection of duties of excise leviable under this section and for
this purpose the provisions of that Act shall have effect as if that Act
provided for the levy of duties of excise on all items specified in the
Schedule.

{Column 2 referred to above indicates Items ‘Crude Oil’ and ‘Natural

Gas'}

Section 16 of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for
crediting of proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India as below:

The proceeds of the duties of excise levied under section 15 shall first
be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this
behalf, so provides, pay to the Board from time to time, from out of such


proceeds, after deducting the expenses of collection, such sums of
money as it may think fit for being utilized exclusively for the purposes
of this Act.

Section 17 of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for
the following:

The Central Government may also, after due appropriation made by
Pariiament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants or
10975 such sums of money as the Central Government may consider
necessary.

Section 18 (1) of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for
creation of Oil Industry Development Fund as below:

There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Oil Industry Development
Fund and there shall be credited thereto- (a) any sums of money paid
under section 16 or section 17; (b) any grants that may be made by any
person or institution for the purposes of this Act; (c) any borrowings by
the Board; (d) the sums, if any, realized by the Board in carrying out its
functions or in the administration of this Act.

Section 18 (2) of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for
application of fund as below:

The Fund shall be applied- (a) for meeting the salaries, allowances,
honoraria and other remuneration of the officers and other employees
of the Board and of the advisers, consultants or other agencies whose
services are availed of by the Board; (b) for meeting the other
adm nistrative expenses of the Board; (c) for rendering assistance
under section 6; (d) for repayment of any loans taken by the Board or
for meeting other liabilities under this Act. The Oil Industry Development
Board is functioning under the administrative control of Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas. .

Section 6 of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 (referred to
above)provides for functions of the Board. No reserve fund for Oil ७855
has been operationalized in the Public Account.

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is the administrative ministry for
administration of the Oil Industry (Development Act), 1974.


10

|. Health and Education Cess

Sub-section (1) of Section 81 of Finance Act (No.2), 2004 provided for
levy and collection Education Cess as below:

Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (11) of section 2,
there shall be levied and collected, in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter as surcharge for purposes of the Union, a cess to be called
the Education Cess, to fulfil the commitment of the Government to
provide and finance universalised quality basic education.

Sub-section (2) of Section 81 of Finance Act (No.2), 2004 provided for
appropriation levy and collection Education Cess as below:

The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, utilise, such sums of money of the
Education Cess levied under sub-section (11) of section 2 and this
Chapter for the purposes specified in sub-section (1), as it may
consider necessary.

Sub-section 13 of the Section 2of the Finance Act 2018 provides for a
composite _cess_on Corporate Tax and Income Tax in the name of
‘Health and Education Cess’ as below:

The amount of income-tax as specified in sub-sections (4) to (10) and
as increased by the applicable surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, calculated in the manner provided therein, shall be further
increased by an additional surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, to
be called the “Health and Education Cess on income-tax’, calculated at
the rate of four per cent of such income-tax and surcharge so as to fulfil
the commitment of the Government to provide and finance quality
health services and universalised quality basic education and
secondary and higher education:

The Union Cabinet in the year 2003 had accorded its approval for
creation of a non-lapsable fund for elementary education — ‘Prarambhik
Shiksha Kosh'(PSK) to receive the proceeds of the Primary Education
Cess; and in the year 2017for creation of a non-lapsable corpus fund
for Secondary and Higher education - "Madhyamik and Uchchtar
Shiksha Kosh" (MUSK) to receive the proceeds from the Secondary
and Higher Education Cess.

Administration and maintenance of the PSK and the MUSK lie with
Ministry of Education.


11

¢ The:Union Cabinet in the year 2021 approved the creation of Pradhan

Mantri_ Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) as a single non-lapsable
resetve fund from the share of proceeds of Health and Education Cess
[levied under Section 2(13) of Finance Act, 2018].
Administration and maintenance of the PMSSN is entrusted to Ministry
of Health & Family Welfare.
In terms of the Budget Division, Department of Economic Affair's OM
No. 1(5)-B(AC)/2018 dated 27" November 2020, following sharing
pattern out of the proceeds of Health and Education Cess has been
decided:

a. 60% to Primary & Secondary Education;

b. 15% to Higher Education; and

6. 25% to the Health
Madhyamik and Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) and Pradhan Mantri
Swasthaya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) are expected to be reflected in the
Finance Accounts of 2022-23.

e. Road znd Infrastructure Cess:

Section 206 of the Finance Act 2018 provided for renaming of Central
Road Fund to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund and bringing into its
ambit the State and rural roads; and infrastructure. The ‘Central Road
Fund’ has been suitably renamed to ‘Central Road and Infrastructure
Fund’ as per Finance Account 2021-22.

Section3 of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000 provides
for levy and collection of an additional duty of Customs and Central
Excises called Road and Infrastructure Cess as below: called Road and Infrastructure Cess as below:

(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notifigation in the Official Gazette, specify, there shall be levied and
collected, as a cess, a duty of excise and customs for the purposes of
this Act, on every item specified in column (2) of the 6 [Schedule I],
which is produced in or imported into India and—

(a) removed from a refinery or a factory or an outlet; or

(b) transferred by the person, by whom such item is produced or
imported, to another person, at such rates...as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:
[Provided that the additional duty of customs and the additional
duty of excise on motor spirit commonly known as petrol and on
high speed diesel oil levied under subsection (1) of section 109
and sub-section (1) of section 110, as the case may be, of the
Finance Act, 2018 shall be deemed fo be the cess for the


12

purposes of this Act from the date of its levy and the proceeds
thereof shall be credited to the Fund.]

(2) Every cess leviable under sub-section (1) on any item shall be
payable by the person by whom such item is produced, and in the case
of imports, the cess shall be imposed and collected on items so
imported and specified in the Schedule |.

(3) The cess leviable under sub-section (1) on the items specified in the
Schedule | shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on those
items under any other law for the time being in force.

(4) The provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and the
rules made thereunder and the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 (52
of 1962) and the rules made thereunder, as the case may be, including
those relating to refunds and exemptions from dui‘es shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to the levy and collectiun of cess leviable
under this section and for this purpose, the provisions of the Central
Excise Act, 1944 and of the Customs Act, 1962, as the case may be,
Shall have effect as if the aforesaid Acts provided for the levy of cess on
all items specified in the Schedule |.

Section4 of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000 provides
for crediting of cess to Consolidated fund of India as under:

The proceeds of the cess levied under section 3 shall first be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if
Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides,
credit such proceeds to the Fund from time to time, after deducting the
expenses of collection, for being utilised exclusively for the purposes of
this Act.

Section5 of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000 further
provides for crediting of cess to Consolidated fund of India through
Grants and Loans as under:

The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such
sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary in
the Fund.

Section6 of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000 provides
for establishment of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund as under

(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be
established for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called as the
Central [Road and Infrastructure Fund).



13

(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and
there shall be credited thereto—

(a) any sums of money paid under section 4 or section 5;
(b) unspent part of the cess, being already levied for the

purposes of the development and maintenance of national
highways;

(c) the sums, if any, realised by the Central Government in
carrying out its functions or in the administration of this Act;

(d) any fund provided by the Central Government for the
development and maintenance of State roads.

(3) The balance to the credit of the Fund shall not lapse at the end of
the financial year.

e Section7 of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000 provides
for utilization of Central Road and Infrastructure F of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund as under:
(1) The Fund shall be utilised for the—

(i) development and maintenance of national highways;
(ii) development of the rural roads;

(iii) development and maintenance of other State roads including
roads of inter-State and economic importance;

(iv) construction of roads either under or over the railways by
means of bridges and erection of safety works at unmanned rail-
road crossings, new lines, conversion of existing standard lines
into gauge lines and electrification of rail lines; and

(v) undertaking other infrastructure projects.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act, the expression
‘infrastructure projects” means the category of projects and
infrastructure Sub-Sectors specified in Schedule II.

(2) The Central Government may, depending upon the requirement for
development of infrastructure projects, and if it considers necessary or
expedient to do so, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend
Schedule ॥ relating to any Category of projects or Infrastructure Sub-
Sectors...”

12. When asked about monitoring mechanism in place for ensuring compliance of
the Acts and time taken to finalize accounting procedure in case of aforementioned
funds, the Ministry's reply indicated as under:


14

“Monitoring mechanism / Time taken in finalisation of accounting
procedures:

« The proposal for creation of a Reserve Fund and accounting procedure
for its operationalisation is initiated by the administrative
Ministry/Department.

¢ The accounting procedure for operationalisation of Reserve Fund is
proposed by the administrative ministry and is finalized based on the
consultation with Office of Controller General of Accounts, Budget
Division, Ministry of Finance and on the advice of the Office of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

* The accounting procedure indicates broadly the major functional areas
for which the amount from the reserve funds is utilised. Once a reserve
fund is created, the transfers of sums to the reserve funds and
utilisations sums from the fund are decided each year based on the
RE/BE discussions and are appropriated accordingly with the approval
of Parliament.

« The accounting procedure related to the PMSSN ard MUSK could not
be operationalized due to the difference in opinion between the
government and C&AG in allowing transfer of funds from the Major
Head ‘3601/3602’. After due deliberations in the matter, the C&AG has
since agreed to permit the transfer from ‘3601/3602’. The reserve fund
viz. PMSSN will become operational in the current fiscal.

* The accounting procedure related to the operatioraiization of MUSK
has been concurred by office of the C&AG on 14.2.2923. The fund will
be operationalized in the current fiscal.

* The renaming of “Central Road Fund” as “Central Road and
Infrastructure Fund” has been made effective from accounts of FY
2021-22. The accounting procedure for CRIF has been held up for
want of concurrence from the office of the C&AG for transfers from
Major Head ‘3601-Grants-in-aid to State Governments’, ‘3602-Grants-
in-aid to UT Governments with legislature’ and Capital Expenditure
Major Heads. While the issue regarding transfers from MH 3601/3602
has been resolved, the transfers from capital expenditure Major Heads
are under consideration in the office of the C&AG. The revised
accounting procedure will be made be effective after resolution of the
aforementioned issue.


15

e The actual collections of cess and levies are accounted and reflected in
the Union Government Finance Accounts each year. All transfers to the
reserve funds and expenditure therefrom for specific purposes are
carried out by the respective administrative Ministries/Departments
through their Programme Divisions after due appropriations authorized
by Parliament and the same are reflected in the audited accounts of
that particular year. With this established procedure, the collection of
cesses and their utilisation are monitored.”

13. When asked about steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the levies
collected are transferred to the earmarked funds, the Ministry stated as under:

“Article 266 of the Constitution of India provides that ‘...a/! revenues received
by the Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue
of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received
by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to
be entitled ihe Consolidated Fund of India....’.

The collection of cesses and levies in the Consolidated Fund of India,
allocations and expenditure by the administrative Ministry/Department through
appropriation authorized by Parliament by Law and the transfers to
corresponding Reserve Fund(s) are distinct and concurrent activities. In view
of the fact that the collections under the Cess, during a year, cannot be
assessed in its entirety, and the allocations to the administrative
Ministries/Departments are based on the estimates of cess collection,
matching the same with the transfers to Reserve Fund is not practically
feasible. There is bound to be difference between the collections and the
transfers to, the Reserve. However, the general principles being followed in
transfer of sums to reserve funds from cess collections are detailed below:

(a) There is no explicit provision in any Legislation requiring full transfer
of cess collection from Consolidated Fund of India to the reserve
fund maintained in Public Account. Example — Universal Service
Obligation Fund;
Section 7(2) of FRBM Act 2003 provides that whenever there is a
shortfall in revenue or excess expenditure over the prescribed
ievels during any period in a financial year, the Central Government
shall take appropriate measures for increasing revenue or for
reducing the expenditure (including curtailing of the sums
authorised to be paid and applied from and out of CFI under any
Act so as to provide for the appropriation of such sums);
(c) Transfers to reserve funds are made based on the absorptive
capacity of the Ministry/Department to spend in a year. This is.also
relevant given the fact that at the commencement of the financial

(b


14,

16

year, the likely amount that may be collected during the year is at
best an estimate;

Credit balances lying idle in reserve funds add to the liability of the
Government;

The purpose of establishing a reserve fund in Public Account is to
demonstrate the flow of funds from CFI and its utilisation on
intended purposes;

(f) Gap between the actual transfers and due for transfers has been
reduced over a period of time. The case in point is Central Road
and Infrastructure Fund and the short-fall is less than % 5,000 crore
over a period of 12 years; and

The shortfall, if any, during a year will be considered by this Ministry
to be made up in subsequent year(s), on the need basis and
absorptive capacity of the administrative Ministry.”

(d

(e

(g

When asked about the accounting procedure followed for showing the cess

funds retained in CFI, the Ministry replied as under:

15.

“In terms of Article 266 of the Constitution of India, all the monies/revenues
collected by Government including receipts from cess collection are credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India. The difference between the actual collection
of receipts in the form of cesses/levies and the transfers to dedicated reserve
fund kept in the Public Account remains in the Consolidated Fund.Receipts
from levy of cesses are for meeting specific expenditure of Union Government
such as education, health, transport, infrastructure, etc. and ere not shareable
with States as part of central taxes assigned to States. It needs to be noted
that Centrally Sponsored schemes like Samagra Shiksha and Mid-day Meal
scheme are implemented through State Governments and financed through
Prarambhik Shiksa Kosh, a reserve fund financed through ‘Health and
Education Cess'. Therefore, cesses allocated to Centrally Sponsored
Schemes are used to finance development/welfare measures in the States.”

When asked how justified is collecting an earmarked cess and then keeping it

in the CFI which is neither available for the earmarked purpose for which it was
collected nor to the state governments, the Ministry in their written reply furnished the
following:

“The purpose of such Funds is, inter-alia, to ensure utilisation for the
earmarked purpose over a period of years, but not neceszarily, within each
financial year.It may be submitted that transfers to a dedicais:d reserve fund in
Public Account and financing the scheme expenditure in fisancial statements
from the reserve fund are meant for reflecting the utilisation cf funds from cess
collection. These do not, however, impede the implementation/operation of the


16.

17

schemes notwithstanding the finalisation of accounting procedure for operation
of certain reserve funds in Public Account. Appropriations as authorised by
Parliamen. through Appropriation Act are available to Ministries/Department to
implemeni ‘the schemes/programmes/projects of . the Government,
independent of the reflection of transfers/withdrawal from reserve funds.”

On being asked reasons for taking years to finalize the accounting procedures,

the Secretary, during oral evidence of the Ministry stated as under:

17.

“| would fully acknowledge that it should not take us so long to finalise the
accounting rules. That is a fair point that was made by the hon. Chairperson
and the Committee. We take note of this point, and we will endeavour to
finalise it quickly.”

As regards the reasons for delay in operationalizing Madhyamik and

Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

“Based on the broad accounting guidelines issued by Department of Economic
Affairs (Budget Division), the detailed accounting procedure is proposed by the
Ministry/Department administering the fund and is sent to the office of the
Controller General of Accounts (CGA). After due examination, Office of the
CGA forwérd the draft accounting procedure to the office of the Comptroller
and Auditcr General of India (CAG) for concurrence. After concurrence of the
accounting’ procedure by the office of CAG under article 150 of the
Constitution, the same is notified by administrative Ministry/Department. There
have been differing/divergent viewpoints in finalising the accounting procedure
in operationalising the reserve funds in Public Account. Two major issues viz.

i. transfers from Capital Expenditure Major Heads to Public Account
and

ii. transfers from Major Heads '3601-Grants-in-aid to State
Governments'/3602- — Grants-in-aid to Union __ Territory
Governments with legislature’ are being considered and
deliberated between office of the CAG/CGA and Department of
Economic Affairs (Budget Division). These two issues are
illustrated in the Table given below:


18

( = crore )
Major Heads Accounting Procedure
recommended by
CGAICAG Budget
Division
Example (A)
3054-Roads and Bridges -Transfers to 400.00
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund
(i) 3601/3602-Grants-in-aid to ~
State/UT Governments-Transfers to 100.00
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund
(ii) 3601/3602-Grants-in-aid to
State/UT Governments-Cash releases 100.00 100,00
to State/UT Governments
(iii) Amount met from Central Road
and Infrastructure Fund (100.00 (100.00
Total Expenditure under MHs
3601/3602 (i)+(ii)+(iii) 100.00
Example (B)
3054-Roads and Bridges -Transfers to 100.00
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund
(i) 5054-Capital Outlay on Roads and
Bridges — Transfers to Central Road 100.00
and Infrastructure Fund
(ii) 5054-Capital Outlay on Roads and
Bridges — Cash expenditure 100.00 100.00
(iii) Amount met from Central Road
and Infrastructure Fund (100.00 (9100.00
Total Expenditure under MH 5054 400.00
()+(01)+(॥)

It may be seen from the Examples given above, the accounting procedure

recommended by offices of CGA/CAG
‘transfers to reserve funds ' and ‘expendi

reflect different Major Heads for
iture from reserve funds’, resulting in

understatement of expenditure from ti
expenditure is incurred. The accounting

lhe Major Head from which cash
procedure recommended by Budget

Division captures the expenditure under the same Major Head from which

expenditure is incurred. This procedure

as being recommended by Budget

Division is essential for reflecting the deployment of Government resources
under appropriate sectors for correct reporting and information governance.

The above requirements were discussed

and impressed on office of the CAG.

An early resolution is expected. Accounting is essentially an executive function


19

based on the premise that the entity that presents the Budget should also
have a say in the accounting procedure. This has necessitated discussions
with the office of CAG. The objective is to arrive at a consensus so as to
ensure that the accounting is not diversed from the budgetary aspect.”

A. Universal Access Levy

18. The Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund was set up in April 2002 for
achieving universal service objectives by providing access to telephone services in
rural and remote areas and creation of infrastructure for mobile services and broad
band in these areas. The resources for meeting these obligations were to be raised
through a ‘Universal Access Levy’ (UAL). The levy so collected is first credited to the
CFI and subsequently, transferred, based on the appropriation approved by
Parliament, to a non-lapsable USO Fund created in the Public Account for being
utilized exclusively for the purposes for which the levy is collected.

19. As per Audit Report, during FY 20, Parliament had approved the transfer of
UAL amounting to %8,350 crore to the USO Fund in the budget. Audit scrutiny
showed that total collection of UAL during FY 20 was, however, only 7,961.53 crore
of which only 22,926 crore was transferred to the USO Fund. Thus, there was short
transfer of UAL to the USO Fund amounting to %5,035.53 crore. The issue of short
transfer of the levy to the USO Fund has been brought out in earlier reports of the
CAG on the Union accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2014-15 and 2018-19 but the
matter is yet to be resolved.

20. As per Background note of the Ministry the accounting procedure for the
Universal Service Obligation Fund and the National Mineral Exploration Trust Fund
have been finalized and actual transactions relating to collection of receipts on
account of cess and transfer to fund are reflected in Union Government Finance
Accounts.

21. When asked why there was short collection of UAL vis-a-vis the amount
approved by Parliament of India, the Ministry stated as under:

“Universal sAccess Levy, collected from Telecom Service Providers and
transferred< to Universal Service Obligation Fund, is not a tax levy.The
Universal Service Obligation Fund is financing two schemes viz.

i. for providing compensation to telecom service providers for creation
and, augmentation of telecom infrastructure and access to various
telecom services to people in the rural and remote areas including

* Operation and maintenance of Village Pub lic Telephones and


20

ii. for implementation of Bharatnet project towards creation of telecom
infrastructure required for providing broadband connectivity to all the
Gram Panchayats in the country and facilitating non- discriminatory
access to service providers, for provisioning of broadband services in
rural areas.

The realisation of UAL is dependent on Adjusted Gross Revenues (AGRs) of
Telecom Service Providers. If AGRs of telecom service providers fall in a year
based on the volume of business generated, its impact on UAL is reflected as
a corollary.”

22. On being asked reasons for transferring only = 2,926 crore against a collection
of 27,961.53 crore towards UAL during 2020 and recurrence of short transfer of the
levy to the USO Fund i.e. during 2009-10 to 2014-15 and 2018-19 and again in FY
2020, the Ministry responded as under:

“The purpose of such Funds is, inter-alia, to ensure utilisation for the
earmarked purpose over a period of years, but not necessarily, within each
financial year. Transfer of funds depend, mainly, on the abscrptive capacity of
the Department to spend in any particular year.Further, the following table
shows that Department of Telecommunications was able (9 catch up with the
RE for the year 2020-21 by matching utilization:

(₹ crore )

Year Budget Revised Actuals
2015-16 2400 3100 3100
2016-17 2755 7626 7226
2017-18 11636 7000 7000
2018-19 10000 5000 4788
2019-20 8350 3000 2926
2020-21 8000 7200 7200
2021-22 9000 e300 | |

Section 9C of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 provides that the
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament credit
such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary in the
Fund. Thus, transfers to USOF are made in line with the statutory provisions.”

23. When asked why the Ministry was not able to convince the Audit, the Ministry
furnished following reply:
“While the accounting procedure formalises booking of receipts and
expenditure under appropriate heads, it does not stipulate full transfers to


21

Reserve Fund. Transfers to/from Reserve Fund is a budgetary exercise and is
also done keeping in view the fiscal management and utilisation of scarce
resources of Government as well.”
£
24. As regards the details of UAL collected and spent on providing services from
USOF in the last 20 years , the Ministry furnished the following information:

“The details of UAL collected and spent through USOF from the inception of the
reserve fund are enclosed. The details of utilisation of the funds over the years on
various schemes funded from USOF are also furnished in the enclosed statement.”

8. National Mineral Trust Levy

25. The Union Government set up the National Mineral Exploration Trust in
2015-16 in accordance with the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act. The Trust is funded through payments made by holders of mining
leases as a percentage of royalty paid which is collected by State Governments
and thereafter paid to the Union Government. The collection towards this trust was
% 664.85 crore and transfer to the fund was & 100 crore, resulting in short transfer
of = 564.85 cror:. The Department had submitted that accounting procedure for
National Mineral ‘Exploration Trust Fund was finalised in 2018 and is being
implemented...»

26. To a query: whether the total levy collected as National Mineral Trust levy
has duly been transferred to the Union Government by the concerned State
Governments, the Ministry stated as under:

“The State Governments are transferring the NMET contributions to the
Consolidated| Fund of India on monthly basis as envisaged in the accounting
procedure. .All such receipts are duly reflected in the Public Finance
Management Scheme (PFMS) portal under the domain of Ministry of Mines.”

27. On being pointed out why the total collection of = 664.85 crore has not been
transferred to the National Mineral Exploration Trust, the Ministry furnished the
following reply:

“During the year 2021, Ministry of Mines submitted a proposal to the
Department of Economic Affairs in 31 and final Batch of Supplementary
Demand for Grants 2021-22 for transfer of balance NMET fund of = 2271.82
crore (accumulated upto Dec 2021). The balance fund of = 2771.82 crore
which has been transferred to Public Account during 2021-22 is inclusive of


22

short transfer of = 564.82 crore. With the higher transfer of = 2,872 crore in
2021-22, NMET Fund is having a positive (credit) balance of % 2,862 crore,
pending utilisation, in Public Account as on 31.3.2022.”

28. When asked to specify the activities that have been undertaken by the Ministry
of Mines with the objective of augmenting mineral exploration of the country out of
this fund, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The NMET Fund is being utilized by the Ministry of Mines to fund regional and
detailed exploration of minerals besides funding baseline geo-sciences survey
projects, infrastructure development of Central and State exploration agencies,
notification of Private exploration agencies etc. The details are as under:

a. Till date, NMET has approved 238 exploration activities project with
approved cost of = 1828.50 crore;

b. Incentive to State Government for each successful auction of
mineral block;

c. Partial reimbursement upto 50% of direct cost of exploration to
holders of Composite Licence for deep seated minerals;

d. Notification of Private Exploration agencies for Mineral Exploration;

e. Financial assistance for procurement of machinery/equipment/
instrument at enhancing mineral exploration to Central and State
Government organizations.”

C. Non-transfer of cess to Oil Industry Development Board -

29. Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for establishment of Oil
Industry Development Board (OIDB) for the development of Oil Industry and for that
purpose levy a duty of excise on crude oil and natural gas as a cess. The Act
provides for crediting the cess first in the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) and
thereafter paying to the board such sums as Parliament may approve to be kept in
the Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF). This fund was inter to be used for
taking up measures conducive for the development of the oil indusi:y.

30. Audit scrutiny for the period FY 10 to FY 20, showed that the total cess on
crude oil collected was =1,28,461 crore however no funds out of the net proceeds of
cess had been transferred to OIDB. It is also significant that since inception of OIDB
only %902.40 crore had been transferred to 0108 and since 1991-92, no funds out of
the cess collected by the Government were transferred to OIDB.

31. In the context of the above, Audit also pointed out that the Parliamentary


23

Standing Committee on Petroleum & Natural Gas (15th Lok Sabha) had also noted
that funds collected from this annual cess were being allocated by the MoF in
violation of the OIDB Act. When the matter was pursued by Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas (MoPNG), MoF stated (January 2015) that the Government was
financing various activities from the budget which included proceeds from the Cess,
and this qualified as being for development of the oil industry in terms of the OIDB
Act. Audit observed that it may, however, be noted that treatment of the cess as a
general pool tax defeats the very purpose of levy of the cess which was to create a
non-lapsable pool of funds for specified use. Further, Audit observed that only
215,506 crore had. been spent in the last five years on activities pertaining to
development of oil industry by the Ministry as against collections of 772,384 crore by
way of Cess during this period.

32. Due to non-transfer of the Cess over the past 10 years to 0108, the same
was retained in CFI. As a result, there was no assurance if the cess was used for the
purpose for which these were collected.

33. As per Minis:ry’s Background Note the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
has accepted that.Oil Industry Development Fund (0107) has not been created yet
and the Government was financing various activities from the Gross Budgetary
Support which includes proceeds of the cess.

34. Further, in the same Background note, the Ministry indicated that the
implementation/operation of schemes are not affected by delay in finalization of
accounting procedure of any fund, only transactions are not routed through
respective Reserve Funds.

35. As per Audit Report, since 1991-92, no funds out of the cess collected by the
Government has »een transferred to Oil Industry Development Board (0108).

36. | When asked as to why the cess was still being levied when the collections
are retained in CFI, the Ministry's written reply indicated as under:

“The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for the establishment of
a Board for the development of oil industry and for that purpose to levy a
duty of excise on crude oil and natural gas. Development of oil industry
includes all activities by way of prospecting or exploring for or production of
mineral oil, tefining, processing, transportation, storage, handling and
marketing, of mineral oil production and marketing of all products, down-
stream of an oil refinery and the production of fertilizers and petro-
chemicals and all activities directly or indirectly connected therewith.In
terms: of Section 3 of 0108 Act, 1974, a Board to be calied ‘Oil Industry


24

Development Board’ shall be constituted for the purposes of this Act.
Section 6 of the Act prescribes the following functions for the Board:

{i) render financial and other assistance for the promotion and
development of oil industry;

(ii) making grants or advancing loans to any oil industrial concern
engaged in prospecting or exploring for or production of mineral
oil, refining, processing, transportation, storage, handling and
marketing of mineral oil production marking of cil productions
and production of fertilizers and petro-chemicals and all
activities directly or indirectly connected therewith;

(ii) guaranteeing on loans, deferred payments due from any oil
industrial concerns or other persons, underwriting the issue of
shares, stocks, bonds, or debentures by any oil industrial
concerns, subscribing to the stock or shares of any oil industrial
concerns;

{iv) manufacture and marketing of petrochemicals and fertilizers;

(v) scientific, technological and economic research, which could
be, directly or indirectly, useful to oil industry;

(vi) training of personnel, whether in India or outside, engaged or to
be engaged in any field of oil industry, and such other
measures as may be prescribed;

Section 18 of the Act ibid provides establishment of Oil Industry
Development Fund with the following applications:

(vii) for meeting the salaries, allowances, honoraria and other
remuneration of the officers and other employees of Board

(viii) for rendering assistance as detailed in paragraph 2 above (in
terms of Section 6 of the Act);

(ix) for repayment of any loans taken by the Board or for meeting
other liabilities of the Act.

The reasons for non-constitution of a reserve fund in public account in
favour of Oil Industry Development Board from inception in 1974 could not,
readily, be ascertained.The Audit has recognised the expenditure of =
15,506 crore against the Crude Oil Cess. It needs to’ be noted that
Government has been incurring huge expenditure through Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on ‘strategic oil reserve’,
‘refinery and conservation’, ‘LPG/Kerosene Subsidy’, ‘Poulpur Dhamra
Haldia Pipeline project’, ‘Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited’ and financing of
various autonomous bodies. Year-wise expenditure of Ministry of


3

25

Petroleum and Natural Gas for the last five (5) years is as follows:

( = crore )
Ministry of | Expenditure during - Total
Petroleum | 2015- [2046-17 | 2017-18 | 2018- | 2019-
and Natural | 16 19 20
Gas | 31262 | 30203 32337 | 42778 | 169740

* Excluding Secretariat Expenditure

The details of major expenditure incurred by Government for the benefit of
Oil sector for the last 5 (five) years are below:

( = crore )
Item Expenditure during - Total
expenditure | 2015-16 |2016-17 |2017-18 |2018-19 [2019-20
LPG 22660 | 18678; 15666} 20268) 34086] 111358
Subsidy
PMUY | | 2999 2559 5670 1446 12674
(Ujjwala)*
Kerosene 7339 8861 8804 4568 4443 34015
Subsidy
Strategic 1160] 2030; 1141] 683) 120] 5131
Repayment
of Oil | 9 | | 4 | 9 | Zz
Bonds
Intereston || 9990 | 9990 | 9990 | 9990} 9990] 49950
Oil Bonds;

4 Source: Petroleum Planning and Analysis of MoPNG.

It may be noted that Government has discharged the principal component of
oil bonds amounting to % 78,318 crore (1997-98 to 2021-22). Government has
also paid interest on oil bonds amounting to = 1,49,080 crore during the same
period.”

37. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry, the Oil Industry
Development Fund had not yet been created.

38. | When asked the reasons for not creating the Oil Industry Development Fund
and how & 902.40 crore were transferred to 0108 when the Act prescribes creation of


26

OIDF for crediting such funds, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“The reasons for non-constitution of a reserve fund in public account in favour
of Oil Industry Development Board could not, readily, be ascertained. As
stated earlier, the expenditure on specific schemes does not get impacted
notwithstanding either the finalisation of accounting procedure or constitution
of a reserve fund in Public Account.Government has been financing various
activities from the budget that qualify as development of oil industry within the
purview of the OID Act, 1974 and in view of the emergent situation of the
energy security, expenditure on energy security is likely to increase in the near
future. These activities are financed from the resources of the Government of
which the Cess under the Act is a part. Since Government cannot withdraw
itself from these activities, the Cess receipts already stand committed.”

39. Ona question how the Ministry is ensuring that the funds collected are being
utilised for the intended purposes as OIDF has not been created even after 48 years
and to furnish details of the cess collected viz-a-viz amounts spen: on the specified
activities during the period, the Ministry stated as under:

“Response of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the administrative ministry
is enclosed at Annexure A.”

D. Health and Education ८९७५

40. Audit noted that in FY 19 Primary Education Cess (@ two per cent on all
taxes) and Secondary and Higher Education Cess (@ one per cent on all taxes) on
Income Tax and Corporation Tax were discontinued, and in their place, a new cess
viz., the Health and Education Cess at the rate of four per cent was introduced. The
Primary Education Cess and Secondary and Higher Education Cess on imported
goods were also removed and replaced with a Social Welfare Surcharge on duties of
customs to provide for social welfare schemes of the Government.

41. Audit of Statements 8, 9 and 10 of the UGFA regarding collection of the
above-mentioned cesses and their transfer to dedicated reserve funds revealed that
in FY 20, the total collection under these cesses was %39,241 crore. As no new
reserve funds had been created for the Health and Education Cess, BE and RE for
FY 20 continued to provide for transfer of proceeds of this cess to the Prarambhik
Shiksha Kosh (PSK), and Madhyamik and Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) that
were created for Primary Education Cess, and Secondary and Higher Education
Cess, respectively. In the RE for FY 20, 28,920 crore was approved for transfer to
PSK and %14,460 crore was approved for transfer to MUSK. In the case of PSK, an
amount of $26,848 crore was transferred to the fund during FY 20, while in the case
"of MUSK no transfers were made as the reserve fund was yet to be operationalized.


27

However, audit scrutiny showed that %974 crore was directly utilized for
heads/schemes tat had been proposed to be funded through MUSK, leaving a
shortfall of 13,4€S crore. No expenditure was envisaged for the health sector out of
the cess nor was any dedicated fund created for the purpose.

42. As per Ministry's Background Note the Madhyamik & Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh
(MUSK) accounting procedure is under process.

43. When asked reasons for short transfer to Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh, the
Ministry furnished the following reply:

“Health and Education Cess: A composite cess on Corporate Tax and
Income Tax in the name of ‘Health and Education Cess’ is levied from 2018-
19, replacing the erstwhile cesses called ‘primary education cess’ and
‘secondary and higher education cess’. Proceeds from ‘Health and Education
Cess’ are apportioned and transferred to Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh (50% of
the proceeds), Madhyamik Shiksha Kosh (25% of the proceeds) and
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (25% of the proceeds).

Audit has made the following observation:
( ₹ crore )

Levy , Year Short-
s transfer
Health and
Education 2019-20 39,241 25,755 13,486
Cess

Transfers to the Fund

BE 2019-| RE 2019- | Actuals 2019-
20 20 20
Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh 28920 28920 26848

Name of the Fund

The above statement is incorrect. Audit has stated in the observation that =
26,848 crore was transferred to PSK and an amount of हैं 94 crore was
directly spent on the schemes proposed to be funded through MUSK.
Considering this, the short transfer is only = 11,419 crore.Madhyamik and
Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) and Pradhan Mantri Swasthaya Suraksha
Nidhi (PMSSN) are not operationalized yet in Public Account despite its
approval by Government. The Accounting Procedure for MUSK and PMSSN
is pending finalization in the office of the CAG on the ground explained in


44.

28

Point No.4 above. The pending issues with office of the CGA/CAG are being
resolved in consultation with them.It may further be mentioned that the
collection of Health and Education Cess in 2018-19 vis-a-vis 2019-20 is as
follows:

( & crore )

2018-19 en | Incremental
collection/expendit
ure in 2019-20

Health and Education Cess 41309 39240 (-) 2069
Total Expenditure in

Education and Health 133328 183694 (+) 20366
Sector

With the above, it may be stated that the utilization from ‘Health and
Education Cess’ is much more than the collection of ‘Health and Education

Cess’.

When asked as to how the Government was proposing to allocate the

collections from this cess amongst health and education sectors, the Minsitry's
written reply indicated as under:

45.

“A composite cess on Corporate Tax and Income Tax in the name of ‘Health
and Education Cess’ is levied from 2018-19, replacing the erstwhile cesses
called ‘primary education cess’ and ‘secondary and higher education cess’.
Proceeds from ‘Health and Education Cess’ are apportioned and transferred
to Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh (50% of the proceeds), Madnyamik Shiksha
Kosh (25% of the proceeds) and Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi
(25% of the proceeds).” f

On a specific query over the likely date of finalization of the accounting

procedure for Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN), the Ministry
replied as under:

46.

“The matter of effecting transfers from Major Heads 3601/3602 is in active
consideration by the O/o C&AG in the context of pending accounting
procedure for operationalisation of Madhyamik and Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh
(MUSK), Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) and Central
Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF). Once this is approved, the accounting
procedure for operationalising PMSSN will be notified.”

On being asked regarding the activities that the Ministry of Health had


29

envisaged for the health sector out of the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi
(PMSSN), i.e. a single non- lapsable reserve fund for Health, the Ministry's written
reply indicated as follows:

47.

“Accruals into the Prime Minister Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) have
been approved to be utilized for the following flagship schemes of the Gol:

* Ayushman Bharat — Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana (PMJAY);

+ Ayushman Bharat — Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs);

« National Rural Health Mission;

+ Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY); and

+ Any future Program/Scheme that targets to achieve progress towards
the SDGs and the targets set out in the national Health Policy 2017.”

When asked whether the Madhyamik and Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK)

was operational now, the Secretary, during oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance
stated as under:

48.

“These two years, we were slightly deflected because during covid, many
meetings could not be held. There is a disagreement between the Ministry
and the C&AG under which major head should unreserve accounting for
these two funds — the Madhyamik Uchchatar Shiksha and the Pradhan Mantri
Swasthya Nidhi. Recently, we have intensified efforts to conclude this and we
are hopeful. that this will be concluded very soon, and we will reach an
agreement with the C&AG on the correct procedure for its accounting. We will
get it sorted very soon.”

In this regard, the Ministry in their written reply further stated as under:

“Based on the broad accounting guidelines issued by Department of
Economic ‘Affairs (Budget Division), the detailed accounting procedure is
proposed 7५ the Ministry/Department administering the fund and is sent to
the office of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA). After due
examination, Office of the CGA forward the draft accounting procedure to the
office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) for concurrence.
After concurrence of the accounting procedure by the office of CAG under
article 150 of the Constitution, the same is notified by administrative
Ministry/Department.There have been differing/divergent viewpoints in
finalising the accounting procedure in operationalising the reserve funds in
Public Account. Two major issues viz.

i. transfers from Capital Expenditure Major Heads to Public


30

Account and

ji. transfers from Major Heads
Governments/'3602- Grants-in-aid to | Union

'3601-Grants-ir-aid to State

Territory

Governments with legislature’ are being considered and
deliberated between office of the CAG/CGA and Department
of Economic Affairs (Budget Division). These two issues are
illustrated in the Table given below:

( = crore )

Major Heads

Accounting Procedure

recommended by

CGAICAG

Budget
Division

Example (A)

3054-Roads and Bridges -Transfers to
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund

100.00

(i) 3601/3602-Grants-in-aid to State/UT
Governments-Transfers to Central
Road and Infrastructure Fund

100.00

(ii) 3601/3602-Grants-in-aid to
State/UT Governments-Cash releases
to State/UT Governments

100.00

100.00

(iii) Amount met from Central Road and
Infrastructure Fund

(-)100.00

(-)100.00

Total Expenditure under MHs
3604/3602 (i)+(ii)+(iii)

100.00

Example (B)

3054-Roads and Bridges -Transfers to
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund

100.00

(i) 5054-Capital Outlay on Roads and
Bridges — Transfers to Central Road
and Infrastructure Fund

100.00

(ii) 5054-Capital Outlay on Roads and
Bridges — Cash expenditure

100.00

100.00

(iii) Amount met from Central Road and
Infrastructure Fund

(-)100.00

(-)100.00

Total Expenditure under MH 5054

(i)+(ii)+ (ii)

100.00

it may be seen from the Examples given above, the accounting procedure

recommended by offices of CGA/CAG reflect different Major Heads for
‘transfers to reserve funds ' and ‘expenditure from reserve f.inds', resulting
in understatement of expenditure from the Major Head from which cash


31

expenditu's is incurred. The accounting procedure recommended by
Budget Division captures the expenditure under the same Major Head from
which expenditure is incurred. This procedure as being recommended by
Budget Division is essential for reflecting the deployment of Government
resources tinder appropriate sectors for correct reporting and information
governance: The above requirements were discussed and impressed on
Office of the CAG. An early resolution is expected.Accounting is essentially
an executive function based on the premise that the entity that presents the
Budget should also have a say in the accounting procedure. This has
necessitated discussions with the office of CAG. The objective is to arrive at
a consensus so as to ensure that the accounting is not diversed from the
budgetary aspect.”

49. On being enquired whether any scheme that had been proposed to be
funded through MUSK could not be implemented due to non-operationalization of
MUSK, the Ministry in their written reply furnished the following:

“As stated earlier, the schemes/programmes/projects implemented by
Government will not get impacted for non-finalisation and non-
operationaiization of reserve funds in Public Account. Specific schemes will
continue to be implemented with the appropriation authorised by
Parliament.”

E. Road and infrastructure Cess

50.  Cesses in the nature of additional excise duties on petrol and diesel collected
under the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 are to be credited to the Central Road Fund
(CRF) to the extent provided by Parliament through appropriation by law. The
Finance Act 2018 re-designated the Fund as the Central Road and Infrastructure
Fund (CRIF) with effect from 01 April 2018, enlarging its scope of deployment and
increasing the quantum of cess.

51. Audit scrutiny revealed that Statement 13 continued to depict the Fund as
CRF instead of CRIF. Further, against total collection of cess of %1,22,440 crore
under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved %1,22,369 crore for appropriation.
However actual transfer to the Fund was only %90,252 crore. Part of the short
transfer was due to erroneous transfers of 17,250 crore and %4,380 crore to the
Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to ‘Other Funds’ by the Ministry
of Power, respectively. These funds were, however, fully utilised for the purposes for
which the CRIF had been created. Similarly, 36,853 crore was not transferred to
CRIF on the ground that accounting procedures for CRIF had not been finalised; the


32

amount, however, was spent for intended purposes as General Budgetary Support
(GBS). This left 3,705 crore, which was not transferred/ utilized for the purpose for
which the cess was collected.

52. _ As per Ministry's Background Note, the Central Road Fund is still functional in
Ministry. The proposal for change of name from the Central Road Fund (CRF) to
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) is under Process with the concerned
authorities. As per the Union Government Finance Accounts, the cess collected
under ‘MH 0037.00. 507- Road and Infrastructure Cess’, ‘0038.03.507- Road and
Infrastructure Cess’, ‘(0038.03.106- Additional Excise Duties on indigenous motor
spirit’ & ‘0038.03.107- Additional Excise Duty on High speed Dies! Oil’ work out to
be ₹ 122424 Crore instead of 122440 Crore

53. As regards efforts taken to resolve the issue of the accounting procedures on
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) and erroneous transfers, the Ministry
furnished the following reply:

Sees Efforts are taken to resolve the issue in consultation with office of the
CAG. Two meetings were held (on 27.4.2022 and 14.7.2022) with officers of
CAG to impress upon the need to have a procedure suitable to address the
pending issues. Office of the CAG was requested to re-consider this issue,
vide this Ministry's letter dated 26.10.2022. Office of the CGA has been
requested to finalize the accounting procedure on CRIF, recently on

23.11.2022.”

54. To a pointed question how Ministry was ensuring that ATNs are being
provided within prescribed time limit in case of financial audits as the same are not
uploaded on the APMS, the Ministry replied as under:

e “As per the directions of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), office of
C&AG is required to upload the Audit paragraphs on the APMS portal against
which the ATNs are uploaded by the Ministries/Departments;

e The C&AG has since commenced uploading of the Financial Reports on
APMS. The Financial Reports in respect of the year(s) 2018 to 2022
pertaining to Union Government including Railways have been uploaded on
the APMS portal.

« With specific reference to Para 2.6.5 of the C&AG Report No. 7 on Union
Government Accounts for 2019-20 related to the Road and Infrastructure
Fund, a detailed Note was submitted to the PAC Secretariat vide MoF’s OM
No. 7(1)-B(AC)/2022 dated 21% March 2022 for placing before the Committee.


33

55. As regards year-wise details of funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various
Ministries, the Ministry in a written reply furnished the following:

“Details of funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries:

(& crore)

Year Open-.ng Balance | Receipts | Disbursements | Closing Balance
2021-22 4604.22 | 251738.18 228000.09 28342.31
2020-21 3372.94 | 182363.47 181132.19 4604.22
2019-20 1110.92 90252.40 87990.38 3372.94
2018-19 10250.01 62879.64 72018.73 1110.92
2017-18 9163.90 58521.63 57435.52 10250.01
2016-17 0 6284.48 51853.58 48974.16 9163.90
2015-16 5308.41 43175.10 42199.03 6284.48
2014-15 4564.92 25777.94 25034.45 5308.41
2013-14 4752.00 19433.72 19620.80 4564.92
2012-13 6438.00 19433.73 21119.73 4752.00

Source : Union Government Finance Accounts”

56. | When asked to furnish year-wise details of the number of cesses levied during
the last 10 years and Gross Tax Revenue viz a viz Cesses as a percentage of Gross
Tax Revenue collected during the period, the Ministry furnished the following
information:

i. Year-wise details of the number of cesses levied during the last 10 years

Details of number of cesses levied during 2012-13 to 2021-22

(₹ crore )

Ln, | Year appearing InUGEA Total Revenue from cesses

1 2021-22 25 417340.30

2 | 2020-21 30 388460.14

3 | 2019-20 30 295027.47

4 2018-19 31 274980.48

5 2017-18 37 221658.64

| 6 | 2016-17 41 173201.83

7 | 2015-16 38 146210.90

| 8 | 2044-15 34 91758.89

| 9 | 2018-14 37 84581.07

10 | 2012-13 38 78079.97

Source : Union Government Finance Accounts



34

ii. Year-wise details of Gross Tax Revenue viz a viz Cesses as a
percentage of Gross Tax Revenue collected in previous ten years.

Year-wise details of Gross Tax Revenue viz a viz Cesses as a percentage of
Gross Tax Revenue collected during 2012-13 to 2021-22

(% crore)

Year Gross Tax | Cess/Levy

Revenue (Direct + | Collected Total Cess/Levy

Indirect Tax | (Excluding GST as percentage of

excluding GST Compensation gross tax

Cess) revenue

2021-22 2007210.44 312717.76 15.58
2020-21 1475562.33 303354.49 20.56
2019-20 1408275.45 199538.45 14.17
2018-19 1496127.38 179952.13 12.03
2017-18 1474987.00 159062.67 10.78
2016-17 1715968.04 173201.83 10.09
2015-16 1455891.07 146210.90 ~ 10.04
2014-15 1245135.75 91758.89 7.37
2013-14 1138995.47 84581.07 7.43
2012-13 1036460.45 78079.97| - 7.53

Source : Union Government Finance Accounts

iii. Year-wise details of cesses transferred in the reserve funds created for
crediting afore-mentioned levies viz-a-viz their utilization in each of the
last 10 years.

“Details are enclosed as per Annexure ‘B’ and ‘C’”

57. To have a better analysis of the aforesaid information provided by the Ministry
and indicated at para 56 above, the same has been presented graphically in the
Figures 1, 2 and 3 respectively as under:


35

2500000
1 2000000 4 ह Cess/Levy Collected
1500000 | | (Excluding GST
1000000 | Compensation Cess) (%
500000 | crore)
० | | Gross Tax Revenue (Direct +

indirect Tax excluding GST
(R crore)

2012-13
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22

Figure 1 - Gross Tax Revenue (Direct + Indirect Tax excluding GST) viz-a-viz
Cess/Levy Collected (Excluding GST Compensation Cess) for the FY 2012-2022

Total Cess/Levy as percentage of gross
tax revenue fo the FY 2012-22 ।

25 |

™ Total Cess/Levy as
percentage of gross tax
revenue

Figure 2- Total Cess/Levy as percentage of gross tax revenue for the FY 2012-22


36

Number of cesses appearing in UGFA
for FY 2012-2022

is Number of cesses
appearing in UGFA

Figure 3- Number of cesses appearing in UGFA for FY 2012-2022


37
PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

Introduction

Report No. 7 of 2021 the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
on the accounts of the Union Government gave an overview of Union
Government Finances for Financial Year 2020 and observations on Finance
Accounts. The Committee selected the Para 2.6.1 of the aforementioned Report
which dealt with the subject, “Issues relating to accounting of Cess/Levies” for

detailed examination and report.

The Union Government has the authority to levy various levies and
cesses in order to raise revenue and for the financial year (FY) 2021-22, total
revenue from various cesses (excluding GST Compensation Cess) was =
312717.76 crore which formed around 15 percent of the gross tax revenue.
Cesses do not form part of the divisible pool to be shared with States because
of a constitutional exception in Article 270. The Committee’s examination of
the subject and ‘heir observations/ recommendations on the issues relating to
accounting of cess/levies as brought out in the Audit Report and updated
information received from the Ministry are detailed in the succeeding

paragraphs.

1. Disparity | provisions on creation’ operationalisation of the Reserve
Funds in the enabling Acts pertaining to cess and levies.

The Committee note that Government imposes levies/cesses and other
charges to raise funds for specific purposes; and accounting of collection of
such receipts is, in most cases, regulated by legislation and rules which often
provide for creation of reserve funds to ensure that these
levies/charges/cesses are used for intended purposes. However, the Ministry
in a written reply stated that creation/operationalization of Reserve Funds in


38

Public Account pertaining to cesses /levies are based on the provisions of the
enabling act (e.g., USOF, CRIF etc.) or based on executive decision if a need is
felt for creation of the same (e.g., PSK, MUSK, PMSSN). Further, in case when
the nature of levy is very broad and generic in nature and nut relatable to a
specific function of any Ministry, Government may take a decision not to
create the Reserve Fund e.g. Social Welfare Surcharge. As regards importance
of creating Reserve Funds in Public Account, the Ministry in a separate reply
underlined that the purpose of establishing a reserve fund in Public Account is
to transparently demonstrate the flow of funds from CFI and its utilisation on
intended purposes. While observing that creation/operationalization of
Reserve Funds in Public Account pertaining to Cesses /Levies is subject to
provisions of the Act governing them and executive decision of the
Government to create them the Committee are of the view that non-
creation/non operation of Reserve Funds makes it difficult to ensure that
cesses and levies have been utilised for the specific purposes for which they
were intended and levied. The Committee are of the opinion that to ensure
utilization of levies/charges/cesses for their intended purposes, the provisions
for creation/ operationalization of reserve funds in public account in the
designated acts/rules/legislations should be clearly defined. Further, the
Committee, recommend that earnest efforts in the matter be taken so that the
reserve funds in Public Account are invariably created and the flow of funds
from CFI and its utilization and accomplishments on intended purposes in a

time bound manner ensured.

2. Non-creation of Oil Industry Development Fund

The Committee observe that for the development of Oil Industry, Oil
Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides for levying a duty of excise on
crude oil and natural gas as a cess and establishment of Oil Industry
Development Board (OIDB). Further, the Act also provides for crediting the
cess first in the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) and thereafter paying to
the Board such sums as Parliament may approve to be kept in the Oil


39

Industry Development Fund (OIDF). The Committee also note that Section
18(2) of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides that “the Fund
Shall be applied- (a) for meeting the salaries, allowances, honoraria and
other remuneration of the officers and other employees of the Board and of
the advisers, consultants or other agencies whose services are availed of by
the Board; (b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board;
(c) for rendering,assistance under section 6; (d) for repayment of any loans
taken by the Board or for meeting other liabilities under this Act.” Through
Audit scrutiny for the period FY 10 to FY 20, the Committee note that since
1974, the total cess on crude oil collected was %1,28,461 crore, however only
%902.40 crore had been transferred to OIDB and since 1991-92, no funds out
of the cess collected by the Government were transferred to OIDB.
According to the Ministry, implementation/operation of schemes is not
affected by delay in finalization of accounting procedure of any fund, only
transactions are not routed through respective Reserve Funds. Further, the
Government has been financing various activities from the budget that
qualify as being aimed development of oil industry within the purview of the
OID Act, 1974 and in view of the emergent situation of the energy security,
expenditure on energy security is likely to increase in the near future. Also,
these activities are financed from the resources of the Government of which
the Cess under the Act is a part. The Committee also, while noting the
Ministry’s response that the reasons for non-constitution of a reserve fund
in public account in favour of Oil Industry Development Board from
inception in 1974 could not, readily, be ascertained, wonder how payments
were made for meeting the liabilities as specified in Section 18(2)(d) of the
Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, when the fund was not created. The
Committee opine that the Ministry’s response regarding non creation of
OIDF not only questions the rationale of collection of the cess but also the
actual utilization: of the same for the intended purposes. The Committee feel
that absence of binding provisions regarding specific timeline for creation
of reserve funds also contributed to the non creation of OIDF. The
Committee, therefore, while expressing concern over the Ministry’s
lackadaisical reply on non-creation of OIDF in terms of the provisions of


40

OIDB Act 1974, desire that besides strengthening compliance mechanism in
the Ministry, the reasons for non-constitution of a reserve fund in public
account in favour of Oil Industry Development Board from inception in 1974
may be ascertained urgently and the Committee may be apprised thereof.
The Committee, also, recommend that to obviate recurrence of such lapses
in future, the Ministry revisit the provisions of the OIDB act and take
necessary action for ensuring adherence to the Act both in letter and spirit.

3. Review of provisions relating to Cess and Levies in USOF

The Committee observe that some of the provisions for crediting of sum
from cess collection to Consolidated Fund of India, are open ‘to interpretation
viz. in The Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 (giving statutory status to
the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF)) wherein it has been provided
that the sums of money received towards the Universal Service Obligation
under section 4 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Furid of India, and
the Central Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in
this behalf so provides, credit “such proceeds” to the Fund from “time to time”
for being utilised exclusively for meeting the Universal Service Obligation. The
Committee in this regard, would draw reference to a recent judgement of the
Division Bench of Madras High court where in they have maintained that “The
purpose and collection of any cess remains distinct, as any cess amount
collected, is liable to be spent for the avowed and dedicated purpose for which
such imposition was made, unlike in the case of collection of taxes. Such
distinction is a settled principle of law and the Supreme Court has upheld it in
various decisions.” Further, as explained in V. Nagappa v. Iron Ore Mines
Cess Commissioner, the legislation imposing a cess must spell out its
earmarked purpose. The purpose must not be vague or uncertain, as it could
lead to a claim of excessive delegation of power. The Committee also opine
that the nature of the levy should be specific, the provisions governing the
cesses need specific details regarding frequency of their appropriation and
utilisation for the ‘specific purposes’ and should be achievable in a given


41

timeframe. Since: cesses are to be imposed for only specific purposes, the use
of broad and general language for their imposition and collection may lead to
discrepancies in utilisation of the proceeds. Impressing upon the need to
ensure specificity, the Committee are of the view that cesses should be levied
for well defined purposes and for limited periods.

4. Rationalization of cesses

The Committee note from the Audit observation that out of the = 2,74,592
crore received from 35 cesses, levies and other charges in 2018-19, only
%1,64,322 crore had been transferred to Reserve Funds/ Boards during the year
and the rest was retained in the CFI leading to the understatement of revenue/
fiscal deficit for the year. The Committee observe from the data furnished by
the Ministry of Finance for the period from FY 2012-13 to FY 2021-22 that in the
Year 2021-22, the number of cesses appearing in Union Government Finance
Accounts (UGFA) was 25 and the total Revenue from cesses was = 4,17,340.30
crore. The Committee also note from the same data that total Cess/Levy as
percentage of «ross tax revenue stood at 20.56% in the FY 2020-21. The
Committee note that in terms of the provisions of Article 270 and Article 271,
revenues collected from certain sources such as income tax are necessarily
part of the divisile pool while cesses and surcharges can be kept outside the
divisible pool. V/hile observing that there have been many discrepancies
pertaining to the administration and utilisation of the proceeds from cess taxes
which gives the impression that the proceeds are being levied to finance the
revenue deficit of the Government, the Committee opine that prior to
imposition of levy, a scientific study should be conducted about the quantum
of money required and the likely time period within which the same is expected
to be collected through the proposed levy. Further, in light of the fact that
burden of taxes/cesses/levies eventually falls on the common man, the
Committee believe that for effective decision making, a review of cesses be
periodically undertaken to determine the extent of achievement of the intended
purpose by prescribing a specific timeframe. Highlighting the recommendation

:


42

made by the Thirteenth Finance Commission that the Centre shall review the
surcharges and cesses in order to reduce its share in the gross tax revenue,
the Committee urge the Ministry to include within provisions of Cesses, a
clause for timely review of Cesses, through a sunset clause or any other
method as deemed suitable by the Ministry so that discontinuation of the Cess
may be considered if its objectives have been achieved.

5. Draft framework to finalize accounting procedure

The Committee observe that accounting procedures could not be
finalized for some of the cess funds viz. the National Mineral Exploration Trust
Fund, Madhyamik & Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK), Oil Industry
Development Fund (OIDF) and Road and Infrastructure Cess. The Committee
also observe that the Ministry has been silent over the timeline of finalization
of accounting process of funds created for Cesses. Instead, the Ministry
apprised the Committee about the current status of the extant proposals for
the same. Regarding Madhyamik & Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK), the
Ministry’s response indicates that the accounting procedure is under process.
As regards Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF), the Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas has stated that the same has not been created yet. Further, for
Road and Infrastructure Cess, the process of finalization of accounting
procedure was still under process as the same was pending with Budget
Division, DEA. Regarding reasons for delay in finalization of accounting
procedure, the Ministry stated that based on the broad accounting guidelines
issued by Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division), the detailed
accounting procedure is proposed by the Ministry/Department administering
the fund and is sent to the office of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA).
After due examination, Office of the CGA forwards the draft accounting
procedure to the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
for concurrence. After concurrence of the accounting procedure by the office
of CAG under Article 150 of the Constitution, the same is notified by
administrative Ministry/Department. Similarly, Audit had noticed that as no
new reserve funds had been created for the Health and Education Cess, BE


43

and RE for FY 2020 continued to provide for transfer of proceeds of this cess
to the Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh (PSK), and Madhyamik and Uchchatar
Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) that were created for Primary Education Cess, and
Secondary and Higher Education Cess, respectively. The Ministry also stated
that the Accounting Procedure for MUSK and Pradhan Mantri Swasthya
Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) is pending finalization in the office of the CAG and
the pending issues with office of the CGA/CAG are being resolved in
consultation with them. The Committee are of the opinion that accounting
procedures is one of the foundational aspects of creation and monitoring of
cess and funds. ‘Therefore, its non-finalization / delay in finalization, inhibit the
overall monitoring of the inflow and outflow of moneys from the designated
funds which hiriders executive accountability to the Parliament. While
acknowledging the importance of the subject matter, Secretary, Ministry of
Finance, during the oral evidence admitted that “it should not take us so long
to finalise the accounting rules”. The Committee observe that since each cess
may require deliberations in respect of how objectives of the cess as
enshrined in the law are to be achieved, there is an urgent need for enhancing
cooperation among all the agencies involved in finalization of accounting
procedure so that concerns and issues wherever arising may be highlighted at
an early stage and the same may be resolved promptly within a specific time
frame. The Committee also desire that all the agencies involved in finalization
of accounting procedures for a cess fund may also deliberate upon the
possibility of having an accounting standard/ guidance note on treatment and
disclosure of various issues related to the management of cess funds.

6. Universal Access Levy

The Committee note that the ‘Universal Access Levy’ (UAL) was set up
in April 2002 for achieving universal service objectives by providing access to
telephone services in rural and remote areas and creation of infrastructure for
mobile services and broad band in these areas. The Committee also note that
the levy is first credited to the CFI and subsequently, transferred, based on the
appropriation approved by Parliament, to a non-lapsable Universal Service


44

Obligation (USO) Fund created in the Public Account for being utilized
exclusively for the aforementioned purposes. Audit scrutiny revealed that
during FY 2020, although, Parliament had approved the transfer of UAL
amounting to = 8,350 crore to the USO Fund in the budget, there was short
transfer of UAL to the USO Fund amounting to € 5,035.53 crore. Audit also
pointed out that issue of short transfer of the levy to the USO Fund had been
brought out in earlier reports of the CAG on the Union Accounts for the years
2009-10 to 2014-15 and 2018-19 but the matter remained unresolved. In their
reply, the Ministry stated that the USO Fund is financing two schemes viz. for
providing compensation to telecom service providers for creation and
augmentation of telecom infrastructure and access to various telecom
services to people in the rural and remote areas including operation and
maintenance of Village Public Telephones and for implementation of Bharatnet
project towards creation of telecom infrastructure required for providing
broadband connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats in the country and
facilitating non- discriminatory access to service providers, for provisioning of
broadband services in rural areas. The Ministry also stated that the purpose of
such Funds is, inter-alia, to ensure utilisation for the earmarked purpose over
a period of years, but not necessarily, within each financia! year and that
transfer of funds depend, mainly, on the absorptive capacity of the Department
to spend in any particular year. Further, Section 9C of Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, 2003 provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament credit such sums of money as that
Government may consider necessary in the Fund. Thus, transfers to USOF are
made in line with the statutory provisions. From the information provided by
the Ministry regarding funds allocated and disbursed through USOF since the
year 2002-03 to 2022-2023, the Committee note that as against a total collection
of % 130923.91 crore, only % 68683.44 crore was utilized leaving ₹ 62240.46
crore (47.5%) as unspent. Observing that almost fifty percent of the UAL
collected for the designated purpose remains undisbursed, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the accounting procedure adopted by the Ministry
to reflect the undisbursed amount in the Government Accounts,


45
7. Further, the Committee are of the considered view that the extent of
collection of UAL may be revisited to ascertain whether the rate of UAL needs
adjustment so that instead of short transfers, an amount more in tune with the
absorptive capacities of the Department may be collected.

8. Besides, as.a part of initiatives for gainful utilization of the significant
portion of amount lying undisbursed and also for the achievement of avowed
objectives envisaged under UAL and specifically under the two schemes, the
Committee desire that the Ministry come up with a perspective plan so that
time bound utilization of the financial resources collected under UAL may be

ensured.

9. National Vineral Trust Levy

The Committee note that in accordance with the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, the National Mineral Exploration Trust
which was set up in 2015-16 is funded through payments made by holders
of mining leases as a percentage of royalty paid which is collected by State
Governments and thereafter paid to the Union Government. Audit observed
that the collectign towards this trust was हैं 664.85 crore and transfer to the
fund was हैं 100;crore, resulting in short transfer of = 564.85 crore. As
regards the reasons for short transfer of funds, the Ministry of Mines in their
response stated that during the year 2021, Ministry submitted a proposal to
the Department of Economic Affairs in third and final Batch of
Supplementary Demand for Grants 2021-22 for transfer of balance NMET
fund of = 2271.82 crore (accumulated upto Dec 2021) which has since been
transferred including the short transfer of = 564.82 crore. The Ministry
further stated that with the higher transfer of = 2,872 crore in 2021-22, NMET
Fund is having a positive (credit) balance of = 2,862 crore, pending
utilisation, in Public Account as on 31.3.2022. The Committee opine that the
practice of shori transfers and subsequent recuperation of the designated
funds with highe« transfers at one go is not prudent viz-a-viz of the principle


46

of sound financial management. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
reasons for non transfer of funds previously and the utilization of funds by
the NMET since its creation.

10. Road and Infrastructure Cess- Issues related to nomenclature

The Committee note that cesses in the nature of additional excise duties
on petrol and diesel collected under the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 are to be
credited to the Central Road Fund (CRF) to the extent provided by Parliament
through appropriation by law. Further, the Committee note tha: the Finance Act
2018 re-designated the Fund as the Central Road and Inirastructure Fund
(CRIF) with effect from 01 April 2018, enlarging its scope of deployment and
increasing the quantum of cess. Audit scrutiny revealed that Statement 13
continued to depict the Fund as CRF instead of CRIF. As per the Ministry of
Finance Background Note, the Central Road Fund was still functional in the
Ministry and the proposal for change of name from the Central Road Fund
(CRF) to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) is under process with the
concerned authorities. In this regard, the Ministry further stated that efforts are
being taken to resolve the issue in consultation with office of the CAG and that
two meetings were held (on 27.4.2022 and 14.7.2022) with officers of CAG to
impress upon the need to have a procedure suitable to address the pending
issues. The Ministry also stated that the Office of the CAG and CGA both were
requested to re-consider this issue. The Committee are concerned to note that
the issues related to nomenclature of funds not only remained unnoticed until
pointed out by the Audit but have not been resolved also as yet. The
Committee desire that before making changes to the provisions underlying a
cess fund all the agencies concerned be taken on board. Highlighting the need
for enhanced cooperation between various agencies, the Committee desire
that issues may be resolved at the earliest. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the final outcome of the initiatives taken for changing the name
from the Central Road Fund (CRF) to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund
(CRIF) and bolstering the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry.


47

11. Road and Infrastructure Cess — Erroneous transfer

The Committee observe from audit scrutiny that against total collection
of cess of %1,22,440 crore under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved ₹1,22,369
crore for approp-iation, however actual transfer to the Road and Infrastructure
Cess Fund was %90,252 crore only. The Committee have been informed that
part of the short transfer was due to erroneous transfers of 217,250 crore and
%4,380 crore to the Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to
‘Other Funds’ by the Ministry of Power, respectively and
these funds were, however, fully utilised for the purposes for which the CRIF
had been created. On a request for providing year-wise details of funds
transferred to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries, the Committee note with
dismay that the Ministry furnished an account of receipts and disbursements
but the Ministry- wise data remained unavailable. The Committee insist that to
ensure accountability and transparency, a thorough analysis of the transfers
made to and from CRIF is necessary. Moreover, since the data available shows
only the receipts and disbursements, erroneous transfers, if any, cannot be
determined. The Committee, therefore desire that a detailed statement
regarding transfers made to and from CRIF by various Ministries may be
prepared and sent to Audit, under intimation to this Secretariat, for in-depth

scrutiny.
Conclusion

While, examining the issues related to Cess and Levies, the
Committee examined a number of issues viz. non finalization of accounting
procedure, issues related to nomenclature and lack of coordination
mechanism to finalize accounting procedure. Noting that drafting and
finalizing of accounting procedures for cess involves multiple agencies
including CGA, C&AG and Budget Division of DEA, Ministry of Finance, and
the concerned Ministry, the Committee trust that enhancing coordination
mechanism among these various bodies will go a long way in resolving issues
and timely creation of the designated funds as per the legal provisions.


48

Further, the Committee desire that the cess should be specific and time bound
and the law governing the cess should clearly state the earmarked purpose. To
enable transparency and accountability, the reserve funds for the cesses being
levied should invariably be provided for and the proceeds should be credited
to these funds regularly. Further, the Committee recommend that a special
Audit of the utilization of the proceeds from collection of various cesses may
be conducted to determine the extent of achievement of the intended purpose.

अऋ अं ऋऋऋ

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
097" August, 2023 Chairperson,

18, Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


49

Confidential
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23)

HELD ON 117 OCTOBER, 2022.
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 11" October, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to
1630 hrs. in the Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT _

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury --- Chairperson

Members

LOK SABHA

2. Shri Jagdambika Pal

. Shri Bharteuhari Mahtab

. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
. Shri Brijendra Singh

. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

NOOB w

. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

oo

9. Dr. Amar Patnaik
40. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

11. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
12. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

PART-I
(1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.G.Chandrashekhar -- Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja -- Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG

1



4. Shri Rakesh Mohan
2. Shri Sanjay Jha

50

-- Dy. C&AG
-- Director General

3. Shri S.V.Singh -- Director General
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX

1. XXXX

2. XXXX

3. XXXX

XXXX XXXX XXXX

1. XXXX

2. XXXX

3. XXXX

4. XXXX

5. XXXX

6. XXXX

7. XXXX

8. XXXX
2. XXXXXK XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXXK XXXXX,
3. XXXXK XXXXK XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.
4. XXXXK XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXK XXXXX.
5. XXXXK XXXXX XXXXK XXXXK XXXXK XXXXX,
6. XXXXXK XXXXX XXXXXK XXXXX XXXXKK XXXXX.
7. XXXXXKX XXXXK XXXXK XXXXXK XXXXK XXXXX.


51

8. XXXXX XXXXXK XXXXX XXXXXK XXXXK XXXXXK.

रे PART-II
(1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
4. Shri T.G.Chandrashekhar -- Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja -- Director

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG

SI. No. Name Designation

1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury Dy. C&AG

2. Shri Manish Kumar Director General
3. Smt. Aman Deep Chatha Director General

The Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officials of C&AG to the
Sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by Audit officers on the subject, “Issues
relating to accounting of Cess/Levies” based on Para 2.6 of C&AG Report No.7 of 2021.
Highlighting the issues raised by Audit in respect of Universal Access Levy, National Mineral
Trust Levy, Non-transfer of cess to Oil Industry Development Board, Health and Education
Cess and Road and Infrastructure Cess, the Hon'ble Chairperson sought to be apprised of
the findings of Audit and action taken by the concerned Ministries/Departments thereon.

2. Thereafter, the officials of Audit highlighted issues like short transfer of funds, non-
finalization of accounting procedures, non-transfer/utilization of cess, non creation of a
separate reserve fund etc. in respect of Universal Access Levy, National Mineral Trust Levy,
Oil Industry Development Board, Health and Education Cess and Road and Infrastructure
Cess. The Members were also apprised that while in some cases the cess/levies collected
could not be transferred because the reserve fund was not operationalized or the accounting
rules were not notified, in other cases there was also short transfer of fund due to erroneous


52

transfers. The Committee were further informed that in the absence of a reserve fund, the
cess collected was accumulated and utilized from the Consolidated Fund of India rather than
through the reserve fund mechanism, making it difficult to ascertain whether the cess
collected was actually utilized for the designated purpose. The Members of the Committee
were also of the opinion that the purpose for which cess is collectec: is defeated as a
separate reserve fund was not created for the same. The Members of tiie Committee were
also informed that no expenditure had been envisaged for the health sector out of the Health
and Education cess collection nor was any dedicated fund created for 108 purpose. Further,
while the Central Road Fund (CRF) has been re-designated as Central Road and
Infrastructure Fund (CRIF), budget statements are still shown under CRF since CRIF has

not been created in the reserve fund till date.

3. The Hon'ble Chairperson then thanked the officials of C&AG of India for sharing
invaluable information with the Committee during the deliberation.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.


53

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2022-23) HELD ON 9" NOVEMBER, 2022.

PART-I

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the 97" November, 2022 from
1100 hrs. to 1340 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘3’, Block A, Extension Building,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT बओ
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

Members
LOK SABHA
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Brijendra Singh
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

oon en

Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry
0. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

soon

RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
13. Dr. M.Thambidurai
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. | ShriSaritJafa _ Dy. C&AG __ _

Director General

2._| Shri Saurabh Narain



54

3. | Ms. Rashmi Agarwal [ - | Director General

4, | Shri S.V.Singh [- | Director General

XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXX

1. [XXXX I" XXXX

2. | XXXX | | XXXX

3. | XXXX | XXXX

4, | XXXX | XXXX

5. | XXXX I" | XXXX

2. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

3. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXA XXXXX.

4. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX,
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

7. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.

8. XXXXXK XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX.



55

PART II

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE)

SI.No. Name .. Designation

1. Dr. T.V Somanathan Secretary

2. Smt. Bharati Das CGA

3. Dr.Shakuntala Devi Additional CGA

4. Smt. Aastha Saxena Khatwani Additional CGA

5. Ms. Leena Johri AS&FA, Education

6. Shri Ashish Vachhani JS, Economic Affairs

7. Shri Sunil Kumar JS, Petroleum & Natural Gas

8. Smt. Prachi Pandey JS, Education

9. Shri Upendra Joshi JS, Mines

10. Shri Sudip Chaudhury Chief Engineer, Road Transport &
Highways

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENE'2AL OF INDIA

Sl.No. Name Designation
Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury Dy. CAG
पं Ms.Roti Shukla Malge PD
3. Ms. R Uma Director

The Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officials of C&AG to the
Sitting of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on the subject, “Issues relating to
accounting of Cess/Levies” based on Para 2.6 of C&AG Report No.7 of 2021. The Audit
officers briefed the Members on the subject and apprise the Committee of the action

taken by the Ministry.

2. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) were called in. While welcoming the representatives of the Ministry, the
Hon'ble Chairperson also highlighted various issues like short transfer of cess funds,
non-finalization of accounting procedures, non-creation of reserve funds étc. in respect


56

of Universal Access Levy, National Mineral Trust Levy, cess on crude oil, Health and
Education Cess and Road and Infrastructure Cess. Pointing out that Controller General
of Accounts is responsible for framing appropriate accounting procedures for monitoring
receipts and operation of appropriate reserve funds, the Hon’ble Chairperson sought
details of action taken by the Ministry on the findings of Audit.

3. The representatives of the Ministry, then submitted before the Committee that while
the cess collected should be used for the purpose intended, it is not a strict legal
requirement to deposit the entire amount in the reserve fund each year. In the case of
Universal Access Levy, cess funds collected were initially credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India (CFI) and then transferred to the reserve fund, as per the Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, based on estimation of requirement for the intended purpose. As
regards Oil Industry Development Fund, the representatives apprised the Committee that
while a separate reserve fund was not constituted, the total expenditure incurred towards
development of oil industry during the last five years exceeds the amount collected as
cess. In respect of Health and Education Cess, the Committee were informed that
though accounting procedures of Prarambik Shiksha Kosh (PSK) and Madyamik
Ucchthar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) have not been finalized, expenditure incurred on
education and health sector in 2018-19 and 2019-20 have exceeded the amount
collected during the period. All efforts are being made to finalize the accounting
procedures for PSK and MUSK. In respect of road and infrastructure cess, the scope of
the fund has been expanded through the Finance Act, 2018 and short transfer of funds
occurred as a result of an estimation of the inflow of cess against actual realization of
cess. The shortfall will be collected and adjusted in the coming yea*s. In respect of
National Mineral Trust Levy, the Committee were apprised that the short transfer of
funds has been corrected in the year 2021-22. The Committee were aiso informed that
the Ministry are in consultation with the Ministry of Mines to finalize a plan for utilization
of the fund towards additional exploration of different minerals. As regards non-
finalization of account procedures, the representatives of the Ministry submitted that the
delay occurred. due to difference in opinion between Comptroller and Auditor General
and the Ministry of Finance. The Committee were assured that the difference of opinion
will be reconciled and the pending accounting procedures will be finalized soon.


57

4. The Members of the Committee observed that cesses are collected for specific purpose
and a separate reserve fund is created for the same. However, if the cess collected is retained
in the Consolidated Fund of India, the purpose for which the cess was collected would be
defeated. The Members of the Committee also impressed upon the representatives of the

Ministry to urgently finalize all pending accounting procedures.

5. The Hon'ble Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) for sharing invaluable information with the Committee during the

deliberation.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.


58

Confidential

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCGUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24) HELD ON 97 AUGUST, 2023.

The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) sat on Wednesday, the 9" August, 2023

from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs in Room No. ‘51’, Chairperson’s Chamber, Parliament House,

New Delhi.

N

ONO w

9.

10.
11.
12.

1.
2.
3.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
Members
LOK SABHA

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
RAJYA SABHA
Dr.K. Laxman
Dr.M. Thambidurai
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G.Chandrasekhar - Additional Secretary

Shri Santosh Kumar - Director
Smt. Bharti Sanjeev. Tuteja - Director

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF

INDIA

1.
2.

Shri Sarit Jafa - Dy. CAG
Ms. Rebecca Mathai - Dy. CAG


59
3... Shri Subir Mallick - Dy. CAG

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the
office of C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions

of the Members on the following Draft Reports:-

i. Draft Report on “Issues relating to Accounting of Cess/Levies”

ii. XXXX
iii. XXXX
iv. XXXX
v XXXX

3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports
without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light

of factual verification done by the Audit.

The Committee then adjourned.

eee


[Ameurea | A a

Statement showing: the balance of UAL amount available as potential fund under
USO as on 30.09.2022

Rupees in Crore,|
\ Year UAL Funds allocated Balance (CB)

collections (Booked| and disbursed
figures as per DOT A/cs) | through USOF

2002-03 1653.61 300.00 1353.61
2003-04 [1.2] 200.00} 3296.83}
2004-05 [~i8S.73 1314.59 5439.97|
2005-06 [8215.13 1766.85} 6888.25
2006-07 [8940.73 1500.00 9328.98
2007-08 5405.80 1290.00) 13444.78
2008-09 [~S9S.14 8548.64) 10411.28
2009-10 5778.00} 2400.00 13789.28
2010-11 6114.56) 3100.00 16803.84
2011-12 [_॒_॒ 5723.57 1687.96| 21839.45
012-13 6735.47 625.00 27949.92)
2013-14 7896.39} 2163.45} 33682.86|
2014-15 7537.88} 2086.98 39133.76)
2015-16 9835.70) 3100.00 45869.46|
2016-17 9763.87 7227.03} 48406.29
2017-18 7019.22] 6998.76 48426.75|
2018-19 6911.50} 4788.22 50550.04|
[2019-20 |... 7961.53| 2926.00} 55585.57|
2020-21 9471.23 7200.00 57856.80}
2021-22 10287.18 8300.00) 59843.98)
2022-23 3556.45} 1159.96 62240.46|
[Total 130923.91 68683.44] 62240.46)

«66 -


Annentrs &

Statement showing details of surcharge an

Sl. Name of the levy Major Actuals Actuals Actuals
No. Head 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
CESSES
A. GST Compensation Cess 0009 0.00 0.00 0.00
B. Other Cesses (excluding GST Compensation Cess)

1 Health and Education Cess 0.00 0.00 0.00
2 Krishi Kalyan Cess 0.00 0.00 0.00
3 National Calamity Contingent Duty 3546.07 3732.55 5172.93
4 Primary Education Cess 22836.55 24218.99 18782.66
5 Secondary & Higher Educatio Cess 11266.12 11959.50 9240.37
6 Health Cess 0037 0.00 0.00 0.00
7 Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Cess 0.00 0.00 0.00
8 Cesses on Exports 0037 1820.30 1179.06 122.39
9 Road and Infrastructure Cess* 20477.92 25121.95 69539.98
10 Infrastructure Cess 0038 0.00 0.00 0.00
11 Cess on Crude Oil 0038 14533.20 14655.05 14310.69
12 Cess on Bidi 0038 149.42 150.21 146.27
13 Cess on Sugar 0038 565.20 564.96 1008.49
14 Cess on Automobiles 0038 310.49 370.35 386.36
15 Others ड़ 0038 854.63 887.92 897.43
16 Clean Environment Cess 0038 3081.72 5393.46 12675.60
17 Cess on Jute 0038 -218.00 -285.21 99.24
18 Cess on Tobacco 0038 0.30 0.44 0.38
19 Cess on Salt 0038 3.31 4.33 3.92
20 Swachh Bharat Cess 0.00 0.00 4213.90
21 Water (९५५ 0045 261.73 251.22 242.97
22 R&D Cess 0045 737.54 906.78 914.81
23 Other Cess 0045 4.25 5.57 9.53
B. Other Cesses (excluding GST Compensation Cess) 80230.75 89117.13 137569.44
C. Total Cess including GST Compensation Cess (A+B) 80230.75 89117.13 137569.44

* Includes additional duty of excise on petrol and diesel, which were known as ‘road cess' before intro
d cesses estimated as part of principal taxes

-6l-


Actuals
2016-17

0.00

0.00
8379.16
6426.20
20219.88
1002819
0.00
0.00
177.21
72399.53
3917.65
12618.31
136.21
2881.61
408.55
906.33
26117.25
96.07
0.18
0.91
12475,39
215.84
118.24

0.00

Actuals
2017-18

62611.59

0.00
4266.84
2938.44

21117.31
10538.80
0.00
9,00
384.56
83132.29
903.90
1357°.21
32.60
793.40
96.42
453.82
11463.43
22.71

0.33

0.00
4289.63

188.90
191.41
0.00

Actuals
2018-19

95080.71

41177.44
168.89
1797.80
97.40
34.24
0.00
0.00
1690.23
110847.16
6.36
17814.23
-0.03
13.40
0.08
-21.52
4.88

0.16
0.0
0.00
216.40
6.76
45.34
0.00

177522.71 154392.00 173899.29
177522.71 217003.59 268980.00

Actuals
2019-20

95553.09

39131.10
40.13
2380.40
81.48
27.97
0.00
0.00
5759.14
122424,32
0.94
14062.49
0.02

3.50
1.08
14.98
24.56
2.18
0.03
0.00
46.63
11.16
14.68
0.00

Actuals
2020-21

Actuals
2021-22

Budget
2022-23

Aun 8

की 7००००

(% crore )

Revised
2022-23

Budget
2023-24

85191.91 104768.66 120000.00 130000.00 145000.00

35821.55
10.61
5098.81
61.85
11.42
-13.52
0.00
9214.64
235782.55
-0.07
10894.44
0.00

0.35
0,00

0.03

0.01

0.06
0.01
0.00
17.34
6.82
16.77
0.00

52732.33 53846.16 62500.01 69062.50

7.24
7074.87
15.44
2.50
31.02
76950.68
1457.10
195986.96
0.00
19353.84
0.01
0.02
0.01
-0.16
23.86
0.04
0.07
-0.20
9.63
2.78
16.42
0.00

0.00
6400.00
0.00
0.00
870.00
77780.00
1500.00
138450.00
0.00
18020.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
8000.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
73500.00
2100.00
$8200.00
0.00
21000.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00
8780.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
79400.00
1500.00
45110.00
0.00
20540.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

184026.79 296923.67 353664.46 296866.16 225320.01 224412.50
279579.88 382115.58 458433.12 416866.16 355320.01 369412.50

duction of ‘road and infrastrucure cess’.



[Annexurec | Cc

Utilization of Cess proceeds (transferd to the Reserve Funds)

|

lane. Name of the Fund | 2013-14 | 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
1 |Prarambik Shiksha Kosh frs988.24 _|22323.19 |19298.16 |19732.47
2 _|Madhyamik & Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh*
3 GST Compensation Fund Je a | [=

Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 1943372 77794 [4317510 |51853.58

National Disaster Response Fund/ National [164444 s4eo.gs {7180.48 [6450.00 500.00

Calamity Contingency Fund

Clean Energy Fund Hi650.00  |a700.00 _|t00.00 [6466.75
7 |Sugar Development Fund 47.82 (854.97 [2352.66 (2312.82
5. |Cine Workers Welfare Fund 6.81 1.73 1.93
jp | Mines Welfare Funds 122.67 [32.28 5.42
fio 18660 Workers Welfare Funds 60.00 15593. |. id |
i | Other Development & Welfare Fund ns8.69 _fi75.32 1236 कल पिछ
112 Krishi Kalyan Kosh Not in operation 3596.28 8916.39
13 | Bharat Infrastructure Kosh Not in operation 314.00
4 Rashtriya Swachhata Kosh Not in operation |2400.00 110000.00 {3400.00
hs [Prevention and Control of Water Pollution’ 61.73 5722. 42.97 45.64 [74.82
6 __|Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi#

Grand Total 47279. s7733.46 | 173965.88 |101039.21 | 1155413.16 [144882.54

4 No physical fund has been constituted. However, expenditure provision has ken netted against receipts in

[Statement of Budget Estimates.

* Madhyamik & Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh has not yet been operationalized. Allocatior ५ made in Revised Estimates

leach year are indicated.

# Pradhan Mantri Swastya Suaksha Nidhi has noty et been operationalized. Utilisatic:

RE and 2023-24 as per BE.

in 2022-23 is assumed as per

63 -


Utilization of Cess proceeds (transferd to the Reserve Funds

crore )

हु | 22 | 2023-24
sino | Name of the Fund | 201820 | | 2020-2 | (RE) ibe)
jt ___[Prarambik Shiksha Kosh 26848.35 0168. [3800.00 __ [30000.00
a Madhyamik & Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh* __[14460.25 _|20561. 24350.00 {1200.00

GST Compensation Fund 15391029 |106317.00 |110795.47___|130000.00 _ 145000.00
| Central Road and Infiastructure Fund 90252.40 _|182363.47 |251738.18 _|208743.00__|s4020.00
National Disaster Response Fund/ National 480.00 |sa20.00 frseco | 8000.00 8780.00

Clean Energy Fund
Sugar Development Fund
Cine Workers Welfare Fund
Mines Welfare Funds
10 186९0 Workers Welfare Funds
11 Other Development & Welfare Fund
12 Krishi Kalyan Kosh

13 [Bharat Infrastructure Kosh

14 Rashtriya Swachhata Kosh

ES Calamity Contingency Fund
7 |
8 _|

15 Prevention and Control of Water Pollution’ |...
16 Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi#t 20000.00 [2149872 20542.37 114589.00
Grand Total 287951.29 |365230.08 1446955.22 | [429635.37 274389.00

- £4-