1 
 
      57 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 
2006 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their 21st Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
 
 
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
 
(i) 
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
CHAPTER I Report  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2022-23) on 05.12.2022 
 
II.  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their 21st Report (17th Lok Sabha) 

4 
 
  

5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2022-23) 
 
            SECRETARIAT 
 
1.       Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar    -   Additional Secretary 
2.       Shri Tirthankar Das              -   Director 
3.       Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  -   Deputy Secretary 
  
                                                
1 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha on 21 June, 2022. 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
8. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
9. Shri Brijendra Singh 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
19. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
20. Vacant1 
21. Dr. M Thambidurai 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

6 
 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee  (2022-23), having been 
authorised by  the Committee, do present this Fifty-seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action  Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Commit tee contained in their Twenty -
first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Implementation of Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006’ relating to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
2. The Twenty-first Report  was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 2nd February, 2021. Final Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
27.01.2022. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and 
adopted the Report at their Sitting held on  5 December, 2022. Minutes of the 
Sitting are given at Appendix-I. 
  
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of t he Committee have been printed in bold in the body of 
the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the o ffice of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                 ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
  7    December, 2022      Chairperson       
  16  Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)                          Public Accounts Committee 

8 
 
  

9 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Twenty -First Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on "Implementation of Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006". 
 
2. The Twenty-First Report (17 th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 2 nd February, 2021 contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all  the Observations/Recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health & Family 
Welfare) and these are broadly categorized as follows: 
 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 19    
   
          Total:      13       
          Chapter – II 
 
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter – III 
 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Governme nt have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Para Nos., 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 18 and 20 
          Total:    07 
          Chapter – IV 
 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/no replies: 
NIL 
     
                                                                              Total:    NIL    
                                                                             Chapter –V 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed deficiencies 
in  the digital clearance systems of the food samples, the non NABL laboratories for food 

10 
 
testing, the testing of imported food and the samples taken and non possession of 
professional and technical qualifications by the   Customs Officers designated by FSSAI as 
Authorised Officers, status of food consignments released despite ‘Non -Conformatory’ 
Report against them, the purpose behind the rationalisation of the Points of Entry  and the 
non presence of FSSAI at the border areas of India, especially at the Nepal border etc. The 
Committee had accordingly given the Observations/Recommendations in their Twenty -First 
Report on the Subject: ‘Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act,2006’. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations made in the Original Report which either need reiteration 
or merit comments. 
 
 
 Stakeholders 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
5. The Committee noted that although more than 10 years have elapsed following the 
enactment of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and 5 years since FSS regulations 
came into force, there are several loose ends which are still to be fixed. The Committee also 
noted tha t although the process of standardisation is a continuous one and there are 
numerous challenges being faced by the regulatory and enforcement divisions of FSSAI, 
however, it is also a fact that action plans with a crystal clear Standard Operating Procedure  
(SOPs) are lacking at many places to identify areas on which standards are to be 
formulated/reviewed, if necessary, within specific timelines. The Committee felt that 
involvement of Food Business Operators (FBOs) as a first step towards identification of food 
products is necessary, but at the same time, it may be fraught with the risk of orientation 
towards safeguarding of their own business interest. Therefore, the Committee 
recommended that for bringing about greater transparency in the task of revision of 
standards for selection of food products, FSSAI should not limit itself to consulting only with 
FBOs, rather a wider consultative group with the involvement of public from across various 
spectrums of life, preferably elected representatives of the peopl e from the local bodies 
(Panchayat level) to the Members of Parliament, consumer groups and eminent private 
individuals. The Committee were of the view that it was necessary to appropriately take into 
consideration the diverse interests of the stakeholders  across a wide spectrum and devise 
effective SOPs enabling stakeholders to prepare their action plans. 

11 
 
6. In the Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare submitted as under: 
“21 Scientific Panels comprising of 11 expert members each have been constituted to 
review the regulatory framework as and when required. The Panels hold necessary 
consultations before suggesting the regulatory framework requiring review.  
Further, FSSAI h as notified Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) prescribing 
timelines for development and notification of regulations. The draft of a 
standard/regulation approved by the Food Authority/Government is notified for 
inviting comments by all stakeholders viz FBO s, Organizations, Individuals etc giving 
sufficient time (60-90 days) for comments.  Where requested, meetings are also held 
with stakeholders for discussion on draft regulations. After appropriately addressing 
all the stakeholder comments by the Scientific Panel, the standards are then finalized 
and notified for implementation as the final standard after following due process.  
After finalisation, minimum 180 days’ time is given before newly notified standards 
are enforced.    
The Food Authority, which is responsible for framing/review of standards, has 
Members representing diverse interest groups such as food industry, consumer 
organisations, farmers’ organisations and retailers’ organisations.   Even in   other 
fora/special groups created for purposes of development/review of standards, various 
interest groups are represented. For example, a Consultative Group was constituted 
in November, 2020 to finalise the threshold values of fat, sugar and salt for all food 
categories and subcategories regarding Front of Pack Labelling. The said Group 
includes representatives from Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the 
Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry (CIFTI) of Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (CIFTI -FICCI), VOICE and CERC (bot h 
consumer organisations) as non-official members.   
FSSAI is creating consumer awareness related to food safety, health and nutrition, 
healthy and safe cooking and eating practices through regular updates shared 
through different social media platforms li ke Facebook, Instagram and Twitter and 
through MyGov platform also. 
As a part of ongoing collaboration with MyGov platform, short videos with celebrity 
endorsements for mass awareness on tips and precautions to stay healthy were 
developed and disseminated.  Videos on food fortification to address micro nutrient 
deficiencies, trans-fat to deal with non-communicable diseases, adulteration tests etc. 
were also disseminated. 
Online competitions to engage various segments of society to create consumer 
awareness were also conducted such as Eat Right Creativity Challenge for school 
children, Eat Right Quiz, Recipe competitions (low salt, healthy recipe, plant rich 
protein etc.)  
 
A number of handbooks/guidelines documents were also launched to facilitate 
stakeholders and create awareness around food safety and healthy and nutritious 
food.   
FSSAI is also working towards countering false videos and news items which create 
scare among consumers through scientifically validated information released through 
press release s, videos on social media platforms like Facebook, twitter, guidance 
notes and myth busters which are uploaded on its websites 

12 
 
FSSAI is enabling consumers to make an informed choice through symbols and 
logos to identify fortified, organic food etc, and thr ough provisions such as menu 
labelling, hygiene rating, etc.” 
 
7. In their Vetting Comments Audit observed as follows: 
  “No further comments.” 
 
8. In response to above said Audit observation, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
have reiterated their Action Taken Note cited above, as furnished in the first instance. 
 
9. Although ten years had passed, following the enactment of the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 and 5 years since FSS regulations came into force, there are 
several loose ends which are still required to be fixed. Therefore the Committee came 
out with the recommendation that for bringing about greater transparency in the task 
of revision of standards for selection of food products, FSSAI should widen its 
consultative group with the involv ement of public from across various spectrums of 
life. However, the Committee note the clichéd final action taken reply of the Ministry 
wherein they have furnished the composition of the Food Authority responsible for 
framing/reviewing of standards. The Co mmittee further note that no efforts seem to 
have been made by the Ministry to grasp the intent of the Committee’s 
recommendation, leave alone the question of pursuing the recommendation in true 
letter and spirit. 
The Committee are surprised to note that their recommendation for inclusion 
of people from varied sectors including common groups, persons of eminence as 
also representatives of people is conspicuous by its absence in the Food Authority 
constituted by FSSAI. The Committee feel that because of the ir diverse experience, 
representatives from these sections would be more instrumental in contributing 
towards framing or review of the food standards for selection of food products. 
 
They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation for involving public from 
across various spectrums of life including the elected representatives and eminent 
private individuals in order to take into consideration diverse interests of the 
stakeholders. 
 NOC and Product Approval 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 

13 
 
10. The Committee noted that the FSSAI issued no objection certificates to FBOs and 
renewed their licenses on the basis of Product Approval Mechanism not under the 
regulations notified by the former but on the advisories issued therein. This unhealthy 
practice continued t ill the intervention and directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, 
which set them aside as unlawful on the ground  that advisories do not empower the FSSAI 
to issue NOC and renew licenses. The Court held that only  regulations issued by FSSAI 
empower the latter to issue NOCs and renew licenses. The Committee were dismayed to 
note that FSSAI  had failed to ensure the cancellation of the licenses issued under the 
product approval system, (which was declared unlawful by the  Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
order product recall. The Committee felt, FSSAI being the nodal agency established for food 
safety, should have acted with agility in the matter. Had there been no audit check, the 
matter of non -withdrawal of NOCs and licenses issued on the basis of product approva l, 
despite being turned down by the court would not have come to the light.  The Committee 
felt that FSSAI should not only be content with framing of regulations, but should also 
conduct the assessment of the impact of the regulations in place and all inter ventional 
measures should be taken to align the regulatory food safety ecosystem in order to serve 
the final objective of food safety for the consumers in the country. As per information 
furnished, officials responsible for acting in violation of Supreme C ourt’s directions have 
been identified and steps taken to ensure that they are brought to task. Yet the 
Committee observed that there have been certain administrative delays in the process as a 
result of which the officials concerned could go scot free des pite the recommendations of 
the fact finding Committee instituted by FSSAI. The Committee, therefore, could not but 
express their displeasure about the way the matter was handled and recommended FSSAI 
to aggressively pursue the matter by way of soliciting advisories from DoPT in this regard, 
so as to enable in tackling all cases of irregularities in proper perspective. 
 
11. In their Action Taken Note, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under: 
 
“It is stated that at the time of framing regulations, all stakeholders are given sufficient 
time (60—90 days)   for comments / suggestions on the proposed draft regulations. 
Where requested, meetings are also held with stakeholders for discussion on draft  
regulations. The draft proposals are reviewed and finalised with appropriate 
modifications as may be necessary in the light of the comments/suggestions 
received. Adequate time is given for enforcement of new regulations. Even after the 
regulations are not ified, where necessary, the regulations are reviewed and 
necessary amendments made, inter -alia, in the light of the experience in its 
implementation. Thus, through constant interaction with stakeholders and feedback 

14 
 
mechanism in place, any issue relating t o impact of regulations is appropriately 
addressed. 
Regarding action against the officials, it is clarified that the fact finding Committee 
had identified officials for procedural lapses in the process of product approval and 
not specifically for acting in violation of directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further, 
in respect of Shri Pradip Chakraborty, then Director on deputation to FSSAI, who was 
repatriated to his parent cadre in West Bengal in January, 2015, matter was taken up 
with the concerned cadre a uthorities viz. West Bengal Fisheries Development 
Corporation in February, 2015, along with the Preliminary Enquiry Report for initiating 
major penalty proceedings against him under the Disciplinary Rules governing the 
official. The West Bengal Fisheries D evelopment Corporation wrote back in August, 
2015 conveying a resolution of its Board stating that as Shri Chakraborty was with 
FSSAI for the relevant period, it was not possible for them to initiate enquiry into the 
matter which may be done by FSSAI itsel f. However, as the Rules did not permit 
FSSAI to take disciplinary action against a person who stood repatriated to his parent 
Department, FSSAI wrote back to West Bengal State Fisheries Development 
Corporation on 28th September, 2015 apprising them about the relevant rules and 
requesting them to take appropriate disciplinary action against Shri Chakraborty. 
There was no delay on the part of FSSAI in taking up the matter with the concerned 
cadre controlling authorities of Shri Chakraborty. FSSAI   is pursui ng the matter   with 
the Corporation. 
Regarding action against Shri Anupam Rastogi, then Assistant Director, FSSAI, 
major penalty proceedings were instituted against him with approval of the 
disciplinary authority. The report of the Inquiry Officer has bee n received and the 
case has been submitted to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for second stage 
advice through Chief Vigilance Officer, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.” 
 
12. In their vetting comments Audit  stated that Ministry may apprise PAC abou t the 
outcome of the disciplinary proceedings. 
 
13. In response to above said Audit observation, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
stated as under: 
“It is stated that at the time of framing regulations, all stakeholders are given sufficient 
time (60—90 days)   for comments / suggestions on the proposed draft regulations. 
Where requested, meetings are also held with stakeholders for discussion on draft 
regulations. The draft proposals are reviewed and finalised with appropriate 
modifications as may be ne cessary in the light of the comments/suggestions 
received. Adequate time is given for enforcement of new regulations. Even after the 
regulations are notified, where necessary, the regulations are reviewed and 
necessary amendments made, inter -alia, in the l ight of the experience in its 
implementation. Thus, through constant interaction with stakeholders and feedback 
mechanism in place, any issue relating to impact of regulations is appropriately 
addressed. 
Regarding action against the officials, it is clarif ied that the fact finding Committee 
had identified officials for procedural lapses in the process of product approval and 
not specifically for acting in violation of directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further, 
in respect of Shri Pradip Chakraborty, then Director on deputation to FSSAI, who was 

15 
 
repatriated to his parent cadre in West Bengal in January, 2015, matter was taken up 
with the concerned cadre authorities viz. West Bengal Fisheries Development 
Corporation in February, 2015, along with the Preliminary Enquiry Report for initiating 
major penalty proceedings against him under the Disciplinary Rules governing the 
official. The West Bengal Fisheries Development Corporation wrote back in August, 
2015 conveying a resolution of its Board stating that as Sh ri Chakraborty was with 
FSSAI for the relevant period, it was not possible for them to initiate enquiry into the 
matter which may be done by FSSAI itself. However, as the Rules did not permit 
FSSAI to take disciplinary action against a person who stood repatriated to his parent 
Department, FSSAI wrote back to West Bengal State Fisheries Dev Corporation on 
28th September, 2015 apprising them about the relevant rules and requesting them 
to take appropriate disciplinary action against Shri Chakraborty. There w as no delay 
on the part of FSSAI in taking up the matter with the concerned cadre controlling 
authorities of Shri Chakraborty. FSSAI is pursuing the matter with the Corporation. 
Regarding action against Shri Anupam Rastogi, then Assistant Director, FSSAI, 
major penalty proceedings were instituted against him with approval of the 
disciplinary authority. The IO was appointed by the Disciplinary authority and the IO 
has submitted the report. Based on the IO’s report and the second stage advice of 
the CVC, the Disciplinary Authority has exonerated Shri Anupam Rastogi of all the 
charges vide order dated 18 -10-2021. FSSAI has been advised to find out the 
officers responsible for providing erroneous information to the Enquiry Committee. 
Appropriate action is being taken accordingly.” 
 
14. Related to the question of setting of the standards for selection of food 
products, is the issue of product approval. The Committee had noticed the issue of 
unlawful advisories by the FSSAI without keeping the Ministry of Health an d Family 
Welfare in loop, way back in the year 2012 -13.These advisories permitted the FSSAI 
to issue product approvals to individual FBOs for products which were not covered 
under existing standards. No Objection Certificates (NOCs) were issued by the 
Product Approval Division of the FSSAI, for a period of one year, pending 
recommendation of the Scientific Panels. Such issuance of provisional approvals 
were not contemplated in the Act, and the decision on whether a food product is safe 
or unsafe (as stipula ted in section 22 of the Act) can only be determined by way of 
scientific opinion, which, only Scientific Panels/ Committee can provide under 
Sections 13 and 14 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, as amended.It is 
precisely for this reason, the Honble Supreme Court of India struck down these NOCs 
as unlawful, as it bypassed Section 93 of the FSS Act (requiring placing the notified 
regulations before Parliament) thus having no force of law.  Having recommended to 
identify and initiate disciplinary pro ceedings against erring officers responsible for 
such violation,  the Committee find the reply of the Ministry to be vague and 
misleading, rather than being committal in nature.  

16 
 
 The Committee were given to understand by the replies submitted by the 
Ministry that the officials responsible for the violation of the Supreme Court’s 
directions have been identified and steps were being taken to ensure that they were 
brought to task. The Committee feel misled  by the updated action taken reply of the 
Ministry wher eby they have been informed that one of the officers involved in the 
irregularities has been exonerated, and the Ministry have advised FSSAI to identify 
the officers responsible for providing erroneous information to the Enquiry 
Committee. The Committee are surprised to note the stance of the Ministry and desire 
that the process of identification of such officers be made by FSSAI in a time -bound 
manner so that persons involved in unlawful activities are brought to book. The 
Committee also desire to be appri sed of the outcome in this regard. The Committee 
are also surprised to note that in another case, the Ministry have expressed 
helplessness in taking action against the officer concerned only because the 
individual, who was on deputation to FSSAI, has been repatriated to his parent 
organization. 
 The Committee also further note that even after a lapse of more than a decade, 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is continuing to pursue the matter with the 
parent organization of the officer in Government o f West Bengal. The Committee are 
anguished to note that while on the one hand, the Ministry have stated that the Rules 
did not permit FSSAI  taking disciplinary action against a person who stood 
repatriated to his parent Department, on the other, it is cla imed that the matter is still 
being pursued. Moreover, the reply of the Ministry leaves the Committee wondering 
whether the recommendation of the Committee to solicit advise from DoPT on issues 
relating to initiating action on the errant officer was at all  adhered to by the Ministry. 
The Committee are of the opinion that when there are innumerable instances of 
action being taken against officers even after their repatriation, or even 
superannuation, such an argument by the Ministry is only indicative of a c asual 
approach. 
 The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
going slow on an established matter of corruption involving violation of Section 93 of 
the FSS Act (requiring placing the notified regulations before Parliamen t) which 
mandated the requirement of formal approval of regulations by Parliament as well as 
violation of directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The Committee recommend 

17 
 
that FSSAI should fix responsibility in these cases of violation and should 
aggressively pursue these disciplinary cases and the outcome of these cases be 
intimated to the Committee at the earliest. The Committee further recommend that 
FSSAI should take all necessary steps to ensure that such irregularities do not recur. 
 
 Safety Mechanism for Imported Food-Entry Points 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
15. The Committee noted from the information furnished by the Government that the 
number of entry points directly being controlled by FSSAI is being increased gradually and 
the presence o f Authorised Officers merely supplements the efforts of FSSAI. The 
Committee were of the view in this regard that for ensuring effective regulatory control of the 
FSSAI, the Government should strive to achieve 100 percent presence of FSSAI officials at 
all entry points of food import. This, the Committee felt, was essential for safeguarding the 
health of the citizens. The Committee also recommended that FSSAI must examine and 
review the quality of training being imparted to all officials handling the import  of food items 
at each import entry point in India. 
16. In their Action Taken Note Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under: 
“FSSAI had earlier notified 417 points of entry for regulating food imports. These 
points of entry have been rationali sed on the basis of volume of food imports and 
now only 150 points of entry have been notified as food import entry points. These 
150 entry points also include some points of entry having low volume of imports 
which are mainly located at land border to fac ilitate food import from neighbouring 
countries. Following operationalisation of new offices at Mundra (Gujarat) and 
Krishnapatnam (AP) in March, 2021, FSSAI has its Authorised Officers at 44 points 
of entry at present. All of these are major points of ent ry. At other points of entry, 
Customs officers have been notified as Authorised Officers.  FSSAI is likely to post its 
AOs at 23 additional major points of entry within 3 months. With these 67 major 
points of entry, FSSAI officials will directly regulate 7 0-80% of food import in the 
country shortly. Further expansion will take place in a gradual manner depending on 
availability of funds. 
FSSAI, in coordination with National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes and 
Narcotics (NACIN) under Central Board of Indi rect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), has 
developed Food Import Clearance Training of Authorised Officers of Customs 
(FICTAC) portal which is an online E -Training portal dedicated to the Customs 
Officials functioning as Authorised Officers. The portal imparts kno wledge regarding 
the food import clearance with updated FSSAI rules and regulations.” 
17. Vetting Comments of Audit  on the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare’s ATN is 
given as under: 
“No further comments.” 
 

18 
 
18. In their ATN with respect to Vetting Comments of Audit, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare stated as under: 
“FSSAI had earlier  notified 417 points of entry  for regulating food imports.  These 
points of entry have been  rationalised on the basis of volume of food imports and 
now only 157 poin ts of entry have been notified as food import entry points. These 
157 entry points also include some points of entry having low volume of imports 
which are mainly located at land border to facilitate food import from neighbouring 
countries. Following   operationalisation of new offices,  FSSAI has its Authorised 
Officers at 54 points of entry at present. All of these are major points of entry and with 
these, FSSAI officials directly regulate 70 -80% of food import in the country.  Further 
expansion will take place in a gradual manner depending  on availability of funds and 
the engagement of more manpower. 
FSSAI, in coordination with National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes and 
Narcotics (NACIN) under Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs  (CBIC), has 
developed Food Import Clearance Training of Authorised Officers of Customs 
(FICTAC) portal which is an online E -Training portal dedicated to the Customs 
Officials functioning as Authorised Officers. The  portal imparts knowledge regarding 
the food import clearance with updated FSSAI rules and regulations.” 
 
19. On the issue of the import of safe food in India, the Committee had observed 
that the Government should strive to achieve 100 percent presence of FSSAI officials 
at all entry points of food import. 
Now, the Committee note from the reply of the Ministry in this regard which 
puts the compliance at 70 -80% and out of a total of 157 points of entry of food 
imports in India, FSSAI deploys its Authorised Officers at only 54 points.  The 
Committee wonder how, in the absence of sufficient authorized officers at entry 
points, FSSAI would be able to discharge its regulatory control in an effective 
manner. The Committee feel that in order to check possible adulteration of food 
items, its check at import entry point s is an imperative need. Considering its 
importance, the Committee recommend that FSSAI should try to deploy more 
manpower at all entry points in order to be able to directly regulate 100% of food 
import in the country.  Action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
  
Safety Mechanism for Imported Food - Technical Background for Authorised Officers 
at entry points 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
20. During the Course of the deposition of the officials concerned, the Committee were 
informed that even a person without appropriate qualifications could be working as FSSAI 
Authorised Office at the entry points. The Committee noted in this regard that in our country, 

19 
 
availability of persons with appropriate professional credentials/qualifications would not 
pose a problem. However, there is a need of integration and collaboration among the 
Universities, Educational Institutions and Industry for development of  skills in this area. The 
Committee were of the view that the linkage between the Industry and Educational 
Institutions needs to be fostered and strengthened. The Committee noted that in the present 
situation, any normal graduate who may not possess approp riate or suitable qualifications 
can become an Authorised Officer and be entrusted with the work of safety of food import in 
India. The Committee were of the view that for ensuring effective handling of matters of food 
safety, the Authorised Officer should  be professionally qualified to effectively discharge the 
duties prescribed. 
 
21. Action Taken Notes as furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
given as under: 
“In FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017, it is mentioned that “The Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India shall notify the officers for the purpose of food import 
clearance to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act, and it may also notify 
officers from other government agencies to maintain the standard operating 
procedure for food import clearance.” 
Currently, no specific technical qualification is prescribed in FSS (Import) 
Regulations, 2017 for Authorised Officers, including Customs officials notified as 
Authorised Officers. They are appointed in their respective services foll owing due 
process of selection. They are regularly updated with FSSAI’s regulatory 
requirements through training programmes organised from time to time. With the 
augmentation of staff in FSSAI, its officials will be posted at more points of entry to 
function as AOs. Already FSSAI has plans to open import offices at few more places. 
However, covering, majority of points of entry with FSSAI officials would take more 
time.” 
22. Vetting Comments of Audit on the aforesaid Action Taken Note are as follows: 
“Specific steps taken on the recommendation of PAC, Ministry may apprise the PAC: 
i. For the linkage between the Industry and Educational Institutions 
ii. For effective handling of matters of food safety, the Authorised officer should be 
professionally qualified..” 
 
23. Final ATN with respect to Vetting Comments is given as under: 
“As per provisions of Chapter —IX of the food safety standards (Import) Regulations 
2017 Food Authority shall notify officers from other Govt. Departments, including 
Customs, to maintain standa rd operating procedure for Food Import Clearance.  
Currently, no specific technical qualification is prescribed in FSS (Import) 
Regulations, 2017 for Authorised Officers, including Customs officials notified as 
Authorised Officers. They are appointed in their respective services following due 
process of selection. 
 

20 
 
FSSAI has been organizing various training programmes for the Custom Officers 
functioning as its Authorised Officers. In association with NACIN Academies at Delhi, 
Chennai, Kolkata & Mumbai and  Regional Centres at Visakhapatnam & Kochi, it has 
successfully conducted 18 training programmes in the last 4 years. Through these 
Training programmes, 438 Customs Officials have been imparted Food Import 
Clearance training. Further, to enable these Custo m Officers carry out necessary 
checks and processes as prescribed under the FSSAI Act and rules & regulations 
made thereunder and also to extend equal opportunities for concurrent training to the 
Custom officers posted as Authorised Officers at distant / i solated locations, an on 
line Training Module “FICTAC” (Food Import Clearance Training for Authorised 
officers from Customs) has been made live on 19th June 2020 under intimation to all 
nodal offices. The said module provides quick link to FSSAI Notificati ons, Orders & 
FAQs and also gives quick access to Whats App number/email address of FSSAI —
Head Office for expeditious resolution of their problems. 
 
FSSAI has also requested CBIC vide D.O. letter dated 8.11.2019 for compulsory 
training of Customs official s at the time of induction and posting as FSSAI’s — 
Authorised Officers for food import clearance . 
 
It is also mentioned that with the augmentation of staff in FSSAI, its officials will be 
posted at more points of entry to function as AOs.   Already  FSSAI has opened 
import offices at more places viz. Mundra, Kandla, Krishnapatnam,  Bengaluru, 
Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam. 
 
Regarding establishing linkage between Industry and Educational Institutions, it is 
submitted that FSSAI has established effective li nkages with Industry and 
educational Institutions through statutorily established networks like NetSCoFaN 
(Network for Scientific Cooperation for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition), a network 
of eight groups of research and academic institutes working in t he area of food and 
nutrition; National Reference Laboratory network etc. Further, FSSAI also involves 
Industry and other Industry related/Scientific Associations to promote regulatory 
awareness among different stakeholders including regulatory officers. F ew such 
initiatives include NetProFaN (Network of Professionals in Food and Nutrition) and  
CHIFSS (CII -HUL Initiative on Food Safety Sciences), a tripartite partnership 
between FSSAI, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and Hindustan Unilever 
Limited (HUL ).” 
24. One of the important recommendation  of the Committee made towards 
ensuring food safety in the country is to ensure that the Food Safety Officer of the 
FSSAI is duly qualified for the job. However, the Committee find it distressing to note 
that the Ministry, instead of initiating action towards ensuring that qualified 
personnel are engaged, have notified that officers of other Government Departments 
to be deployed as Authorised Officers. 
 The Committee feel that the duties of the Food Safety Officer is fundamental for 
ensuring the food safety in India and deploying officers from Government 

21 
 
Departments who do not possess professional or technical expertise cannot be a 
befitting replacement for Food Safety Officer. 
 The Committee, therefore, recomme nd that the Ministry should ensure that the 
officials entrusted with the job of ensuring safety of food in India possess requisite 
technical qualifications for Food Safety in India especially in the context of Food 
(Import) Regulations. Taking note of the final action taken reply of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare that currently no specific technical qualification is 
prescribed in FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017 for Authorised Officers, including 
Customs officials notified as Authorised Officers, t he Committee recommend that 
specific technical and professional qualification be prescribed for Authorised 
Officers in the FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017.  The Committee are of the view that 
there is no dearth of professionally qualified persons in the cou ntry in the area of 
food safety and reiterate their recommendation that there is a need for integration 
and collaboration with industries and educational institutes in this area. 
 
 Safety Mechanism for Imported Food- Audit findings of results of assessment of food 
safety 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
25. The Committee noted that the FSSAI has endeavoured to rationalise the number of 
entry points of import of food items. The Committee were of the view that rationalisation of 
entry points should be combined with effective monitoring of these entry points in the matter 
of safety of food imported food items. The Committee further noted the findings of the Audit 
that in approximately 9000 cases, the Authorised Officers have neither issued No Objection 
Certificates (NOC) nor Non -Conformation Report (NCR) despite assessing the safety of 
food being imported. As pointed out by the Audit, it is the mandate of the FSSAI  to regulate 
the import of food under the Act. The Committee were of the firm view that the Authorised  
Officers should either issue No Objection Certificates (NOC) or Non -Conformation Report 
(NCR), as the case may be, and no food item should be allowed to be imported without the 
safety assessment done by the officials designated by FSSAI. The Committee fel t that not 
issuing either of the two certifications would be grossly improper. The apprehension of 
unsafe food getting imported cannot be entirely ruled out in view of such instances of non -
issue of the prescribed certification going unnoticed. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommended that accountability of officials responsible for such lapses be fixed. In this 
regard, the Committee also noted that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have 

22 
 
ascribed the ‘lapses or irregularities’ to the incomplete integra tion of the Food Import 
Clearance System (FICS) with Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway 
(ICEGATE). The Committee noted in this regard that, at present, the status of a food 
consignment as reflected in ICEGATE is not captured in FICS on real  time basis. They, 
therefore, recommended that the FSSAI and Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
(CBIC) may accelerate the process  of complete integration of both the system of ICEGATE 
and FICS. A definite timeline for such integration needs to be submitted to the Committee. 
 
26. Action Taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is as under: 
“FICS (Food Imports Clearance System) of FSSAI is integrated with Customs 
ICEGATE in such a way that bills of entry identified through Risk Management 
System (RMS) are forwarded to FSSAI for examination purpose and No Objection 
Certificate (NOC)/ Non -Conformance Certificate  (NCC) is electronically transmitted 
from FICS to ICEGATE. However, message exchange regarding Out of Charge of a 
consignment either for domestic release or for re-export is not transmitted to FICS as 
of now. FSSAI is coordinating with Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
(CBIC) to carry out complete system integration of ICEGATE and FICS so that FSSAI 
may have all the data perta ining to consignments finally released/ detained/ re -
exported by Customs. For this purpose, IT system based requirements have been 
shared with Single Window team of CBIC and same is expected to be completed by 
the Customs within a year.” 
 
27. In the Vettin g Comments Audit stated that Ministry’s reply is silent on PAC’s 
recommendations that accountability of officials responsible for lapses of non -issue of the 
prescribed certificate be fixed. 
28. In the Final ATN, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under: 
“FICS (Food Imports Clearance System) of FSSAI is integrated with Customs 
ICEGATE in such a way that bills of entry identified through Risk Management 
System (RMS) are forwarded to FSSAI for examination purpose and No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) / Non -Conformance Certificate (NCC) is electronically transmitted 
from FICS to ICEGATE. However, it may be noted that the process of integration of 
FICS (Food Imports Clearance System) of FSSAI with Single Window System of 
Customs ICEGATE was initiated onl y in 2015 -16 and before that the applications 
were filed manually in the system. This resulted in several duplicate/wrongly 
filed/Incomplete applications being filed in the system which has to be rejected by 
Authorized Officer.   
 
At the time of audit, app rox. 9204 such entries were noted which actually pertains to 
3724 unique bills of entry since same bill of entry was filed multiple times by 
importers/CHAs. Out of these, 783 bills of entry were accepted for further processing 
and decision was communicated, 248 bills of entry were not in scope of FSSAI as per 
their end use, clarification was sought in almost 194 bills of entry & appx. 2499 bills of 
entry were rejected at scrutiny itself by the concerned Authorised Officer as they 
were duplicate/wrongly filed/Incomplete applications. 

23 
 
 
To further strengthen the import control and ascertain the Out -of-Charge status of 
any food consignment, FSSAI is coordinating with Central Board of Indirect Taxes 
and Customs (CBIC) to carry out complete system integration of I CEGATE and FICS 
so that FSSAI may have all the data pertaining to consignments finally released to 
domestic area/detained/re -exported/destructed by Customs. For this purpose, IT 
System based requirements have been shared with Single Window team of CBIC 
and same is expected to be completed by the Customs soon.” 
 
29. The Committee, in their original report noted the findings of Audit that in 
approximately 9000 cases of import of food at the entry points in India, the 
Authorised Officers have neither issued No  Objection Certificate nor issued the No - 
Conformation Report. Taking exception to such irregularities, the Committee 
recommended that accountability of officials responsible for such lapses be fixed, 
and also to accelerate the process of integration of FICS with ICEGATE. 
The Committee are surprised to note that the reply of the Ministry is 
conspicuously silent about action against the erring officials.  Moreover, the Ministry 
have gone to the extent of justifying that no irregularities have taken place.  
Considering the gravity of the situation, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation that action be taken against the erring officials responsible in this 
case be and the same be communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 
On the aspect of complete int egration of the ICEGATE with Food Import 
Clearance System (FICS), the Committee note that although the work is moving in the 
right direction, the Ministry has overlooked the recommendation of the Committee to 
come out with a definite timeline for the work and intimate the same to the 
Committee.  
The Committee therefore again recommend to the Ministry to expedite the work 
of integration of both the electronic Clearance Systems and the outcome of the action 
taken in this regard be communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
Manpower 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
30. The Committee further took note of the gap analysis done by FSSAI in regard to the 
post of Designated Officers (DOs) under FSSAI and State Food Authorities. While the 
Designated Officer is one of  the key posts, the Committee were astonished to note that 
State level Authorities are continuing with the shortage of DOs. The Committee felt 
that FSSAI should regularly undertake persuasive measures with the State Authorities and 

24 
 
emphasise on them the urgency to expedite the recruitment of DOs, whose shortage rang es 
from 5 to 80 percent in 12 States. The Committee felt that continuing with such a shortage 
of staff will definitely tell upon the work of the existing staff and the quality of their 
performance The Committee would, therefore, recommended that the Minist ry, in 
consultation with State Authorities, take necessary steps to overcome the shortage of staff 
especially at the key positions. 
 
31. Action Taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is as under: 
“The requirement of Designated Officers (DOs) as  assessed is 840. Against this, the 
number of DOs in position is on a lower side. However, the number of DOs in 
position which was 619 during 2017 -18 has gone up to 667 as on 31.12.2020. This 
number fluctuates as there were 741 DOs in 2018 -19. These figure s include DOs 
who are on additional charge. 
FSSAI is regularly persuading States/UTs through various channels viz. written 
communications, Video Conferencing, State Visits and Central Advisory Committee 
meetings to appoint requisite number of full time Designated Officers, Food Safety 
Officers and other technical staff for efficient implementation of laid down provisions 
of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Steps taken in this regard by 
States/UTs are being monitored regularly. Due to persi stent efforts by FSSAI, action 
for creation of new posts/filling of posts have been initiated in various States like 
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Delhi, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Goa, Odisha etc.” 
 
32. In the Vetting Co mments Audit stated that PAC may be intimated about the latest 
status of vacancies under FSSAI and State Food Authorities. 
33. In the Final ATN, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under: 
“FSSAI had undertaken an exercise to work out the ideal strength of DOs/ FSOs for 
each State/UT taking into account the population, number of blocks, sub -divisions, 
tehsils etc in States/UTs. The ideal strength of DOs/ FSOs as per FSSAI so worked 
out was shared with States/ UTs. This ideal strength was reviewed  with the States/ 
UTs in the 31st and 32nd Central Advisory Committee (CAC) meetings. After review 
and various consultations with States/ UTs, the ideal strength was finalised in the 
32nd CAC meeting held on 15 Sep 2021. The latest strength of DOs/FSOs of States/ 
UTs vis-a-vis the ideal strength is detailed at Annexure-I. 
 
FSSAI is regularly persuading States/UTs through various channels viz. written 
communications, Video Conferencing, State Visits and Central Advisory Committee 
meetings to appoint requisit e number of full time Designated Officers, Food Safety 
Officers and other technical staff for efficient implementation of laid down provisions 
of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Steps taken in this regard by 
States/UTs are being monitored r egularly. Due to persistent efforts by FSSAI, action 
for creation of new posts/filling of posts have been initiated in various States like 
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Delhi, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Goa, Odisha etc.” 
 

25 
 
34. The Committee in their original report had pointed out aspect of acute shortage 
of Designated Officers (DOs) in State Food Authorities which ranges from 5 to 80 
percent in 12 States and recommended that the Ministry in consultation with State 
Authorities take necessary steps to overcome the shortage of staff especially at the 
key level. 
The Committee find that the shortage of staff both at Designated Officer (DO) 
and Food Safety Officer (FSO) levels still remains to be acute in various states. The 
Committee further note that as against 855 numbers of ideal strength of Designated 
Officers (DOs), a total of 656 posts of Designated Officer (DOs) are filled at present, 
and against 4029 numbers of ideal strength of Food Safety Officers (FSOs), a total of 
2537 posts of Food Safety Officers (FSOs) are presently in position. The Committee 
observe that unfilled vacancies at the level of key officials responsible for food safety 
in the country reflects poorly on the efficiency of the Ministry and various State 
Governments to guarantee availability of safe food for the common man. They are, 
therefore, constrained to reiterate their recommendation for taking necessary steps 
to overcome the shortage of staff especially at key positions in a time bound manner 
under intimation to the Committee.  
Internal Resources 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
35. The Committee noted that an unspent amount collected mainly in the form of license 
fee to the tune of ₹ 300 crore is lying idle with FSSAI for want of procedural approval/nod 
from Ministry of Finance for utilizing the same. The Committee recommended the 
Government to intervene and expedite the examination of setting up of a separate public 
account with FSSAI to enable the latter to gainfully utilize these internally generated funds 
for discharging its mandated duties. 
 
36. Action Taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is as under: 
“The Authority has formulated the Financial Regulations and the same are pending 
consideration of the Government. Once these are approved, the draft regulations 
would be notified for soliciting comments from stakeholders. Provision for utilisation 
of internally generated funds has been included in the draft Financial Regulations.” 
 
37. In the vetting comments, Audit stated as under: 
“The action i s yet to be completed. Ministry may apprise the PAC about the timeline 
of notification of Financial Regulations of FSSAI and setting up of a separate public 
account with FSSAI.” 

26 
 
 
38. In the Final ATN, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under: 
“The Authority has formulated the Financial Regulations and the same are under 
examination of the Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Law & Justice and Ministry 
of Finance. Once these are approved, the draft regulations would be notified for 
soliciting comments from stakeholders. Provision for utilisation of internally generated 
funds has been included in the draft Financial Regulations.” 
 
39. After noticing the unspent amount of approximately ₹ 300 crore collected 
mainly in the form of license fee ly ing idle with FSSAI, the Committee had 
recommended the Government to intervene and expedite the examination for setting 
up a separate public account with FSSAI to enable them to gainfully utilize these 
internally generated funds for discharging the mandated duties. 
However, the Committee note that even after lapse of more than a year since 
making their recommendation, the process of obtaining approval from the Ministry of 
Finance still remains at the same place where it was a year back. Whereas on one 
hand the Ministry are not able to efficiently discharge their mandated tasks due to 
shortage of funds, on the other hand, the Committee note that there has been little 
effort on part of the Ministry to claim the amount of  ₹300 crores lying unspent and 
idle. The refore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation to expedite the 
process of approval from the Ministry of Finance for setting up of a separate public 
account with FSSAI. The Committee would specifically desire that this matter be 
aggressively pursued b y the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with the Ministry 
of Finance, because an unspent and idle fund lying with the Ministry reflects poorly 
on the organization. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
     7   December, 2022               Chairperson, 
    16    Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)                            Public Accounts Committee 
  

27 
 
Annexure-I 
   
Strength of DOs and FSOs in States/UTs   
Sl. No. 
State/UT 
DO FSO   
Ideal 
Full 
Time 
Part 
Time 
Ideal 
Full 
Time Part Time   
No. No. No. No.   
1 A&N Islands 3 3 0 14 13 0   
2 Andhra Pradesh 17 9 0 132 43 2   
3 Arunachal Pradesh 25 1 24 30 3 0   
4 Assam 33 0 4 77 32 0   
5 Bihar 42 0 14 115 14 0   
6 Chandigarh 1 1 0 5 5 0   
7 Chhattisgarh 30 0 28 112 60 0   
8 Dadra NH &DD 3 3 0 4 3 0   
9 Delhi 12 8 0 32 15 0   
10 Goa 2 2 0 39 20 0   
11 Gujarat 38 25 13 279 188 0   
12 Haryana 22 6 0 45 15 0   
13 Himachal Pradesh 15 12 0 40 16 0   
14 J&K 23 21 0 106 71 0   
15 Jharkhand 45 45 0 77 19 0   
16 Karnataka 36 24 12 244 38 192   
17 Kerala 17 14 0 160 127 0   
18 Ladakh 3 1 0 15 1 2   
19 Lakshadweep 1 0 1 12 0 9   
20 Madhya Pradesh 55 0 51 380 159 0   
21 Maharashtra 90 44 0 350 211 0   
22 Manipur 18 11 0 34 22 0   
23 Meghalaya 11 3 8 23 5 6   
24 Mizoram 2 0 3 9 2 7   
25 Nagaland 12 3 0 16 7 0   
26 Odisha 37 3 34 105 27 0   
27 Puducherry 2 1 0 8 1 0   
28 Punjab 22 11 11 60 50 0   
29 Rajasthan 34 0 34 98 0 49   
30 Sikkim 3 3 0 4 4 0   

28 
 
31 Tamil Nadu 39 32 0 391 271 0   
32 Telangana 35 9 0 81 37 0   
33 Tripura 10 0 10 23 3 0   
34 Uttar Pradesh 75 72 0 662 609 0   
35 Uttarakhand 14 14 0 57 20 0   
36 West Bengal 28 28 0 190 159 0   
  Total 855 409 247 4029 2270 267   
Note: DO – Designated Officer, FSO – Food Safety Officer. Against total 855 Nos 
of Ideal Strength of DOs, 656 post of DOs are filled at present. Similarly, against 
total 4029 Nos of Ideal Strength of FSOs, 2537 posts of FSOs are filled at 
present. 
  
  
  
 

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1. Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that providing safe food is the primary responsibility of 
the States. In order to ensure a robust regulatory and administrative 
mechanism that secures safety of food consumed in the country, the Union 
Government enacted a comprehensive Act viz. Food Safety and Standards Act, 
2006 subsuming the prevalent Prevention of Adulteration Food Act, 1954 and 
the applicable orders/advisories/instructions issued by different Central 
Ministries/Departments. The aims and objectives of this Act were to safeguard 
people of the country against adulterated food as well as educating them 
towards safe and nutritious food. They further note that even after seven 
decades since independence , adequate protection   has not been ensured to 
the citizens against adulterated and unsafe food, nor the consumers 
appropriately educated of the importance of wholesome and nutritious food .  
The Committee are of the opinion that food being sine qua non to human life, 
the basic human requirement, it  is imperative that unadulterated and safe 
food is accessible to all sections of society including the poorest. They are of 
the considered view that safe food will not only reduce excessive burden over 
health but will also have an impact on public hygiene.  Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend a robust regulatory and administrative 
mechanism for safe food in the country. 
[Para 1] 
  
Action Taken 
FSSAI is in agreement with the recommendations and observations of the 
Committee on the need for a robust re gulatory and administrative mechanism 
for safe food in the country for which it has been consistently working towards 
strengthening regulatory and administrative mechanism.  
FSSAI has a robust mechanism for development of standards of food 
products.  There are presently 21 Scientific Panels, a few Working Groups/ 
Expert Committees, the Scientific Committee to oversee the science -based 
process of standard setting.  Regulations have been notified covering all areas 
related to food standards.   
FSSAI is in pro cess of opening new offices and import offices at Points of 
Entry across the country for strengthening food safety mechanism.  FSSAI has 
already operationalized new import offices at Mundra (Gujarat) and 
Krishnapatnam (Andhra Pradesh).   There are at presen t 44 Points of Entry at 
8 locations under direct control of FSSAI officials.    
FSSAI is setting up two more National Food Testing laboratories at Chennai 
and Mumbai under PPP mode for which the Partners have been identified and 
awarded the contracts.  

30 
 
FSSAI has strengthened State Food Testing infrastructure under a Central 
Sector Scheme and an amount of Rs. 314.48 crores has been released to 39 
SFTLS in 29 States/UTs towards upgradation with High End Equipments 
(HEEs) viz. GC-MSMS, LC-MSMS and ICP-MS and for setting up of Microbiology 
Laboratory (ML) . Further, 90 Mobile Food Testing Labs called Food Safety on 
Wheels have been provided to 32 States for testing, training and awareness 
activities to cover also the far flung and remote areas.   
FSSAI has condu cted Oil survey and Milk Product survey in 2020 to identify 
hotspots of adulterated products and to take remedial action. Surveillance 
activities are being enhanced further.  
FSSAI has empanelled Experts, identified the trainers, recognised the training 
institutes and developed the training manual to systemise the whole training 
ecosystem (induction/refresher courses) for the regulatory staff. So far, over    
1500 State regulatory personnel (Food Safety Officers/Designated 
Officers/Adjudicating Officers) hav e undergone the regulatory training. FSSAI 
also conducts general and specialised training for lab personnel of State labs. 
FSSAI is also conducting training of food handlers under FoSTaC programme 
and more than 4 lakh food handlers have been trained on ens uring proper 
hygiene and sanitation in food service establishments.   
 Infrastructure and regulatory gaps exist in the country’s food safety 
ecosystem which are non -uniform across States and UTs. In order to address 
the gaps in the food safety eco -system o f States/UTs and to promote the 
culture of safe and wholesome food through pooling of technical knowledge 
and best practices, as a shared responsibility, FSSAI has signed 
Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) for strengthening of Food Safety 
Eco-system in th e country by providing technical and financial support to 
States/UTs from the year 2020-21 for: 
  
(i)      strengthening of enforcement and compliance system; 
(ii)      strengthening of food testing system;  
(iii)     implementation of various initiatives under the Eat Right India 
movement in              a focused manner; and  
(iv)     any other matter consequential to ensuring food safety.  
  
Further, FSSAI has developed State Food Safety Index to measure th e 
performance of States/UTs on various parameters of Food Safety.   The Index 
is a dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model that provides 
an objective framework for evaluating food safety across all States/UTs. The 
index is based on performan ce of a State/ UT on five significant parameters, 
namely; Human Resource and Institutional Data; Compliance; Food Testing 
Infrastructure & Surveillance; Training & Capacity Building; and Consumer 
Empowerment. The performance of the States/UTs are monitored  on a 
quarterly basis.   
FSSAI is  educating consumers to inculcate among them the habit of   safe 
and  healthy food through a number of measures which include   nation-wide 
campaign featuring celebrities like Shri Raj Kummar Rao, Shri Virat Kohli and 
others; developing and uploadin g  guidance notes for consumers; regularly 

31 
 
 updating  consumers on food safety , health and nutrition   through 
messaging on different social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, 
Twitter, YouTube and MyGov platform as well as Doordarshan etc; conductin g 
outreach programmes  like eat right challenge, eat right creativity challenge 
etc.   
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may apprise the PAC, if any measure is contemplated to regulate the 
misleading advertisements on food modules on various platforms. Se condly, 
the performance of the States /UTs in State Food Safety Index for the last 
quarter may be provided to PAC.   
Final ATN 
FSSAI is in agreement with the   recommendations and observations of the 
Committee on the  need for a robust regulatory and administrative mechanism 
for safe food in the   country for which it   has been consistently   working 
towards strengthening  regulatory and administrative mechanism.  
FSSAI has a robust mechanism for development of standards of food 
products.  There are presently 21 Scientific Panels,   a few Working Groups/ 
Expert Committees ,   the Scientific Committee to oversee the science based 
process of standard setting.  Regulations have been notified covering all areas 
related to food standards.   
 FSSAI has operationalized new import offices at Krishnapatnam, Mundra, 
Kandla, Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam & Bengaluru   for  strengthening food 
safety mechanism.    There are at present 54 Points of Entry at 12 locations 
under direct control of FSSAI officials. 
FSSAI  has established  one more National  Food Testing laboratory at JNPT , 
Mumbai  under PPP mode and another National Food Testing Lab is being 
established at CPT, Chennai under PPP mode and is likely to be   operational 
soon.   
FSSAI has strengthened State Food Testing infra structure under a Central 
Sector Scheme and an amount of Rs. 313.98 crores has been released   to 39 
SFTLS in 29 States/UTs towards upgradation with High End Equipments 
(HEEs) viz. GC -MSMS, LC -MSMS and ICP -MS  and  for setting up of 
Microbiology Laboratory (ML)  . Further,  170 Mobile Food Testing labs (called 
Food Safety on Wheels)  have been sanctioned of which 135 FSWs have been 
provided to 33 States for testing , training and awareness activities to cover 
also the far flung and remote areas.   
FSSAI has conducted Oil survey and Milk Product survey in 2020 to identify 
hotspots  of  adulterated products and to take remedial action. A trans fat 
survey was also conducted in 2021 . Surveillance activities are being enhanced 
further.  
    FSSAI has empanelled s ubject experts/professionals in the field of food 
science/ law/nutrition/microbiology/food technology etc. as empanelled 
trainers and recognized the training institutes.   FSSAI has developed the 
training manual to systemize the whole training ecosystem for  regulatory 

32 
 
staff. So far, 1674 State regulatory personnel (Food Safety Officer/ Designated 
Officers) have undergone various training programs 
(Induction/Refresher/Need Based training, etc.).   In addition, around 100 
Adjudicating Officers of different Stat es/UTs have undergone Orientation 
training programs. FSSAI has also conducted general and specialized training 
for laboratory personnel of State labs. FSSAI is also conducting training of 
food handlers (FBOs) under FoSTaC programs and more than 7.38 lakh f ood 
handlers have so far been trained on ensuring Good Manufacturing Practices 
(GMP), proper hygiene and sanitation in food service establishments. These 
training programs are being organized regularly. 
 Infrastructure and regulatory gaps exist in the coun try’s food safety 
ecosystem which are non -uniform across States and UTs. In order to address 
the gaps in the food safety eco -system of States/UTs and to promote the 
culture of safe and wholesome food through pooling of technical knowledge 
and best practice s, as a shared responsibility, FSSAI has signed 
Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) for strengthening of Food Safety 
Eco-system in the country by providing technical and financial support to 
States/UTs from the year 2020-21 for: 
  
(i)      strengthening of enforcement and compliance system; 
(ii)      strengthening of food testing system;  
(iii)     implementation of various initiatives under the Eat Right India 
movement in              a focused manner; and  
(iv)     any other matter consequential to ensuring food safety.  
  
For the year 2020 -21, funds to the extent of Rs. 64.66 crores were provided 
to 24 States/UTs. For the year 2021 -22, funds to the extent of Rs. 57.67   
crore have been provided to 26 States/UTs against approved work plans.  
Further, FSSAI has developed State  Food Safety Index to measure the 
performance of States/UTs on various parameters of Food Safety.   The Index 
is a dynamic quantitative and qualitative benchmarking model that provides 
an objective framework for evaluating food safety across all States/UTs.  The 
index is based on performance of a State/ UT on five significant parameters, 
namely; Human Resource and Institutional Data; Compliance; Food Testing 
Infrastructure & Surveillance; Training & Capacity Building; and Consumer 
Empowerment. The performance  of the States/UTs   are  monitored on a 
quarterly basis. The report of the 03 rd State Food Safety Index for the year 
2020-21   is available at 
https://www.fssai.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Report_SFSI_20_09_2021.pd
f. It is intimated that FSSAI releases State Food Safety Index on a yearly basis 
and till now three indexes 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 has been released. 
The 03rd State Food Safety Index 2020 -21 under 03 categories (Large States. 
Small States, UTs) was released by the Hon’ble Minister of Hea lth and Family 
Welfare on 20th Sep 2021.   The assessment and evaluation of each category 
was done by separate teams comprising of outside experts for food testing 
and food & nutrition professionals in addition to FSSAI officials.   The teams 

33 
 
examined the de tails provided by States/ UTs and also interacted with 
States/UTs through web meetings. 
FSSAI is   educating consumers to inculcate among them the habit of   safe 
and  healthy food through a number of measures which include   nation-wide 
campaign featuring ce lebrities like Shri Raj Kummar Rao, Shri Virat Kohli and 
others ; developing and uploading   guidance notes for consumers; regularly 
 updating  consumers on food safety , health and nutrition   through 
messaging on different social media platforms like Faceb ook, Instagram, 
Twitter, YouTube and MyGov platform as well as Doordarshan etc; conducting 
outreach programmes  like eat right challenge  , eat right creativity challenge 
etc.   
In order to address the issues of misleading advertisements/claims related to 
Food and Beverages, FSSAI has notified Food Safety and Standards 
(Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018. Further, FSSAI had signed an 
agreement with Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI), a self -
regulatory voluntary organization of the advertis ing content on 1st July 2021 
for exclusive tracking, tracing and evaluation of all Food and Beverages 
advertisements appearing across various media which could be potentially 
violating provisions of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder and 
for submission of its recommendation to FSSAI for further investigation and 
appropriate action. 
  
2. Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee are appreciative of the fact that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the FSSAI have identified 32 areas out of w hich 
regulations on 28 areas already have since been notified. However, they 
observe that it has taken nearly a decade to reach this level. The Committee 
note that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India , being the nodal 
Authority established in 2008 , is accountable primarily for regulating the 
availability of safe, hygienic and healthy food to all the citizens. The 
Committee note that FSSAI being the national level apex agency for 
development of robust food standards and codes of practice for sa fe food, is 
accountable to create a positive regulatory environment, establish a credible 
and robust national food testing environment and infrastructure to address the 
problem of adulteration and unsafe food in the country. The delay in framing 
the regula tions and their proper enforcement and administration may cost 
heavily not only on the precious lives of people but also on the national health 
Exchequer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI must notify the 
regulations on the remaining areas lik e organic food, financial regulations etc. 
and keep the regulatory framework agile, progressive and updated. They also 
recommend that a mechanism may be evolved for frequent and regular 
reviews of the regulatory framework and regulations notified to keep p ace 

34 
 
with the changing food processing technology and emerging new trends in 
consumer food taste.    
  
[Para 2] 
 
Action Taken 
 
This is to apprise that the   Food Safety and Standards (Organic Food) 
Regulations, 2017 have been notified on 29 th December, 2017. The    Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (Financial) Regulations have  been 
formulated and the same   are under process of notification for inviting 
stakeholders’ comments. 
Further, developing/amending standards or regulations is a continuous 
process taking into account the latest developments in food science, food 
consumption patterns, new ingredients and additives, advancements in 
processing technology and food analytical methods, and other best practices. 
Keeping in view of the changing trend in technology and emerging food safety 
risk based on secondary data, revision or amendment to a standard is taken 
up and thus development of standards is a continuous process.  
The details of amendments carried out so far in the principal re gulations is 
given at Annexure –I which would show that regulations on standards are 
constantly evolving.  
           A robust system for setting standards and prioritization has been put 
in place. 21 Scientific Panels comprising of 11 expert members each h ave 
been constituted to review the regulatory framework as and when required. 
           FSSAI is also addressing other emerging issues and few of them are 
enumerated below:  
 Expert Committee constituted to provide no objection for conducting 
human intervention studies on novel or non-specified food 
ingredients/products. 
 Working Group on cell-based meat (cultured meat) 
 Task Force for Vegan Foods. 
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
  
(i) Ministry may apprise the PAC, whether FSSAI has notified the regulations 
on the remaining areas like financial regulations etc. 
  
  
(ii) PAC’s Report was tabled in the Parliament on 02.02.2021, in which PAC 
recommended that a mechanism may be evolved for frequent and regular 
reviews of the regulatory framework and r egulations notified. From Annexure-
1, it is not clear as to when the last amendment in the principal 
rules/regulations took place. Hence, it is not clear if Ministry has taken any 
action on PAC’s recommendation since the tabling of PAC Report.  

35 
 
Final ATN: 
   
 This is to apprise that the Food Safety and Standards (Organic Food) 
Regulations, 2017 have been notified on 29 th December, 2017 and Food 
Safety and Standards (Genetically Modified or Genetically Engineered Foods) 
Regulations, 2021 have been draft noti fied for inviting stakeholders’ 
comments. The    Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Financial) 
Regulations have been formulated and the same are under process of draft 
notification for inviting stakeholders’ comments. 
The regulations are reviewed  and necessary amendments made, inter -alia, in 
the light of the experience in its implementation for which there is a 
mechanism for constant interaction with stakeholders and getting feedback. 
Further, developing/amending standards or regulations is a cont inuous 
process taking into account the latest developments in food science, food 
consumption patterns, new ingredients and additives, advancements in 
processing technology and food analytical methods, and other best practices.   
The details of amendments c arried out so far in the principal regulations is 
given at Annexure–I which would show that regulations on standards are 
constantly evolving. During 2021, 16 Amendment Regulations have been 
notified. Last amendment is notified on 27.12.2021. 
           A robust system for setting standards and prioritization has been put 
in place. 21 Scientific Panels comprising of 11 expert members each have 
been constituted to review the regulatory framework as and when required. 
           FSSAI is also addressing other emerging issues and few of them are 
enumerated below:  
 Expert Committee constituted to provide no objection for conducting 
human intervention studies on novel or non-specified food 
ingredients/products. 
 Working Group on cell-based meat (cultured meat) 
 Task Force for Vegan Foods. 
  
3    Observations/Recommendations 
 
The Committee note that there was a considerable delay of almost two years 
following the passing of the Act in notifying the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India in the year 2008. Moreover, the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority started notifying their regulations as per mandate, only from the 
year 2011 onwards and the process is still continuing . These notifications 
have brought the entire law into effect, making it mandatory for every food 
business operator/petty food vendor to register or procu re a license 
depending on the annual turnover.  
The Committee further note that sub -section 16(2)(g) of the FSSA Act 
stipulates that it shall be the duty of the FSSAI to conduct survey for 
enforcement and administration   of the Act. The Committee express c oncern 

36 
 
over the fact that FSSAI are still not successful in identifying the relevant and 
new emerging areas of food and their processing mechanism. 
The Committee note that there are 67.5 lakh FBOs which are registered with 
the Authority. The Committee feel  that identification of new areas and 
notification of regulations pertaining thereto and registering new food vendors 
and licenses to identified food business operators is an ongoing process. 
There is a possibility that some new FBOs may open and old ones close their 
business. Therefore, there is no doubt that FSSAI needs to double its efforts 
to make a comprehensive and exhaustive database of FBOs in the country by 
digitizing the latter invariably. The Committee note that the FBOs are required 
to apply for  renewal of their food licenses before the license expiry. In this 
regard, Committee strongly recommend that the Food Business Operators 
should be taken into confidence to apply for fresh issue as well as renewal of 
licenses well before the expiry of the l icense and the computerised system for 
issue and conversion of licenses be updated, if the need be, to obviate the 
necessity of any external intervention. The Committee feel that this will not 
only avoid delay but prevent corrupt practices also. The Commit tee are of the 
firm view that this will be possible only with the sustained and continued 
efforts from FSSAI.   
[Para 3] 
 
Action Taken 
The Food Authority has reviewed the need and feasibility of conducting survey 
for identification of FBOs. Since, all food  businesses are required to be either 
registered or licensed under the FSS Act, 2006, therefore FSSAI has advised 
States/UTs to carry out special drives for registration and licensing of Food 
Business Operators at regular intervals so that no Food Business  Operator 
operates food business without a valid registration/license. The State 
Authorities have been requested to take all possible steps to bring all FBOs 
under the ambit of FSSAI through awareness camps, License/Registration 
special drives, etc.  Further, sub-clause 2.1.3(4)(iii)(f) of FSS Rules states that 
it shall be the duty of FSO to maintain a database of all food businesses within 
the area assigned to him. Accordingly, FSOs are required to maintain data of 
FBOs in their respective areas.  
Moreover, FSSAI has signed Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with 
States/UTs to improve the food safety ecosystem in the country by providing 
financial and technical assistance highlighting the critical areas. Under the 
MoU framework, funds amounting to Rs. 6361 .72 lakh for approved work 
plans have been released to 23 States/UTs till date.   
  
Further, FSSAI has developed standardized Quarterly Report formats for 
quarterly review of performance of States/UTs. It is aimed to gather the 
information from States/UTs and discuss their performance on various 
benchmarks like availability of Human Resource, Compliance, Inspection and 
Sampling, status of license/registration, Handling of consumer grievance, 
Testing Infrastructure, progress on various FSSAI Initiatives etc.   Performance 
of States/UTs has been monitored periodically through Central Advisory 

37 
 
Committee Meetings, Video Conferencing and States’ visits.  Progress in 
issuance of licenses/registrations is also regularly monitored in these 
meetings. 
The database of F BOs is now fully computerised through an online platform 
called FoSCoS. Alerts are generated to FBOs well before expiry of license. In 
order to promote ease of doing business, perpetual licenses have now been 
proposed.  Auto generation of    registration ce rtificates and licenses is also 
being introduced, which will reduce scope of corrupt practices.    
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
 
Final ATN 
The Food Authority has reviewed the need and feasibility of conducting survey 
for identification of FBOs. Since, all food businesses are required to be either 
registered or licensed under the FSS Act, 2006, therefore FSSAI has advised 
States/UTs to carry o ut special drives for registration and licensing of Food 
Business Operators at regular intervals so that no Food Business Operator 
operates food business without a valid registration/license. The State 
Authorities have been requested to take all possible s teps to bring all FBOs 
under the ambit of FSSAI through awareness camps, License/Registration 
special drives, etc.  Further, sub-clause 2.1.3(4)(iii)(f) of FSS Rules states that 
it shall be the duty of FSO to maintain a database of all food businesses within 
the area assigned to him. Accordingly, FSOs are required to maintain data of 
FBOs in their respective areas.  
Moreover, FSSAI has signed Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with 
States/UTs to improve the food safety ecosystem in the country by providing  
financial and technical assistance highlighting the critical areas. Under the 
MoU framework, funds amounting to Rs.   64.66 crores were released to 24 
States/UTs during 2020 -21 and for the year 2021 -22, funds to the extent of 
Rs. 57.67 crore have been released to 26 States/UTs so far as first tranche.   
  
Further, FSSAI has developed standardized Quarterly Report formats for 
quarterly review of performance of States/UTs. It is aimed to gather the 
information from States/UTs and discuss their performance on various 
benchmarks like availability of Human Resource, Compliance, Inspection and 
Sampling, status of license/registration, Handling of consumer grievance, 
Testing Infrastructure, progress on various FSSAI Initiatives etc.   Performance 
of States/UTs has b een monitored periodically through Central Advisory 
Committee Meetings, Video Conferencing and States’ visits.   Progress in 
issuance of licenses/registrations is also   regularly monitored in these   
meetings. 
The database of FBOs is now fully computerised t hrough an online platform 
called FoSCoS. Alerts are generated to FBOs well before expiry of license. In 
order to promote ease of doing business, perpetual licenses have now been 
proposed.  Auto generation of registration certificates and licenses is also 
being introduced, which will reduce scope of corrupt practices.    

38 
 
 
  
4.  Observations/recommendations 
The Committee note that the apex food regulator i.e. Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India is grappled with the new emerging area of online 
food de livery platforms. They feel that FSSAI cannot remain content with 
merely issuing regulations,   directives and advisories but shall have to be 
proactive to share the new responsibility of food safety in e -commerce and 
online platforms for food items and eat ables The Committee are of the view 
that in addition to taking the regular recourse of   consumer laws put in place 
to safeguard consumer protection, the FSSAI will have to present an 
additional alternative e -platform for expediting action in cases of compl aints 
from consumers with regard to quality and safety of food available on line 
platforms. The Committee further note that in this fast -moving world, there is 
an imperative need to ensure food safety and quality standard of food 
available through online platforms. They are of the considered view that FSSAI 
should evolve a  scientific and digital mechanism for expeditious resolution of 
consumer complaints and grievances, touching all aspects of food safety, 
packaging for the healthy growth and development o f e -commerce food 
industry in the country The Committee recommend FSSAI to put in place an 
online  mechanism, in consultation with e -food retailers and consumer groups 
and other stakeholders, for speedy resolution and effective intervention in 
matters of f ood safety thereby fostering a sustainable e -food ecosystem that 
is predominantly organised. The Committee also desire that the effort of 
FSSAI should be to find a right balance between self -regulation, voluntary 
checks and regulatory supervision. 
[Para 4] 
 
Action Taken 
FSSAI has a robust complaint handling system that provides multiple options 
to the consumers to raise their food concerns through toll -free 24x7 helpline 
(1800112100), WhatsApp, Mobile App, Twitter, Facebook, SMS, email, 
CPGRAM, Instagram (N ational Consumer Helpline). Independent of the 
channels through which the concerns are raised, the support at FSSAI back -
end acts as facilitators to qualitatively assess before logging in the concern 
into the web -based system processing centre. This helps to filter non -serious 
and frivolous concerns from reaching the concerned authorities and also 
educating the consumers on the mandate of FSSAI. Further, in addition to 
above channels, in order to facilitate quick redressal of food concerns, FSSAI 
has develo ped an online food concern redressal system i.e. ‘Food Safety 
Connect’ that is part of the online Food Safety Compliance System (FoSCoS). 
This online platform helps consumers to register their complaints and 
feedbacks about food safety issues related to ad ulterated food, unsafe food, 
substandard food, labelling defects in food and misleading claims & 
advertisements related to various food products including e -commerce 
issues. On successful registration of a food concern, consumer receives a 
unique concern n o. via SMS on the mobile number provided at the time of 

39 
 
registering the concern. This reference no. can be used at a later time to track 
his/her concern in the online system. The FSSAI team, the State DOs/FSOs 
and the FBOs – all three stakeholders have onl ine access to the grievances 
raised by consumers. 
  
Besides, 30 States/UTs also have their helpline for food related issues. 
Remaining States like Bihar, Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Rajasthan 
and Sikkim have been advised to set up a dedicated helpline  in their State at 
the earliest. 
  
FSSAI is proactively monitoring all the consumer grievance and has asked 
States/UTs to resolve all consumer concerns/grievances raised expeditiously 
as per the provisions contained under FSS Act, 2006, Rules and Regulatio ns 
made thereunder. 
  
  
As recommended by the Committee, FSSAI is already working towards finding 
a right balance between self -regulation, voluntary checks and regulatory 
supervision. Through its FoSTaC platform, FSSAI is encouraging the FBOs to 
undergo basic training on general hygiene and sanitary practices to be 
followed.  Also, a scheme of hygiene rating of food establishments has been 
introduced thereby promoting the culture of self -compliance and regulation.   
Funds are also provided to the States/UTs for arranging such train ings and 
hygiene rating audits. States/UTs have been advised to reduce inspections of 
such compliant FBOs and focus mainly on the FBOs in the high -risk category 
to reduce regulatory supervision and encourage self-regulatory compliance.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may apprise the PAC whether the remaining States like Bihar, 
Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Rajasthan and Sikkim have set up a 
dedicated helpline  for food related issues.  
 
Final ATN- 
FSSAI has a robust complaint handling system that pr ovides multiple options 
to the consumers to raise their food concerns through toll -free 24x7 helpline 
(1800112100), WhatsApp, Mobile App, Twitter, Facebook, SMS, email, 
CPGRAM, Instagram (National Consumer Helpline). Independent of the 
channels through whi ch the concerns are raised, the support at FSSAI back -
end acts as facilitators to qualitatively assess before logging in the concern 
into the web-based system processing centre. This helps to filter non -serious 
and frivolous concerns from reaching the conc erned authorities and also 
educating the consumers on the mandate of FSSAI. Further, in addition to 
above channels, in order to facilitate quick redressal of food concerns, FSSAI 
has developed an online food concern redressal system i.e. ‘Food Safety 
Connect’ that is part of the online Food Safety Compliance System (FoSCoS). 
This online platform helps consumers to register their complaints and 

40 
 
feedbacks about food safety issues related to adulterated food, unsafe food, 
substandard food, labelling defects in  food and misleading claims & 
advertisements related to various food products including e -commerce 
issues. On successful registration of a food concern, consumer receives a 
unique concern no. via SMS on the mobile number provided at the time of 
registering the concern. This reference no. can be used at a later time to 
track his/her concern in the online system. The FSSAI team, the State 
DOs/FSOs and the FBOs – all three stakeholders have online access to the 
grievances raised by consumers. 
  
Besides, 30 Sta tes/UTs also have their helpline for food related issues. 
Remaining States like Bihar, Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Rajasthan 
and Sikkim were advised to set up a dedicated helpline in their State at the 
earliest. Of these six states, Rajasthan has sinc e established helpline for food 
related issues. Remaining 5 States have been further advised    to set up a 
dedicated helpline in their State at the earliest. 
  
  
FSSAI is proactively monitoring all the consumer grievance and has asked 
States/UTs to resolve  all consumer concerns/grievances raised expeditiously 
as per the provisions contained under FSS Act, 2006, Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. 
  
 As recommended by the Committee, FSSAI is already working towards finding 
a right balance between self -regulation, voluntary checks and regulatory 
supervision. Through its FoSTaC platform, FSSAI is encouraging the FBOs to 
undergo basic training on general hygiene and sanitary practices to be 
followed.  Also, a scheme of hygiene rating of food establishments ha s been 
introduced thereby promoting the culture of self -compliance and regulation.   
Funds are also provided to the States/UTs for arranging such trainings and 
hygiene rating audits. States/UTs have been advised to reduce inspections of 
such compliant FBOs and focus mainly on the FBOs in the high -risk category 
to reduce regulatory supervision and encourage self-regulatory compliance.  
 
7.   Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the shortage of quality 
laboratories and lack of uniformity of standards across the country. The 
Committee observe that though the responsibility of enforcement and 
regulation of food safety and standards li es with the respective State 
Governments /UTs,   the poor and inadequate infrastructure for testing 
samples in the absence of the financial resources with the States does not 
allow effective and efficient functioning of the labs with clinical accuracy.   
Recognising the inadequacy of financial resources available with the State 
Governments, it would not be prudent to expect optimum improvement in 
laboratories in States/UTs without financial support from   the Union 
Government. The Committee take   note of the e xisting food testing 
infrastructure in the country and observe that given the exponential increase 

41 
 
in magnitude of the problem of food adulteration in our country with complex 
food varieties, that an infrastructure of a mere 340 food testing laboratories 
would not suffice.   The Committee , therefore, recommend that adequate 
financial support to the States/UTs be provided impromptu to create a robust 
lab infrastructure duly accredited with National Accreditation Board for Testing 
and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) . The Committee recommend   that in the 
interest of maintaining food testing standards, the number of mobile food 
testing laboratories be enhanced till such time sufficient   number of food 
testing laboratories are established.  
The   Committee are further constrained to note that despite the Bombay High 
Court’s direction, most of the laboratories in the country are still not NABL 
accredited. The Committee   are of the view that NABL accreditation of labs 
would  ensure standards of testing and enhance reliability. The Committee 
feel that this will ensure uniformity and accuracy in testing standards, which is 
central to food testing. The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI 
must ensure that all the labs approved by the Authority are NABL accredited  
within the shortest time as feasible. The Committee further recommend that 
food testing laboratories be equipped with necessary infrastructure and 
trained manpower.  
[Para 7] 
Action Taken 
Earlier, FSSAI had been recognizing even those of the food testing 
laboratories (FTLs) which were having NABL accreditation even for a few 
chemical and/or biological parameters. Subsequently, FSSAI notified the FSS 
(Recognition and Notification of Laboratories) Regulations, 2018 in November, 
2018. The ibid Regulations cover all the standard procedural requirements for 
the recognition and notification for laboratories such as types of laboratories, 
criteria for recognition and notification, renewal, audit & investigation, 
obligations of the laboratories, suspension, de-recognition, etc. 
In order to foster ease of doing business,  to bring about transparency, and, 
to have a proper system for reviewing and monitoring the activities of food 
laboratories on a single platform and thereby improving the quality of food 
testing in t he country, the Food Authority has started recognizing food 
laboratories with effect from 15th June, 2019, only through the unified 
approach of laboratory accreditation/ recognition/approval system of National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) which also 
has other regulators viz. Export Inspection Council (EIC), The Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Tea Board, 
and the  Indian Oilseed and Produce Export Promotion Council (IOPEPC).  
Now, only those of the FTLs which have the competence to perform most of 
the chemical, biological and food safety parameters such as pesticide residue, 
antibiotic residue, toxins etc. for different categories of food products as per 
the relevant Food Safe ty and Standards Regulations are being recognised. 
Thus, FSSAI is continuously making its effort to enhance the quality and 
numbers of FSSAI notified NABL accredited laboratories. 
  

42 
 
Most of the State Food Testing Labs (SFTLs) have not obtained NABL 
accreditation even after repeatedly taking up the matter by FSSAI at various 
forums/meetings (CAC meetings, State visits of senior officers, Video 
conferencing held with States/UTs, etc.). Considering the fact that no action 
was being taken by few laboratories in  this direction, FSSAI has denotified 39 
SFTLs out of 74 from the ambit of section 98 of FSS Act, 2006in December, 
2020. As a result, 11 of these 39 SFTLs have also applied for NABL 
accreditation now and the rest are in the process of doing so. As of today, 193 
out of 211 SFTLs under the ambit of FSSAI are NABL accredited, remaining 18 
labs have already applied for accreditation and are under evaluation by NABL.   
  
FSSAI had conducted in 2018 a ‘Meta Study on Food Testing Laboratories in 
India: A Synopsis’ , through Yes Bank. As per the report, around 600 food 
testing laboratories are available in India. These laboratories include all NABL 
accredited laboratories (for food products) (459 Laboratories), FSSAI notified 
laboratories, state laboratories, laborat ories approved by APEDA, laboratories 
approved by EIC, laboratories assisted by MoFPI for upgradation and other 
institutional and private sector laboratories.   Other than these, there is 
another set of food testing laboratories which exist with the Food Bu siness 
Operators (FBOs) to carry out their regular/routine tests for raw material as 
well as value added products.   Moreover, there exist around 200 export -
oriented units in India (100% export oriented as registered under FSSAI), 
majority of which have sma ll food testing laboratories for in house tests. In 
total, these small laboratories with basic testing equipments (largely based on 
the requirements of the FBOs) are likely to exceed 1000 in number, taking the 
total number of food testing laboratories in India to more than 1500.   
  
At present, FSSAI hasits own National Food Laboratories (NFLs), one at 
Ghaziabad, U.P. (Northern India) being run on PPP mode; and another at 
Kolkata, West Bengal (Eastern India) which is being run by FSSAI itself. 
Further, two more NFLs, one at Chennai Port Trust (CPT), Chennai (Southern 
India) and another at Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Mumbai (Western 
India) are being set up soon under PPP mode for which the contract is already 
awarded.  It has also come to the notice o f FSSAI that some of the States like 
Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh are in the process of establishing more 
State FTLs. 
  
To further strengthen the food testing ecosystem in the States/UTs, FSSAI has 
implemented a Central Sector Scheme (CSS). A grant of Rs. 10.50 crore to 
13.50 crore (approx.) is earmarked for each SFTL. This includes (i) Rs. 0.50 
crore towards creation/renovation of infrastructure for housing high -end 
equipments (HEEs) (ii) Rs. 8.45 crore towards procurement of 3 high end 
equipments viz.  LC-MSMS, GC -MSMS and ICP -MS (along with consumables, 
Comprehensive AMC and manpower) and, (iii) Rs.1-4 crore towards setting up 
of microbiology laboratory and Rs. 60 lakh for each SFTL towards 
procurement of consumables @ Rs. 10 lakhs/year for 3 years and  towards 
meeting contingencies @ Rs. 10 lakhs/year for 3 years. A grant of Rs. 10 crore 

43 
 
is also being provided to a State for setting up of basic food testing 
laboratory. Further, for those North Eastern States which do not have any 
Food Testing Laboratory, the Scheme provides a grant of Rs. 3 crore each for 
setting up new food testing laboratory. So far, a total Grant -in-aid of Rs. 
313.48 crore has been released towards upgradation of 39 State Food Safety 
Laboratories (SFTLs) of 29 States/UTs. This include s 33 for HEE, 4 for basic 
lab and 2 for upgradation of microbiology lab. This would enable the State 
Food Testing Laboratories to analyse the safety parameters in food samples 
such as heavy metals, pesticide residues, drug residues including antibiotics, 
vitamins, food additives, colour, naturally occurring toxic substances (NOTS), 
etc., along with microbiological tests.  
  
Further, from the Financial Year 2020 -21, grant is also being provided to 
States/UTs under MoUs towards NABL accreditation, HEE/basic e quipment, 
consumables, basic lab infrastructure, technical manpower, etc. 
  
Referral labs are also being strengthened under the CSS. So far, a grant of Rs. 
27.02 Crore has been released towards strengthening of 11 referral 
laboratories with high end equipm ent so as to ensure that these laboratories 
could become the apex labs of the country with the latest state -of-the-art 
analytical facilities. 
 
FSSAI is also in the process of increasing the number of Mobile Food Testing 
Labs called Food Safety on Wheels (F SWs) in States/UTs across the country. 
So far, 90 FSWs have been delivered to 32 States/UTs. Another 60 FSWs are 
being procured for the year 2021-22.   
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
 
Final ATN 
Earlier, FSSAI had been recognizing even those of the food testing 
laboratories (FTLs) which were having NABL accreditation even for a few 
chemical and/or biological parameters. Subsequently, FSSAI notified the FSS 
(Recognition and Notification of Laboratories) Regulations, 2018 in November, 
2018. The ibid Regulations cover all the standard procedural requirements for 
the recognition and notification for laboratories such as types of laboratories, 
criteria for recognition and notification, renewal, audit & investigation, 
obligations of the laboratories, suspension, de-recognition, etc. 
In order to foster ease of doing business,   to bring about transparency, and, 
to have a proper system for reviewing and monitoring the activities of food 
laboratories on a sin gle platform and thereby improving the quality of food 
testing in the country, the Food Authority has started recognizing food 
laboratories with effect from 15th June, 2019, only through the unified 
approach of laboratory accreditation/recognition/ approva l system of National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) which also 
has other regulators viz. Export Inspection Council (EIC), The Agricultural and 

44 
 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Tea Board, 
and the  Indian Oilseed and Produce Export Promotion Council (IOPEPC). 
Now, only those of the FTLs which have the competence to perform most of 
the chemical, biological and food safety parameters such as pesticide residue, 
antibiotic residue, toxins etc. for different categories of food products as per 
the relevant Food Safety and Standards Regulations are being recognised. 
Thus, FSSAI is continuously making its effort to enhance the quality and 
numbers of FSSAI notified NABL accredited laboratories. 
  
Most of  the State Food Testing Labs (SFTLs) have not obtained NABL 
accreditation even after repeatedly taking up the matter by FSSAI at various 
forums/meetings (CAC meetings, State visits of senior officers, Video 
conferencing held with States/UTs, etc.). Conside ring the fact that no action 
was being taken by few laboratories in this direction, FSSAI has denotified 39 
SFTLs out of 74 from the ambit of section 98 of FSS Act, 2006 in December, 
2020. As of today, out of 39 SFTLs which were de-notified by FSSAI, 14 SFTLs 
has obtained NABL accreditation and notified by FSSAI, 1 SFTl has already 
closed its operation and 24 are still under de-notified list. 
  
  
FSSAI had conducted in 2018 a ‘Meta Study on Food Testing Laboratories in 
India: A Synopsis’, through Yes Bank. As per the report, around 600 food 
testing laboratories are available in India. These laboratories include all NABL 
accredited laboratories (for  food products) (459 Laboratories), FSSAI notified 
laboratories, state laboratories, laboratories approved by APEDA, laboratories 
approved by EIC, laboratories assisted by MoFPI for upgradation and other 
institutional and private sector laboratories.   Other than these, there is 
another set of food testing laboratories which exist with the Food Business 
Operators (FBOs) to carry out their regular/routine tests for raw material as 
well as value added products.   Moreover, there exist around 200 export -
oriented units in India (100% export oriented as registered under FSSAI), 
majority of which have small food testing laboratories for in house tests. In 
total, these small laboratories with basic testing equipments (largely based on 
the requirements of the FBOs) are likely to exceed 1000 in number, taking the 
total number of food testing laboratories in India to more than 1500.    
  
At present, FSSAI has its own National Food Laboratories (NFLs), one at 
Ghaziabad, U.P. (Northern India) being run on PPP mode; and ano ther at 
Kolkata, West Bengal (Eastern India) which is being run by FSSAI itself. 
Further, one more NFL at Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Mumbai 
(Western India) has been established under PPP mode. Another NFL is being 
established under PPP mode and wi ll be operational soon.    It has also come 
to the notice of FSSAI that some of the States like Uttar Pradesh and Madhya 
Pradesh are in the process of establishing more State FTLs. 
  
To further strengthen the food testing ecosystem in the States/UTs, FSSAI has 
implemented a Central Sector Scheme (CSS). A grant of Rs. 10.50 crore to 

45 
 
13.50 crore (approx.) is earmarked for each SFTL. This includes (i) Rs. 0.50 
crore towards creation/renovation of infrastructure for housing high -end 
equipments (HEEs) (ii) Rs. 8. 45 crore towards procurement of 3 high end 
equipments viz. LC -MSMS, GC -MSMS and ICP -MS (along with consumables, 
Comprehensive AMC and manpower) and, (iii) Rs.1-4 crore towards setting up 
of microbiology laboratory and Rs. 60 lakh for each SFTL    towards 
procurement of consumables @ Rs. 10 lakhs/year for 3 years and towards 
meeting contingencies @ Rs. 10 lakhs/year for 3 years. A grant of Rs. 10 crore 
is also being provided to a State for setting up of basic food testing 
laboratory. Further, for those North Eastern States which do not have any 
Food Testing Laboratory, the Scheme provides a grant of Rs. 3 crore each for 
setting up new food testing laboratory. So far, a total Grant -in-aid of Rs. 
313.98 crore has been released towards upgradation of 39 State Foo d Safety 
Laboratories (SFTLs) of 29 States/UTs. This includes 33 for HEE, 4 for basic 
lab and 2 for upgradation of microbiology lab. This would enable the State 
Food Testing Laboratories to analyse the safety parameters in food samples 
such as heavy metals , pesticide residues, drug residues including antibiotics, 
vitamins, food additives, colour, naturally occurring toxic substances (NOTS), 
etc., along with microbiological tests.  
  
Further, from the Financial Year   2020-21, grant is also being provided to 
States/UTs under MoUs towards NABL accreditation, HEE/basic equipment, 
consumables, basic lab infrastructure, technical manpower, etc. 
  
Referral labs are also being strengthened under the CSS. So far, a grant of 
Rs. 30.19 Crore has been released towards s trengthening of 12 referral 
laboratories with high end equipment so as to ensure that these laboratories 
could become the apex labs of the country with the latest state -of-the-art 
analytical facilities. 
 
FSSAI is also in the process of increasing the numbe r of Mobile Food Testing 
Labs called Food Safety on Wheels (FSWs) in States/UTs across the country. 
So far, 170 FSWs have been sanctioned out of which 135 FSWs are delivered 
to 33 States/UTs.   
 
8. Observations/Recommendations 
 
Chapter V of the Food Safety  and Standards Act, 2006 prescribes that all 
imports of food articles are to be subjected to the provisions of the Act which 
inter-alia prohibits import of any unsafe or misbranded or sub -standard food 
or food containing extraneous matter into India.   Though the Act, as claimed 
by Government, sufficiently empowers FSSAI, the Committee understand that 
the mechanism for ensuring safety and quality standards of food items at the 
entry points at borders, ports and airports is not adequate and foolproof. 
[Para 8] 
 
 

46 
 
Action Taken 
 Section 25 of the Food Safety & Standard Act, 2006, stipulates that all 
imports of articles of food are subject to the provisions of the Act. The 
procedure and requirements for import of food articles are regulated by  FSS 
(Import) Regulations, 2017. 
  
FSSAI has its  Authorised Officers  at 8 locations namely Chennai, Kolkata, 
Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi, Tuticorin, Krishnapatnam and Mundra covering 44 
points of entry for ensuring compliance to the provisions of FSS Act, 2006 and 
regulations made thereunder.  23 more points of entry will be overseen 
directly by FSSAI within the next three months, taking the total points of entry 
covered by FSSAI to 67. These 67 points of entry will account for 
approximately 70-80% of the total food imports of the country.    
  
Further, there are other locations throughout the country where Customs 
officials have been notified as Authorised Officers by FSSAI. FSSAI has an 
online system for clearance of food imports called Food Import Clearance 
System (FICS) which is integrated with the Customs ICE -GATE (Indian 
Customs Electronic Commerce/Electronic Data interchange (EC/EDI) Gateway) 
under SWIFT (Single Window Interface for Facilitating Trade). Selective 
sampling & testing of food articles on the basis of risk profiling done by FSSAI 
is implemented at the Customs ICEGATE. 
 
The food articles when referred to FSSAI for clearance by the Customs 
Authorities are subjected to scrutiny of documents, visual inspection, sampling 
and testing in order to determine whether or not they conform to t he safety 
and quality standards established and laid down under various Food Safety 
and Standards Regulations. If sample is found conforming then No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) is generated and if found non -conforming, then Non -
Conformance Report (NCR) is generated. 
  
FSSAI has implemented Risk Management System (RMS) through Custom’s 
ICEGATE based on risk associated with consignment as per the compliance 
history of importer, exporter, exporting country and risk associated with the 
food product etc.  
 FSSAI has also notified around 190 (ISO 17025) accredited labs which are 
utilized for food testing.     
Further, FSSAI is continuously imparting training to officers of field formations 
to ensure that they are updated about latest FSSAI regulatory developments.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments. 
 
Final ATN 
  
Section 25 of the Food Safety & Standard Act, 2006, stipulates that all imports 
of articles of food are subject to the provisions of the Act. The procedure and 

47 
 
requirements for import of food articles are regulated by  FSS (Import) 
Regulations, 2017. 
  
FSSAI has its  Authorised Officers  at 12 locations namely Chennai, Kolkata, 
Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi, Tuticorin, Krishnapatnam, Vishakhapatnam, Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Kandla and Mundra covering 54 point s of entry for ensuring 
compliance to the provisions of FSS Act, 2006 and regulations made 
thereunder.  These points of entry cover majority of the total food imports of 
the country.    
  
 Further, there are other locations throughout the country where Customs 
officials have been notified as Authorised Officers by FSSAI.  
FSSAI has an online system for clearance of food imports called   Food Import 
Clearance System (FICS)  which is integrated with the Customs ICE -GATE 
(Indian Customs Electronic Commerce/El ectronic Data interchange (EC/EDI) 
Gateway) under SWIFT (Single Window Interface for Facilitating Trade). 
Selective sampling & testing of food articles on the basis of risk profiling done 
by FSSAI is implemented at the Customs ICEGATE. 
 
The food articles w hen referred to FSSAI for clearance by the Customs 
Authorities are subjected to scrutiny of documents, visual inspection, sampling 
and testing in order to determine whether or not they conform to the safety 
and quality standards established and laid down u nder various Food Safety 
and Standards Regulations. If sample is found conforming then No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) is generated and if found non -conforming, then Non -
Conformance Report (NCR) is generated. 
  
FSSAI has implemented Risk Management System (RMS) through Custom’s 
ICEGATE based on risk associated with consignment as per the compliance 
history of importer, exporter, exporting country and risk associated with the 
food product etc.  
   
FSSAI has also notified  222 NABL accredited labs which are u tilized for food 
testing.     
    
Further, FSSAI is continuously imparting training to officers of field formations 
to ensure that they are updated about latest FSSAI regulatory developments 
 
12. Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee have taken note of the reply of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare which states that the duties and responsibilities of the 
Authorised Officers are equally applicable to the Custom Officials working as 
AO. However, the Committee note t hat the FSSAI is silent on the aspect of 
administrative and regulatory control in case of non -compliance by any 
Authorised Officer. The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare must ensure that the Charter of Duties o f 
Authorised Officers of CBIC which should invariably include the role and 

48 
 
responsibilities of the Authorised Officers as envisaged in the Food Safety and 
Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017     
[Para 12] 
 
Action Taken 
 The Authorised Officers  are notified by FSSAI under the relevant provisions    
of FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017.   The Duties and responsibilities and 
powers mentioned in FSS(Import) Regulations, 2017 are equally applicable on 
all the officials   notified as Authorised Officers , including C ustoms officials 
notified as Authorised Officers .   These notifications are duly circulated to 
Customs’ Commissionerates and normally the Commissionerates   also issue 
internal orders asking these officers to perform the task assigned to them as 
Authorised Officer under the Food Safety and Standards  Act, 2006.  
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments. 
 
Final ATN 
The Authorised Officers  are notified by FSSAI under the relevant provisions    
of FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017.   The Duties and responsibilities and 
powers mentioned in FSS(Import) Regulations, 2017 are equally applicable on 
all the officials   notified a s Authorised Officers , including Customs officials 
notified as Authorised Officers .   These notifications are duly circulated to 
Customs’ Commissionerates and normally the Commissionerates   also issue 
internal orders asking these officers to perform the t ask assigned to them as 
Authorised Officer under the Food Safety and Standards  Act, 2006.   
 
13.  Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee have also taken note of the information furnished by the 
Ministry on the issue of the requirement in regard to   labelling  of imported 
food items in India. The Committee , in this regard, express its view that 
FSSAI must check all imported food items in India for strict compliance with 
the regulatory conditions. The Committee have also taken note of the fact that 
the labelling for packaged food provides many a vital information about   the 
food item being imported and that the   regulations prescribe that the label 
should either  be in English or Hindi  . It would be essential to ensure that no 
food items allowed to ente r the country without all requisite details on the 
label in accordance with the prescribed regulations.   
  [Para 13] 
 
Action Taken 
 The labelling of imported consignments is verified during Scrutiny and Visual 
inspection of food consignments. Labelling re quirements as recommended by 
the Committee  are already applicable as per FSS (Packaging and Labelling) 
Regulations, 2011 as amended from time to time.  
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 

49 
 
No further comments 
 
Final ATN 
The labelling of imported consignments is verified during Scrutiny and Visual 
inspection of food consignments. Labelling requirements as recommended by 
the Committee  are  already applicable as per FSS (Packaging and Labelling) 
Regulations, 2011 as amended from time to time.   
  
14. Observations/Recommendations 
The  Committee further note from the reply of the Government that there is 
an element of regulatory overlap with the Department of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying (DAHD) for import of products of anima l origin and recommend 
that FSSAI should sort out the issue by holding active meetings with their 
counterparts in DAHD. 
[Para 14] 
Action Taken 
FSSAI is conducting regular meetings   with Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry & Dairying (MoFAHD). Recently in a meeting held on 18.03.2021 
with MoFAHD , it has been decided that MoFAHD will issue order omitting 
requirement of Sanitary Import Permit (SIP) for fisheries products, thereby 
eliminating need of NOC for import clearance. MoFAHD is also in process of 
vetting the list of HS Code shared by FSSAI which may have overlapping. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments. 
 
Final ATN 
The  Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying (MoFAHD) vide order 
dated 13.05.2021has issued order omitting requirement of Sanitary Import 
Permit (SIP) for fisheries products, thereby eliminating need of NOC for import 
clearance from MoFAHD. 
 
15.Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee express grave concern over the fact that the rate of conviction 
is low despite the increasing number of failed samples. One of the reasons for 
this phenomenon, the Committee feel is attributable to inadequate training of 
the Food Safety Officers. The Committee feel that the performance of Food 
Safety Officers needs to be judged not only on the basis of number of samples 
collected but also on the basis of the number of successful convictions   
relating to the failed cases. The Committee are of the view that poor 
infrastructure for storage of samples, particularly in the case of peri shable 
commodities, is a contributory factor for the low conviction rate. The process 
of sampling should be methodically defined in a scientific way based upon the 
food item samples and there should be adequate training in regard to sample 
collection, hand ling and storage protocols. The Committee urge upon the   
FSSAI to function as a scientific repertoire and technically credible authority   
to ensure food safety standards in India. 

50 
 
[Para 15] 
Action Taken 
FSSAI is implementing a scheme of providing financial  assistance for Sample 
Management System (SMS) with cold chain facilities to States/UTs at District 
Level, subject to their readiness. This facility will not only maintain desired 
temperature of the food samples during transportation/storage but also 
facilitate the FSOs to maintain the integrity of the picked up sample from the 
site of inspection until it reaches the laboratory.   The  Scheme has  provision 
of  following components in order to harmonise the sample collection, its 
handling, storage & subsequent transport to the laboratories in each district of 
the country:   
1. Compact Cabinets (Each Designated Officer) 
2. Vehicle mounted mobile Freezer units- battery operated (Each 
Designated           Officer) 
3. Portable chill boxes (Each Food Safety Officer) 
4. Back-pack style bags (Each Food Safety Officer) 
These SMS components are being distributed based on the requisition 
received from the States/UTs. Till date, the SMS components have been 
delivered to 31 States/UTs. Further, FSSAI has also provided training on the 
use of the SMS components to all the States/UTs.  
With an objective of sustainable achievement of target for collection and 
testing of enforcement samples, the figures for collection of samples based on 
8 samples per FSO per month in consonance with  the availability of regulatory 
staff in the States/UTs have been worked out.  
Functioning of Sample Management System is being monitored quarterly 
through Central Advisory Committee Meetings, through Video Conferencing 
and States’ visits. Further, in order to address the gaps in the food safety eco-
system of States/UTs and to promote the culture of safe and wholesome food 
through pooling of technical knowledge and best practices, as a shared 
responsibility, FSSAI has signed Memorandums of Understanding (Mo Us) to 
extend both technical and financial support to the States/UTs. 
Regarding recommendation for FSSAI to function as a Scientific repertoire and 
technically credible authority, it is stated that FSSAI has a robust mechanism 
that involves 21 Scientific Panels, Working Groups/ Expert Committees and the 
Scientific Committee with scientific and technical experts having domain 
knowledge as Members to oversee the science -based process of standards 
setting.  FSSAI has thus the necessary scientific and technical  expertise for 
development of standards and regulations   
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
 
Final ATN 
FSSAI implemented a scheme of providing financial assistance for Sample 
Management System (SMS) with cold chain facilities to States/UTs at District 

51 
 
Level, subject to their readiness. This facility will not only maintain desired 
temperature of the food sam ples during transportation/storage but also 
facilitate the FSOs to maintain the integrity of the picked -up sample from the 
site of inspection until it reaches the laboratory.   Under the said scheme there 
was provision for     following components in order t o harmonise the sample 
collection, its handling, storage & subsequent transport to the laboratories in 
each district of the country:   
5. Compact Cabinets (Each Designated Officer) 
6. Vehicle mounted mobile Freezer units- battery operated (Each 
Designated           Officer) 
7. Portable chill boxes(Each Food Safety Officer) 
8. Back-pack style bags(Each Food Safety Officer) 
 Till date , 796 Compact Cabinets, 797 Vehicle mounted mobile Freezer 
units- battery operated, 2545 Portable chill boxes and 2545 Back -pack 
style bags have been delivered and installed in 31 States/UTs as well as in 
some State Food Testing  Laboratoriess, Regional Offices, Port Offices and 
national Food Labs as per the requisition received from them. Further, 
FSSAI has also provided training on  the use of the SMS components to all 
the States/UTs. 
  
With an objective of sustainable achievement of target for collection and 
testing of enforcement samples, the figures for collection of samples based on 
8 samples per FSO per month in consonance with the avai lability of regulatory 
staff in the States/UTs have been worked out.  
 Functioning of Sample Management System is being monitored quarterly 
through Central Advisory Committee Meetings, through Video Conferencing 
and States’   visits. Further, in order to ad dress the gaps in the food safety 
eco-system of States/UTs and to promote the culture of safe and wholesome 
food through pooling of technical knowledge and best practices, as a shared 
responsibility, FSSAI has signed Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) to 
extend both technical and financial support to the States/UTs. 
FSSAI has developed the training manual to systemize the whole training 
ecosystem for FSOs and other regulatory staff. So far, 1674 State regulatory 
personnel (Food Safety Officer/ Designated O fficers) have undergone various 
training programs (Induction/Refresher/Need Based training, etc.).   In 
addition, around 100 Adjudicating Officers of different States/UTs have 
undergone Orientation training programs. These training programs are being 
organized regularly. 
Regarding recommendation for FSSAI to function as a Scientific repertoire and 
technically credible  authority, it is stated that FSSAI has a robust mechanism 
that involves 21 Scientific Panels, Working Groups/ Expert Committees   and 
the Scientific Committee with  scientific and technical experts having   domain 
knowledge as Members to oversee the science based process of standards 
setting.   FSSAI has thus   the necessary scientific and technical expertise for 
development of  standards and regulations  .  

52 
 
  
16.  Observations/Recommendations 
 The Committee would also like to see the standards of FSSAI at par with and 
in harmonisation with those of the intentional /codex standards and reiterate 
that state -of-the-art laboratories be established, where any 
stakeholder/business operator can retrieve the samples for further testing and 
verification by referral labs in the country . 
 [Para 16] 
Action Taken 
Standards notified under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 are 
mandatory in nature and are specifically framed on the basis of experts’ inputs 
/recommendations  by Scientific Panels/Scientific Committee of the FSSAI .   
 One of the responsibilities of FSSAI is to promote consistency with the 
relevant international standards as envisaged under Se ction 16(3) (m) of the 
FSS Act, 2006. Accordingly, FSSAI has established internationally 
benchmarked standards for various categories of food products largely 
harmonized with the Codex Alimentarius.   India being a signatory to WTO 
which recognised the Code x Standards as reference standards for 
international trade,  FSSAI keeps on harmonising the standards under 
domestic regulations with those of the Codex Alimentarius   as appropriate. 
 FSSAI, while framing standards, also takes into consideration   standards of 
the other international regulatory bodies such as EFSA, USFDA etc. besides   
standards developed by   BIS, AGMARK etc.    Significant data generated 
domestically in India    also serves as the starting point for standards 
development. The globally benchmar ked standards in   domestic regulations 
have largely contributed to the strengthening of the food safety system in the 
country, and in particular enhanced the capacities of the food business 
operators in producing safe and good quality food products. 
  Food Testing in India is at par with other developed countries of the world. 
This can be assessed by number of NABL food testing labs currently exist in 
the country. These labs have state -of-the-art food testing 
equipments/instruments and have internationally recognized and validated 
analytical methods being followed in their  labs. In fact, FSSAI notified labs on 
being satisfied that the labs are meeting   ISO 17025 standards, well 
recognized by the ILAC (International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation) 
and APLAC (Asia Pacific Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation). 
  FSSAI is also co-coordinating with all the research institutions to obtain NABL 
recognition under integrated assessment so that their labs could   be 
recognized as FSSAI referral laboratories and become the apex labs of the 
country with the latest state-of-the-art analytical facilities 
  
FSSAI has set up a network of National Reference Laboratories (NRLs) for 
method development, method validation, training, proficiency testing and 
providing technical support to FSSAI as well as States,  as and when required. 
 A NRL is either a primary lab notified u/s 43(1) or a referral lab u/s 43(2) of 
the FSS Act, 2006. 
 

53 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Further progress made to obtain NABL accreditation under integrated  
assessment by FSSAI may be intimated to PAC 
 
Final ATN 
Standards notified under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 are 
mandatory in nature and are specifically framed on the basis of experts’ inputs 
/recommendations  by Scientific Panels/Scientific Committee of the FSSAI .    
One of the responsibilities of FSSAI is to promote consistency with the 
relevant international standards as envisaged under Section 16(3) (m) of the 
FSS Act, 2006. Accordingly, FSSAI has established internationally 
benchmarked st andards for various categories of food products largely 
harmonized with the Codex Alimentarius.   India being a signatory to WTO 
which recognised the Codex Standards as reference standards for 
international trade,   FSSAI keeps on harmonising the standards u nder 
domestic regulations with those of the Codex Alimentarius   as appropriate.  
FSSAI, while framing standards, also takes into consideration  standards of the 
other international regulatory bodies such as EFSA, USFDA etc. besides   
standards developed by   BIS, AGMARK etc.    Significant data generated 
domestically in India    also serves as the starting point for standards 
development. The globally benchmarked standards in   domestic regulations 
have largely contributed to the strengthening of the food safety  system in the 
country, and in particular enhanced the capacities of the food business 
operators in producing safe and good quality food products. 
  Food Testing in India is at par with other developed countries of the world. 
This can be assessed by number  of NABL food testing labs currently exist in 
the country. These labs have state -of-the-art food testing 
equipments/instruments and have internationally recognized and validated 
analytical methods being followed in their  labs. In fact, FSSAI notified labs on 
being satisfied that the labs are meeting   ISO 17025 standards, well 
recognized by the ILAC (International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation) 
and APLAC (Asia Pacific Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation).  
Though all the FSSAI notified labs are NABL accredited, since June, 2019, labs 
are being recognised by FSSAI as per ISO 17025/2017   only through the 
unified approach of laboratory accreditation/recognition /approval system of 
National Accreditation Board for   Testing and Calibration Laboratories (N ABL) 
which also has other regulators viz. Export Inspection Council (EIC) EIC, 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
(APEDA), Tea Board, Indian Oilseed and Produce Export Promotion Council 
(IOPEPC)  on board .  Notified labs  under Section 43(1)   which  have not 
obtained their accreditation through FSSAI-NABL Integrated Assessment mode 
, including the State Food laboratories , are required to obtain the same 
through  this integrated assessment mode prior to the expiry of their  NABL 
approved validity period.   Fresh application for NABL accreditation/FSSAI 
recognition shall be   through FSSAI-NABL integrated assessment mode only. 
These labs are being monitored by NABL through audits, verification and other 
periodical desktop surve illance audit, reassessment and renewal of 

54 
 
accreditation.   Of the   FSSAI’s  235 primary and referral labs, 84   have 
 obtained NABL accreditation under FSSAI -NABL Integrated Assessment 
mode.  Another 17 such labs have applied for such Assessment. 
 Further,   FSSAI is also co -coordinating with all the research institutions to 
obtain NABL recognition under integrated assessment so that their labs could   
be recognized as FSSAI referral laboratories and become the apex labs of the 
country with the latest state -of-the-art analytical facilities. .   FSSAI has 
sanctioned Rs. 10 lakhs to each of the five NABL accredited ICAR/State 
agricultural universities lab to obtain NABL under Integrated 
Assessment(FSSAI-NABL).   
 
FSSAI has set up a network of National Reference  Laboratories (NRLs) for 
method development, method validation, training, proficiency testing and 
providing technical support to FSSAI as well as States,   as and when 
required.  A NRL is either a primary lab notified u/s 43(1) or a referral lab u/s 
43(2) of the FSS Act, 2006. 
  
17. Observations/Recommendation 
The Committee note with concern the contents of the section of the report of 
the C&AG on FSSAI regarding human resources. They have been apprised by 
FSSAI that nearly 300 contractual employees includin g technical staff who 
have been hired are continuing in service for more than five years. The 
Committee feel that there is a legitimate expectation from contractual 
employees to continue on the posts, although hired on short term basis. The 
Committee would , therefore, recommend FSSAI to identify all such areas 
accurately where the nature of work is of a perennial nature and in 
accordance with the recruitment regulations and extant laws of the land, 
expedite the process of recruitment of officers/staff at va rious levels in FSSAI 
in permanent capacity, wherever required. 
  
                      [Para 17] 
  
Action Taken  
Considering the   manpower requirement of    FSSAI, Government has 
 sanctioned  additional 493  posts in August, 2018 thereby raising its 
sanctioned strength to 824 posts.  The details of these posts are at Annexure 
II  . Immediately after recruitment regulations were notified on 1 st October, 
2018, FSSAI   started recruitment process to fill up the posts on direct 
recruitment basis, in the fi rst phase. Recruitment to 288 posts has been 
completed so far and appointment orders issued. Skill test for filling up of 28 
posts of Personal Assistants is scheduled for   for  07.04.2021.   177 newly 
recruited employees have already joined the Authority.   There are 210 regular 
employees in FSSAI at present . Besides, 76 posts have been filled up on 
deputation basis. FSSAI will start recruitment process of   2nd phase  in April, 
2021. , Consequent upon joining of the regular employees the number of 
contractual employees has come down to 175.  
  

55 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The details provided by Ministry are not upto date.   Ministry may apprise the 
PAC of the updated position 
  
Final ATN  
Considering the manpower requirement of FSSAI, Government has   
sanctioned additional 493 posts in August, 2018 thereby raising its sanctioned 
strength to 824 posts. Subsequently, Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (Recruitment and Appointment) Regulations, 2018 were notified. The   
details of these posts are at Annexure II . Immediately after recruitment 
regulations were notified on 1st October, 2018   , FSSAI started recruitment 
process to fill up the posts on direct recruitment basis. In the first phase,   
recruitment of 288  posts has been completed and appointment orders issued. 
254 newly recruited employees have already joined the Authoirty. There are 
280 regular employees in FSSAI at present. besides, 76 posts have been filled 
up on deputation basis and   40 posts have been filled up on deemed 
deputation basis. FSSAI has started 2 nd phase recruitment process   for 38   
senior level posts (Pay level 11 and above) and various junior level posts (Pay 
level 10 and below) by issuing advertisements in April, 2021 and September, 
2021 respectively.  
  
Consequent upon joining of regular employees, the number of contractual 
employees has come down to 163.   
 
19. Observations/Recommendation 
The Committee note that sustained scrutiny has finally yielded the desired 
result whereby an Internal Audit Cell has now been established   in FSSAI. The 
Committee believe that the Internal Audit Cell will act as a catalyst to the 
efforts of FSSAI to function as an organisation of undoubted credibility. 
  
                   [Para19] 
Action Taken 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
As per direction of PAC, the replies should be comprehensive and not 
inconclusive, vague , or couched in general terms like ‘Noted’ or ‘accepted’ 
etc. Hence, specific steps taken in compliance to PAC’s observation may be 
stated.  
Final ATN 
Recommendations of the Committee have been complied with and Internal 
Audit Cell is fully functional now. 

56 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

57 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
5.   Observations /Recommendations 
The Committee note that although more than 10 years have elapsed following 
the enactment of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and 5 years since 
FSS regulations came into force, there are several loose ends which are still to 
be fixed. The Committee a lso note that although the process of 
standardisation is a continuous one and there are numerous challenges being 
faced by the regulatory and enforcement divisions of FSSAI, however, it is 
also a fact that action plans with a crystal clear Standard Operati ng Procedure 
(SOPs) are lacking at many places to identify areas on which standards are to 
be formulated/reviewed, if necessary, within specific timelines. The Committee 
feel  that involvement of FBOs as a first step towards identification of food 
products is necessary, but at the same time, it may be fraught with the risk of 
orientation towards safeguarding of their own business interest. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that for bringing about greater transparency in the 
task of revision of standards fo r selection of food products, FSSAI should not 
limit itself to consulting only with Food Business Operators, rather a wider 
consultative group with the involvement of public from across various 
spectrums of life , preferably elected representatives of the people from the 
local bodies (Panchayat level) to the Members of Parliament , consumer 
groups and eminent private individuals. The Committee are of the view that it 
is necessary to appropriately take into consideration the diverse interests of 
the stakeholders across a wide spectrum and devise effective SOPs (Standard 
Operating Procedures) enabling stakeholders to prepare their action plans  
[Para 5] 
Action Taken 
 21 Scientific Panels comprising of 11 expert members each have been 
constituted to review the regulatory framework as and when required. The 
Panels hold necessary consultations before suggesting the regulatory 
framework requiring review.  
Further, FSSAI has notified Standards Operating Procedure (SoP) prescribing 
timelines for development and notif ication of regulations. The draft of a 
standard/regulation approved by the Food Authority/Government is notified 
for inviting comments by all stakeholders viz FBOs, Organizations, Individuals 
etc giving    sufficient time (60 -90 days) for comments.  Where r equested, 
meetings are also held with stakeholders for discussion on draft regulations. 
After appropriately addressing all the stakeholder comments by the Scientific 
Panel, the standards are then finalized and notified for implementation as the 
final stand ard after following due process.   After finalisation, minimum 180 
days’ time is given before newly notified standards are enforced.    

58 
 
 The Food Authority, which is responsible for framing/review of standards, has 
Members representing diverse interest grou ps such as food industry, 
consumer organisations, farmers’ organisations and retailers’ organisations.    
Even in    other fora/special groups created for purposes of 
development/review of standards, various interest groups are represented. 
For example, a Co nsultative Group was constituted in November, 2020 to 
finalise the threshold values of fat, sugar and salt for all food categories and 
subcategories regarding Front of Pack Labelling. The said Group includes 
representatives from Confederation of Indian Ind ustry (CII), the 
Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry (CIFTI) of Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (CIFTI -FICCI), VOICE and CERC 
(both consumer organisations) as non-official members.   
FSSAI is creating consumer awareness related to food safety, health and 
nutrition, healthy and safe cooking and eating practices through regular 
updates shared through different social media platforms like Facebook, 
Instagram and Twitter and through MyGov platform also. 
As a part of ongoing c ollaboration with MyGov platform, short videos with 
celebrity endorsements for mass awareness on tips and precautions to stay 
healthy were developed and disseminated. Videos on food fortification to 
address micro nutrient deficiencies, trans -fat to deal wi th non-communicable 
diseases, adulteration tests etc. were also disseminated. 
Online competitions to engage various segments of society to create 
consumer awareness were also conducted such as Eat Right Creativity 
Challenge for school children, Eat Right Q uiz, Recipe competitions (low salt, 
healthy recipe, plant rich protein etc.)  
A number of handbooks/guidelines documents were also launched to facilitate 
stakeholders and create awareness around food safety and healthy and 
nutritious food.   
  
FSSAI is also working towards countering false videos and news items which 
create scare among consumers through scientifically validated information 
released through press releases, videos on social media platforms like 
Facebook, twitter, guidance notes and myth busters which are uploaded on its 
websites 
  
FSSAI is enabling consumers to make an informed choice through symbols 
and logos to identify fortified, organic food etc, and through provisions such 
as menu labelling, hygiene rating, etc.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
 
Final ATN 
21 Scientific Panels comprising of 11 expert members each have been 
constituted to review the regulatory framework as and when required. The 
Panels hold necessary consultations before suggesting the regulatory 
framework requiring review.  

59 
 
Further, FSSAI has notified Standards Operating Procedure (SoP) prescribing 
timelines for development and notification of regulations. The draft of a 
standard/regulation approved by the Food Authority/Government is notified 
for inviting comments by all stakeholders viz FBOs, Organizations, Individuals 
etc giving    sufficient time (60 -90 days) for comments.   Where requested, 
meetings are also held with stakeholders for discussion on draft regulations. 
After appropriately addressing all the  stakeholder comments by the Scientific 
Panel, the standards are then finalized and notified for implementation as the 
final standard after following due process.   After finalisation, minimum 180 
days’ time is given before newly notified standards are enforced.    
 The Food Authority, which is responsible for framing/review of standards, has 
Members representing diverse interest groups such as food industry, 
consumer organisations, farmers’ organisations and retailers’ organisations.    
Even in    other fora/ special groups created for purposes of 
development/review of standards, various interest groups are represented. 
For example, a Consultative Group was constituted in November, 2020 to 
finalise the threshold values of fat, sugar and salt for all food catego ries and 
subcategories regarding Front of Pack Labelling. The said Group includes 
representatives from Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the 
Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry (CIFTI) of Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Indu stry (CIFTI-FICCI), VOICE and CERC 
(both consumer organisations) as non-official members.   
FSSAI is creating consumer awareness related to food safety, health and 
nutrition, healthy and safe cooking and eating practices through regular 
updates shared thro ugh different social media platforms like Facebook, 
Instagram and Twitter and through MyGov platform also. 
As a part of ongoing collaboration with MyGov platform, short videos with 
celebrity endorsements for mass awareness on tips and precautions to stay 
healthy were developed and disseminated. Videos on food fortification to 
address micro nutrient deficiencies, trans -fat to deal with non -communicable 
diseases, adulteration tests etc. were also disseminated. 
Online competitions to engage various segments of  society to create 
consumer awareness were also conducted such as Eat Right Creativity 
Challenge for school children, Eat Right Quiz, Recipe competitions (low salt, 
healthy recipe, plant rich protein etc.)  
A number of handbooks/guidelines documents were a lso launched to facilitate 
stakeholders and create awareness around food safety and healthy and 
nutritious food.   
  
FSSAI is also working towards countering false videos and news items which 
create scare among consumers through scientifically validated in formation 
released through press releases, videos on social media platforms like 
Facebook, twitter, guidance notes and myth busters which are uploaded on its 
websites 
  

60 
 
 FSSAI is enabling consumers to make an informed choice through symbols 
and logos to id entify fortified, organic food etc, and through provisions such 
as menu labelling, hygiene rating, etc.  
  
6   Recommendations/Observations 
The  Committee note that the FSSAI issued no objection certificates to FBOs 
and renewed their licenses on the basis of Product Approval Mechanism not 
under the regulations notified by the former but on the advisories issued 
therein. This unhealthy practice  continued till the intervention and directions 
of Supreme Court of India , which set them aside as unlawful on the ground   
that advisories do not empower the FSSAI to issue NOC and renew licenses. 
The Court held that only   regulations issued by FSSAI empo wer the latter to 
issue NOCs and renew licenses. The Committee are dismayed to note that 
FSSAI  had failed to ensure the cancellation of the licenses issued under the 
product approval system, which was declared unlawful by the   Supreme Court 
and order prod uct recall. The Committee feel, FSSAI being the nodal agency 
established for food safety, should have acted with agility in the matter. Had 
there been no audit check, the matter of non-withdrawal of NOCs and licenses 
issued on the basis of product approval , despite being turned down by the 
court would not have come to the light.   The Committee feel that FSSAI 
should not only be content with framing of regulations, but should also 
conduct the assessment of the impact of the regulations in place and all 
interventional measures should be taken to align the regulatory food safety 
ecosystem in order to serve the final objective of food safety for the 
consumers in the country.  
As per information furnished, officials responsible for acting in violation of 
Supreme Court’s directions have been identified and steps taken to ensure 
that they are brought to task. Yet the Committee   observe that there have 
been certain administrative delays in the process as a result of which the 
officials concerned could go scot free despite the recommendations of the fact 
finding Committee instituted by FSSAI. The Committee , therefore, can not but 
express their displeasure about the way the matter was handled and 
recommend FSSAI to aggressively pursue the matter by way of soliciting 
advisories from DoPT in this regard , so as to enable in tackling all cases of 
irregularities in proper perspective. 
         [Para 6]  
Action Taken 
 It is stated that at the time of framing regulations, all stakeholders are given 
sufficient time (60 —90 days)   for comments / suggestions on the proposed 
draft regulations.  Where requested, meetings are also held with stakeholders 
for discussion on draft regulations . The draft proposals are reviewed and 
finalised with appropriate modifications as may be necessary in the light of the 
comments/suggestions received. Adequate time is given for enforcement of 
new regulations.  Even after the regulations are notified, where necessary , 
the regulations are reviewed and necessary amendments made , inter -alia, in 
the l ight of the experience in its implementation.    Thus,  through constant 

61 
 
interaction with stakeholders and feedback mechanism in place, any issue 
relating to  impact of regulations is appropriately addressed.  
Regarding action against the officials, it is c larified that the fact finding   
Committee had identified   officials  for procedural lapses in the process of   
product approval and not specifically for acting in violation of directions of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further , in respect of   Shri Pradip Chakraborty, then 
Director on deputation to FSSAI, who was repatriated to his parent cadre in 
West Bengal   in January, 2015,   matter was taken up with the concerned 
cadre authorities viz. West Bengal Fisheries Development Corporation in 
February, 2015 , along with the Preliminary Enquiry Report for initiating major 
penalty proceedings against him under the Disciplinary Rules governing   the 
official.   The West Bengal Fisheries Development Corporation wrote back in 
August, 2015 conveying a resolution of its Board s tating that as Shri 
Chakraborty was with FSSAI for the relevant period, it was not possible   for 
them to initiate enquiry into the matter which may be done by FSSAI itself. 
However, as the Rules did not  permit FSSAI to take disciplinary action against 
a person who stood repatriated to his parent Department, FSSAI wrote back 
to West Bengal State Fisheries   Dev Corporation on 28 th September, 2015 
apprising them about the relevant rules and requesting them to take 
appropriate disciplinary action against Shri Chankraborty.   There was no 
delay on the part of   FSSAI in taking up the matter with the concerned cadre 
controlling  authorities of Shri Chakraborty.   FSSAI   is pursuing the matter    
with the Corporation .   
Regarding  action  against Shri Anupam Rastog i, then Assistant Director, 
FSSAI, major penalty proceedings were instituted against him with approval of 
the disciplinary authority The report of the Inquiry Officer has been received   
and the case has been submitted to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for 
second stage advice through Chief Vigilance Officer , Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare.   
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may apprise PAC about the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings. 
 
Final ATN 
It is stated that at the time of framing r egulations, all stakeholders are given 
sufficient  time (60—90 days)   for comments / suggestions on the proposed 
draft regulations.  Where  requested, meetings are also held with stakeholders 
for discussion on draft regulations . The draft proposals are r eviewed and 
finalised with appropriate modifications as may be necessary in the light of the 
comments/suggestions received. Adequate time is given for enforcement of 
new regulations.  Even after the regulations are notified, where necessary , 
the regulations are reviewed and necessary amendments made , inter -alia, in 
the light of the experience in its implementation.    Thus,  through constant 
interaction with stakeholders and feedback mechanism in place, any issue 
relating to  impact of regulations is appropriately addressed.  
Regarding action against the officials, it is clarified that the fact finding   
Committee had identified   officials  for procedural lapses in the process of   

62 
 
product approval and not specifically for acting in violation of directions of  
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further , in respect of   Shri Pradip Chakraborty, then 
Director on deputation to FSSAI, who was repatriated to his parent cadre in 
West Bengal   in January, 2015,   matter was taken up with the concerned 
cadre authorities viz. West Be ngal Fisheries Development Corporation in 
February, 2015 , along with the Preliminary Enquiry Report for initiating major 
penalty proceedings against him under the Disciplinary Rules governing   the 
official.   The West Bengal Fisheries Development Corporat ion wrote back in 
August, 2015 conveying a resolution of its Board stating that as Shri 
Chakraborty was with FSSAI for the relevant period, it was not possible for 
them to initiate enquiry into the matter which may be done by FSSAI itself. 
However, as the Rules did not permit FSSAI to take disciplinary action against 
a person who stood repatriated to his parent Department, FSSAI wrote back 
to West Bengal State Fisheries Dev Corporation on 28 th September, 2015 
apprising them about the relevant rules and requ esting them to take 
appropriate disciplinary action against Shri Chankraborty.   There was no delay 
on the part of   FSSAI in taking up the matter with the concerned cadre 
controlling  authorities of Shri Chakraborty.   FSSAI   is pursuing the matter    
with the Corporation .   
Regarding action against Shri Anupam Rastogi, then Assistant Director, FSSAI, 
major penalty proceedings were instituted against him with approval of the 
disciplinary authority.     The IO was appointed by the Disciplinary authority 
and th e IO has submitted the report.   Based on the IO’s report and the 
second stage advice of the CVC, the Disciplinary Authority has exonerated Shri 
Anupam Rastogi of all the charges vide order dated 18 -10-2021. FSSAI has 
been advised to find out the officers r esponsible for providing erroneous 
information to the Enquiry Committee. Appropriate action is being taken 
accordingly.   
 
9. Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee note  from the information furnished by the Government that 
the number of entry points directly being controlled by FSSAI is being 
increased gradually and the presence of Authorised Officers merely 
supplements the efforts of FSSAI. The Commit tee are of the view in this 
regard that for ensuring effective regulatory control of the FSSAI, the 
Government should strive to achieve 100 percent presence of FSSAI officials 
at all entry points of food import. This, the Committee feel , is essential for 
safeguarding the health of the citizens. The Committee also recommend that 
FSSAI must examine and review the quality of training being imparted to all 
officials handling the import of food items at each import entry point   in 
India.   
 [Para 9]  
 
Action Taken 
 FSSAI had earlier   notified 417 points of entry   for regulating food imports. 
 These  points of entry have been  rationalised on the basis of volume of food 
imports and now only 150 points of entry have been notified as food import 

63 
 
entry points. These 150 entry points also include some points of entry having 
low volume of imports which are mainly located at land border to facilitate 
food import from neighbouring countries. Following   operationalisation of new 
offices at Mundra (Gujar at) and Krishnapatnam (AP) in March, 2021,   FSSAI 
has its Authorised Officers at 44 points of entry at present. All of these   are 
major points of entry . At other points of entry, Customs officers have been 
notified as Authorised Officers.  FSSAI is likely to post its AOs at 23 additional 
major points of entry  within 3 months.  With these 67 major points of  entry , 
FSSAI officials will directly regulate 70 -80% of food import in the country   
shortly.   Further expansion  will take place in   a gradual manne r depending  
on availability of funds.  
 FSSAI,  in coordination with National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes 
and Narcotics (NACIN) under Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs   
(CBIC),  has developed Food Import Clearance Training of Authorised O fficers 
of Customs (FICTAC) portal which is an online E -Training portal dedicated to 
the Customs Officials functioning as Authorised Officers. The   portal imparts 
knowledge regarding the food import clearance with updated FSSAI rules and 
regulations. 
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
Final ATN 
  
FSSAI had earlier   notified 417 points of entry   for regulating food imports.   
These  points of entry have been   rationalised on the basis of volume of food 
imports and now only 157 points of entry hav e been notified as food import 
entry points. These 157 entry points also include some points of entry having 
low volume of imports which are mainly located at land border to facilitate 
food import from neighbouring countries. Following  operationalisation of new 
offices,  FSSAI has its Authorised Officers at 54 points of entry at present. All 
of these   are major points of entry and with these, FSSAI officials directly 
regulate 70 -80% of food import in the country.       Further expansion   will 
take place in   a gradual manner depending   on availability of funds and the 
engagement of more manpower.  
 FSSAI,  in coordination with National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes 
and Narcotics (NACIN) under Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs   
(CBIC),  has developed Food Import Clearance Training of Authorised Officers 
of Customs (FICTAC) portal which is an online E -Training portal dedicated to 
the Customs Officials functioning as Authorised Officers. The   portal imparts 
knowledge regarding the food import clear ance with updated FSSAI rules and 
regulations. 
  
10  Observations/Recommendations 
During the Course of the deposition of the officials concerned, the Committee 
were informed that even a person without appropriate qualifications could be 
working as FSSAI Authorised Office at the entry points. The Committee note in 
this regard that in our country, availability of persons with   appropriate 

64 
 
professional credentials/qualifications would not pose a problem. However, 
there is a need of integration and collaboratio n among the Universities , 
Educational Institutions and Industry for development of skills in this area. 
The Committee are of the view that the linkage between the Industry and 
Educational Institutions needs to be fostered and strengthened. The   
Committee note that in the present situation, any normal graduate who may 
not possess appropriate or suitable qualifications can become an Authorised 
Officer  and be entrusted with the work of safety of food import in India . The 
Committee are of  the view that for   ensuring effective handling of matters of 
food safety, the Authorised Officer should be   professionally  qualified to 
effectively discharge the duties prescribed.  
 [Para 10]  
  
Action Taken 
 In FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017,  it is mentioned that “The F ood Safety 
and Standards Authority of India shall notify the officers for the purpose of 
food import clearance to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act, and it 
may also notify officers from other government agencies to maintain the 
standard operating procedure for food import clearance.” 
  
Currently , no specific   technical qualification is   prescribed in FSS (Import) 
Regulations, 2017 for Authorised Officers, including Customs officials notified 
as Authorised Officers . They are appointed in their  respective services 
following due process of selection . They are   regularly updated with  FSSAI’s 
regulatory requirements  through training programmes organised from time to 
time. With the augmentation of staff in FSSAI, its officials will be posted at 
more points of entry to function as AOs.   Already FSSAI has plans to open 
import offices at few more places. However,   covering ,majority of points of 
entry  with FSSAI officials would take  more time.    
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Specific steps taken on the recommendation of PAC, Ministry may apprise the 
PAC: 
i. For the linkage between the Industry and Educational Institutions 
ii. For effective handling of matters of food safety, the Authorised officer 
should be professionally qualified.  
  
Final ATN 
  
  As per provisions of Chapter —IX of the food safety standards (Import) 
Regulations 2017 Food Authority shall notify officers from other Govt. 
Departments, including Customs, to maintain standard operating procedure 
for Food Import Clearance.   Currently, no specif ic technical qualification is 
prescribed in FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017 for Authorised Officers, including 

65 
 
Customs officials notified as Authorised Officers . They are appointed in their 
respective services following due process of selection. 
  
FSSAI ha s been organizing various training programmes for the Custom 
Officers functioning as its Authorised Officers. In association with NACIN 
Academies at Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata & Mumbai and Regional Centres at 
Visakhapatnam & Kochi, it has successfully conducted 18 training programmes 
in the last 4 years. Through these Training programmes, 438 Customs Officials 
have been imparted Food Import Clearance training. Further, to enable these 
Custom Officers carry out necessary checks and processes as prescribed under 
the FSSAI Act and rules & regulations made thereunder and also to extend 
equal opportunities for concurrent training to the Custom officers posted as 
Authorised Officers at distant / isolated locations   , an on line Training Module 
“FICTAC” (Food Import C learance Training for Authorised officers from 
Customs) has been made live on 19 th June 2020 under intimation to all nodal 
offices. The said module provides quick link to FSSAI Notifications, Orders & 
FAQs and also gives quick access to Whats App number/em ail address of 
FSSAI —Head Office for expeditious resolution of their problems. 
  
FSSAI has also requested CBIC vide D.O. letter dated 8.11.2019 for 
compulsory training of Customs officials at the time of induction and posting 
as FSSAI’s — Authorised Officers for food import clearance .  
  
It is also mentioned that with the augmentation of staff in FSSAI, its officials 
will be posted at more points of entry to function as AOs.   Already  FSSAI has 
opened import offices at more places   viz. Mundra, Kandla, K rishnapatnam,  
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam.. 
  
 Regarding establishing linkage between Industry and Educational Institutions, 
it is submitted that FSSAI has established effective linkages with Industry and   
educational  Institutions through statut orily established networks like   
NetSCoFaN (Network for Scientific Cooperation for Food Safety and Applied 
Nutrition ), a network of   eight groups of research and academic institutes 
working in the area of food and nutrition;   National Reference   Laboratory 
network etc.   Further, FSSAI also involves Industry and other Industry 
related/Scientific Associations to promote regulatory awareness among 
different stakeholders including regulatory officers. Few such initiatives include 
NetProFaN (Network of Professionals in Food and Nutrition) and  CHIFSS (CII-
HUL Initiative on Food Safety Sciences), a   tripartite partnership between 
FSSAI, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and Hindustan Unilever Limited 
(HUL ) .  
  
11. Observations/Recommendations 
The Committee note that the FSSAI has endeavoured to rationalise the 
number of entry points of import of food items. The Committee are of the 
view that rationalisation of entry points should be combined with effective 
monitoring of these entry points in th e matter of safety of food imported food 

66 
 
items. The Committee further note the findings of the Audit that in   
approximately 9000 cases, the Authorised Officers have neither issued No 
Objection Certificates (NOC) nor Non -Conformation Report (NCR) despite 
assessing the safety of food being imported. As pointed out by the Audit, it is 
the mandate of the FSSAI   to regulate the import   of food under the Act. The 
Committee are of the firm view that the Authorised Officers should either 
issue No Objection Certific ates (NOC) or Non -Conformation Report (NCR) , as 
the case may be, and no food item should be allowed to be imported without 
the safety assessment   done by the officials designated by FSSAI. The 
Committee feel that not issuing either of the two certificatio ns would be 
grossly improper. The apprehension of unsafe food getting imported cannot 
be entirely ruled out in view of such instances of non -issue of the prescribed 
certification going unnoticed. The Committee , therefore, recommend that 
accountability of officials responsible for such lapses be fixed. In this regard, 
the Committee also note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have 
ascribed the ‘lapses or irregularities’ to the incomplete integration of the Food 
Import Clearance System (FICS) wit h Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
(ICEGATE) . The Committee note in this regard that, at present, the status of 
a food consignment as reflected in ICEGATE is not captured in FICS on real 
time basis. They, therefore, recommend that the FSSAI and Central B oard of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) may accelerate the process   of complete 
integration of both the system of ICEGATE and FICS. A definite timeline for 
such integration needs to be submitted to the Committee.  
[Para 11]  
 
Action Taken 
FICS (Food Impo rts Clearance System)  of FSSAI is integrated with Customs 
ICEGATE in such a way that bills of entry identified through Risk Management 
System (RMS ) are forwarded to FSSAI for examination purpose and No 
Objection Certificate(NOC)/ Non-Conformance Certificate(NCC) is electronically 
transmitted from FICS to ICEGATE. However, message exchange regarding 
Out of Charge of a consignment either for domestic release or for re -export is 
not transmitted to FICS as of now. FSSAI is coordinating with Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) to carry out complete system integration 
of ICEGATE and FICS so that FSSAI may have all the data pertaining to 
consignments finally released/ detained/ re -exported by Customs. For this 
purpose, IT system based requirements have been shared with Single Window 
team of CBIC and same is expected to be completed by the Customs within a 
year.   
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry’s reply is silent on PAC’s recommendations that accountability of 
officials responsible for lapses of non -issue of the prescribed certificate be 
fixed.  
 
Final ATN 

67 
 
FICS (Food Imports Clearance System)   of FSSAI is integrated with Customs 
ICEGATE in such a way that bills of entry identified through Risk Management 
System (RMS ) are forwarded to FSSAI for examination purpose and No 
Objection Certificate(NOC)/ Non-Conformance Certificate(NCC) is electronically 
transmitted from FICS to ICEGATE. However, it   may be noted that the 
process of integration of FICS (Food Imports Clearance System) of FSSAI with 
Single Window System of Customs ICEGATE was initiated only in 2015 -16 and 
before that the applications were filed manually in the system. This resulted in 
several duplicate/wrongly filed/Incomplete applications being filed in the 
system which has to be rejected by Authorized Officer.   
  
At the time of audit, approx. 9204 such entries were noted which actually 
pertains to 3724 unique bills of entry since same bill of entry was filed multiple 
times by importers/ CHAs. Out of this, 783 bills of entry were accepted for 
further processing and decision was communicated, 248 bills of entry were 
not in scope of FSSAI as per their end use, clarification was sough t in almost 
194 bills of entry & appx. 2499 bills of entry were rejected at scrutiny itself by 
the concerned Authorised Officer as they were duplicate/wrongly 
filed/Incomplete applications. 
  
To further strengthen the import control and ascertain the Out -of-Charge 
status of any food consignment,    FSSAI is coordinating with Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) to carry out complete system integration 
of ICEGATE and FICS so that FSSAI may have all the data pertaining to 
consignments finally re leased to domestic area/detained/re -
exported/destructed by Customs. For this purpose , IT System based 
requirements have been shared with Single Window team of CBIC and same is 
expected to be completed by the Customs soon.   
 
18.     Observations/Recommendation 
  
The Committee further take note of the gap analysis done by FSSAI in regard 
to the post of Designated Officers (DOs) under FSSAI and State Food 
Authorities. While the Designated Officer is one of   the key posts, the 
Committee are astonished to note that State level Authorities are continuing 
with the shortage of DOs. The Committee felt that   FSSAI should regularly 
undertake persuasive measures with the State Authorities and emphasise on 
them the urgency to expedite the recruitm ent of DOs   , whose shortage 
ranges from 5 to 80 percent in 12 States. The Committee feel that continuing 
with such a shortage of staff will definitely tell upon the work of the existing 
staff and the quality of their performance The Committee would , ther efore, 
recommend that the Ministry, in consultation with State Authorities , take 
necessary steps to overcome the shortage of staff especially at the key 
positions. 
 [Para 18] 
 
Action Taken 

68 
 
The requirement of Designated Officers (DOs) as assessed is 840.   Against 
this, the number of   DOs in position is on a lower side. However, the number 
of DOs in position which was 619 during   2017-18 has gone up to 667   as on 
31.12.2020. This number fluctuates as there were 741 DOs in 2018 -19. These 
figures include DOs who are   on additional charge.   
FSSAI is regularly persuading States/UTs through various channels viz. written 
communications, Video Conferencing, State Visits and Central Advisory 
Committee meetings to appoint requisite number of full time Designated 
Officers, Food Safety Officers and other technical staff for efficient 
implementation of laid down provisions of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Steps taken in this regard by States/UTs are being 
monitored regularly . Due to persistent efforts  by FSSAI, action for creation of 
new posts/filling of posts have been initiated in various States like West 
Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Delhi, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Goa, Odisha etc.  
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
PAC may be intimated about the latest status of vacancies under FSSAI and 
State Food Authorities.  
 
Final ATN 
FSSAI had undertaken an exercise to work out the ideal strength of DOs/ 
FSOs for each State/UT taking into account the population, number of block s, 
sub-divisions, tehsils etc in States/UTs. The ideal strength of DOs/ FSOs as per 
FSSAI so worked out was shared with States/ UTs. This ideal strength was 
reviewed with the States/ UTs in the 31 st and 32 nd Central Advisory 
Committee  (CAC) meetings. Afte r review and various consultations with 
States/ UTs, the ideal strength was finalised in the 32 nd CAC meeting held on 
15 Sep 2021. The latest strength of DOs/FSOs of States/ UTs vis -a-vis the 
ideal strength is detailed  at Annexure-III  
  
FSSAI is regularly persuading States/UTs through various channels viz. written 
communications, Video Conferencing, State Visits and Central Advisory 
Committee meetings to appoint requisite number of full time Designated 
Officers, Food Safety Officers and other technical st aff for efficient 
implementation of laid down provisions of FSS Act, Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Steps taken in this regard by States/UTs are being 
monitored regularly . Due to persistent efforts by FSSAI, action for creation of 
new posts/fillin g of posts have been initiated in various States like West 
Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Delhi, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Goa, Odisha etc.  
 
20. Observations/Recommendation 
  
The Committee note that an unspent amount collected mainly in the form of 
license fee to the tune of ₹ 300 crore is lying idle with FSSAI for want of 
procedural approval/nod from Ministry of Finance for utilizing the same. The 

69 
 
Committee recommend the Gover nment to intervene and expedite the 
examination of setting up of a separate public account with FSSAI to enable 
the latter to gainfully utilize these internally generated funds for discharging 
its mandated duties. 
 [Para 20] 
 
Action Taken 
The Authority has  formulated the Financial Regulations and the same are 
pending consideration of the Government. Once these are approved, the draft 
regulations would be notified for soliciting comments from stakeholders.   
Provision for utilisation of internally generated f unds has been included in the 
draft Financial Regulations.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The action is yet to be completed. Ministry may apprise the PAC about the 
timeline of notification of Financial Regulations of FSSAI and setting up of a 
separate public account with FSSAI.  
 
Final ATN 
The Authority has formulated the Financial Regulations and the same are 
under examination of the Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Law & 
Justice and Ministry of Finance. Once these are approved, the draft 
regulations would be notified for soliciting comments from stakeholders.   
Provision for utilisation of internally generated funds has been included in the 
draft Financial Regulations. 
  
  

70 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
     7   December, 2022               Chairperson, 
    16    Agrahayana 1944 (Saka)                            Public Accounts Committee 
  

71 
 
  

72 
 
 
(APPENDIX – II) 
(Vide para 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY FIRST  REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations - 20 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 
19  
 
- Total: 13 
Percentage–65% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government: 
  
-Nil- 
 
- Total:Nil 
Percentage - 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 18 and 20 
                         
- Total: 7 
Percentage–35% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
             -Nil- 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage – 0% 
 
 