52

CONSTRUCTION AND UTILIZATION OF
LIMITED HEIGHT SUBWAY (LHS)

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2280

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

CONSTRUCTION AND UTILIZATION OF
LIMITED HEIGHT SUBWAY (LHS)

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2022 /Ashadha, 1944 (Saka)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Construction and Utilisation of Limited Height Subway’ based on Para
3.1 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019 relating to the Ministry of Railways.

2. The C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019 was laid on the Table of the House on 23%
September, 2020

3. Public Accounts Committee (2021-2022) selected the aforesaid subject and
allocated the same to Sub-Committee-Ill (Railways, Communication, Jal Shakti and
External Affairs) for examination and Report.

4. The Sub-Committee-III (Railways, Communication, Jal Shakti and External
Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) took briefing by Audit on
07.09.2021. Thereafter, Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways on the aforementioned subject on 18" November, 2021.

5. The Sub-Committee—Ill (Railways, Communication, Jal Shakti and External
Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) first considered and adopted the
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their sitting held on 06.04.2022. Then
the Draft Report was placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2022-2023) for
consideration and adoption. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft
Report at their sitting held on 15" June, 2022. The Minutes of the Sittings are
appended to the Report

6 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part-
॥ of the Report.

7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence
and obtaining information on the subject.

8. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry Railways for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Sub-Committee-Il] (Railways, Communication, Jal
Shakti and External Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) in connection
with the examination of the subject.

9. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and by the Office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
July, 2022 _ Chairperson,
Ashadha, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Cvi>


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iti)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) (iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -॥ (RAILWAYS, COMMUNICATIONS,
JAL SHAKT] & EXTERNAL AFFAIRS) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2021-22) (v)
INTRODUCTION (vi)
REPORT
PART- |
1 INTRODUCTORY

I JUSTIFICATION FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LHS
(a) Construction of LHS at places with very Low Train Vehicle Units (TUVs)

(b) Construction of LHS at places where diversion road already exists

Tt PROBLEMS FACED POST CONSTRUCTION OF LHS
(a) Non provision of drainage system
(9) Accumulation of water in LHS

IV MAINTENANCE OF LHS

(3) Co-ordination with State Governments
(b) Accidents

PART -॥।
OBSERVATIONS/REC OMMENDATIONS
APPENDICES
Minutes of the First sitting of the Sub-Committee — ॥ (Railways, Communications,
Jal Shakti & External Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 07-
09-2021.

॥ 8 Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Sub-Committee — Ill (Railways,
Communications, Jal Shakti & External Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee
(2021-22) held on 18-11-2021. ‘

We Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Sub-Committee — II! (Railways, Communications,
Jal Shakti & External Affairs) of Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) held on 06-
04-2022.

IV. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) held on
15-06-2022.

10

1
13

16-27


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

40. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
41. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

42. Shri Jayant Sinha

43. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

44. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

45. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

OONDAARYN

RAJYA SABHA

46. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
417. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
48. Dr. Amar Patnaik

49. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

20. Vacant

21. Dr. M Thambidurai

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

ee --
* ghri V. Vijayasai Reddy ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha
on 21 June, 2022.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

PN OM ARwD

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

(2021-22)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury sss - ~SSs Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi’

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara®
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

AJYA SABHA

bs]

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. C.M. Ramesh

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Dr. M. Thambidurai

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi‘

1 Elected ७.९. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

* Elected w.c.f, 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

* Elected w.c.f. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
“Elected w.e.f 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021.

civ)


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-I) (RAILWAYS,
COMMUNICATIONS, JAL SHAKTI & EXTERNAL AFFAIRS) OF PAC

(2021-22)
1. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
2. Shri T. R. Baalu - Convenor
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry न Member
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal - Member
5. Dr. Satya Pal Singh - Member
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Member

(४)


REPORT
PART- |
|. INTRODUCTORY

1) The Level Crossings (LCs) are very crucial intersection area for the road
vehicles and for the railway traffic. These are provided to facilitate smooth passage of
road traffic in a regulated manner and are governed by specific rules and regulations.
These intersections also have high potential of accidents and put up a challenge to
ensure safety of train operation as well as safety of road users. There used to be a lot
of accidents on unmanned LCs causing deaths of road users. Initially, Limited Height
Subways (LHS) were constructed to provide uninterrupted passage to Light Vehicles.
To improve safety, Ministry of Railways decided to reduce unmanned Level Crossings
(UMLCs) by Constructing Road Under or Over Bridges, Limited Height Subways and
any other prescribed methods to minimize accidents.

2). As per the background note furnished by the Ministry of Railways, Railway
Board issued orders in November, 2006 regarding elimination of level crossings by
construction of limited use subways. The order stated that at many locations, the
traffic consist of Light Vehicles, two wheelers etc., which can be catered to by
providing subways of limited height which are economical. Railway Divisions were
instructed to identify such unmanned/manned level crossings which can be eliminated
by construction of ‘Limited use subways’. Simultaneously, it was also instructed that
Limited Height Subways should be provided very selectively with the personal
approval of General manager at critical locations based on one or more of the

following considerations:-


2

i) — Safety Consideration: Accident vulnerable LC Locations where visibility

is poor and elimination of level crossing will increase safety.

(ii) | Reduction in Level Crossings numbers: Elimination of Level crossings
will yield substantial operational benefits e.g. section where the number
of level crossings in larger or suburban sections.

(iii) Site feasibility: Embankment height (3m) is adequate and will not allow
collection of water under the bridge and surroundings, water table is low
and approach road is feasible.

(iv) Train Vehicle Unit (TVU): Locations where TVUs are less but have

potential of getting manned or have already qualified.

3) Railway Board in March, 2010 observed that Railways are not constructing
LHS if adequate embankment height is not available. Whereas with water proofing
atrangements, like, retaining wall along approach ramp, top covering, water
harvesting and other local measures, LHS can be provided in lieu of most level
crossings. Therefore, all zonal Railways can plan construction of LHS in lieu of LC as
one of the methods.

4) As per a White Paper on Indian Railways, 2015 the highest number of fatalities
in Railways occur due to accidents at unmanned level crossings. CAG in its Report
has recorded the findings of Indian Railways Vision 2020, that nearly 70 percent of
the fatalities in Railways mishaps take place at unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs).
Thus, LCs are vulnerable points for accidents and were proposed to be removed by
building Road Over Bridges (ROBs), Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Limited/Normal
Height Subways (LHSs)/NHSs) and through other prescribed methods.

5) __ In view of the crucial issue of Level Crossings and the findings of Audit on
Limited Height Subways (LHSs), the Public Account Committee examined the issue,
taking into account the response of the Ministry of Railways on the findings of the
Audit.

—I-


3
I. | JUSTIFICATION FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LHS

6) As mentioned by Railways there had been a lot of accidents, particularly, on
unmanned level crossings on the Indian Railways with the deaths of the road users.
So, initially they wanted that these level crossings should be somehow reduced; and
for that, one solution was that the limited height subways could be provided because
there are many places where only the pedestrians or may be two wheelers etc. pass
through. Then, Railways tried to take this solution for even the manned level-
crossings also and for unmanned level-crossings. Since the safety was increasing, it
was taken in a big way. Since, unmanned level-crossings are being eliminated new
ones are not permitted. Some of the unmanned level-crossings were also manned.
This figure was increasing, but at the same time this is also being limited. As on

01.04.2021, there are 863 unmanned level crossings.

(a) Construction of LHS at places very Low Train Vehicle Units (TUVs)

7) Audit found that as per provisions, locations where TVUs were less but have
potential of getting manned or have already qualified for manning should be selected
for construction of LHS. The Audit also found that Railway Board in August, 2014
further directed to close UMLCs having negligible TVU. Audit noticed that SECR
violated the prescribed norms and spent Rs. 10.92 crore in the construction of seven
LHS where density of TVU ranged between 68 and 321.

8)  SECR informed (2017) audit that no guidelines had been issued by the Railway
Board for fixing of minimum TVU for construction of LHS. While audit verified the case
it found that Railway Board in September, 2011 had directed the Zonal Railways to
eliminate LCs with very low TVUs, (less than 500 or so) by outright closure.

9) — While the Committee raised issue about construction of 7 LHS where density of

TVU ranged between 68 to 321, the Ministry in a written reply mentioned as follows:


10)

4

“For closure of unmanned level crossing, Railway Board prescribed the method
of elimination or direct closure with the consent of district administration.
However, in cases where outright closure was not possible, other methods like
closure by providing diversion road, LHS or manning of UMLC were to be
adopted. Out of 358 unmanned level crossings on SECR, 46 unmanned level
crossings were eliminated by direct closure and rest of the unmanned level
crossing where Collector permission for direct closure could not be received,
were closed by diversion/LHS/Manning etc. with State Government (Collector)
permission. Accordingly, SECR took action to eliminate UMLCs by above
mentioned methods. There were many UMLCs having less TVU, where
collector's consent was not received for direct closure due to local public
protest mainly for reasons like having cultivated land on other side of track and
requiring frequent movement across the track by local farmers etc. were closed
by methods other than direct closure. (Reference: Railway board's letter dated
03.05.2010). Therefore, these 7 unmanned level crossings (BK-105, BK-106,
AB-14, AB-35, AB-44, AB-67) were eliminated by other feasible options like
construction of LHS.(sic)"

Asked whether Ministry of Railways have taken necessary action against the

concerned Zonal Railways for the construction of 7 LHS in contravention to the

prescribed norms, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated that ‘as such there

was no contravention to the prescribed norms; hence, no further action against the

concerned Zonal Railways was taken’.

11)

Probed further, the representative of the Ministry of Railways during the oral

evidence stated as under:-

"जी we close that level crossing, without providing any passage, without their
consent, there will be agitation. In fact, for whatever below 500 TVU level
crossings which were there, the South-East Central Railway had applied to the
local authorities. They were’ able to get NOC from them for 46 and were able to
close them, but for seven, they did not allow because of the agitation of the
local people. For, those, we had to go for it.”


5

12) Taking the discussion further, it was asked during the oral evidence as to
whether Railway Board reacted to the agitation by some people. The Ministry of

Railways stated that services are to be run if there is lot of need felt.
(b) Construction of LHS at places where diversion road already exists

43) The audit found that Railway Board instructed (2010) Zonal Railways to
prepare a Master Plan for elimination of UMLCs. One of the methods of elimination of
UMLC was diversion of road to other LCs.

14) While audit conducted joint inspection with railway officers it found that one
LHS (BK 39) was constructed at a cost of Rs. 2.34 crore in 2014 while RUB was at a
distance of only 134 m from the location.

15) — Audit noted the reply of Ministry of Railways as under:-

“In reply, SECR stated (October 2017) that LC no, BK-39 was initially
eliminated (March 2013) by construction of diversion road through bridge as an
interim measure to enhance safety. During peak monsoon, the diversion road
becomes unusable due to high water level in the bridge. As such, for safe
movement of the road users in all weather, subway was constructed to avoid
any mishap. At this LC, the drainage arrangement planned along with LHS
work was not carried out by the contractor. Accordingly, the contract was
terminated. However, the problem of accumulation of water and mud at this
subway is being addressed by making suitable drainage arrangements in 2017-
18."

16) Audit, during joint inspection also noticed that bases of the LHS at LC were
lower than the existing bridge. The drainage system was defective and LHS was more
prone to water logging than the existing RUB.

17) In case of LC Nos. AB-23, 88-24, AB-25 and 88-35 also, audit found that Rs.
5.37 crore was spent in the construction where RUBs were there nearby within 304 m


6

distance. Audit mentioned that the construction of these LHSs were not justified and
were in violation of Railway Board's order of May, 2010.

18) In case of other LCs audit was informed by the Ministry that these were
eliminated after construction of diversion road through nearby bridges but due to
protest by local public who faced difficulty in negotiating additional distance of 300 m
to 700 m demanded for construction of subways. In case of LC No. 88-23, the slope
of the connecting diversion road was very steep.

19) Asked to clarify why LHS were constructed where diversion Road Under
Bridges (RUBs) already existed at a distance ranged between 24 m to 304 m; the
Ministry in its written reply mentioned as under:

"LC No. AB-23, AB-25, AB-35, BK-39 were closed initially during 2012-13 by
construction of diversion road through nearby dry water way bridges as an
interim measure in view of safety of road users and to facilitate the construction
of LHS. Railway bridges are provided for water flow and not for road traffic but
in dry season, sometimes end spans are used as temporary passage as in
above cases. These diversions can be used during fair weather only and may
affect safety of existing bridges due to movement of road traffic. In this regard,
Chief Bridge Engineer/South East Central Railway (CBE/SECR) during his
inspection of these sites, had also directed for construction of subways. LHS
were constructed to provide all weather passage to road users and also to
safeguard the Rail Bridges.”

20) In case of AB-24, unmanned LC was eliminated in February, 2011 by
construction of 2.5m clear height LHS with collector permission. But later on due to
movement of heavy vehicles the height LHS was found inadequate leading to public
agitation, therefore, as an alternate, path for heavy vehicles end span of nearby
Water Bridges was allowed for passage of heavy vehicle during dry season.

21) The Ministry further added that diversion through nearby railway water bridges

was an interim measure for elimination of UMLCs to enhance safety of road users.


7

LHS were constructed as public agitated for all weather passage as road passing

through bridges were water logging during rainy seasons.

lll. PROBLEMS FACED POST CONSTRUCTION OF LHS

22) The audit found that in March, 2010 Railway Board remarked that they were
not constructing LHS if adequate embankment height was not available. This was
followed and LHS was allowed with exception to some water proofing arrangements
viz. retaining wall along approach ramp, top covering, water harvesting and other
local measures etc. Audit, during joint inspection, further noted that there were
problems post construction.

(a) Non- provision of drainage system

23) As per Railway Board’s letter (April, 2008) the cost of approaches and drainage
facility falling outside Railway boundary if required, should be borne by the respective
State Government/local authority. The audit during joint inspection found that 11 LHS
out of 18 LHS were non-gravitational where the water did not drain out automatically
and needed to be drained out by construction of drains, use of pumps, sumps etc.
Further, it was noticed by the audit that there was water accumulation during rainy
season and in some cases throughout the year. In case of seven LHS drainage
system was not constructed or partially constructed.

24) During the oral evidence, when it was suggested that the officers on the site
are not properly considering the availability of drainage facility at the time of pre-
feasibility study, DPR, designing etc. the representative of the Ministry of Railways
agreed as under:

“Yes, very right, Sir. We are making use of all the technologies. Sir, at the
moment, we are sanctioning work only when it is perfectly feasible and
drainage, etc. can be provided. Hence, | stated in my presentation that a


8

Senior Administrative-grade Officer/Chief Engineer ranked officer ensures it,
and once he clears that this can be provided or these things are available, then
only we are sanctioning the work. Otherwise, we are not going ahead with it.”

25) Audit found that LHS built is facing water logging during rainy season and mud
is dried up and accumulated in the basement. In this condition vehicles prefer to move
on RUB.

26) ॥ 2006 Railway Board issued an order stating that 3 m embankment height is
adequate where water table was low and approach road was feasible. This would not
allow collection of water under the bridge and surroundings. Further, it was decided
by the Railway Board that not RUB/LHS were to be planned where natural drainage is
not available,

27) During the joint inspection, Audit noticed that bases of the LHS at the LC were
lower than the existing bridge. The drainage system was defective and LHS was more

prone to water logging than the existing RUB.
(b) Accumulation of water in LHS

28) Audit found that there was accumulation of water in 39 LHS of Nagpur Division,
11 LHS of Bilaspur Division and 7 LHS of Raipur Division. SECR stated that they
have tried to provide gravitational drainage system wherever feasible in the past.
Other methods viz. retaining wall along approach road, top covering of the
approaches and drainage system were provided to avoid entry of water in the
subways. The audit observed that with the construction of LHS with gravitational
drainage, the problem of water logging could have been avoided at a large number of
LHS in SECR. The audit also mentioned that in spite of adopting different approach to
prevent water logging most of the LHS were submerged and closed most of the year,

defeating main purpose of construction.


9

28) The major audit observations are summated as under:-

a. The sign of water accumulation on the walls of LHS from 1 feet to 8 feet
was visible and dried up mud was lying inside the 10 LHS (BK-12, TT-
6, GCF-57, CG-1, BK-39, 388, 358, DD-16, DD-5, AB-16). During rainy
season, these LHS remained closed due to water logging.

b. LHS No. CG-7 in Bilaspur Division was full of water even during hot,
dry summer season. This indicated that dewatering may not be
possible during rainy season even after use of pumps due to high
seepage of water. Audit found that people continued to cross the
closed LC risking lives.

6. Water accumulation with mud was also seen in LHS No. 286, 294 and
295 of Bilaspur Division during the month of December, 2016.
d. In Nagpur Division, LC No. GCF-49 could not be commissioned due to

water logging. Railway Administration replied (November,2014) that
LHS was functional, pumping was done as and when required and the
LC is closed.

30) ॥ another case audit found that in Nagpur Division LHS at LC No. 51 was
processed for plain closure due to water logging, after casting of boxes and base
slabs at a cost of Rs. 29.39 lakh. Audit observed that the problem of water logging
was brought to notice by the concerned Senior Section Engineer (Works) only after a
substantial amount had been spent over the work. Since one of the major concerns of
LHS was water accumulation, measuring the level of ground water should have been
done during estimation stage.

31) ॥ a written reply to the Committee the Ministry further clarified that out of 57
LHS in which water logging has been pointed out by the Audit, gravitational drain has
been provided and is working in 30 number of LHS. In remaining 27 number of LHS,
arrangement of pump and sump has been made for pumping out of rainy/seepage
water. Now all the LHS are in use and issue of water logging in these LHS has been

handled effectively.


10

32) The Ministry further assured the Committee in it's reply that before start of
construction of LHS sites are finalized through preliminary and final survey of location
by concerned Divisional Engineers/Senior Divisional Engineers and LHS are
constructed after satisfying all prescribed norms for requirement of LHS as per
drawings approved by Railways and district authorities.

33) During the oral evidence, on being pointed out that Ministry of Railways should
have anticipated many things well in advance with regard to finding solutions for
waterlogging, seepage etc., the representative of Ministry of Railways stated as
under:-

“Sir, | just want to submit that with experience we learnt a lot of things. Of
course, we have taken all those actions."

IV. MAINTENANCE OF LHS

34) In the Railway system, Member Engineering at Railway Board is responsible
for maintenance of all fixed assets of Indian Railways such as Tracks, Bridges,
buildings, Roads. In addition, construction of new assets such as new lines, gauge
conversion, doubling and other expansion and developmental works are also
undertaken by him. He is assisted by Additional Member (Civil Engineering),
Additional Member (Works) and Advisor (Land & Amenities).

35) At Zonal level, the Engineering Department is headed by Principal Chief
Engineer (PCE). He is assisted by various Chief Engineers for maintenance of
Tracks, Bridges, Buildings, Roads, etc. Each Zonal Railway also has a construction
organization headed by a Chief Administrative Officer (Construction) who is
responsible for major construction works of Zonal Railway. He is assisted by various
Chief Engineers (Construction).

36) Regarding expenditure, audit noted that in 2017-18, the total expenditure on
repair and maintenance of assets by Indian Railway was Rs. 13,947.38 crore. Indian


11

Railway also incurred an expenditure of Rs. 38156.76 crore on creation of new
assets.

(a) Co-ordination with State Governments

37) In April, 2012 Railway Board directed all Zonal Railways that LCs which did not
qualify for sanction of RUB on cost sharing basis could be planned for elimination by
subways, if found technically feasible. As per the direction Railways were to bear the
complete initial cost of construction of subway and future maintenance cost of subway
proper. State Government was to acquire and provide encumbrance free land free of
cost to Railway area, where required. The responsibility for maintenance of road
passing through subway, lighting, drainage system, diversion road and any other
allied works, was also to rest on the State Government. Audit has reported their
findings that SECR had written to the State Governments of Chhattisgarh,
Maharashtra, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh. Only Chhatisgarh Government had
responded with the reply that these works will be done only in Municipal areas. Audit
had found that in case of Chhatisgarh only one (LHS DD-51) was in municipal area.
No response was received from other State Governments. In May, 2014 SECR had
requested Railway Board to withdraw the condition for maintenance and other
arrangements through the concerned State Government, however, Railway Board did
not agree with the proposal.

38) The audit noted that in Bilaspur and Raipur divisions dewatering was got done
by zonal contractors in respect of seven LHS (LHS No. BK-11 in Bilaspur Division and
LHS No. 388, DD-11, DD-16, DD-29, DD-42 and DD-47 in Raipur Division) and
amount was spent due to faulty construction of LHS and due to lack of agreement
with State Governments. In Nagpur Division, the work of dewatering for 20 subways

(in Gondia -Chanda Fort Section under ADEN/Nagbhir) was awarded at a cost of |


12

25.35 lakh. Therefore, due to faulty construction of LHS and lack of agreement with
State Government, SECR had to undertake maintenance and a recurring expenditure
on dewatering of these LHS.

39) Asked further about the monitoring mechanism and coordination with State
Governments the Ministry mentioned as under:

“SECR made lot of efforts in persuading State Government through regular co-
ordination meetings to take their consent for taking the responsibility for
maintenance of drainage, road and lighting arrangement in the subways. In
spite of constant chasing with State Governments, consent was not received.
However, Principal Secretary, Urban Administration and Development,
Government of Chhattisgarh has given his consent for maintenance of
subways in the jurisdiction of municipality areas only. Although, Government of
Chhattisgarh has signed MOU for 6 LHS only but they have not taken over the
maintenance of these LHS even after signing of MOU."

40) The Ministry also informed that vide letter dated 02.07.2018 Railway Board
issued instructions to all Zonal Railways to undertake maintenance of road passing
through subway, lighting, drainage system, diversion road and any other allied works
in Railway portion.

41) Specifically asked why the State Governments were not taking responsibility of
maintenance the Ministry informed that despite constant chasing with State
Governments, through various coordination meetings, State Government did not
come forward to undertake responsibility of maintenance. Government of Chhatisgarh
agreed for maintenance of subways in the jurisdiction of municipality areas only. After
that Government of Chhatisgarh has signed MOU for 6 LHS only but they have not
taken over the maintenance of these LHS even after signing of MOU.

42) During oral evidence the representative of the Ministry of Railways stated as

under:


13

“Because earlier we had decided that the construction of these subways will be
at the cost of the Railways, but the maintenance of the road passing through,
subway lighting, drainage system etc. will be done by the local authorities as
per the other road maintenance. Later on, we found that the complaints were
coming out to be little more and there were issues of water-logging and all. So,
we went for taking the responsibility of everything - maintenance of the entire
subway including drainage etc. - on the Railways’ cost. Due to complaints
about poor maintenance of LHS, Railway took over the responsibility to
maintain these LHS in Railway portion.”

(b) Accidents

43) 88 per Railway Protection Force (RPF) records, 3 accidents (LC No. 286, AB-
16-Bilaspur Dn.LC No. BK 12-Nagpur Dn) had occurred during May, 2014 to
December, 2016. The reasons for accidents were stated to be due to non-completion
of LHS by scheduled date, water logging and non-barricading of closed LC and road
travellers trying to cross tracks. The schedule date of completion of LHS at LC No.
BK-12 was 11 September, 2013 which could not be achieved. Accidents occurred at
the site on 22 May, 2014.

44) The Committee noted the Audit observation on the basis of report of RPF (30
December 2016) that an accident took place on 6 December 2016 at the LC no.286.
In the report, it was mentioned that though the LC was closed, it was not barricaded.
Audit reported conducting of a joint inspection at this LC on 7 December 2016 and
reported its finding that the LHS was filled with water up to brink. Audit has further in
their report stated that an accident also took place on 13 September 2016 as reported
(20 February 2017) by Railways. It was mentioned in the report that there was heavy
rainfall on the date of accident and the LHS was flooded with water. Audit also
observed that as per RPF report (31 May 2017), an accident occurred at LC no. BK-
12 on 22 May 2014. Audit observed that at the time of accident, construction of LHS


14

was not completed though the scheduled date of completion of the LHS was
11.09.2013. ,
45) Asked about the reasons for non-completion of LHS within the scheduled date,
the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated as under:

“There has been delay in construction of LHS at LC No-BK-12 in Nagpur
Division due to ban on auction of sand mining and consequently non-
availability of sand alongwith non-availability of OPC-53 cement. For the delay
contractor was issued 7 days notice and penalized. The work has been
completed and commissioned on 29.06.2017.

For completion of LHS in time all necessary site clearances such as cable
clearance, caution orders and traffic blocks are closely monitored by
concerned DEN/Sr DEN on regular basis. Further to expedite the execution of
LHS work, execution program prepared in the form of bar chart is jointly
signed by executing agency and Railways officials and progress is closely
monitored and cornpared with as planned in bar chart.

During construction of LHS, alternate road connectivity was available.
However, some road users did resort to trespassing, which resulted in
accidents.”

46) Asked about the action taken by the Ministry against the official responsible for
the delay in completion of LHS, non-barricading of Closed LC etc.the ministry in a

written reply stated as under:

“For delay in completion of LHS at LC No-BK-12 in Nagpur Division contractor
was penalized while granting extension of time. The work has been completed
and commissioned on 29.06.2017. For LC No-286, barricading of closed LC was
done but the motorbike driver was trespassing at far away location from LC
leading to accident. In case of AB-16 also two persons were trespassing the
railway track which led to accident. Since, contractor of AB-16 was at default in
providing proper drainage arrangement of LHS hence, his contract was
immediately terminated after the incidence and corrective action was taken by
deploying other agency and was completed within one month of incident.


15

All level crossings after closure have been barricaded.

Since the Railway Officials executing the works at these LCs have taken action
as per contractual provisions such as imposition of penalty and termination of
Contracts therefore, no action has been taken against Railway Officials
executing the LHS works.”

47) The Committee asked about the steps taken by the Railway to dissuade road
travellers from crossing closed LC, Ministry informed of following steps taken:

(a) Necessary Barricading is provided with retro reflective STOP Board to deter
any movernent during day or night;

(b) News of closure of LC is published in local Newspapers one week before
closing of any LC to inform the road users;

(c) Road users are regularly counselled for using alternate road of LHS for
movement and not to trespass/use closed LC any further.


16

PART -॥

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

1. The Committee note from the Audit observations that 7 LHSs were built in
places where Train Vehicle Units (TVU) ranged between 68 to 321 which is far
less than the prescribed norm of building such sub-ways only in places with
TVU in excess of 500. The Committee find it surprising to note that while in
2017, South East Central Railways informed Audit that there were no guidelines
issued by the Railways in regard to taking up construction of Limited Height
Subways (LHSs), on scrutiny, Audit found that in 2011 a clear directive on the
subject matter was actually formulated and issued by the Railways. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the SECR were either not aware of the
stipulated norms applicable for building LHSs, or chose to ignore the
stipulations. Moreover, the Committee have not got clarification on whether the
cause for the lapse was looked into by the authorities concerned and whether
any action was taken against the errant for non-adherence with the stipulations.
The Committee deprecate the failure of Railway Board in monitoring
implementation of its own guidelines effectively and are surprised that Railway
Board is not aware that one of its zones, SECR was not following its guidelines.
The Committee desire for a suitable explanation regarding action taken against
the officials concerned for permitting construction of LHSs in contravention of

the applicable stipulations.

2. The Committee are also surprised to see that while the Railway Board

has prescribed undertaking the work of elimination of Level Crossings with the


17

consent of the district administration concerned, which is of importance, and
takes into account the ground reality, LCs have been closed and LHS
constructed without the consent or discussion with the district administration
concerned. The Committee wish to point out that LHSs have significant impact
on the daily life of the people living in the adjoining areas and having to
commute across railway lines. Therefore, it is not surprising that there have
been protests when the movement of people at the site of LCs was affected.
The Committee are of the view that had planning for doing-away with LCs and
replacing them with LHS been done in consultation with the local district
administration, public protests that were witnessed following the execution of
the projects could have been averted. The Committee are of the opinion that the
wasteful expenditure could have been avoided if the management of Railways
had considered all ground level factors and followed the guidelines while
finalizing the projects. The Committee desire that an effective mechanism of
communication may be developed to get feedback from the ground level and
effectively assess the requirement of the people so that while preparing
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), all relevant matters can be considered and
unnecessary expenditure avoided.

3. The Committee find that in such cases guidelines issued prescribing
TVUs merely remain on paper. In this context, the Committee recommend that
guidelines issued in the matter may be revisited and reframed as may be
needed, with clear action plan, considering all aspects. The Committee are of
the view that sanctioning of construction of LHS overlooking the applicable
2011 guidelines of Railway Board invites appropriate punitive action. The

Committee, therefore, expect that necessary action is taken for overlooking or


18

ignoring the prevailing guidelines. The Committee wish to be apprised of the

action taken on account of acting in contravention of the guidelines.

4. The Committee note that 11 of the 18 LHS had no gravitational drainage
system owing to which additional expenditure has been incurred for pumping
out drain water, creating sumps etc., The Committee are astonished to find that
Railways have been sanctioning and undertaking construction of LHS which
are ‘non-gravitational’, the matter having been pointed out by Audit consequent
to their selective joint inspection exercise. The Committee also note that there
was no drainage system or a partially constructed drainage system existed in
case of seven LHS despite these being needed, in the places. While considering
the above facts, the Committee are surprised to see the reply of the Ministry of
Railways that all LHS sites are finalised after preliminary and final survey of
location by concerned Divisional Engineers. LHS are constructed after
satisfying all prescribed norms for requirement of LHS and as per drawings
approved by Railways and district authorities. The Committee recommend that
responsibility of officials concerned for lapses in regard to construction of LHS

be fixed and action taken be communicated to the Committee.

Accumulation of Water in LHS

5. The Committee note the findings of Audit in regard to accumulation of
water in LHS. The Committee cannot help but express their displeasure on the
findings that in 57 LHS (39 in Nagpur Division, 11 in Bilaspur and 7 in Raipur
Division) there was water accumulation. Even at the cost of repetition, the

Committee would like to note the major Audit observations noteworthy as a


19

representative sample of the grave problem of water accumulation, which are

summated as under:

iti.

The sign of water accumulation on the walls of LHS from 1 feet to 8
feet was visible and dried up and mud was lying inside the 10 LHS
(BK-12, TT-6, GCF-57, CG-1, BK-39, 388, 358, 00-16, DD-5, AB-16).
During rainy season, these LHS remained closed due to water
logging.

LHS No. CG-7 in Bilaspur Division was full of water even during
hot, dry summer season. This indicated that dewatering may not be
possible during rainy season even after use of pumps due to high
seepage of water. Audit found that people continued to cross the
closed LC risking lives.

Water accumulation with mud was also seen in LHS No. 286, 294
and 295 of Bilaspur Division during the month of December, 2016.
In Nagpur Division, LC No. GCF-49 could not be commissioned due
to water logging. Railway Administration replied (November 2014)
that LHS was functional, pumping was done as and when required
and the LC is closed.

Another LHS at LC No. 51 in Nagpur Division was processed for
plain closure due to water logging, after Rs 29.39 lakh was spent on
casting of boxes and base slabs. Audit observed that the problem
of water logging was brought to notice by the Senior Section
Engineer (Works) concerned only after a substantial amount had

been spent over the work.


20

6. The Committee recommend that those responsible for the sanctioning of
such projects with poor pre- feasibility study should be taken to task, suitable
explanation: sought from these officers and action taken thereon. The

Committee are especially perturbed to note the silence of the Ministry over the
spending of nearly ~ 30 lakh in case of LH-51 in Nagpur Division where the

Senior Section Engineer (Works) noticed the problem of water logging after the
amount was expended. The Committee strongly recommend fixing
responsibility in all such cases. The details of action taken be communicated to

the Committee within six months.

7. The Committee feel that cases of water logging post construction of LCs,
non-provision of drainage system etc. as pointed by Audit are part of wider
problem indicating design faults which is a failure of engineering division. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways should use all available
technology and revisit the design phase of all those LHS which are ‘non-
gravitational’ and a mandatory directive be issued to all concerned to ensure
that the LHS is made ‘gravitational’ at the design stage itself. This exercise, the
Committee feel, will help in evolving a near perfect standardized manual for
construction and maintenance of LHS by Railways.

8. The Committee notice the findings of Audit in case of LC at BK No, 39
where LHS was newly constructed at a cost of Rs 2.34 crore in 2014. The
Committee note the findings of Audit in their joint inspection along with
Railways of selected LCs that a diverted RUB already existed at a distance of
only 134 m from the location of the LHS. Surprisingly, this LHS was prone to

water logging during rainy season and mud accumulated on the basement of


21

LHS due to which vehicles preferred using the RUB instead of the LHS. The
Committee note in this regard that the interim measure i.e. constructing RUB to
be a better option than the final solution (LHS). The Committee find that no
forethought or planning has been done in construction of the said LHS at BK-
39,

9. The Committee notice other similar cases from the Audit observations
regarding LC nos. AB-23, AB-24, AB-25 and AB-35 constructed at a cost of Rs
5.37 crore where diversion RUBs already existed. All the LHSs built were in the
range of less than 304 m from these RUBs. The Committee note from the audit
observation that the construction of these LHSs were not justified and are in
violation of Railway Board’s order of May 2010. The Committee also note from
the information furnished by the Ministry in this regard that the reasons
attributed for undertaking construction of LHSs range from, necessity of
eliminating of few LCs by construction of diversion road nearby bridges to
pressure exerted by local public. The Committee nevertheless cannot help
noting that the construction of these LCs are not only violative of the Railway
Board’s Order but are also cases of bad assessment of the need of the public in
these areas which resulted in wastage of public funds. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways may have to
comprehensively re-look the present guidelines on construction of LHSs and
update the same in accordance with the experiences, inputs and feedback
received so far. The Committee also reiterate the need for taking appropriate
action against those who may have acted in contravention to the prevailing

guidelines of the Railway Board.


22

10. Considering that the joint inspection of selected LCs undertaken was a
. sample case, the Committee recommend that, a thorough survey of all the LCs
is required to be undertaken by Indian Railways in all zones at all LCs as a joint
exercise of Railways alongwith concerned District Officials of the area in a time
bound manner and the result of such an exercise be communicated to the
Committee within a period of six months. Further, the Committee recommend
that the shortcomings in regard to the LCs should be acted upon and redressed

by the Railway Authorities.

11. The Committee are disappointed to note that despite incurring additional
expenditure for addressing the problem, water logging continues in LHSs. The
Committee desire that Railways take all necessary action to make all LHSs fully
usable and ensure safe movement of the public through the sub-way passages.
Responsibility in regard to managing drainage systems should be clearly
demarcated. The Committee, in this regard, recommend that contact details of
officers concerned need to be clearly displayed at the site of LHSs. The
Committee further recommend that responsibility should be fixed on account of
occurrence of post construction water logging, problem of drainage etc. that

was witnessed at several sites.

42. The Committee note that instances where LHSs constructed could not be
used due to water logging etc. only resulted in sheer wastage of money. The
Committee are also concerned to note that in spite of water logging, LHSs are
kept open and no evaluation is made of their utility or action taken for
preventing the possibility of accidents. The Committee, in this regard

emphasize the importance of taking time bound measures at the ground level


23

so that the problems posed on account of seasonal hazards viz. flooding, water

logging can be effectively addressed and resolved.
Maintenance

13. The Committee note that as per the 2012 directives of Railways, the
complete initial cost of construction of subways, and future maintenance cost
of the sub way proper is to be borne by the Railways. State Governments are to

provide encumbrance free land free of cost to the Railways, wherever required.

The Committee further find that responsibility for maintenance of roads
passing through subways, lighting, drainage system, diversion roads and any
other allied works, was to rest on the State Governments. The Committee are
disappointed to find that these stipulations have remained on paper only and as
per information furnished by the Ministry, there is no positive response from
the State Governments on these issues. The Committee also express
displeasure on the fact that no details are available with the Railways indicating

as to why the State Governments have not been showing proper interest.

14. The Committee note the Audit observation that in Bilaspur and Raipur
Divisions dewatering was got done by zonal contractors in respect of seven
LHS (LHS No. BK-11 in Bilaspur Division and LHS No. 388, 00-14, 00-16, DD-
29, DD-42 and DD-47 in Raipur Division). In Nagpur Division, the work of
dewatering for 20 subways (in Gondia -Chanda Fort Section under
ADENINagbhir) was awarded at a cost of Rs 25.35 lakh. The Committee are
pained to find that due to faulty construction of LHS and lack of agreement in
clear terms with State Governments, SECR had to undertake maintenance and

incur recurring expenditure on dewatering of these LHS. The Committee feel


24

that this expenditure was completely avoidable and concur with the Audit
observation that role and responsibility of Railways and the State Governments
for the construction and maintenance of LHS need to be revisited and clearly
demarcated. The Committee are of the opinion that lack of response from State
Governments to Railways is perhaps indicative of un-willingness of States to
bear the cost of maintenance of LHS, especially as the design is reportedly
faulty. Keeping in view the spirit of cooperative federalism, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Railways should initiate steps towards taking
State Governments on board so that coordination at the ground level becomes

easier.

15. The Committee in this regard, also doubt whether, while framing the
guidelines the State Governments were consulted and informed in clear terms
of their responsibility, sharing of expenditure in regard to maintenance etc.
From the response furnished, the Committee note that from 2018, Railways
have taken over the responsibility of maintenance works of the LHSs that was
originally intended to be that of the State Government concerned. The
Committee desire that a ‘designated officer’ who can effectively monitor the
situation pertaining to the maintenance works of the LHSs be assigned the

responsibility of attending to maintenance works.

16. The Committee note that as per guidelines issued in 2010 by Railways
LHS are not to be constructed if adequate embankment height was not
available, with the exception being made only in cases where water proofing
arrangements are available. While the guidelines are in tune with the ground

reality, what the Committee find to be disappointing to note is that guidelines


25

pertaining to maintenance are unclear and do not clearly designate and bestow
responsibility. The Committee note that as per the guidelines, the cost of
provisioning drainage facility in areas that fall outside the Railway boundary is
to be borne by the respective State Governments, but the Governments
concerned have not owned up any responsibility. As provision of drainage
facility was not considered to be any one’s responsibility, and not stipulated in

clear terms, maintenance work was not being undertaken.

17. The Committee also recommend that Railways should form a Committee
of Senior Engineers to come out with solutions for mitigating recurrent and
perpetual cost of dewatering in the sub-ways and find a permanent and low
cost method of ensuring maintenance of drainage in all LHS. Steps taken in this

regard may be intimated to the Committee.

Accidents at LCs where LHS could not be used

18. The Committee are aghast to note that as per report of RPF an accident
took place on 6 December 2016 at the LC no 286, due to non-barricading of the
LC although the LC was closed. The Committee note that the subsequent joint
inspection of Railways with Audit revealed that the LHS was filled with water up
to the brink. The Committee have found that the explanation of the Ministry
given in this regard is evasive. While the Audit clearly stated that the RPF
reported the accident at the LC No. 286, the Ministry in their written reply stated
on the contrary that there was barricading, LC was closed, and the motorbike
driver involved in the accident was trespassing the railway track at a location
far from the LC. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry contradicting the
Report of RPF, as cited by Audit. The Committee emphasize the importance of


26

human life and deplore the casual manner in which the railway has chosen to
respond on the matter. The Committee desire that an explanation on the points
highlighted in the RPF report may be given to the Committee and recommend
that responsibility, as warranted be fixed on the official(s) responsible for
getting the barricading done in this case, and the Committee intimated of the

outcome at the earliest.

19. In yet another case of accident, the Committee take note of the findings
of Audit that as per RPF report at LC no BK-12 on 22 May 2014 an accident took
place. The Committee also note the Audit observation that at the time of
accident, construction of LHS was not completed though the scheduled date of
completion of the LHS was 11.09.2013. ॥ this regard, the Committee also take
note of the reply from the Ministry of Railways that since the Railway Officials
executing the works at these LCs have taken action as per the contractual
provisions such as imposition of penalty and termination of Contracts
therefore, no action has been taken against Railway Officials executing the LHS
works.

The Committee feel that the ultimate responsibility lies with the Railway
Officials, and therefore recommend that simply penalizing the contractor and
absolving the railway officers is not the solution and will not solve the issue.
The Committee wonder as to why no action is taken against erring officers
when there was a delay of more than eight months in construction of LHS and
no warning/security was put in place for the general public. The Committee
express the need for identifying the senior railway officers who did not report

the delay nor act on the delay reported in this case.


27

20. Further, the Committee stress the importance of regular monitoring of
barricaded/closed LCs along railway lines so that lives are not lost. Therefore,

the Committee desire that a specific monitoring mechanism with earmarked

responsibility may be developed.

Sead

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

July, 2022 _ Chairperson,
Ashadha, 1944 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


wv
ch
\

Confidential

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE - ॥ (RAILWAYS,
COMMUNICATIONS, JAL SHAKTI & EXTERNAL AFFAIRS) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 77 SEPTEMBER, 2021.

The Sub-Committee - Il (Railways, Communications, Jal Shakti & External
Affairs) met on Tuesday, the 7" September, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1635 hrs. in
Committee Room 'D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T. R. Baalu न Convenor
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal
3. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
RAJYA SABHA
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
5. Or. Sudhanshu Trivedi
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri TG Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri 5. R. Mishra - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director

4. Shri Girdhari Lat - Deputy Secretary


H24-

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms, Dolly Chakraborty न Dy.CAG

2. Shri AC Singh Laisram - Dy.CAG

3. Ms. Sangita Choure - Dy.CAG

4. Shri Manish Kumar - DG

5. Ms. Namita Prasad - PD

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee—ill (Railways, Communications,

Jal Shakti & External Affairs) welcomed the Members and Officials from C&AG Office to
the Sitting of the Sub-Committee convened to have briefing by Audit on the subjects;

(i) xxxx XXXX XXXK XXXX

(ii) “Construction and Utilization of Limited Height Subway (LHS)" based on Para
3.1 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019; and

(iii) xxxx XXXK XXXX XXXX.
3. XXXX_XXXX XXXK XXXX

4. XXXX_ XXXX XXXK XXXX

5 XXXX_XXXX XXXX XXXX

6. 30006. 30006 XXXX XXXX

7. Thereafter, Audit officers briefed the Committee on important observations made

in Para 3.1 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019 on “Construction and Utilization of Limited
Height Subway (LHS)". Audit highlighted issues like construction of LHS at places
where diversion road already existed, non-provision of drainage system, inadequate
survey and verification of construction site which led to water logging, non maintenance
of constructed LHS, accidents at Level Crossings where LHS could not be used etc.

8. The Members, while noting that the responsibility of maintenance of constructed
LHS lies with the State Government and the local municipal bodies, stressed on the
need for the Ministry of Railways to play a more active part in the matter. The Members
also noted that there was lack of proper planning and physical verification/survey of
LHS construction sites. The Members also desired that General Managers of the Zonal


Railways may be called to appear before the Commitiee for oral evidence along with the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways.
9. The Convenor thanked the officials of C&AG of India for assisting the Sub-

Committee during the deliberations.

The Sub-Committee. then. adjourned.



Confidential

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE - ॥ (RAILWAYS, COMMUNICATIONS,

JAL SHAKTI & EXTERNAL AFFAIRS) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)

HELD ON 18° NOVEMBER. 2021.

The Sub-Committee - ill (Railways, Communications, Jal Shakti & External Affairs) met
on Monday, the 18" November, 2021 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Commitlee Room °C’.

Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T. R. Baalu -
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2. Shri Vallabhaneni
Balashowry

3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
RAJYA SABHA
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

5. Or. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA
SECRETARIAT

1 Shri TG Chandrasekhar न
2. Shri S. R. Mishra -

3. Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja -

Joint Secretary
Director

Additional Director


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms. Dolly Chakarborty -  Dy.CAG
2. Shri R.Subu - PD (Rly)
3. Shri S.V Singh - 7000)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

1 Shri Sanjeev Mittal - Member (Railway Board)

2. Shri V.P Singh - Additionat General Manager, SEC Railway

3 Shri Pankaj Saxena - Principal Executive Director/Bridges

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Commiltee-ill (Railways, Communications, Jal

Shekti & External Affairs) welcomed the Members and Officials tram C&AG Office to the
Sitting of the Sub-Commitlee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministries of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject, “Construction and Utilization of
Limited Height Subway" based on Para 3.1 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019.

3. The Convenor asked the Audit officials aboul the updates on the audit para. Audil
officers then briefed the Members of the Sub-Committee on the current status of their findings
‘on the subject.

4 The representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) were then called in.
The Convenor drew the alfention of the representatives of the Ministry to a number of issues
like construction of Limited Height Subway (LHS) al places where diversion road already
existed which resulted in wastage of public money, non-provision of proper drainage system
leading to water logging rendering the constructed LHS unusable, ambiguity in the
responsibility on maintenance of constructed LHS, water logging and non-barricading of
incomplete and closed Level Crossings (LCs) leading to accidents, non-conducting of
feasibility and physical survey of construction site before undertaking the work of construction

etc.


-33-

5. The representatives of the Ministry apprised the Sub-Committee that construction of
Road Under or Over bridges, Limited height subways were constructed to eliminate
manned/unmanned Level Crossings (LCs) and minimize accidents. In 2019, all unmanned
level crossings on the broad gauge section were eliminated and now only a few unmanned
level crossings cn meter gauge and narrow gauge remain. in 2018 the responsibility of
maintenance of road passing through subway, lighting, drainage system & electricity in
Railway portion of Road Under Bridges (RUBs) was given to concerned Zonal Railways. The
Committee were apprised that to tackle the problem of waler logging in subways, the Ministry
issue guidelines and general solutions based upon topography. rainfall and bank height. A
Senior Administrative Grade Officer (SAG) certificate has been made mandatory before
sanction of work for drainage system which would effectively ensure proper physical and
feasibility survey of the construction site. The Members of the Sub-Committee were also
apprised of the remedial action taken on the findings of Audit. The representatives of the
Ministry had provided RCC drain with retaining wall, sump and pumping arrangements at
areas of drainage problem highlighted by audit.

6. The Members of the Sub-Committee impressed upon the Ministry that a more
permanent solution should be evolved to tackle the issue of water logging at LHSs and
necessary provisions should be incorporated in the design stage and preparation of DPR.

7. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) for furnishing valuable information on the subject and asked the Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) to furnish written replies to the queries raised by the Members
as well as to the list of points given by the PAC Secretariat within 15 days

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record

The Sub-Committee, then. adjourned.



-3५-
CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE ॥ (RAILWAYS,
COMMUNICATIONS, JAL SHAKTI AND EXTERNAL AFFAIRS) OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 6™ APRIL, 2022.

The Committee sat on Wednesday the 6" April, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs.
in Committee Room “D", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T.R Baalu - Convenor
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
RAJYA SABHA
3. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Shri Rakesh Mohan Dy. CAG

2. Shri Praveer Pandey DG

3. Shri S.V. Singh DG

4 Ms. Nameeta Prasad PD

5. Shri Subu R. PD

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to the Sitting
of the Sub-Committee, convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of External Affairs on the subject, “Loss of Revenue due to irregular Tax exemption — South
Asian University (SAU)” based on Para 5.2 of C&AG Report No. 2 of 2021 and to consider


—3e
the draft Report on the subject, “Construction and Utilisation of Limited Height Subway”
based on Para 3.1 of C&AG Report No.19 of 2019
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the afore-mentioned draft Report

without any modification. The Committee also authorized the Convenor to finalise the

Report on the basis of factual verification done by the Audit and place it before the Public

Accounts Committee.
‘ PART II

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

SI.No. Name Designation

1 Shri Saurabh Kumar Secretary (East)

2. Shri Rudrendra Tandon Additional Secretary (BIMSTEC &
SAARC)

3. Shri Manoj Sahai Joint Secretary

4. XXXX XXXX XXXX

5. XXXX XXXX XXXX

6. XXXX XXXX XXXX

7. XXXX XXXX XXXX

8. XXXX XXXX XXXX

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.


MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23) HELD ON THE 4577 JUNE, 2022.

The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) met on Wednesday, the 15" June, 2022
from 1100 hrs to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

Lok Sabha

& ANnNOoahWN

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Brijendra Singh

---- CHAIRPERSON

Members

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
In Chair (from 1100 hrs to 1230 hrs.)

Dr. Satya Pal Singh -
Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

10. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

11. छा. Amar Patnaik
12.Dr. C. M. Ramesh

13. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
14.Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1.
2. Shri Tirthankar Das

3.

4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar

Shri T.G.Chandrashekhar

Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja

Additional Secretary
Director

Director

Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri R.G.Viswanathan
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia

- Dy. C&AG

Director General


3. Shri Deepak Kapoor -- Director General
4. Shri S.V.Singh -- Director General

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS

1. Shri Kamran Rizvi -- Additional Secretary
2. Shri Rahul Kashyap = --_ Director, Delhi Div.
3. Smt. Archana Agarwal -- Member Secretary (NCRPB)
4 Shri Jagdish Parwani -- Director, NCRPB
2. At the outset, in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the 'Rules of Procedure and

Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’, the Committee chose Dr. Satya Pal Singh, MP, Lok
Sabha to act as Chairperson for the sitting.

3. XXXX XXXX XXXX
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX
5. XXXX XXXX XXXX
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX
7 XXXX XXXX XXXX
8 XXXX XXXX XXXX
9 XXXX XXXX XXXX
10. 22000 XXXX XXXX
11... XXXX XXXX XXXX
12.  XXXX XXXX XXXX
13... XXXX XXXX XXXX
14... XXXX XXXX XXXXK
15... XXXX XXXX XXXX

000५९... 2200५. XXXK


16. The Committee resumed their Sitting from 1400 hrs and sat till 1610 hrs.

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

Sl. Name Designation

No.

1. Shri Rakesh Mohan Dy. CAG

2. Shri S.V. Singh Director General

17. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC, welcomed the Members and Audit

Officers to the Sitting of the Committee, convened (i) to take further oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the subject “Ground Water Management and
Regulation” based on C&AG Report No. 9 of 2021 and (ii) to consider and adopt the
following two draft Reports:-

(i) “Construction and utilization of Limited Height Subway (LHS)” based on
Para 3.1 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2019; and

(ii) “Assessment of Assessees in Entertainment Sector (DT)" based on C&AG
Report No. 1 of 2019.

18. Before commencing the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on the
subject “Ground Water Management and Regulation’, the Committee took up the
aforesaid two Reports for consideration. Following some deliberations, the Committee
adopted the afore-mentioned draft Reports without any modification. The Committee
also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual
verification and present the same to Parliament.

19. XXXX XXXX XXXX

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI, DEPARTMENT OF


WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION

SI. Name Designation
No.
1. Shri Pankaj Kumar Secretary
2. Shri Vikas Sheel AS&MD, NJJM
2. Shri Subodh Yadav Joint Secretary(A,IC&GW)
3. Smt. Richa Misra Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Shri Sunil Kumar Chairman, Central Ground Water Board
(CGWB)
5. Shri Anoop Nagar Member, CGWB
6. Shri Ashish Kumar Director, (WR,RD & GR)
7. Dr. Ranjan Ray Scientist-E, CGWB
21... XXXX XXXX XXXX
22. XXXX XXXX XXXX
23. XXXX XXXX XXXX
24. XXXX XXXX XXXX
25. XXXX XXXX XXXX

26. The Chairperson thanked the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Committee

during the deliberations.
4 copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.