INVENTORY MANAGEMENT __ IN
SERVICES

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

Ki

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

104

ORDNANCE


PAC NO. - 2334

ONE HUNDRED AND
FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Inventory Management in Ordnance Services

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

सत्यमेद जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


Chapter - 1

Chapter - 2

Chapter - 3

Chapter - 4

CONTENTS

Composition of the Public Accounts Committee(2023-24)
Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-23)

Introduction
Report
Part-I
Audit Objectives and Methodology
i. Introduction
ii, Audit Objectives

ili. Audit Criteria
iv. Scope of Audit
v. Organizational Structure
vi. Budget and Expenditure
Provisioning in Ordinance Services
i. Persistent Deficiency and Surplus in respect of Class A Stores
during Provisioning
ii. Discrepancy in Data Relating to Class B Vehicles
iii. Irregular Reduction of Assets during Provision Review in
respect of Vehicle Earmarked as Anticipated Discard
iv. Over-Provisioning of Stores due to Non-Reduction of Dues in
Quantity
Procurement by Ordnance Services
i. Quantum of Procurement from Different Sources
ii. Delay in Procurement of Critical Items by DGOS
iii. Outstanding Supplies Against Various Supply Agencies
iv. Issues in Procurement of Stores
A. Extra Expenditure of Rs. 6.75 crore due to Failure to
Accept the tender within Validity Period
B. Extra Expenditure of Rs. 4.36 crore in Central Procurement
vis-a-vis Local Procurement
C. Procurement of Stores at Rates higher than last Purchased
Price (LPP) by 147 percent
D. Excess expenditure of Rs. 3.89 crore due to Non-
Placement of Orders under Repeat Order Clause / Option
Clause by DGOS/CODs

v. Procurement for UN Mission
A. Loss due to non-availability / unserviceability of Major
Equipment in UN Mission Area and Deduction from Troop
Reimbursement
Inventory Management
i. Holding of non-moving and Surplus Inventory by three Central
Depots
ii. Low User Satisfaction
A. High Outstanding Demand for Stores
B. High Inability Percentage to meet Users’ Demand

Pages
(iv)
(v)
(vi)


Chapter - 5

iii. Inordinate Delay in Meeting the Demands for Equipment Out of
Action (EOA) and Vehicles Off-Road (VOR) by the Depots
Computerization and Internal Controls
i, Computerized Inventory Control Project (CICP)
A. Implementation Issues of CICP Phase — II at Army HQ
ii. Internal Controls
A. Non-Receipt of Confirmation of Receipt of Stores at
Consignee end
B. Discrepancies in Issue and Receipt of Stores
C. Discrepancy in PRFs Reviewed and Vetted by Inventory
and Budgetary Control Cells

Part - Il
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee

Appendices
Minutes of the Sitting of PAC (2022-23) held on 12 October, 2022
Minutes of the Sitting of PAC (2022-23) held on 9 November,
2022
Minutes of the Sitting of PAC (2023-24) held on 5 February, 2024


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

2.

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien’
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

1 Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2022-23)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

Shri Shyam Singh Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Dr. Amar Patnaik

Dr. C. M. Ramesh

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddyt
Dr. M Thambidurai

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

1 Shri ५. Vijaisai Reddy was elected as Member of Public Accounts Committee w.e.f. 13.12.2022.

Vv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and fourth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Inventory Management in Ordnance Services” based on
C&AG Report number 3 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Defence, Department of
Military Affairs.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in Lok Sabha on
18 July 2022 and in the Rajya Sabha on 07 April 2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2022-23) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took briefing on the subject from the
representatives of Ministry of Defence at their setting held on 12.10.2022. The
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence at their
sitting held on 09.11.2022. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) obtained detailed
information in connection with the examination of the subject. The Committee
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05.02.2024. The Minutes of
the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the
Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affairs for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2023 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vi)


PART-I
CHAPTER-1
Audit objectives and methodology

1. Introduction

1.1. The Committee have learnt that Army Ordnance Corps (AOC) is responsible for
providing material and logistics support to the Indian Army during war and peace. The
inventory management functions of AOC primarily involve provisioning, receipt, storage,
preservation, accounting, stocktaking and issue of ordnance stores. The aim of the AOC
is to make available all kinds of stores required to raise and maintain an efficient and
effective Army. The inventory range covers every conceivable requirement of the soldier
from clothing to weapons, and also all ammunitions except fuel, fodder and medicines.

1.2 The C&AG of India (Audit) conducted a performance audit to assess the
efficiency of the supply chain management of Central Ordnance Depots in meeting the
requirements of Army. The Report is based on the audit of the major stakeholders in
inventory management in ordnance services like Director General Ordnance Services,
Procurement Progressing Organisation under Master General Ordnance and selected
Ordnance Depots dealing with electronics & engineering stores and combat/ non-
combat vehicles. The period covered in the audit was 2014-15 to 2018-19.

1.3. The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and
report, this C&AG Report No. 3 of 2022 (Union Government-Defence Services-Army) on
the subject, “Inventory management in Ordnance Services”. This Audit Report pertains
to the Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affairs.

1.4 The Committee took briefing from Audit on the subject matter on 12" October
2022 and oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Defence, Department of
Military Affairs on 9" November 2022. The Committee also obtained written information
on various aspects of the issues under consideration. Based on the briefing, oral
evidence and written submissions made, the Committee have carried out in-depth
examination of the subject as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

1.5. The Committee have found that the Inventory management functions of AOC
involve:

(a) provisioning, receipt, storage, preservation, accounting, stocktaking and issue
of ordnance stores i.e. armament, engineering, electronic stores and mechanical
transport spares, vehicles, ammunition, clothing and necessaries to the Army
and common user items to Navy and Air Force and para military forces;

(b) repair and modifications to ordnance stores which are not the responsibility of
the Corps of Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (EME);

(c) inspection, repair, proof and test, conversion and disposal of ammunition and
explosives; and


(d) disposal action in respect of unwanted stores including unserviceable stores.
॥. Audit Objectives

1.6 The Performance Audit (PA) of ‘Inventory Management in Ordnance Services’
was taken up to assess the efficiency of the supply chain management of Central
Ordinance Depots (CODs) in meeting the requirements of Army. The Performance
Audit also examined status of action taken by the Ministry on the assurances given in
the Action Taken Notes (ATN) of earlier reviews. In particular, Audit reviewed:

1. Whether provisioning was done efficiently based on requirements projected
by the users as per prescribed scales taking into account existing stock levels at
different echelons;

2. Whether procurement, including for UN Peace Keeping Missions, was
conducted timely as per laid down procedure with due consideration to
objectivity, transparency and competitiveness to obtain value for money;

3. Whether inventory was maintained at optimum level with due consideration to
operational necessity;

4. Whether computerization and internal controls aided effective inventory
management.

I. Audit Criteria

1.7. The audit criteria for the performance evaluation were derived from Defence
Procurement Manual, 2009, General Financial Rules 2017, DGOS Technical
Instructions, Provision Review Directives issued by Army HQ and CODs, Delegation of
Financial Powers, Regulations for the Army 1987 and Action Taken Note of the Ministry
on C&AG's Report No. 7A of 2000 and Report No. 3 of 2006 (PA on Information
Technology).

IV. Scope of Audit

1.8 The PA covered the five years period from 2014-15 to 2018-19. Audit covered
activities related to only Class ‘A’ stores under Electronic and Engineering (L&E)
Section and Combat Vehicle (CV) wing at DGOS and their spares at DDG Procurement
Progressing Organisation (PPO) and three central depots at Agra, Dehuroad and
Kirkee. Provisioning activities at three central depots for 2019-20, wherever carried out
during the time of audit, were also examined. The Depot activities like automation,
inventory management, internal control, etc. were covered in audit at selected ordnance
depots and other units. In respect of automation, Audit covered the implementation of
CICP in the relevant section of DGOS and other depots. The present audit does not
cover the IT Audit of CICP. The procurement related to stores and equipment by MGO
for troops on UN Mission was also covered.


Vv. Organisational Structure

1.9 The Committee have also learnt that the Director General, Ordnance Services
(DGOS) as the head of the AOC reports to Master General of Ordnance (MGO) at Army
Headquarters (Army HQ). DGOS is responsible for administration and direction of
Ordnance Services. At the field level, there are Central Ordnance Depots (CODs)
located at different stations to deal with specified items of stores being provisioned,
procured, stocked and managed.

1.10 Provisioning of Class ‘A’ ‘stores is carried out by the concerned Stores Sections
of the DGOS. Additional Director General of Ordnance Services (ADG OS) Combat
Vehicle (CV) carries out the provisioning of all types of vehicles and ADG OS Technical
Stores (TS) deals with the provisioning of stores related to Electronics and Engineering
(L&E) items, Armament and Ammunition. Provisioning of Class ‘B” stores is carried out
by the respective Central Depots designated for specific type of inventory.

1.11. The decision for procurement of ordnance stores, where deficiencies are
revealed through provision reviews, is taken by the various Procurement Authorities
from the lowest level i.e. Ordnance Units to the highest level i.e. Vice Chief of Army
Staff at Army HQ, as per the delegation of financial powers. The cases of procurement
through import are separately processed by ADG Procurement. ADG Equipment
Management (EM) exercises control over management of inventories and lays down
policies for management of equipment in the Indian Army. The supply of the stores to
Army units is carried out through a network of depots and store holding units.

1.12 The production and supply agencies including Ordnance Factories and Defence
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) supply bulk of the materials. Responsibility for the
quality assurance of items lies with the Directorate General Quality Assurance (DGQA).
Budgetary control with the exception of delegated powers rests with the Ministry of
Defence (Finance). Controller General of Defence Accounts handles payment for
procurements through various Principal Controllers of Defence Accounts.

Vi. Budget and Expenditure

1.14 The Audit Budget under Revenue Head is sub allocated to Army Ordnance
Corps (AOC) under Major Head 2076 and Minor Head 11 (C), both for procurement
through trade (central and local purchases) and Ordnance Factories.

1.15 The Committee desired to know the quantity, percentage-wise as well as money
wise supply of inventory from the Ordnance Factories, other Govt organisations, private
parties and foreign vendors. The Ministry submitted the following information:-

* Weapon Systems and complete equipment such as tanks, radars, guns, vehicles and helicopters are termed 35
Class A stores.
? Items required for support of weapon systems and equipment such as spares, consumable and expandable stores
are termed as Class B stores.

3


“(a)

(b)

Received In terms of Budgetary allocation (Financial Year 2020-21):-

[1४० | | 3००० | Allotment Percentage of
Rs in Cr allotment
[| DPSU 6686.4565 58.42%
(ii) | Import 3478.4316 30.39%
(iii) | Trade 1280.4588 11.19%
Total 11445.3469 100%
Receipt in terms of number of items:-
| SNe | No | Sere | Receipt Percentage
a _ Receipt
(i) _ | DPSU 30337 35%
[(ii) | Trade 33197 38%
[ (iii) | Ex-Import 23694 27%

1.16 During oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Defence, a
representative stated the following:-

“Out of this (inventory of 4.4 lakh items), 41 per cent is related to vehicles and
spare parts, 35 per cent is related to electronics, 14 per cent is about armaments,
five per cent is related to aviation, and around two per cent constitutes general
stores and clothing.”



2.1

CHAPTER-2

Provisioning in Ordnance Services

The Committee have been given to understand that Army Ordnance Corps

(AOC) is responsible for providing major and minor equipment; related spares;
ammunition and general stores and clothing to meet all requirements of the Army. The
major and minor equipment and ammunition are normally classified as Class A stores
and the related spares, accessories and general store and clothing are classified as
Class B stores. A brief description of the process to calculate required stores and
different stocks is as follows:-

2.2

Process to calculate required stores and stocks

Provisioning at Army HQ: Ordnance Sections at DGOS is responsible for
provisioning of Class A stores. Annual Provision Reviews (APRs) are carried out
to work out the requirement by netting off liability on account of authorisations of
units (Unit Entitlements (UE),reserves ( War Wastage ), etc. with assets held in
stock at units (Unit Holdings (UH), stocking depots (Reserves and free stock) and
stores due for delivery against orders placed in the past (Dues-in*) .

Provisioning at Depots : Central Ordnance Depots .(CODs) are responsible for
provisioning of Class B Stores. Provisioning is based on monthly average of past
wastage (consumption). Liability is worked out based on monthly maintenance
figure (MMF) for assigned provisioning period, estimated period between
placement of demand and physical receipt of stores (Interim Period), overhaul
(OH) requirements, Unmet users' requirements (Dues out) and reserves, if any.
Assets include stock held and dues-in.

Provision Review Form (PRF) is used to record Liability and Assets. Excess of
liability over assets results in demand for procurement. Excess of assets over
liability is termed as surplus.

Maintenance Period (MP) :- The Period, in months, represents working
stocks for normal maintenance by any depot.

o 12 months MP for Central Ordnance Depots (CODs).

o 4-5 months MP for Regional Ordnance Depots (RODs).

० 3 months MP for Field Ordnance Depots (FODs) and Advanced Base
Ordnance Depots (ABODs).

o 2months MP for Divisional Ordnance Units (DOUs).

Audit noticed various system deficiencies in the process of provisioning. These

are given in the succeeding paragraphs.

3 Ordered already


1. Persistent deficiency and surplus in respect of Class A stores during
provisioning

2.3 DGOS, in respect of Electronics and Engineering (L&E) stores, carries out an
annual review of 168 items, 92 items were selected in audit for detailed scrutiny. Audit
analysed surplus and deficiency as per Annual Provision Reviews (APRs) from 2014-15
to 2018-19 in respect of selected 92 items / equipment. It was noticed that,

(a) Out of 63 items which were deficient as per APR of 2018-19 , 15 items were such
where there was continuous deficiency for last two to five years ranging between 24
Percent and 100 percent of respective Unit Entitlement (UE)*. Further, out of 15 items,
deficiency increased from year to year in case of seven items, indicating a deteriorating
position. These included Class A Stores such as Radars, Radios, Signal Generators,
Power Sets, GPS equipment etc.

(b) Out of 23 items which were surplus in 2018-19, Army was holding six items as
surplus up to 19 times of the respective UE for last two to five years. These included
Class A Stores such as Field Cipher Equipment, Test Battery discharge, Transformer
etc.

2.4 Out of the 63 deficient items, there was continuous significant deficiency in the
case of 24 per cent items. Similarly, out of 23 surplus items, continuous significant
surplus existed in case of 26 per cent items for the previous two to five years.

2.5 The Ministry stated that continuous deficiency exists for some items due to
upgradation of electronic equipment on ground of technological obsolescence and non-
recommendation by the user directorate for procurement. Certain items remain surplus
which are being replaced by new equipment and their authorization in units, is reduced
resulting in their surplus. Ministry explained that out of 15 deficient items, in six items,
the deficiency was due to non-recommendation of user directorate for procurement and
in another four items, the supply orders were already placed. Further, out of the six
cases of surplus pointed out by Audit, now there was deficiency in respect of two items.

2.6 Audit noticed that even after ignoring six items that were not recommended by
user directorates, persistent shortfall existed in respect of the other nine items. The
teply of the Ministry indicates that delay in updating scales/ requirement of certain items
makes the provisioning process ineffective and leads to excess procurement resulting in
surplus.

2.7. In this regard, the Ministry of Defence submitted the following in their background
note:-

“Annual Provision Reviews (APRs) of Class ‘A’ stores is carried out by the
concerned stores section of the DG OS taking into account the authorisation of
the units (Unit Entitlement) UE, stores held with unit (Unit Holdings) UH, stores
held in Ordnance Depots, requirement of reserves and existing supply orders if

* Unit Entitlement- Stores authorised to a unit.


any. Once requirements are revealed, views of users (Line Directorates) are
obtained for any procurement actions. Subsequently, based on operational
criticality and availability of budget, Priority Procurement Plan (PPP) is finalised
by the Master General of Sustenance. Procurement action is then initiated for
only those items included in PPP.

For the equipment undergoing rapid technological changes especially
electronics stores, on many occasions Line Directorates do not recommend
procurement of existing models and carryout trials on advanced models. Thus no
procurement action is initiated till such time trials are successful. This leads to
temporary deficiencies of stores.

Deficiencies also occur due to inabilities of Ordnance factories, DPSUs, ex
import sources as well as indigenous sources to timely supply stores as per
required specifications and in required quantities.

The reasons for surpluses revealed during Annual Provision Review are
invariably because of reduction in Unit Entitlements (UE) due to phasing out of
equipment / disbandment of the units and reductions in requirement of reserves.

With automation of data with MISO, the provisioning process is now more
strengthened, as earlier manual compilation of the basic data by MISO was
prone to certain inaccuracies.

Majority of the items where deficiencies were revealed were not
recommended by the line directorates. Surpluses revealed are mostly on account
of reduction in Unit Entitlements (UE).

No operational criticality was expressed by the user directorates for items
which remained deficient due to technological upgrades.”

2.8 When asked for specific reasons for deficiencies in items for so many years as
pointed out by the audit, the Ministry submitted as under:-

“Deficiency in equipment highlighted by C&AG needs to be viewed in light of
anticipated requirements worked out for a year, based on inputs in terms of Unit
Entitlement (UE), Unit Holding (UH), forecasts, reserves, state of previous
procurement cases and supplies and numerous other factors. With all factors
remaining stable and as expected, the deficiency revealed can be made up each
year. However, in actual all these are quite dynamic leading to deficiency.
However, to illustrate the same, main causes are as follows:-

(a) As a process, any equipment in service is planned for
upgrade/replacement based on inputs/recommendation of the User Directorate
as also the down gradation of an introduced equipment for obsolescence
(OBE/OBT) is undertaken based on inputs/recommendation of Line Directorate.
Accordingly, upon phasing out of equipment initially, Line Directorate don't
recommend the old pattern equipment for procurement and plans are made for
introduction of its successor equipment. The old equipment meanwhile continues

7


to be utilised alongside and in case the new equipment fructifies these numbers
get added to the unit holding leading to surplus. Whereas concurrent reduction of
old equipment doesn’t take place upto the time the equipment is declared
OBE/OBT and slowly its population withers out from the environment during its
continued exploitation to the maximum.

(b) | Procurement of equipment is also not recommended by User Directorate
due to replacement of equipment planned, Upgradation of Technical
Specifications and additional inputs awaited from other stakeholders. This may
lead to temporary deficiencies.

(c) | The delays in procurement add up to the deficiencies. Further, inabilities
of Ordnance Factories/DPSUs/Ex import sources in timely supply of items lead to
deficiencies.”

2.9 The Committee desired to know the importance of these items in the functioning
of the various units of Army. In this regard, the Ministry submitted the following
response:-

“The items mentioned in the Audit Para are related to Surveillance,
Communication, Engineer, Power and Test Equipment. While equipment being
phased out are not critical, upgraded equipment being inducted holds more
importance. As such it is Line/ User Directorate which is the ultimate user which
gives its recommendation for procurement / non procurement of equipment
based on its criticality / importance at that point of time. The urgency/criticality of
requirement from the operational perspective has been duly factored in our reply
to Audit Para 2.2.”

2.11. When asked how the Army (the units) was coping with the situation arising out of
the aforementioned deficiencies, the Ministry furnished the following reply:-

“All Annual Provision Review (APRs) upon compilation are routed through User
Directorate for their vetting and comments, so as to duly authenticate the
requirement and offer comments with respect to urgency/ deficiency of the
equipment from the user's perspective. In addition, Priority Procurement Plan is
made every year to prioritise the procurement. Besides this, where required
adequate reserves are catered for and in case of emergency internal
rationalisation within Formations is resorted to. Besides, this procurement
through ACSFP and Emergency Procurement is also exploited for immediate
requirements.”

2.12 The Committee enquired about the reasons for surplus availability of items and
whether any assessment was made before procuring those items. The Ministry, in this

regard, furnished the following response:-

“(a) 116 surplus revealed during audit needs to be seen holistically, in light of
provisioning of particular items which form part of a PRF (Provision Review
Form) Group. All similar nature items/variants which perform the same/similar
task are clubbed to form a PRF group and the ones declared

8


obsolescent/obsolete and their upgrades / newer versions against previously
procured are being accounted for under same head. This being a concurrent
exercise undertaken every year, does indicate positive balance (surplus) for a
limited period, till such time the obsolescent /obsolete, get phased out by 100%
fresh variant of the item. Alongside, surpluses are created when Units
Entitlement (UE) are reduced due to changes in scaling/authorisation as also on
disbandment/optimisation of units. This again is a concurrent exercise and more
so cannot be predictive, hence the positive balance (surplus) emerging due to
this are rationalised among existing units for continuity of operations and also
ensuring complete exploitation of the equipment upto end of life.

(b) Surplus revealed during audit are on account of the following: -

(i) Reduction in Unit Entitlement (UE).
(ii) Disbandment/ optimisation of Units.
(iii) | Phasing out of equipment.

(iv) Inconsistency in UE/OH data

2.13 When asked about the action taken by the Ministry for strengthening the
provisioning process to update the scales/requirements of items and to mitigate
persistent surplus/deficient stock, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“Steps taken to strengthen the provisioning process are as follows: -

(a) Automation of Basic Data. Automation of MISO, so as to rule out
inconsistency in Unit Entitlement/Unit Holding data provided by them. MISO
functioning was automated in 2016-17 hence during audit period i.e 2014-2019
data was seen to be inconsistent, as it took 2-3years for the same to stabilize and
errors being obviated.

(b) Collegiate of Stakeholders. Inputs are obtained from user
Directorate on quantity revealed (deficient/surplus) and technical specifications

during APR and prior to obtaining AON. Post DFPDS-2016, PC (Procurement
Committee) Collegiate mechanism has been introduced, where all stake holders
including maintenance agency i.e. DGQA, Equipment management etc are all
part of the PC for their regular monitoring and valuable inputs during the
complete procurement process.

(c) Descaling of Obsolete / Obsolescent Equipment. Six monthly review

of equipment by updation of technical specifications by users and fielding of new
equipment and OBE/OBT to GSEPC for scaling/descaling action in a time bound
manner.

(d) Surplus Management. Equipment declared surplus is rationalised
among existing units performing similar tasks during its phasing out period.


2.14 During oral evidence, the Committee enquired how the Ministry/ Army was
rationalizing such variations of either deficiency for many years or huge surplus in
respect of items. The Ministry submitted the following written reply:-

“Both deficiency or surpluses are revealed each year for all items during the
Annual Provision Review (APR), undertaken at various levels of Ordnance
echelons. These are not classical deficiency/ surpluses, but are positive and
negative balances arrived at after factoring various aspects related to
provisioning. These include Assets (Unit holding, Dues-in quantities, already on
order even though not fructified on ground, Reserves held etc) and Liabilities
(Unit Entitlements, Forecast requirements, War Wastage Reserves (WWR) etc).
Upon comparing the Assets Vs Liabilities, in case of a minus balance, it indicates
that the quantities reflected need to be procured. Similarly, in the case of a plus
balance, it indicates that the item is available in adequate numbers and no
procurement action needs to be undertaken. Besides assets and liabilities, other
factors (which are very dynamic) are also considered prior to undertaking any
procurement action. These include the Status (Current/Obsolescent/Obsolete) of
the item, its anticipated balance life, progress on previous procurement cases
initiated for the item, the extent of exploitation of the item/equipment, existing
sources and their capacity/ capability, administrative lead time, level of
maintenance stocks to be maintained etc. Based on a thorough assessment by
the Provision Officer, final call with respect to further procurement action is taken.
For items where surpluses are revealed after provision review, cancellation of
Dues-in (if any) is resorted to, if required, after holistic consideration of the case.
At the operational/ field level, deficiency/ surpluses are rationalised at theatre
level by Command and Corps Headquarter, where the Operational logistics or
Equipment Management sections undertake a regular exercise to rationalise
these within their geographical region. Reserves are also catered for at various
levels to cater to any unforeseen situation/ circumstances. Further, adequate
decentralisation exists in the system to permit procurement of any emergent
requirement of items through Army Commander Special Financial Power, Local
Purchase and other grants.”

Il. Discrepancy in data relating to Class B® Vehicles

2.15 Management Information System Organisation (MISO) of Army HQs acts as a
repository of data of UE and UH of all equipment used by the Army. MISO data of UE
and UH are used for carrying out provisioning by DGOS. For provisioning purpose,
items of similar nature are categorised in Groups and provisioning of each Group is
carried out in a separate Provisioning Review Form (PRF). Audit scrutiny of APRs of 36
Groups for ‘B' vehicles carried out by ADG (CV) during 2014-15 to 2018-19 revealed
discrepancies in data affecting accuracy of the provisioning process. A few such cases
noticed are discussed below:

(a) Audit noticed that in 19 Group of vehicles, the increase in unit holdings in a particular
year over the previous year was not commensurate with the anticipated supplies
against already placed supply orders (i.e. dues-in quantity year). In six cases, unit

5 Non-combat vehicles such as truck, bus, motor cycle, car, gypsy, etc.
10


holdings increased more than the dues-in quantity of previous year and in 13 cases unit
holdings increased where there was no dues-in quantity in previous year. For example,
the number of 2.5 Ton SPL (3) vehicles increased from 0 to 99 to 111 to 182 to 222 in
each successive year from 2014-15 to 2018-19 without any dues-in for the years; Crane
5-10 Ton (501) increased to 4 in 2015-16 to 76 in 2016-17 without any dues-in for the
years.

(b) In APRs of 500 KG Special 4X4' vehicle, UE/Reserve figures changed every year in
the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 . Further, the total holding of vehicles decreased by
645 from 1632 in 2014-15 to 987 in 2018-19. However, the total number of vehicles
projected for discard during the above period was only 125.

(c) In APR for 2018-19 of PRF Group ‘Lorry 10 Ton’ 907 vehicles were taken into
account for working out anticipated discard whereas the actual holding as per their
record was only 751, thereby raising question marks on the authenticity of data.

2.16 Ministry in its reply stated that there had been regular changes in the scaling
(UE) of various weapons & equipment and changes in the number of units from year to
year arising out of new raising/disbandment, etc. It further stated that the variation in
data observed by Audit was of pre-computer Inventory Control Project (CICP) roll out
and since 2019, the UE and UH data was being directly imported from CICP. Ministry
did not explain the reasons for inconsistent changes in UH. As regards direct import of
data from CICP since 2019, integration of MISO application and connectivity with User
Directorates had not been achieved

2.17 In this regard, the Committee sought to know reasons for discrepancy in unit
holding for each type of vehicle especially the 500kg special 4x4. The Committee
enquired how the decrease of 645 vehicles was rationalised when the vehicles
projected for being discarded was only 125. The Ministry submitted the following
response:-
“(a) Reasons for variations are provided against each item as given in
Annexure II of the CAG Report in the Appendix ‘A’ enclosed to the questionnaire
(not enclosed). Variations exist in the data provided with respect to surplus
vehicles given in the Annexure ॥ by the audit and the records held with this
office. Reconciled details of holdings are also rendered in Appendix ‘A’ (not
enclosed). It is highlighted that the surplus quantities are minimal and the Annual
Provision Review (APR) process has inherent tolerance for such miniscule
surpluses, which get addressed in subsequent reviews.

(b) Special vehicles details are compiled by OS Directorate based on MISO
data. The data presented is of 500 Kg Special 4x4 vehicle as highlighted in audit
para 2.3 (b). It can also be seen from table 3 of C&AG Report that no dues-in for
the said special vehicle exists. These vehicles are generally drawn from the GS
Pool of corresponding category, 500 kg Light Vehicle 4x4 in the instant case and
issued by EM Directorate for modification to the line directorates. In some cases,
COTS vehicles are procured with required modifications making them special
vehicles. The requirement against the deficiencies of the said. special vehicles
are being met through General Staff (GS) Pool vehicles which are primarily

11


meant for administrative requirements. The Civil Hired Transport (CHT) are used
to meet the administrative requirements, as per the need / requirement.

(c) Anticipated discard quantities are forecast figures and actual data of
discard may vary due to prolonged and operational exploitation which renders
mechanical condition of vehicles unfit for further use. The actual discard is
dependent on utilization of vehicles during the period, operational imperatives,
terrain etc and is bound to vary. It is pertinent to mention that the said discard
variation is covering the period of five years i.e. from 2014-15 to 2018-19.

2.18 The Committee asked the Ministry / DG OS to comment on cases of discrepancy
seeking views on whether the mere explanation of the audit report being of the pre-
computerisation period justified aberration of such serious nature. The Ministry
submitted the following reply:-
“(a) Mismatch of holdings data had been a challenge due to delays/ errors in
updation of holdings data by units/ formations which has been streamlined to a
great extent due to updated MISO application being used by units as on date.
Delays in updation are also attributable to deployment of units in remote areas
which also has been addressed with improved LAN connectivity in recent years.
Variations in UE also occur due to regular changes in the scaling of vehicles due
to revision of WE/ PE, disbandment, raising of new units etc.

(b) It is perceived that with the MISO application, the auto compilation of data
would rule out errors of accounting vis a vis manual compilations and would be
real time. Analysis of data would also be facilitated and it would be easier to
check such variations by the MISO.”

2.19 When asked what corrective measures had been taken for removal of
discrepancies in data resulting in unwarranted provisioning of Class ‘B’ vehicles,
the Ministry provided the following reply:-

“To address the issue of variations and timely updation of Class ‘B’ vehicles data,
MISO application has been made user friendly and units have been sensitised to
regularly update the holdings data. In recent years, intranet connectivity in the
operational areas / difficult areas has been upgraded by the Army which will
facilitate timely updation of data by units. A lot of emphasis has been given by the.
Army on training of personal on use of MISO application for updation of data.”

il. Irregular reduction of assets during provision review in respect of vehicle
earmarked as anticipated discard.

2.20 Annual Provision Review of Class B vehicles are carried out at CV wing Of
DGOS taking into consideration the data published by MISO towards unit entitlement
and unit holding. While working out requirement/Liability, initial requirements of new
raisings, deficiencies in UEs of regular Army units, forecast requirements of other
services/non-Army users is considered. In the case of discard vehicles, reserves have
to be calculated at a fixed percentage as adopted in the Emergency Cabinet Committee

12


Intake/Discard Plan ranging from 5 to 13 per cent. Besides, a specific percentage of
reserve on account of War Wastage Reserve (WWR) equivalent to 0.5 percent is
supposed to be provided for in the APR Under Assets total stock held with units against
their entitlements, depot stock and dues in against demands already placed are to be
considered.

2.21 Audit noticed that in 16 out of total 36 PRF Group while working out liability, 5 to
15 per cent of the unit entitlement was considered towards reserve (without bifurcating
WWAR and other reserves.) However, anticipated quantity of discard published by MISO
has been deducted from the Assets. As no authority exists to reduce the available
assets while conducting provision review, this reduction of assets against the data
published by MISO towards anticipated discard is not in order. This reduction of assets
without proper authority against vehicles for which proper reserve have been
considered in the Emergent Cabinet meeting led to over provisioning to that extent as
worked out by audit in respect of vehicles of 12 PRF group.

2.22 Ministry stated that the reserve percentage and anticipated discard quantity are
different. It explained that while the reserve was to cater for unforeseen exigencies like
operations, unexpected attrition, raising of new units/formations and accelerated
exploitation of equipment, the anticipated discard quantity was for replacement for
discarded/downgraded vehicles. Ministry further stated that action to revise the policy of
1972 was under process and policy for quantity of anticipated discard would also be
addressed once the new policy is implemented.

2.23 The Ministry explained the different purposes of reserves and anticipated discard
quantity. However, reduction of assets on account of anticipated discard was without
any laid down criteria or policy of the Ministry. Further, the DGOS had not undertaken a
detailed study on the level of reserves since 1972.

2.24 The Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“Reserve percentage and anticipated discard quantity which are being catered in
provisioning of vehicles are different. Provision of reserve is catered for both type
of vehicles covered under discard policy and not covered under discard policy to
compensate the deficiency maintained due to time taken in procurement process
and also to cater for any unforeseen situations.

However, the anticipated discard quantity is being catered in vehicles
provisioning for the replacement of vehicles which are to be discarded under
discard policy. The same is being maintained by MISO and forwarded to this
office yearly for provisioning of vehicles.

Based on observation of the audit, action has been initiated to review the policy
on this subject.”

IV Over-provisioning of stores due to non-reduction of dues-in quantity

13


2.25 DGOS Technical Instruction provides that in case of provisioning of Class A
stores where surpluses are revealed in the form of dues-in, a decision will be taken as
to whether these will be carried forward against the future requirement or to defer
procurement or to cancel dues-in. In case of Class B stores, if surpluses are revealed in
provision review, action has to be initiated for their adjustment by cancellation/reduction
of dues-in building up of reserves, retention or disposal as necessary or permissible
under the rules. Audit found cases where over-provisioning of Class A and B stores had
arisen due to non- reduction of dues-in despite surpluses.

2.26 (i) Class A stores:- Audit observed that in 5 out of 92 selected L&E Class 'A'
stores, the APR revealed surplus warranting action for reduction of quantity under
procurement. Similarly, APRs of 4 out of 36 PRF Groups of B vehicles for 2018-19
revealed surplus quantity where the dues-in quantity also existed. However, Audit did
not find any document indicating that a considered decision was taken so as to carry
forward the surplus against the future requirement or to defer procurement or to cancel
dues-in. Thus, non-reduction of 'surplus' from the 'dues-in' of the respective items
resulted in their over-provisioning.

2.27 Ministry replied that surplus /deficiency of stores keeps changing from year to
year owing to the change in scale, state of equipment/technology, etc. It added that, in
the APR 2020-21,the surplus existed only in four out of nine items and no provisioning
was done for Crane 5/8 Ton.

2.28 The reply of Ministry confirms surplus and upholds the point relating to non-
reduction of dues-in quantity when surplus was revealed in APR. Such non-reduction of
dues-in quantity as per APRs resulted in holding surplus quantity valuing 324.41 crore
in respect of these five items. Such excess procurement may lead to idling/slow-moving
of stores in depots besides locking up of resources.

2.29 (ii) Class B stores:- In respect of Class 'B' stores at COD Agra, analysis of data
of entire population of PRFs_ pertaining to the year 2018-19 revealed that in case of
2,414 items, provision review resulted in surpluses valuing Rs. 178.56 crore but the
dues-in quantity was not reduced. The surpluses of the above items were also noticed
in the PRF of 2019-20.Audit also observed from PRFs of 2019-20 at CAFVD, Kirkee
that in 23 out of 35 sampled PRFs, provision review resulted in surpluses worth Rs.
125.80 crore, requiring reduction of dues-in quantity.

2.30 COD Agra stated that source of majority of stores was either Ordinance Factories
or Defence PSUs. It was added that the items were forming part of overhaul/equipment
out of action and were recurring in nature, and therefore, surplus item would be required
during next three to five years again. It further stated that ex-import indents are placed
after Global Tender Enquiry which is a cumbersome and long drawn process and takes
years to fructify.

2.31 CAFVD Kirkee stated that review of PRFs was in process and post review, action

would be initiated for placing demand/reduction. Reply of COD Agra is not tenable as it

is not in accordance with the guidelines of provisioning. Cumbersome procedures do
14


not justify holding of a ‘surplus’ and the projection for future utilization needs to be
balanced out by cost-effective resource constraints. Over provisioning of Class B stores
worth 304.36 crore at COD Agra and CAFVD Kirkee had, therefore, taken place as
surpluses revealed through provision reviews had not been reduced from dues-in
quantity.

2.32 The Ministry in their background note submitted the following on the matter:-

“Due to delayed supplies beyond stipulated time, especially by Ordnance
Factories and DPSUs, dues-in quantity against surpluses as revealed in the
provision review are not cancelled at times anticipating that such surpluses will
get adjusted in next review cycle. In such cases cancellation of dues-in of older
contracts and then subsequently purchase of those items in future may lead to
procurement at higher rates on account of inflation.

However the audit observation is agreed to and instructions have been passed to
all concerned to follow the laid down policy on the subject, strictly.”

15


CHAPTER-3
Procurement by Ordnance Services

३.1. The Committee found that Procurement constitutes an integral part of inventory
management and relates to sourcing and acquisition, inter-alia, of critical items of
inventory and entails substantial financial outlays. Details of procuring authorities, types
of procurement and sources of procurement are explained below.

Authorities for Procurement

Director General of Ordnance Services (DGOS)- Procures common use, Defence,
Civil use and Defence exclusive items under delegated powers.

Additional Director General (Procurement)/DDG Procurement Progressing
Organisation (PPO) - Procures stores ex-import.

Central Ordnance Depots (CODs)/Advance Base Ordnance Depots (ABODs)/Field
Ordnance Depots (FODs)/Ordnance Depots (ODs)/ Divisional Ordnance Units
(DOUs) - Commandants/Commanding Officers of these Depots are empowered to
make central and local purchases up to the limits, laid down from time to time
under delegated powers.

Types of Procurement

Central Procurement (CP) - CP is undertaken against those items, which are
required to be procured centrally. These are requirements resulting either as
consolidation of demands by a Central agency through planned provisioning
processes or an ad-hoc / special exercise without adopting Provisioning Review
route. CP covers the consolidated requirements of the item or group of items for
the duration of the provisioning period.

Local Procurement (LP) - LP undertaken by various authorities as per the
delegated powers to meet the short-term, ad-hoc or urgent requirements of
units/establishments when supplies are not available through the central
provisioning agency and to meet the normal requirements of units/establishments
for stores which are not within the purview of central purchase organizations.

Sources of supply of stores

Director General of Ordnance Factories - The main source of supply of
ordnance stores are the Ordnance Factories (OFs) under DGOF. After acceptance
of necessity, all stores falling within the product range of the OFs are procured
through the Ordnance Factories Board (OFB) by placing indents without issuing
RFPs.

16


Trade - In the case of emergency purchase, items falling within OFB’s product
range are procured from trade following the tendering procedure but only after
obtaining a “No Objection Certificate” from the OFB.

Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) - Any _ item
developed/manufactured by a DPSU specifically for the Defence Services, with
transfer of technology or through design and development, is procured from the
concerned DPSU only by following the tendering procedure.

Import - Import of equipment and spares is also resorted to until the required
items are indigenised.

1 Quantum of procurement from different sources

3.2. During the period 2014-15 to 2018-19, DGOS procured 64.37 per cent value of
items through DGOF and 35.63 per cent value of items through trade (including
DPSUs).

3.3. DPM 2009 stipulates that purchases of stores must be made in timely and most
economical manner and in accordance with the definite requirements of the Defence
Services. To achieve this, controls must be in place to (a) scientifically assess the
reasonability of rates, (b) ensure completion of different stages of tendering process as
per stipulated schedule, (c) follow-up with vendors for timely receipt of stores, (d)
ensure timely replacement of defective stores by vendors, etc. Similarly, procurement
for UN Mission must ensure (a) that procurement is as per UN requirements, (b)
timeliness in transportation and (c) economy. Audit noticed several instances of system
deficiencies resulting in delays in procurement and excess expenditure. These are
given in the succeeding paragraphs.

Il Delay in procurement of critical items by DGOS

3.4 DPM 2009 lays down that every individual in the chain of the procurement
process is accountable for taking action in a specified time period so that the
requirements are met on time. The prescribed time frame, laid down in DPM, for
placement of supply order or signing of the contract since vetting of indent under single
bid and two bid system is 17 to 19 weeks and 20 to 23 weeks, respectively.

3.5 During the audit of procurement at ordnance section of DGOS and Central
Ordnance Depots, Audit noticed ten cases where there were delays in procurement
process of Class A and Class B stores ranging between 13 and 301 weeks, as given in
Table below.

Si. Name/ Type of Procure | Demand | Whether SO/ Status | Delay’ in Reasons for
No. | equipment ment tevealed | indent placed | of procurement | delay, as per
agency (as of supply | (as on reply
February where | February
2020) 50 2020)
Placed | beyond 23
weeks
4) 2 3, 4, 5, | (86) | 7 y (8)

1. Equipment '8' DGOS June SOnotplaced [- [165 ५९९४७ [Delayin |

17


(Qty. 30) as (L&E) 2016 finalisation of

BFE for specification,

Equipment ‘R’ obtaining
Acceptance of
Necessity (AoN

2. 10 items of DGOS Betwee | SO not placed P| 73 to 229 Cases were at
class ‘A’ (L&E) n2014- weeks different stages of
equipment 15 and procurement.

2018-19

3. 25 cases of a Betwee | SO placed N/A™ 13 weeks to | Inordinate time
spares of Class n2014- | between April 85 weeks taken in opening
‘A’ equipment 15 and 2017 and of price bid and its

2018-19 | August 2019 finalisation.

4. Engines Tank DGOS 2014-15 | SO placed N/A 65 weeks Delay in obtaining
'T 322 (CV) between of sanction and
numbers Tank September placement of
"७: 905 and December indent.
numbers Tank 2016
‘Vv’: 501
numbers

5. 22 cases of --do-- 2016-17 | SO placed N/A 13 weeks to | Inordinate time
spares of Class to 2018- | between 81 weeks taken in opening
‘A’ Vehicles 19 December of price bid and its

2017 and finalisation.
March 2019

| Tank 1 spares | --do-- April September Not 49 weeks ADG(CV) took 17
LHBU:215 2016 2017 compl months in
numbers eted converting the
RHBU:293 demand into
numbers supply order.

7. 68 items for CAFVD | 2017-18 | SO not placed P| 73 weeks SOs were not
Tank 'T’ Kirkee placed within bid

validity leading to
retendering.

| | 19 items for Po | 2017-18 | SO not placed P| 73 weeks SOs were not
Tank ‘V’ placed within bid

validity leading to
retendering.
है 1106 items for डे 2017-18 | SO for only - 73 weeks Against
Tank ‘W’ 128 items requirement of
placed in 1106 items, SO
2019-20 placed for 128
items only. In
some cases, SO
could not be
placed within bid-
validity.

10. 17 items for MGO. May SO placed in Sept 301 weeks AoN was granted
Radio Set ‘N’ PPO 2011 August 2017 2018 after 04 years of

revealing of
demand. Further,
there was delay in
conduct of trials.

3.6 As seen from above, in four cases, the supply order was yet to be placed

(February, 2020) even after delay of 73 to 229 weeks (Sr. No. 1,2,7 & 8).

18



3.7 Ministry replied that in case of delays, system has provision of reserve and
stocks at various echelons, which meet the critical requirements of the field army and
ensure that operational preparedness is not compromised. It was further added that
maximum dependency of A vehicles and technical spares was on Ordnance Factories
and DPSUs. The delays were not only attributed to procedures/documentation but also
due to slippage in meeting of targets by Ordnance Factories and DPSUs.

3.8 However, Audit had commented on the delay in placing supply orders. Further,
deficiency arising against an item is inclusive of all types of reserve which may not be
sufficient in case of inordinate delay in procurement.

3.9 In their background note, the Ministry submitted the following on the matter:-

“Efforts are made by procuring authorities to complete the process within laid
down timeframe. However at times delays do occur which are beyond the control
of procuring agency on account of following:-

(a) Delays in finalisation of specifications by the User Directorates.

(b) Delays at TEC stage for want of registration of firms with DGQA and
Capacity Verification/ Capacity Assessment.

(c) Delays at price negotiation stage as in some cases a number of rounds of
negotiations are carried out.

(d) Delays at trial stage.
(e) Delays due to re-tendering.
(f) Inadequate/ nil response by DPSUs/firms.

Procurements through GeM has considerably reduced the timelines for
completion of procurement activities.”

3.10 The Committee enquired on the action taken to avoid delays in the procurement
process. The Ministry, in this regard, responded with the following written reply:-

“Common reasons leading to delays have been identified and actions taken to
avoid these delays in procurement process are as follows: -

(a) Delay in Capacity Assessment /Capacity Verification (CA/CV). Fresh
RFPs now issued have requirement of firms to apply for registration or CA/CV
against RFP with DGQA at the time of bidding itself.Firms are required to submit
proof of having applied for the same with DGQA alongwith Bid documents. Also,
CA/CV is part of Technical Evaluation/assessment which is now stipulated to be
done, within 3 months by DGQA.

(b) Specification Changes. Prior to obtaining AON itself, the
user/nominated Line Dte is expected to firm up specification either based on

19


3.11

JSS/BOOs/COTS/GSQR so that no delay occurs owing to that and AON is
granted only once specifications are frozen

(c) Trials. Conclusion of trials is also to be done by the Users within a
stipulated time so as to ensure timely conclusion of contracts.

(d) Monitoring Mechanism. Monthly, quarterly & half yearly review of
progress of procurement cases is being undertaken both at OS Dte & MGS Br.
All Carry Forward cases of PPP are closely monitored & expedited.

(e) Creation of New MGS Procurement Branch. With promulgation of
new DFPDS enhanced powers have been granted to ADG Procurement, a newly
created appointment alongwith a new vertical viz. MGS (Procurement) Branch
within MGS for smooth & effective procurement functions & monitoring of the
same.

(f) Procurement through GeM Procurement through GeM is a
mandatory requirement now and this has enhanced timely progress of cases as
timelines are being imposed during bid validity/ expiry, timely delivery and also
timely payment being ensured to the firms.

(g) Indigenisation It was observed that cases of foreign procurement
were inevitably delayed owing to the long duration of trials. The same is being
plugged through a rapid indigenisation drive under Atma nirbhar Bharat. This will
wade over the procurement delays involved in the process.”

In case of inordinate delays of procurement, the Committee desired to know how

the critical requirements of Army's Field units are met. The Ministry responded thus:-

“Units deployed in field have their critical requirements being met through, within
Command rationalisation where necessary. Reserves are released at the level of
Command & IHQ of MoD (Army). Also, adequate funds are available for
procurement through ACSFP, Local Procurement, Grants etc. Even at AHQ for
operational requirements Emergency Procurement is resorted to. Deficiency of
vehicles is also mitigated through civil hired transport.”

Outstanding supplies against various supply agencies

3.14 Audit examination of the outstanding supply orders/indents placed by COD Agra
on DGOF, DPSU, trade and foreign vendors revealed that supply orders valuing more
than Rs. 700 crore were outstanding beyond the delivery period and awaiting
completion for the last one to nineteen years as shown in the Table below-.

Table- Details of outstanding supply orders

Procurement No. of Supply orders/Indents Amount of SOs/indents ("in crore
Source 1105 | 51010 10 Total | 11005 | 51010 10 Total
years | years | years years | years | years
& &
above above
DGOF 186 147 | 90 | 423 | 241.92[ 11.93] 13.11] 266.96

20



DPSU 957 341 36 1324 | 354.32] 72.74[ 2.69 | 429.75
Trade 109 | - | - | 109 038; -| -[ 0.38
Import 75 10 1 | 86 | SO details not available

3.15 Audit further noticed in CAFVD Kirkee that 364 indents for Tank ‘T’ placed on
Ordnance Factories between January, 2004 and February, 2010 were outstanding to be
supplied for more than 10 years.

3.16 Ministry stated that due to non-civil end use items and availability only through
PSUs/DGOF, the supply orders were not cancelled for criticality of these items in Indian
Army. It further stated that the matter was required to be addressed at OFB level and
instructions had been issued to CAFVD, Kirkee to cancel all indents which were more
than 10 years old. It added that steps were being taken to widen the base of sources of
supply from trade. Ministry's reply, however, was silent on the cases pertaining to COD
Agra. COD Agra in its reply to Audit had stated that orders outstanding for supply from
Ordnance Factories and Defence PSUs were not cancelled as they are the only sources
of procurement.

3.17 According to Audit, both Ordnance Factories and DPSUs are under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry. Ministry should have taken proactive steps to ensure that the
supplies get materialized within the stipulated delivery period. Non-materialisation of
supplies for such a long period impacted the efficacy of provisioning reviews as
outstanding items were kept reflected as dues-in (asset), however, they were actually
not made available to the Indian Army. Inordinate delay in meeting the requirement of
the units, in turn adversely affects their operational preparedness.

3.18 The Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“Bottlenecks in procurement chain where PSUs/ DGOF are involved are well
documented.

Steps are being taken to widen the base of sources of supply through trade.

Due to non civil end use items and availability of items only through
PSUs/DGOF, the Supply Orders are not cancelled as requirement of these items
in Indian Army remains. Therefore Delivery Period is extended time and again.

Alternative sources for 218 items have also been identified by CAFVD Kirkee in
2019-20 & 2020-21.

With corporatisation of Ordnance Factories, supply situation is likely to improve.”

3.19 When asked about reasons for not being able to supply tank ‘T’ even after a gap
of 10 long years, the Ministry submitted the following reply:-

“The supply of stores for Tank ‘T’ was sub optimal by erstwhile Ordnance
Factories ie EFA, Avadi and HVF, Avadi. The provisioning activity and placing of
21


indents was done in time bound manner by CAFVD Kirkee. With Corporatization
with Ordnance Factories, the situation may improve.”

3.20 The Ministry were asked to give the current status of supply of Tank ‘T’,

especially in view of corporatisation of the Ordnance factories. In reply, they submitted

the following:-

3.21

“Post corporatization of Ordnance Factories, grandfathering of indents (clubbing
of previous years outstanding quantities) was carried out. These were converted
into Deemed Contracts. CAFVD is entirely dependent on AVNL for spares
support for approx 80% of its inventory and slippages to the tune of approx 92%
for financial year 2021-22 existed based on the Deemed Contract quantities. It is
being assumed that once the newly created DPSU i.e. AVNL stabilises, the
supply position will improve.”

When asked to elucidate on the efforts and result thereof to complete supply of

orders pending for more than 2 decades , the Ministry replied thus:-

‘Post corporatization the outstanding indents have been clubbed under the
Grandfathering scheme and during this exercise, 732 indents which were more
than 10 years old have been cancelled. The AVNL is periodically expedited for
supply of stores and the same is monitored at IHQ of MoD (Army) level. The
impact of Corporatization of Ordnance Factories will only be known after few
years, once the new system stabilises.”

3.22 On being asked to elucidate on the efforts and result thereof to widen the base of

sources of supply from trade, the Ministry stated the following:-

3.23

“In the course of past three years, alternate sources for 259 items have been
developed by CAFVD Kirkee and it is a continuous process. In addition to this, it
is notable to mention that the AVNL group of factories have also undertaken
indigenisation drive to indigenise certain critical assemblies and items of tanks.
The Army is also embarking on the project to involve reputed firms for
overhauling of tanks and engines which will boost indigenization of tank spares,
enhance overhauling capacities and contribute towards having alternate
sources.”

The Committee queried about the contractual provisions in case of delay in

supply of orders by DGOF, DPSUs, trade and foreign vendors and whether the

provisions were invoked in cases of delays in supply of orders. The Ministry submitted

the following written reply:-

“The contractual obligations for various sources of supply are governed by DPM

2009, its supplement and numerous Government instructions issued from time to

time. Post corporatization, the DPSUs will be treated akin to private firms (Trade)

and compete in open/limited tenders They will also invite penal clauses like

payment of liquidated damages on delayed deliveries, risk and expense clause,
22


cancellation of supply order, black listing/ debarring of firm to participate in
defence tenders etc. These clauses, however, do not apply to the quantities
covered in the Deemed Contract as this is covered under the hand holding phase
wherein the newly converted DPSUs stabilize and reorient their internal
procedures. These clauses are invoked with due diligence in all cases where
failure on the part of supplier to supply the stores occurs.”

3.24 The Committee desired to know whether there was any mechanism to penalise

the supplying agencies who failed in supplying the product within the stipulated delivery

period and if so, the action taken against the non-complying vendors. The Ministry

replied thus:-

“(a) DPM provides adequate provisions towards penalising defaulting vendors,
like imposition of LD (maximum upto 10%), carrying out Risk & Expense
purchase .& Blacklisting/Holiday listing etc. For old contracts/indents, (besides
OFB) the existing provisions are adequately being used to ensure timely supplies
and all firms, including DPSU/Trade/Foreign vendors are all penalised for late
deliveries. For erstwhile OFBs (new DPSUs) the LD clause was done away with
in old indents as part of the handholding of these new units by the Govt.
However, with effect from 01 Oct 2021 all orders on erstwhile OFB (Now DPSUs)
will be done through competitive bidding and with all standard provisions being
part of contracts.

(b) | Mechanism to penalize the defaulting agencies exists as given above and
the mechanism has an IFA rep and other stakeholders to analyse the case and
arrive at an informed decision to suitably deter such defaulting behaviour by
suppliers within the provisions of DPM 2009 and its supplement.”

3.25 On the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure timely supply of orders from DGOF

and DPSUs, both of which are under their control, the Ministry stated the following:-

“Steps undertaken to ensure timely supplies from DGOF & DPSUs are as under:

(a) Re-conciliation of 100% outstanding indents on DGOF (including 19 years
old) & conversion of these into standard deemed contract with supplies to be
completed in next three years for revenue items & maximum five years for capital
items from the date of signing of contracts.

(b) All contracts post 01 Oct 2022 with new DPSUs(including erstwhile OFB)
have been concluded with all mandatory provisions to ensure timely supplies.

(c) Delayed supplies in case of DPSUs (including erstwhile OFB), Trade &
Foreign vendors will be imposed LD and where required Risk & Expense
purchase or even Blacklisting/Holiday listing is also resorted to.”

Issues in procurement of stores

Extra expenditure of Rs. 6.75 crore due to failure to accept the tender

within validity period
23


3.26 As per Appendix ‘A of paragraph 2.6.1 of DPM, for procurement through two bids
system, the laid down timeframe from opening of technical bid to signing of contract is
15 weeks. Audit observed that non-adherence to stage-wise laid down timeframe for
acceptance of contract led to extra expenditure of Rs. 6.75 crore.

3.27 The Request for Proposal (RFP) for procurement of Truck Tanker under two bids
system was floated in April, 2017 with validity of tender up to 2 September, 2017. The
date of opening of the bid was 3 May, 2017. Technical bids were opened on 4 May,
2017. Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) meetings were held on 11 May, 2017 and
3 August 2017, and TEC recommended a firm (M/s IPWT) after 12 weeks against the
laid down three weeks’ time frame.

3.28 Commercial bid was opened on 1 September, 2017 1.6. One day before the
expiry of validity. M/s IPWT, Mumbai had quoted price of Rs. 39 lakh per item excluding
tax. However, the firm intimated Army HQ on 6 September, 2017 that the validity of the
offer for the tender had expired on 2 September, 2017 and hence put certain conditions
not forming party of the RFP. Commercial Negotiation Committee (CNC) meetings were
held thrice in September, 2017. Procurement Committee (PC) recommended that the
case be closed and retendered, as the firm refused to attend the CNC.

3.29 Army HQ again floated RFP in November, 2017 and supply order was placed in
April, 2018 for procurement of 18 Truck Tankers on M/s Ashok Leyland Limited at a
total cost of Rs. 17.63 crore at the rate of Rs. 76.50 lakh per item excluding tax. Thus, in
the first bid, against the stipulated timeframe of 15 weeks from opening of technical bid
to signing of contract, Army HQ took approximately 20 weeks till conduct of CNC. Non-
adherence of timeframe of tender process resulted in retendering and placement of
supply order at higher rate resulting in extra expenditure of Rs. 6.75 crore.

3.30 Ministry stated that the process of procurement was hampered due to capacity
verification and firm’s reluctance to participate in CNC as the firm was insisting on
cabinet chassis as well, along with payment terms which were not as per RFP. Ministry
stated that this indicated that quoted price by the bidder was only for fabrication and
superstructure and cost of chassis, which is the major part of any vehicle, was not
included in price. The reply is not tenable as the firm was declared technically compliant
by TEC. The CNC meeting was scheduled on a date falling after bid validity period and
hence the firm placed new conditions beyond terms of RFP. The Ministry, therefore,
could not derive the advantage of lower price.

3.31 In their background note, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“Whenever capacity verification is required to be undertaken at TEC stage, the
laid down timeframe of 03 weeks for TEC approval cannot be achieved by
DGQA. In this case too it took three months for TEC approval as it involved
capacity verification. ,

The loss pointed out by audit is only a notional loss.”

24


३.32 When asked what action was taken by the Ministry to ensure finalising of the
tendering process in time to avoid such situations in future, the Ministry replied thus:-

“As brought out in the reply of the instant case, the matter was processed as per
DPM 2009 and its supplement. Capacity verification by DGQA was necessary
and it is a time consuming process. No undue delay which can be attributed to
any agency involved in the procurement process took place in the instant case
and it had to be retendered due to firms’ insistence on inclusion of additional
terms and conditions (which were not in RFP and thus, not in order) and non-
participation in the CNC despite three reminders. To ensure that all procurement
cases are processed without undue delay, various advisories are issued from
time to time and monitoring of ongoing cases is done by procurement agency.”

3.33 On being asked if any action had been taken against the erring officials, the
Ministry submitted the following written reply:-

“The case has been examined and it is revealed that no individual official can be
blamed for non finalization of the contract, as various circumstances were
beyond their control.”

B. Extra expenditure of Rs. 4.36 crore in central procurement vis-a-vis local
procurement

3.34 Audit analysed data of supply orders, as furnished by COD Dehu road and COD
Agra for years 2017-18 and 2018-19 and observed that procurement rates under
Tender Purchase Committee (TPC) mode of procurement were higher than the last
purchase price of local purchases made within the last one to six months. The rate of
items purchased under TPC was as high as 17 per cent and extra expenditure of Rs.
4.36 crore at COD Agra and COD Dehu road due to central procurement rates being
higher than the local purchase rates in respect of 10 supply orders.

3.35 In their background note the Ministry submitted the following:-

“Central purchase involves vendors/firms to go under various procurement
stages viz registration, capacity verification, stringent quality checks by DGQA,
etc which was not the case with local purchase. However, DGOS assured that
the point was well taken and noted for future.

Price variation between Tender Purchase Committee (TPC) and Local Purchase
Committee (LPC) mode of procurement can be attributed to :-

(a) ‘Economy of Scale’ i.e. only if qty is huge, as then they setup initial
infrastructure/assembly line.

(b) | Capacity Assessment (CA)/Capability verification (CV) of vendors for
central procurement.

25


(c)
(9)

To curb large variations in LPP, stringent measures are being taken to closely
watch escalation over LPP to prevent any abnormal/unjustified variation. With
enhanced visibility due to implementation of CICP in all CODs, these aspects will
be monitored more closely by superior officers.

Inspection by DGQA.

Advance sample approvals and its trials.

Improvement Proposed
(a)

Greater transparency and concurrent alignment of rates in CP & LP

through ERP being available with all stakeholders.

(b)

better price discovery and enhanced vendor base.”

Procurement of items through GeM has already been implemented for

3.36 When asked why in the instant case, there was no economy of scale in central

procurement, the Ministry responded thus:-

“(a)

In the instant case, it is clarified that the rates quoted by M/s Ashok

Leyland were an aberration as a result of the special prices quoted for certain
tenders as stated by the audit. M/s Ashok Leyland has clarified the under
mentioned vide letter No D&SV:2391 dt 06 Oct 2022:-

(i)

The rates offered by them were the rates at the special discounted
price in consonance with their half yearly clearance policy as the quantity
is less and the same should not be treated as bench mark prices.

(ii) In addition, M/s Ashok Leyland has further certified that the market
tates of the items under discussion were as under: -
| जल Ashok Leyland Ashok Leyland 00
Discounted Price | Actual Mkt Price | Purchase
(in consonance (as certified by Price
with their half M/s Ashok
yearly clearance Leyland)
polic
(aa) | LV7/STLN(VF) 18839.00 34640.00 31900.00
X-7493800
Turbocharger
Re-Entrant
(ab) | LV7/STLN(VF) 16735.00 36720.00 32004.00
B-3205901 S/A
of Rear Spring
(ac) | LV7/STLN(VF) 7212.61 15070.00 9675.00
14683760174
AR __ Distributor
Head

26



7 Item Ashok Leyland Ashok Leyland 600
Discounted Price | Actual Mkt Price | Purchase
(in consonance (as certified by Price
with their half M/s Ashok
yearly clearance Leyland)
polic
(ad) | LV7/STLN(VF) 1911.00 4079.00 3800.00
X-0205310
Release Bearing
Butee DM 86P
(ae) | LV7/STLN 2520- 1400.00 3180.00 2445.00
72-0000552 / B-
1301701 Driven
Plate for Clutch
(af) | LV7/STLN(VF) 718.25 1260.00 1149.00
F-6NO00600
Indicator Water
in fuel
(ag) | LV7/STLN(VF) 155.00 235.00 220.00
F-2215200 Low
Oil Pressure
Switch
(ah) | LV7/STLN (VF) 2094.00 4625.00 4115.00
F-8283900 Air
Filter_ Prima’

(b)

Release Bearing Butee BM 86P.

In this context, it is evident that LP

tates quoted by the OEM were an aberration to the market rates with the aim of
stock clearance and should not be treated as a benchmark price. Being L-1 in the
said tenders, the firm was awarded the contract for said item. The price trend of
the said item for few years is tabulated below:-

| No Year Central Local Purchase rate
Procurement
Rate

ri) | 2013 No procurement Rs 3496/-

(ii) 2014 Rs 3750/- Rs 3750/-

[ (iii) | 2015 No procurement Rs 3500/-

iv 2016 No procurement Rs 3750/-

४ 2017 Rs 3800/- Rs 1911/-

(vi) 2018 Rs 3800/- No procurement

3.37. The Committee desired to know how procurement is carried out in the

organisation and on what basis items are procured locally or centrally. The Ministry

responded with the following written reply:-

“Procurement of stores by the CODs is carried out as per provisions of GFR
2017, DPM and its supplement of 2010. Provision review is carried out by the

27



CODs annually to ascertain the requirements of Army in the subsequent years.
Based on the APR outcome, cases are processed to procurement. Such
procurement cases come under the purview of central procurement. The central
procurement caters to maintenance requirements, reserves, initial requirements
of new raisings, special requirements like overhauls etc. Since quantities
involved are large, it involves strict quality assurance agency, DG QA and
delivery periods vary from six months to eighteen months. In addition to this,
inabilities (dues out) exist for items wherein stocks are not available but are
required to meet the urgent/ special requirements of the Army which may be
covered by central procurement supply orders (dues in) but the stores are likely
to be supplied in future. In such cases, an enabling provision of DPM 2009
empowers the CODs/ other Ordnance echelons to undertake procurement of
such emergent quantities locally. Such quantities procured to meet emergent
requirements are termed as Local Procurement. Delivery period of local
procurement items is short, generally 60 days.”

3.38 On being asked about the mechanism in place within the ordnance services to
compare local rates vis-a-vis central procurement rates, the Ministry submitted as

under:-

“(a) The provision review cards (PRFs) are indexed equipment and COS
section wise and have endorsement of last purchase price alongwith the year of
purchase. It is important to note that rates are quoted only once the supply order
has successfully materialized. In case of an SO which has been placed but
stores are yet to received, the rate will not be endorsed. Rates of the items
irrespective of mode of procurement i.e. LPD /TPC get endorsed on PRF post
delivery of stores. These rates are also vetted by I&BC/IFA while processing the
cases for procurement which also serves as an internal mechanism of checks in
the system for Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) concurrence.

(b) Prior to automation (i.e. during the period of audit viz 2014-15 to 2018-19),
the rates of procurement of items was shared by all echelons both within
Command Zone and also with IHQ of MoD (Army) in writing through dak.

(c) Ever since implementation of CICG in 2018, the procurement rates of all
items are fed into legacy packages (RIMS & DIMS) which are being regularly
updated through monthly updation of records in ERP for units not on CICG and
centrally through the ERP for units and formations on ERP which is visible to all.
Post implementation of ERP at all locations, all LP & CP rates will be available on
one platform to ascertain more realistic and real time data.”

3.39 When asked about the measures that may have been taken to avoid such
situations leading to extra expenditure, the Ministry responded with the following reply:-

“Post implementation of ERP SAP by CICG, visibility of rates will enable the
procurement agency to ascertain the price trends. Moreover, with shift of
procurement from e procurement on DPP portal to GeM has enabled the buyers
to use GeM platform tools like price trends, past transaction history etc to

28


ascertain the price reasonability. The depots have adopted GeM platform for
procurement of stores which offers enhanced vendor base and rate reasonability
by automatic generation of L-1 bidder. Moreover, advisory on the issue has been
issued by IHQ of MoD (Army) on the subject to re-sensitise the agencies
undertaking procurement in larger interest.”

c. Procurement of stores at rates higher than last purchased price (LPP)
by 147 percent.

3.40 Audit analysis of data of supply orders, as furnished by COD Dehuroad, for the
period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 revealed that 22 supply orders valuing Rs. 1.87 crore
were placed at rates higher than the last (three to six months old) purchase price by 17
to 147 per cent which resulted in an extra expenditure of Rs. 27.83 lakh. This indicated
absence of assessment of reasonability of rates before placing of supply orders.

3.41 Ministry stated that in central procurement under TPC tendering only DGQA
registered manufacturers, OEM firms, etc. participate, and the initial setup of
infrastructure/assembly lines for manufacturing of items has to be vetted by DGQA for
capacity verification, which get included in the development cost. Every time
Manufacturer/OEM bids, they start from raw material stage to final inspection and
delivery of stores. This has direct impact on rates of items, which are generally high for
items supplied under TPC. In case of local purchase, only suppliers participate in
bidding for items which are commercially available off the shelf. Ministry, however,
added that depots were continuously making efforts to ensure that quality products are
procured at reasonable rates. Further, to curb large variations from last purchase price,
stringent measures were being taken and advice of Adivsor (Costing) in Ministry of
Defence will also be taken in cases of large variation.

3.42 The justification furnished by Ministry is not convincing as increase of up to 99
percent in rates of central procurement, within six months of local purchase, appears
unjustified. Further, compared to local purchases, central purchases involve larger
quantities resulting in economy of scales which should lead to realization of more
competitive rates. During exit conference in February 2021, the DGOS assured that the
matter was noted for future compliance.

३.43. In their background note, the Ministry submitted the following:-

“There are instances where firms quote very low rates either to enter into
business or to clear their existing stocks. Such rates are subsequently not
sustainable.

There have also been instances where in firms fail to supply quality stores at
quoted low rates leading to cancellation of supply orders. The supply order for
Hose Assy qty 172 at rate of Rs 395 was placed on firm on 03 Jun 2016. Another
order for same item was placed by the Depot for qty 2500 at rate Rs 975 (147%
escalation on 15 Oct 2016), as pointed out by the audit. The firm which took the
first order at rate of Rs 395 failed to supply the item and the order had to be
cancelled on 11 Aug 2017.

29


Last Purchase Price is generally taken as established only after successful
completion of supplies.

With procurement being done through GeM and greater visibility and
transparency post CICP implementation, likelihood of occurrences of such
instances in future will be negligible.”

3.44 When asked about the justification for giving higher rates, which resulted in an
extra expenditure of Rs 27.83 Lakh, the Ministry replied by stating as follows:-

“Central procurement is carried out under OTE (earlier LTE with OEM/OES/past
suppliers and manufacturers). M/s Ashok Leyland has not participated in the TE
directly instead it had nominated OES to participate on their behalf. OES have
participated and obtained SOs accordingly. Out of total 22 SOs, five SOs had to
be cancelled due to failure of firm to supply the items and no Delivery Period
extension was sought by the concerned firms. These are serial numbers
9,16,18,21 & 22 of Annexure V, Para 3.4.3 of C&AG Report. Of the balance 14
SOs, pertaining to seven items, there has been an escalation of price as
highlighted by audit. The SO having 147% escalation was also cancelled by the
depot due to failure of firm to supply the item. At times, firms quote unrealistic low
price in TEs which leads to huge price variations. These prices, though an
aberration, are considered by the procurement committee which includes IFA/
|&BC Cell, CQA reps and CFA. Notwithstanding the above, the Ministry has
issued an advisory to resensitise the depots on the issue.”

D. Excess expenditure of Rs. 3.89 crore due to non-placement of orders under
repeat order clause/option clause by DGOS/CODs

3.45 As per Defence Procurement Manual 2009, purchaser retains the right to place
orders for additional quantity up to a maximum of 50 per cent of the originally contracted
quantity at the same rate and terms of the contract, under option clause and repeat
order provided this clause had been incorporated in the original contract with the
supplier. Procurement under option clause is available during the original period of
contract. A repeat order may be placed within six months of the completion of the
contract.

3.46 Audit observed that the procurement agencies did not avail the provision of
repeat order clause, despite incorporating the said provision in the supply order and
instead, placed a fresh supply order at rates higher than the earlier ones, which resulted
in excess expenditure of Rs. 3.44 crore.

Excess expenditure due to non-availing of repeat order clause (Rs. in lakh)

Name of the unit Number of cases where Loss due to non-availing
repeat order clause was not | benefit of the Repeat order
exercised clause
DGOS 01 95.44
COD Agra 51 234.15
COD Dehuroad 14 14.71
Total लि िओ 344.30

30



3.47 Similarly, the procurement agencies did not avail the provision of option clause,
and instead placed a fresh supply order at rates higher than the earlier ones, which
resulted in excess expenditure of Rs. 44.59 lakh.

Excess expenditure due to not availing the option clause (Rs. in lakh)

Name of the unit Number of cases where Loss due to non-availing
option clause was not benefit of the option clause
exercised
COD Agra 17 13.88
COD Dehuroad मम: फिए 30.71
Total 106 44.59

3.48 Audit pointed out that that due to eschewing of the available repeat/option clause
under supply orders resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 3.89 crore. In reply, it was
clarified that even IFA did not accept repeat order clause which rules out competitive
bidding. Audit pointed out that the cases of repeat order brought out in the report were
mainly pertaining to DPSUs where no other supplier exists. Ministry, thereafter, stated
that this aspect would be examined.

3.49 The Ministry furnished the following in their background note:-

“Majority of the items pointed out by the audit pertain to DPSUs. Option clause in
certain cases was not exercised due to failure of DPSUs to supply stores for
prolonged periods against old supply orders.

Notwithstanding, the point has been noted for compliance and wherever possible
Option / Repeat Order Clauses will be adequately exercised as per the relevant
guidelines given in DPM 2009.”

3.50 On the issue as to why the Ministry did not take advantage of the repeat order
and option clause and why a fresh supply order was placed at rates higher than the
earlier ones, which resulted in excess expenditure, the Ministry gave the following

reasons:-

“(a) Deficiency of any equipment is being calculated only after Annual
Provision Review which is an exercise carried out annually. While validity of
option clause is till receipt of supplies as per contract and Repeat Order upto 6
months from date of last delivery of contracted quantities at times both options
don't fall within currency of review.

(b) Majority of the items pointed out by the audit pertains to DPSUs. Option
clause / Repeat Order in certain cases were not exercised due to failure of
DPSUs to supply stores for prolonged periods against old supply orders, hence
there was no point placing Repeat Order/Option Clause.

31



3.51

५.

3.52

(०)

Repeat order /Option clauses could not be exercised in certain cases due

to numerous reasons as given below: -

(d)

(i) Delays due to deliberations on the cases between the stakeholders
ie. CFA, IFA and the depots which led to lapse of timelines.

(ii) Cases identified by the depot for comparison of subsequent
procurement pertain to central and local procurement which have different
clauses. In the local procurement, no repeat order /option clause is
included.

(iii) | The depots contend that utilization of option clause would have
resulted in splitting of the quantities as the APR outcomes (quantities
required) were more than the permissible quantities in previous SO for
utilization of repeat order/option clause. This would have resulted in a
subsequent audit objection wherein a requirement has been split and
covered under two SOs.

(iv) | Oversight in some cases.

Notwithstanding the above, the depots have been advised to utilize the

option and repeat order clauses wherever feasible. The details repeat orders /

option clauses placed by COD Dehu Road are tabulated below: -
[SNe | No Year No. of SOs placed under
Repeat Order/ Option Clause
(0) | 2020-21 27
(ii) 2021-22 23
Total ee ।

When asked what measures have been taken to avoid such situations in future,
the Ministry submitted the following:-

“a)

Though as per Para 7.13.1 of DPM it is clearly stated that Repeat Order

(RO) /Option Clause (OC) should not be included as a matter of routine in the
RFPs but wherever possible depending on case to case basis RO/ OC are being
adequately exercised. DAD has regularly advised against including of RO/OC
clause on the premise that this leads to higher price being quoted by vendor to
include cost escalation due to time lapse.

(b)

The depots have been advised to utilize the option and repeat order

clauses wherever feasible.”

Procurement for UN Mission

Indian Army contingents are deployed in United Nations Peacekeeping Missions,
viz., United Nations Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo

32


(MONUSCO), United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) (wet lease 7) and
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) (Dry lease 7) as per Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between the Government of India and United Nations (UN). The contingents are
equipped with Individual Kit Items (IKI) including military equipment as per the
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with United Nations (UN).

3.53 The contingent Owned Equipment (COE) system was adopted by the UN by
which countries are reimbursed for providing equipment and personnel to the
contingents in peacekeeping missions. Reimbursement is limited to the items of
serviceable major equipment (including associated minor equipment and consumables)
specifically agreed to by the UN. In case a unit provides less equipment than stipulated
in the MOU, the reimbursement is only for the equipment actually provided. The
reimbursement rates are based on the generic fair market value of equipment which is
determined by the General Assembly.

3.54 Audit noticed that Indian Army contingents deployed to UN Mission were not
adequately equipped with major equipment. Delays in meeting the demand of the units
resulted in deduction in reimbursement due from the UN as discussed in the paragraphs
below.

3.55 The Committee desired to have a detailed account of the terms of reference in
respect of providing equipment and personnel to the UN peacekeeping missions, the
agencies involved in the process and reimbursements. In response, the Ministry
furnished the following information:-

“(a) Terms of Reference for Providing Equipment to UN
Peacekeeping Mission.

(i) UN HQ (Department of Peace Operations, Office of Military Affairs)
issues a document called Statement of Unit Requirement (SUR) which
defines employment concept, capabilities, standards and tasks for the unit
to be deployed in a peacekeeping operation. It lays down requirement in
terms of manpower, major equipment and self sustenance capabilities.

(ii) SUR is analysed at Service HQs and certain adjustments, if
required, are requested to UN HQ to include maximum equipment which is
available with Indian Army or commercially available. However, not all
requests are accepted by UN.

(iii) | Based on SUR, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is signed
between India and UN. This MoU is vetted by MoD and Ministry of
External Affairs.

5 Reimbursement system whereby the troop contributor assumes responsibility for maintaining and supporting
major and minor items of equipment deployed. The troop/police contributor is entitled to reimbursement for
providing this maintenance support.
” Reimbursement system whereby the troop contributor provides equipment to a peace keeping mission and the
United Nations either assumes responsibility for maintaining the equipment or arranges with a third party for
maintenance of the equipment.

33


(iv) Earlier, post conclusion of MoU, a GSL was obtained from MoD for
procurement of major equipment and self sustenance requirements.
However, post promulgation of DFPDS-2021, MoD has stipulated that
GSL is not required to be obtained and procurement can be initiated by
CFAs on conclusion of MoU.

(v) Agencies Involved in the procurement process:-
(aa) SD-3B(UNLgs) - Provision action.

(ab) Respective ८४ 88 - VCOAS, MGS, ADG Proc (A),
ADG Proc (B) for procurement of major equipment/ stores.
Ordnance, Engineer, Medical CFAs under respective delegated
financial powers and contingent commanders for procurement of
self sustenance requirements.

(ac) Various Procurement Agencies - Directorates under
MGS Proc such as MGS Proc (L&E, UN) MGS Proc (Amn), MGS
Proc (GS&C), MGS Proc (Armt), MGS Proc (Vehs), ESP-2, COD
Delhi Cantt, AFMSD, AFTC and ESD.

(ad) Respective IFAs such as Pr IFA (Army Ord), Pr IFA
(DGAFMS) etc.

(ae) Respective budget disbursal agencies such as FP-2, OS-28,
ESP-1, DG-2C etc.

(af) ४०0 (Fin) for procurement cases more than Rs 300 Crore or
capital procurement on Single Tender Enquiry basis for more than
Rs 150 Crore.

(vi) Reimbursement Process.

(aa) Respective COE Inspection Teams carries out quarterly
inspection of major equipment and self-sustenance capabilities
based on which reimbursements are admitted. Reimbursements are
denied for non-serviceability. Deficiency as non-serviceability of
more than 10% COE results in deduction upto 35% from troop
reimbursements.

(ab) Various DAD Cells deployed with UN Contingents, UN Cell,
PCDA New Delhi and Permanent Mission of India, New York are
involved in reimbursement process.

A Loss due to non-availability/unserviceability of major equipment in UN
Mission Area and deduction from Troop Reimbursement

3.56 Audit examination of COE reimbursements of Mission MONUSCO (Congo) and
UNMIS (South Sudan) for the period 2017-18 and 2018-19 revealed (February 2020)

34


that deduction of US $ 108.21 lakh was made from COE payments for major equipment
not in the mission area and for unserviceability of some major equipment.

3.57 Audit noticed in February 2020 that 64.11 percent of the total deduction (US$
27.28 lakh of 42.56 lakh) from amount reimbursable to Mission MONUSCO (Congo)
was on account of deficiency of the major equipment for Rapid Deployable Battalion
(RDB) during 2017-18 and 2018-19.

3.58 UN had also deducted an amount of US $ 440.90 lakh during the earlier period
from April 2013 to December 2016 on the same account. Audit noticed that UN had
deducted US $ 98,150 on account of deploying truck not matching the required
specification/capacity in the Mission Area.

3.59 Audit has cited a case study on delay in providing equipment in the Mission area.
Government sanctions were accorded for procurement of five equipments in January
2017 and for one equipment in May 2018 and supply orders were placed in April 2018
and February 2019, respectively. The equipment was received in COD Mumbai in
January/August 2019. Audit noticed that there were delays ranging from 27 to 83
weeks in placing supply orders as well as receipt of equipment.

3.60 Audit also noticed that moratorium on import was imposed by the Democratic
Republic of Congo from December 2018 to December 2019 and the contract for
transportation of equipment in the Mission area was concluded in March 2020. The
equipment was received in the Mission area in August 2020.

3.61 As a result of delay in procurement and consequent late transportation of the
newly procured equipment to the Mission area, reimbursement of US $ 12.71 lakh to the
Ministry for the delayed period is doubtful.

3.62 Ministry stated in February 2021 that (i) in-service vehicles (truck) readily
available in the inventory of Indian Army were deployed in the Mission Area and a case
had been taken up with UN to amend MOU which was done and reimbursement of
these vehicles commenced from January 2017 (ii) moratorium for importing military
equipment for almost twelve months from December, 2018 by the Government of
Democratic Republic of Congo was the major reason for non-transportation of vehicles
and other equipment to the Mission area and (iii) contract for transportation was
concluded in March, 2020 and the vehicles were transported in June, 2020 and these
reached the Mission area in August, 2020.

3.63 According to Audit, Ministry’s reply was not tenable as the specific equipment
required to be deployed in the Mission area was known and it was necessary to provide
such equipment as per UN requirement. Further, timely procurement of equipment,
immediately after receipt of sanction from Ministry, would have ensured transportation
of equipment to the Mission area before imposition of moratorium by the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

35


3.64 Audit examination of realization of amount towards reimbursement from UN
revealed that deduction of US $ 147.21 lakh from Troop Reimbursement at MONUSCO
and UNMISS during the period from April, 2017 to March, 2019 was also made on
account of non-availability of serviceable contingent owned major equipment.

3.65 Besides, an amount of US$ 661 lakh for the earlier period from March, 2014 to
January, 2017 was also disallowed towards cost of troops. Ministry incurred loss of
US$808.21 lakh during the period between April, 2013 and March, 2019 on troop
reimbursement due to major equipment not being in the mission area or unserviceability
of the equipment. Ministry's reply was silent on reduction from troop reimbursement.

3.66 In this regard, the Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“Since Mar 2019, a number of policies have been formalised to improve
equipment serviceability and available in UN contingents. Due to these efforts,
the equipment status in mission area has improved and reimbursement for major
equipment has increased to 90% of auth. In addition, to address existing and
future requirements, a roll on Plan to replace equipment in mission area before
completion of its shelf life has been evolved. Deficiency in equipment is also
being procured as part of this Roll On Plan. Concurrently case has been taken up
with UN HQ to amend the respective MoUs and remove the equipment/ vehicles
that have limited exploited or are not available for procurement in the India.”

3.67 When asked about the reasons for inadequately equipping or delay in meeting
the demands of Indian Army contingent deployed on UN Mission which resulted in huge
deduction in reimbursement due from the UN, the Ministry submitted the following
written reply :-

“(a) Reasons for Inadequate Equipping. UN procurement is time sensitive
where failure to procure and deploy equipment results in corresponding loss of

reimbursements. Few of the reasons are as under:-

(i) UN procurement is governed by provisions of GFR (amended from
time to time) and DPM-2009. These provisions are more suited for
procurement where there is no financial penalty due to procurement
delays and focus is on following elaborate procedures and achieve most
competitive rates even at cost of re-tendering a case multiple times.

(ii) Even during promulgation of DPM-2009, it was suggested by
service HQ that UN procurement be kept out of scope of DPM-2009,
however, the same was not agreed to by MoD (Fin) (S No 23 of
supplement 2010 to DPM-2009 refers).

(iii) | Since there is no procurement procedure specific to UN
procurement, various CFAs and IFAs apply template of routine
procurement procedures which are not suitable for time bound
procurement required for UN.

36


(iv) _ In certain cases, equipment asked by UN for deployment is not
commercially available in India due to unique technical specifications
mandated by UN. In such cases, industry is approached to custom
manufacture such equipment which results in time delays.

(v) Till 2017, for procurement of major equipment GSLs were
sanctioned by MoD which used to take considerable time thus resulting in
procurement delays. MoD GSL was a pre-requisite for carrying out UN
related procurement.

(vi) UN stores are custom duty exempted. However, host country
sanctions import of UN stores and provides custom duty exemptions.
Number of times host country do not provide these exemptions in time
which results in delay of transportation of equipment to mission areas.

(vil) Due to disruption in contracts, regular container movements did not
take place to MONUSCO and UNMISS between 2012 and 2014. The
containers started reaching the UN mission from May2015 onwards,
hence reimbursements have increased thereafter.”

3.68 On the question of what action has been taken to prevent recurrence of such
situation in future, the Ministry provided the following reply:-

“(a) Policy Changes. Number of policy changes have been implemented to
expedite UN procurement process from 2017-19. Some of these are listed below
for consideration.

(i) Fast Track Procurement Procedure. Schedule 25 was added to
the DFPDS 2016 in March 2017 wherein VCOAS was given financial
powers to carryout emergency procurement of equipment for UN on urgent
basis. SOP for the same was also promulgated duly concurred by all
stakeholders including Pr IFA (Army-Ord) & MoD (Fin). This SOP is being
further refined to factor creation of new procurement verticals in Army HQ,
enhanced financial powers of CFAs and latest Government policies on
public procurement.

(ii) Permission to Procure Major Equipment in MissionArea. MoD

has approved procurement of equipment in UN mission area to reduce
procurement time and cut down delay in transportation of equipment to
mission area. List of equipment procured in various mission areas is given
at Appendix ‘C’.

(iii) | Enhancement of Contingent Commanders’ Financial Power for
Procurement of Minor Equipment in Mission Area. The financial

powers of the Commanding Officer (CO) of UN contingents have been
enhanced from Rs 30 lacs to Rs 60 lacs per rotation. These funds are
available to the CO for procurement of minor equipment, primarily stores,
spares & accessories required for ensuring the serviceability of Major
equipment and self sustenance capabilities in mission area. The
Contingents are also allowed to procure such spares in mission area to cut

37


(b)

(c)

down logistics chain & thus reducing repair time of Major equipment in
mission area.

(iv) Maintenance of Spare Brick. Each contingent has been
authorised to demand a Spare Brick of medical stores, Hygiene&
Chemical stores, spares of equipment, tyres, tubes &batteries to ensure
continuous availability of spares in msn area.

(v) | Maintenance of Additional 10% Equipment with Contingents.

Contingents are being issued with additional 10% equipment (selected
inventory/ equipment being exploited extensively for Operations) to ensure
100% equipment availability/serviceability.

(vi) Financial Powers_to DG SD for Transportation of Stores/
Equipment to UN Mission. Financial Powers have been accorded to
DG SD under ASP Sch-1 of DFPDS 2021 to conclude UN transportation
contracts. This has led to reduced transportation timelines and early
availability of equipment in mission area.

Procedural Improvements & Initiatives.

(i) Equipment Roll on Plan. Two-year Equipment Replacement Roll
on Plan has been formalised at SD Dte based on utilisation patterns in UN
Missions. This will ensure timely changeover of equipment in mission area
before it completes its shelf-life.

(ii) Utilisation of Multiple Transport Options. There is an annual
sea transportation contract in place to move stores t oMission Area. In

addition, aircrafts are hired from IAF/ Civil Contractors for transportation of
urgently required, spares and other stores to ensure maximum
serviceability of Major Equipment deployment in UN Mission.

Impact Achieved. Due to these efforts, the equipment state in UN

mission has improved resulting in more than 90% reimbursement being received.

(d)

However there remains a requirement to promulgate procurement

procedure specific to UN requirement to obviate procedural delays caused due to
various provisions of GFR and DPM.”

38


Chapter-4

Inventory Management

4.1... The aim of an effective inventory management is to keep inventories as low as
possible and at the same time ensure responsive and focused service to the users. An
efficient inventory management system encompasses timely provision, procurement,
conditioning and disposal of unwanted inventory in an expeditious manner. It is also
essential to ensure that critical items are always available and large scale non-moving
inventories of unwanted items are avoided.

Inventory holding of the CODs

4.2 Mention was made in paragraph 7.3 (a) of Audit Report No. 7A of 2000 about
valuation of ordnance inventory by converting tonnage held into money terms. A
recommendation for adopting a system of maintaining price inventory instead of present
system of only quantitative accounting was made. Ministry in ATN stated that once the
Computer Inventory Control Project (CICP) was implemented, the audit
recommendation would be met.

4.3. Audit observed that despite lapse of more than 20 years since the Ministry's long
standing assurance and go-live of CICP at COD level since July, 2018, the pricing
details of complete inventory had been not updated, due to which the real valuation of
inventory could not be made. Audit could work out the value of just 26,950 items out of
total 3,56,717items in the inventory of the three selected central depots where last
purchase price was available.

Inventory of three test-checked central depots

Name of the Total Stock held | Number of | Percentage | Value of the
Depot inventory | (Number of items in of items in | stock held
(No of items items) respect of | respectof | worked out
authorised) which which value by audit
value was was
indicated indicated
C) to (B
[| A | 53 | Cc | bd | 5 |
CAFVD, 83,473 Details not made available
Kirkee
600, 68,364 28,381# 4,925# 17.35 Rs. 162.27
Dehuroad crore (as of
November
2019
COD, Agra* 2,04,880 1,03,186 22,025 21.34 Rs. 1,205.72
crore (as of
July 2018
Total 3,56, 717 1,31,567 a | Rs.
1,367.99
crore

39



Note: # Soft data furnished by the Depots.

* Account card soft data as of 07 July 2018 (date of switch of SAP), PRF 2018-19
soft data and total inventory.

44 Inventory is always stated in terms of quantity kept in stores. The Ministry were
asked if they had any system of maintaining monetary value of the inventory stock at
any given time and if so, details (year wise) of the same during the last 3 years. The
Ministry furnished the following reply:-

“(a) The total inventory today, listed with Indian Army is 4.5 Lakh items. Pricing
of this inventory and arriving at the book value was taken up in earnest during the

~ last one year and has yielded positive results. Specific action to be taken were
enumerated and all vendors have been brought on board to provide price lists
and these have been updated from industry. Defence PSUs have also forwarded
their price catalogues. All new purchases are being updated in real time on ERP
systems. Foreign vendor purchases in Indian prices have also been updated.
These efforts have ensured pricing of close to 3.5 Lakh items.

(b) In certain instances some sub-assemblies or spares have not been priced
rather basket prices have been mentioned by vendors while there are also cases
where items are old and new procurement in last 10-20 years have not been
done. In all such cases, invoking the policy directives Professional Officers
Valuation Boards (POV Boards) including technical members have been ordered.
The results are encouraging and pricing is being carried out with speed and
intent.”

4.5 Audit further observed that while on the one hand, the depots were unable to
meet the demands of the end users as many of the critical and vital stores required by
the users were not held by them, on the other hand, they held stores which were not
required by the end user as discussed in the following paragraphs.

1. Holding of non-moving and surplus inventory by three central depots

4.7. The matter of serviceable stores lying in the open had also been highlighted in
paragraph 14.5 (viii) of C&AG Audit Report No. 7A of 2000. However, even after 20
years, the problem of deficient storage accommodation in the depots was not resolved
as stores were still held in the open.

4.8 Ministry stated in February 2021 that COD Dehuroad, CAFVD Kirkee and COD
Agra hold many items, which do not have any civil end use. It was explained that an
exercise had been undertaken in 2018-19 to identify surplus
serviceable/obsolete/obsolescent items and after necessary approval these would be
disposed. Ministry further stated that in view of deteriorating condition of existing
storage accommodation, urgent necessity to create and modernize the storage
infrastructure had been felt. It added that many ordnance depots had been taken under
modernization plan; however, due to budget constraints, fructification of these projects
takes considerable time.

40


4.9

In their background note, the Ministry submitted the following reply:-

“Spares pertaining to equipment being phased out are held in the depots till such
time complete population of that equipment is totally out of service. These items
do not have civil and use and hence unlikely to fetch substantial revenue through
auctions.

Approx 80,000 items have been identified for disposal during last two years out
of which 40,000 have already been removed from inventory.

More impetus is being given to dispose off non moving inventory within next two
years.”

4.10 The Committee sought details of action taken for judicious disposal of obsolete,
obsolescent and surplus items and present position of these items. The Ministry
submitted the following response:-

“Disposal of Non Moving / Surplus inventory has been identified as a key Result
Area at the Central level. More than one lakh items have been identified for
disposal. Accordingly, actions taken for judicious disposal of Obsolete/
obsolescent and surplus inventory are as under:-

(i) Board_of Officers Convened to Identify Non Moving Sur

Serviceable/OBT inventory for disposal. A Board of Officers was
convened by Mater General Sustenance Branch on 13 May 2019 to

identify ‘Surplus Serviceable Non Moving Cl ‘B’ {Current items (Non
Moving since last 10 years and above) and ‘OBT’ stores (Non Moving
since last 5 years and above)}.

Pe) No] COD Current) OBT | Approved |r
Non for
Moving Disposal
| (aa) _| Delhi 10,605 | 8,924 19,529 | Total 24,816
| (ab) | Kirkee 6,063 | 4,681 10,744 | (30%) OBT/Non
ac) | Agra 33,513 | 7,196 40,709 | Moving Cl ‘B’
| (ad) | 020५ Road| 6,006 | 2,505 8,511 | stores disposed
[ (8९७) _| Kanpur 412 21 433 | off till 30 Sep 22.
| (af) | Bomba’ 341 106 447
Total 56,940 | 23,433 80,373

(ii) This inventory is now being actively reduced and out of 80,373
items approved for disposal 24,816 items have been suitably disposed off
as per orders/ directions in vogue.

(iii) | Revised Methodology of disposal of OBE inventory. A study
was carried out by ADG OS(A) to define a revised methodology for speedy

disposal of obsolete serviceable inventory, a total of 72,130 OBE items are
held with CODs and lower echelons as identified in the study. The details
of OBE inventory as per the study report alongwith disposal action are as
under:-

41


Ro | coD OBE Inventory (COD)
No
| (aa) | Agra 40,755
| (ab) | Jabalpur 5,984
ac) | Dehu Road 6,425
| (ad) | Delhi Cantt 11,338
| (ae) | Bomba 482
| (af) | Kanpur 6,502
| (ag) | Kirkee 644
Total 72,130

Note.

(aa) Inventory identified - 72,130 items

(ab) Inventory disposed - 28,148 items.”

4.11. When asked to furnish details of progress made regarding modernisation and
creation of new storage infrastructure and the timeframe of creation of the same, the
Ministry provided the following reply:-

“Infrastructure as part of modernisation has been created at COD Kanpur, COD
Agra and COD Jabalpur. Modernisation of CASD Delhi Cantt has been planned
in the next phase. For other CODs it will be progressed as per priority and

availability of funds.”

॥. Low User Satisfaction

A High outstanding demand for stores

4.12 As per existing provisions all demands from the users’ units are to be honoured
by the depots within 22 days of receipt of the indent. Stores which are not available for
issue from stocks in that depot are maintained as dues out by the depot. Audit analysed
the data of demands which depots could not honour and, therefore, were converted into

dues-out.

Details of Dues-out as of March 2019 at CODs/ RODs

Total Demands outstanding for
demands
a outstanding 23 days to 6 More than 6 More than
for more than | months (%) months and up one year (%)
22 days to one year (%)
COD Agra 75,190 10,506 (14 21,944 (29 42,740 (57,
COD Dehuroad 60,144 22,679 (38 8,511 (14 28,954 (48
[9FOD si 35,488 13,601 (38 12,903 (36 8,984 (26
[1FOD sd] —4,25,901 53,864 (43 31,077 (25 40,960 (32
222 ABOD 61,140 21,514 (35 14,418 (24 25,208 (41
224 ABOD 1,41,118 42,383 (30 36,645 (26 62,090 (44

42



OD Talegaon 90,812 48,530 (53 19,964 (22 22,318 (25
OD Fort 3,507 1,509 (43 996 (28 1,002 (29
21 DOU 29,836 18,601 (62 4,636 (16 6,599 (22
(26000 | 8,054 3,804 (47 3,528 (44 722 (9
(11000 sid 17,855 7,351 (41 4,512 (25) 5,992 (34
Total 6,49,045 | 244,342 | | 159,134 | 34 | 245,569 |
Percentage

with respect to

total demands

outstanding for 37.65 | 37.83
more than 22

days

Note : Data towards outstanding demands was not furnished by CAFVD Kirkee.

4.13 It could be seen that, as of March, 2019, 6,49,04 demands were outstanding
where stipulated time of 22 days had already elapsed. The demands outstanding upto
six months raged between 14 and 62 per cent whereas the same beyond six months
was 38 and 86 per cent. This indicated inability of the depots in sourcing the required
spares. Thus, inordinate delay in procurement activities and delay in delivery by the
suppliers resulted in ineffectiveness of depots in meeting the users demand in time.

4.14 On this issue, the Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“Regional Procurement. In order to arrest this situation of high outstanding
dues out with the forward Ordnance echelons, an initiative has been taken in the
form of decentralisation of procurement to the level of Regional Ordnance
Depots. Approx 4600 fast moving items have been identified and procurement is
being carried out regionally with effect from financial year 2021-22. This will
enhance the availability of critical stores with field units.

Implementation of CICP Phase Il. The implementation of CICP Phase-lll
will not only provide asset visibility pan India, it will also provide close monitoring
of dues out at the managerial level for prompt action to address the issue at all
levels.

With corporatisation of Ordnance Factories, indigenisation drive and
procurements through GeM, supply situation is likely to improve in future.

The concern of the audit is noted for compliance and will be addressed to a large
extent as brought out above.”

4.15 When asked how the Ministry justified outstanding demands to such a great
extent, they furnished the following reply:-

“The high outstanding demands are not desirable but supply chain bottlenecks
are a reality as highlighted by the audit. As brought out earlier, CAFVD Kirkee is
dependent on DPSUs for almost 80% of its inventory which are fraught with

43


slippages. The slippages were to the tune of 92% in year 2021-22 against
Deemed Contracts. These items are not readily available in the civil market as
they have no civil end use thus, limiting the vendor base. The criticalities are
highlighted at various forums by the Army to the DPSUs at various forums and
some requirements are being met by emergency procurement and
cannibalization of spares/assemblies from class V equipment.”

4.16 On being queried whether the Ministry / DG OS had analysed the reasons for

persistently not meeting demand for stores, the Ministry submitted the following

response:-

“The persistent deficiencies have been regularly analysed and highlighted by the
Army during numerous institutionalized forums like Target Fixation Meetings,
Spare Review Meetings, interactions of high level officials of Army and OFB. Due
to limitation of source and OFB slippages, the deficiencies persisted and
simultaneously, the Army tried to enhance the vendor base through
developmental orders and import substitution through Department of
Indigenisation.”

4.17 On the actions that have been taken by the Ministry to reduce the quantum of

unmet demands, the Ministry furnished the following reply:-

B.

“(a) The Army has made concerted efforts to develop civil vendor base to
enhance the vendor base and increase availability of these spares and
assemblies. Towards this, the Army is encouraging the participation of private
firms for overhaul of tanks which will enhance the overhauling capacities in the
nation and increase the availability of spares required for the tanks and its
various assemblies like engines. The DPSUs have also tried to concurrently
develop alternate indigenous sources to supply critical parts and assemblies like
side gear boxes, tracks etc in the recent years. It is felt that with corporatization
of Ordnance Factories, supplies are likely to increase and will make them more
responsive.

(b) At the Ordnance Depot, regular interactions with DPSUs and
trade/vendors are undertaken to highlight the slippages, lay down priorities for
supply of critical stores, etc.

(c)  Anonline trade procurement plan (OTPP) is also prepared and published
on internet to publicise the details of items required by the Army along with their
anticipated quantities and encourage private players/additional firms to
participate in supply of spares. This leads to development of alternate sources for
supply of critical spares/items.”

High inability percentage to meet users’ demand

4.18 Audit also noticed that the depots were calculating the inability percentage by
taking total dues-out as a percentage of the total items of inventory (i.e. live PRFs) held
by the depot. Accordingly, average inability percentage reported by the depots ranged
between 11 and 35 per cent. Audit further observed that the inability percentage in

44


tespect of spares for issue to the ABWs during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 ranged
from 24 to 41 per cent at CAFVD, Kirkee, 33 to 48 per cent at COD Dehuroad and 17
to 37 per cent at COD Agra. This inability percentage against demand of ABW
contributes to non-achievement of overhaul targets assigned to ABWs.

4.19 This according to Audit did not reflect the actual level of demand satisfaction as
the true performance indicator would be the percentage of demands met out of the
demands received by the depots. Audit analysis of the demand satisfaction level with
reference to the demands received at the selected CODs/ODs revealed that the depots
were unable to issue the stores demanded by the units and the average actual inability
percentage for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 ranged between 48.80 per cent and
77.05 per cent. The actual inability percentage was, therefore, much higher than the
inability percentage reported by the depots.

4.20 Ministry stated that in order to arrest high dues-out with forward ordnance
echelons, initiatives like procurement at regional depot level; identification of additional
sources of supply; Make-in India initiative; and encouraging OEMs/OFB/PSUs to re-
establish assembly lines, were being taken. It was added that implementation of CICP
Phase-Il would also provide pan-india asset visibility and facilitate monitoring of dues-
out.

il Inordinate delay in meeting the demands for equipment out of action (EOA)
and vehicles off-road (VOR) by the depots

4.21 As per existing provisions all demands of stores for equipment out of action
(EOA) and vehicles off-road (VOR) are to be honoured by the depots within 14 days.

4.22 Mention was made in paragraph 10.4 (d) of Audit Report No. 7A of 2000
tegarding inordinate delay in meeting the EOA and VOR demands and it was
recommended that every EOA and VOR demand may be monitored at the highest level
in the depot and all efforts should be made to speed up clearance of such demand.
Ministry in the Action Taken Note stated (December, 2003) that a system of monitoring
the EOA/VOR already existed, which had again been reiterated by Army Headquarters
and the depots had been asked to closely monitor this activity.

4.23 Audit, however, observed that even after passage of two decades, the situation
had not changed as 716 out of 1430 (50 per cent) of the EOA/VOR demands were
outstanding for more than a year as of March, 2019. Inordinate delay in meeting such
demands by the depots resulted in equipment out of action (EOA) and vehicles off-road
(VOR). Audit noticed that 331 Tanks were off road due to want of 279 type of spares,
the demand for which were outstanding at CAFVD, Kirkee. The operational forces were,
therefore, deprived of vital equipment and combat vehicles for a long period of time. ~

4.24 Ministry stated that most of the items of EOA/VOR are of OFB/DPSU origin and
sometimes remained unavailable for a long time. In such cases, action like procurement
ex-trade by identifying sources and retrieval from other equipment was resorted to meet
the requirement.

45


4.25 on this matter, the Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“EOA/VOR demands are being monitored on a regular basis. Items, which are of
OFB/ DPSUs ex-import origin, are sometimes not available for long. In such
cases actions like procurement ex trade by identifying sources and retrieval from

other equipment is also resorted to in order to meet EOA/ VOR requirements.

As per existing instructions laid down by the Military Operations Directorate,
serviceability of vehicles and equipment must be minimum 80 to 90% for different

types of equipment. This serviceability level is invariably maintained.”

4.26 The Committee sought to know the action taken to meet the outstanding
demands for Equipment Out of Action (EOA) and Vehicles Off Road (VOR) by the

users. The Ministry furnished the following reply:-

‘Vehicle Off Road (VOR)/ Eqpt Out of Action (EOA)demands have been met
through cannibalization, emergent procurement, supplies by Ordnance Factories,
placement of developmental orders on private firms concurrently by the Army
alongside allocating major quantities to Ordnance Factories, and import as
special cases. It is agreed that the delay has persisted due to slippages from the
primary source of supply for these items. However percentage of EOA/ VOR is

kept below 10% of overall holdings.”

4.27 As per audit, this delay in meeting demands for EOA and VOR has persisted
over the last two decades. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for the same,
the action taken to improve the situation and the resultant impact. the Ministry replied

with the following information:-

“(a) The persistent slippages from DPSUs (erstwhile Ordnance Factories)
have led to non-liquidation of VOR/EOA demands of the users. As brought out
earlier, slippages to the tune of 92% for spares of armoured fighting vehicles that
are. to be supplied by AVNL was observed in year 2022-23 against Deemed
Contracts. The problem gets compounded by a limited civil vendor base, no civil

end use of these items and issues related to Transfer of Technology.

(b) | To meet these requirements, regular interactions with the DPSUs, laying
down criticalities and minimum quantities required, development of alternate
sources etc have been done by the depot ie CAFVD Kirkee. The depot has made
considerable headway in developing alternate sources to supply spares of tanks

in the last three years.

(c) With corporatization of erstwhile Ordnance Factories and introduction of
penal clauses as applicable to civil vendors, it is felt that supply position is likely

to improve once the system stabilizes.

(d) The Army is encouraging participation of private firms in overhauling of
tanks which will improve the supply of spares of tanks and enhance overhauling
capacities in the country. The DPSUs have also promoted and undertaken
indigenization of critical assembly’s/ sub-assemblies which will also contribute

towards reduction of VOR/EOA demands.”

46


47


Chapter-5
Computerisation and Internal Controls
1 Computerised Inventory Control Project (०७107)

5.1. The Committee have been given to understand that CICP with the aim to
automate the inventory management functions of the AOC was sanctioned in July 1994.
The entire project was planned in three phases. Phase-I was completed in December
2003 at a total cost of Rs.13.60 crore.

5.2. The delay in completion of the CICP was commented in the Audit Report No. 7A
of 2000. On audit recommendation about need to set a definite time frame for
implementation of CICP, Ministry in ATN in December 2003 stated that time frame to
implement the project was compressed and was being executed on 'Fast Track Mode’
and the final Phase-lll of the project would be completed by May 2005, Audit
recommendations for early implementation of all phases of CICP were also repeatedly
made in other Audit Reports i.e. Report No. 3 of 2006 and No.19 of 2015 wherein it was
recommended that phase III of the project needed to be sanctioned immediately, so as
to reap full benefits of computerisation and to avoid further time over-run.

5.3 Audit noticed that despite assurance by the Ministry in ATN to complete Phase-lll
by May 2005, the sanction for Phase-ll of the project itself was accorded by Ministry in
November 2005 at an estimated cost of Rs.165.60 crore to be completed in five years
1.6. by November 2010.The scope under Phase-ll included® automation of a chain of
lower ordnance echelons, ammunitions depots, vehicle depots and aviation depots. The
sanction accorded was for extension of customised software as developed under
phase-l. In response to Expression of Interest (६01) floated in December 2005, most of
the shortlisted firms recommended in March 2006 for adoption of ERP® solution instead
of customised approach because it was considered to be technologically superior.
Ministry in January 2008, approved the change in approach for adoption of ERP
solution for the sanctioned project, without changing the scope of automation and
sanctioned amount.

5.4. Finally, in July 2015, M/s L&T Infotech was awarded the contract for execution of
Phase Il of CICP in 18 months at an amount of Rs.358.12 crore. The contract

° Units included:-
1.0rdnance echelons:- a Divisional Ordnance Unit (DOU), a Central Vehicle Depot (CVD), a Vehicle Depot, a
Technical Store Section (TSS), an Ordnance Store Section (OSS).
2. Aviation:- Central Aviation Support Depot (CASD), a Regional Ordnance Depot (ROD) (Aviation)|, a
Maintenance Flight.
3. Seven Central Ordinance Depots (CODs)/Central Armoured Fighting Vehicles Depot (CAFVD) and one ROD.
4, Management Information System (MIS)/Decision Support System (DSS) for Army Headquarters/Ministry of
Defence and intermediary formation headquarters.
3 ERP — Enterprise Resource Planning is defined as the ability to deliver an integrated suite of business applications.
ERP tools share a common process and data model, covering broad and deep operations end-to-end processes,
such as those found in finance, HR, distribution, manufacturing, service and the supply chain (As per Gartner
Glossary).

48


concluded for Phase-Il of the project included, inter alia, implementation of the ERP,
associated software, hardware and networking components based on centralised
architecture at implementation sites which included various depots, units and Army
Headquarters among others. The scope of the contract provided for Testing and Final
preparation as well as GO-Live followed by maintenance and operation for seven years.
Ministry approved in August 2019, partial Go-Live with effect from July 2018 in respect
of Aviation, Vehicle and Ordnance verticals and start of operation and maintenance
services. The Go-Live in respect of all verticals except Ammunition was achieved as of
February 2020.

5.5 Audit selected two ordnance sections'° at Army Headquarters and three central
depots" to assess the implementation of CICP and observed issues from October 2019
to February 2020 that are outlined in the succeeding paragraphs.

A Implementation issues of CICP Phase-Il at Army HQ

5.6 Annual Provision Review of Class A stores was not being conducted through
ERP Application of CICP (Phase-Il) owing to non-integration of all stakeholders and was
being carried out manually. Besides, other activities like issue of 52२07 to central
depots, obtaining stock position of Class A stores from the holding depots, approval of
higher Competent Financial Authority (CFA) cases of Class B stores and placing of
supply orders for Class A and B stores were also being performed manually i.e. through
paper correspondence. The issue of non-utilisation of on-line concurrence facility by the
AHQ/MoD was also raised in the Audit Report No. 3 of 2006 (paragraph 4.3.4) wherein
Ministry had replied that a deliberate decision was taken to use on-line concurrence to
PFRs by the AHQ/MOD in phase II after all the eight CODs got covered under CICP.
This issue was, however, still not resolved even after more than two years of
implementation of Phase-ll. Further, non-integration of the external agencies like MISO,
Electronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME) directorate and user directorates was
resulting in non-availability of crucial inputs online needed for the provisioning and
procurement of stores. The end user of the project was, therefore, constrained to work
manually rather than using ERP application.

5.7. In reply, Ministry stated that solution for carrying out provisioning of Class A and
Class B stores had been developed and was ready for execution; provisioning activity of
Class A stores in respect of ‘Vehicles’ had been completed; was pending in respect of
Armament Engineering & Signals and Ammunition. Further, AoN for CICP Phase-Ill at
an estimated cost of Rs. 496.56 crore was accorded in November 2020.

30 Ordnance Section at Army HQ — 1. Combat Vehicle (CV) Wing and 2. Electronic & Engineering (L&E) Section of
Technical Stores (TS) Wing.

* Central Ordnance Depots ~ 1. COD Delhi Cantt, 2. COD Dehuroad and 3. Central Armoured Fighting Vehicle
Depot (CAFVD) Kirkee.
77 SPRD - Supplementary Provision Review Directives (SPRD) is issued by DGOS to CODs before commencement of
financial year which constitute important policy guidelines, population of vehicles, overhaul target, etc.

49


5.8 The fact, however, remains that even more than two years after ERP Application
under Phase-Il of CICP had gone live, the provisioning activity integrated with all
stakeholders had not yet been fully implemented in Army HQ. Further, various other
depots/units outside the scope of Phase-II would not be brought on the ERP Application
until successful completion of CICP Phase-lll.

5.9 One of the important advantages of the automation was timely asset visibility of
complete range of inventory across the depots and units from lowest to highest level.
However, inordinate delay in implementation of the automation project has deprived
Army HQ as well as the central depots of the advantages of automation. Besides, lack
of integration of MISO application and connectivity with users and other directorates
would adversely affect optimum utilization of the already implemented ERP Application.

5.10 The Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“For speedy implementation of CICP Phase-lll, necessary measures have been
taken by Service Headquarters by enhancing internal controls of the project with
constitution of three additional committees viz, Empowered Committee headed
by VCOAS, Oversight Committee headed by MGS and Steering Committee
headed by ADG EM for progressing CICG Phase II vide letter No
57926/ICT/IDCOAS (IS&C) Sectt/CICG dt 16 Jul 2021 in addition to governing
mechanism sanctioned by CCS viz, Project Management Board headed by
Secretary DMA, Executive Committee headed by Additional Secretary, DMA, as
also, a Steering Committee headed by DDG OS CICG at CICG as per Contract
of Phase Il.

Remedial action taken:-

(a) Annual Provision Review of Class A Stores have been started for
Armament, Engineering & Signals (AE & S) stores through ERP application of
CICG Phase Il.

(b) Approval of higher CFA cases for Class B stores is being obtained via File
Lifecycle Management (FLM) module in ERP application. Supply Orders for
Class B stores are being generated in ERP application.

(c) Asset Visibility at all levels on ERP application for obtaining stock position
of Class A stores from the holding depot is being utilised.

(d) | With regard to integration with MISO, exchange of pertinent data with
MISO on a weekly basis is being done. Other Directorates (MGS Branch, OL
Directorate & FP Directorate) have been provided with SAP system to extract
relevant data from system.”
5.11. When asked whether provisioning of Class A and Class B stores was being done
through ERP, and if not, the reasons therefor, the Ministry submitted the following

written reply:-

50


5.12

“(a) Annual Provision Review of Class A Stores to include B Vehicles,
Armament, Engineering & Signal (AE&S) stores is being done through a
customised SAP ERP application of CICG Phase-ll.

(b) Provision review of complete Class ‘B’ inventory is being carried out by
Central Depots through the Advance Planning & Optimisation (APO) module of
SAP ERP. The forecast requirement and indent generated as outcome of APO
process is being vetted by various depot functionaries, |1&BC, CQA and higher
CFAs at Army HQ on CICG SAP system.”

The Committee desired to know whether all the external agencies like MISO,

EME Directorate and user Directorates had been integrated with CICP. The Ministry

submitted the following written reply:-

5.13

“(a) With regards to integration with external agencies, CICG has already on
boarded MISO, DGQA, CQAs, PCDA and LAO on CICG SAP system. The
functionalities of listed external agencies have already been developed and
external agency users are working on CICG SAP ERP system to perform their
official activities online.

(b) | Other Directorates (MGS Branch, OL Directorate & FP Directorate) have
been provided with SAP system to extract relevant data from system.

(c) As per current directions of Service Headquarters, units of EME Test Bed
will be integrated with CICG Phase-lll. Accordingly, 23 EME echelons have been
included in RFP of CICG Phase —IIl.”

The Committee also desired to be apprised of the present status of

implementation of CICP Phase-lll. The Ministry furnished the following reply:-

5.14

‘Post AON for Phase-ill, NISG (Technical Consultant) has been onboarded on
21 Jan 2022. RFP (OTE) prepared in consultation with NISG has been approved
by the Secretary DMA (CFA). RFP (STE) has been prepared and vetted twice by
RFP Vetting Committee. Further, it has been progressed for approval of CFA.”

When asked if inventory management had suffered because of lack of proper

ICT application and if so, what efforts had been made by the Ministry / Army to fast

track and complete the process on priority, the Ministry submitted the following written

reply:-

“Between 2003 and 2011 AOC had developed and implemented customised
Inventory Management Application in all its units thereby automating the
Inventory Management Functions. In year 2015 CICG Phase-ll was launched to
upgrade the existing automation to ERP to exploit the benefits of an Enterprise
System. At present ERP is implemented at 23 AOC units/ Headquarters and 27
external entities. A Hybrid System in form of AOC Web Portal has been
developed used to reap benefits of both ERP and legacy Systems. The CICG
Phase III (to extend SAP ERP to remaining units of AOC supply chain) is under
progress and likely to be completed by 2025. In next phase it is planned to
51


upgrade the system to SAP S4 HANA. So, it is inferred that the upgradation of an
automated system is an ongoing process and similarly already implemented
automated Inventory Management System is also under upgradation.”

5.15 The Committee desired to know if the Ministry/ DG OS had gathered information
from other developed countries’ CICP system as to how they manage their inventory.
The Ministry submitted the following replies:-

“(a) The USA & UK adopt Single Service Command Logistics Structures.
Logistic for operations is directed and coordinated through a Joint Logistics
Command and Control node.

(b) The PLA has integrated IT into logistics equipment to support precision
logistics and mobilised by employing internet of things, big data and cloud
computing.

(c) SAP ERP is a robust application which is being used by Armies of several
developed countries like USA. Germany, Australia, Denmark, New Zealand,
Israel, France, Poland, Canada, Italy, Spain, Turkey, Sweden, Portugal, Slovakia
& Slovenia etc. Accordingly, the same Enterprise Software (SAP ERP) was
selected for implementation of AOC Inventory Management Application.”

5.16 In terms of Inventory Management and Automation, the Ministry submitted the
following information:-

AOC constantly strives to ensure responsive and efficient inventory management
system through timely provision, procurement, distribution of the required
inventory, and disposal of unwanted inventory which is finally rendered obsolete
and de-scaled. The aim is to achieve a very high degree of operational
preparedness of the Field Army by maintaining maximum serviceability of
vehicles, armaments and equipment as per the laid down policy.

The advent of automation and implementation of ERP SAP through CICP in the
inventory management functions of AOC alongwith all stake holders at the Apex
level and across all ordnance echelons in a phased manner has immensely
enhanced the efficiency in Inventory Management with pan India visibility and
integration of all inventory management functions. Phase-ll of the project has
already been implemented wef the year 2018 across all CODs and concerned
functionaries at Army HQ level besides the other stakeholders including
Integrated Finance Advisors and has stabilised over a period of past three years.

In order to prepare for the roll out of Phase-lll of the project, for which the AoN
has already been accorded, ERP SAP in one field formation vertical upto a
Divisional Ordnance Unit and an EME Battalion has also been implemented as a
part of CICP Phase-Il as a test bed. The Phase-ill of the project is now at an
advanced stage of RFP formulation.”

52


॥ Internal Controls

5.17 Audit observed certain inadequacies in the prevailing internal controls and
monitoring mechanism of the Ordnance Services, which are discussed below.

A Non-receipt of confirmation of receipt of stores at consignee end

5.18 Receipt of stores. at the consignee end is confirmed by the consignee through
return of a copy of issue voucher enclosed with the stores. Issuing depots are required
to monitor such return to ensure receipt of issue voucher duly acknowledged by the
consignees. In case of non-receipt of acknowledgement of stores, possibility of wrong
dispatch of stores or loss of stores in transit or pilferage could not be ruled out. In C&AG
Report No. 7A of 2000 (Paragraph 10.4 (F)), huge backlog in receipt of the
acknowledgement from the consignees was highlighted. Audit observed that there was
little improvement in the situation as of 31 March 2019.

Cases where acknowledgement was yet to be received by the issuing depot

Units Year wise number of vouchers’ outstanding for
acknowledgement
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19

COD Agra 23124 21850 7528 6846 4956

CAVED Kirkee 12427 11015 11493 8131 11369

222 ABOD 869 1282 8759 123 1513

COD Dehuroad 1722 1185 466 1058 NA

OD Talegaon Year wise outstanding vouchers not 9924 8953
furnished

9 FOD [fo fo fo [0 [153

1 FOD Year wise outstanding vouchers not 67 549
furnished

OD Allahabad Year wise outstanding vouchers not 64 375
furnished

5.19 Outstanding acknowledgements of stores reflect that the COD/OD/ABOD had not
ensured the confirmation of receipt of stores at the consignee end. This is indicative of
ineffectiveness of the internal control and monitoring mechanism prevalent in the
ordnance depots.

5.20 Ministry stated that backlog in confirmation was caused by various factors like (a)
many stores are collected centrally by Regional ODs and distributed to the units which
finally clear RV (receipt voucher) (b) moving of units to alternate locations, (c) non-
availability of tracking facility in the package dispatched by Army Postal Logistics, etc.
Ministry added that considerable progress had been made in receipt of confirmation of
stores.

5.21 The Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

53



“Considerable progress has been achieved and RV-2 has been cleared. The
details of outstanding RV-2 as on date are as under: -

"| P| Year
No

| 201418 | | 2016-16 | 2016-17 | 2017-18 | 2018-19

(a) | As per Audit 23124 21850 7525 6846 4952

(b) | Cleared 22754 | 21411 6724 5082 3732

Reasons for Backlog.

(a) Stores being collected by ROD on behalf of units to aggregate piecemeal
loads which is further being collected by units.

(b) There are instances where the units move to alternate locations which
during the interim period causes delay in the stores reaching the new destination.

(c) User units are committed in various operational preparedness activities i.e
deployed in field, thus leading to time delay in processing RVs.

Improvements proposed in System.

(a) Considerable progress made in interim period (62000 RVs cleared).
(b) — Environment sensitisation to timely clear outstanding RVs.

(c) | The concerned RODs and units were adequately expedited by CODs. As
a result, all pre-ERP/SAP pending receipt vouchers have been successfully
cleared by the depot.”

5.22 On being asked about the action taken by the Ministry for timely receipt of
confirmation of receipt of stores at consignees end, the Ministry furnished the following

reply:-
“(a) There are many stores that are collected centrally by Regional Ordnance
Depots (RODs) on behalf of the units to obviate piecemeal loads. The units
thereafter collect the stores from the RODs resulting in delays in clearance of
Receipt Vouchers (RV). This being a linked activity tends to get delayed.

(b) Further, there are instances where the units move to alternate locations
and owing to the same either documents are delayed or stores are left lying in
previous locations.

(c) RV copies received are delayed in updating on SAP due to acute
shortage of manpower or committed in various operational preparedness
activities i.e. deployed in field for major part of the year. This also accounts for
the delay at times.

54


(0)

Concerted efforts have been made by the depots to clear the backlog of

pending RVs. Details of pending RVs as on date are tabulated below: -

CAFVD Kirkee.
Ko Yr Ols as per CAG Cleared Ols as on Date
No Report
[() | 2014-15 12427 12205 222
(ii) [2015-16 11015 10839 176
[ (iii) | 2016-17 11493 11367 117
iv) | 2017-18 8131 7977 154
V) 2018-19 11369 11368 01
Total 54435 53765 670

(e)

COD Dehu Road.

can Yr Ols as perCAG | Cleared QOls as on Date
No Report
(i) 2014-15 1722 1722 | की |
(ii) 2015-16 1185 1185 | शशि |
00) [2016-17 466 466 [ 0७ |
(५) 2017-18 1058 1058 Nil

Total 4431 4431 Nil

Remedial Measures.

(i) Considerable progress has been made in clearance of RV's of
outstanding cases (approx 62000 RVs have been cleared).

(ii) RODs and units are being regularly expedited by COD’s.

(iii) | Post implementation of SAP / ERP, all activities will be on one
platform and receipt vouchers will be cleared by Depots within time frame.

(iv) DO letters are also being written to fmns and units for early
clearance of RVs.

(५) Active involvement of Fmn HQs for necessary instructions to units
for early clearance of RVs is also being sought.

(vi) Stores are being collected by RODs and also stores are being
dispatched to central locations directly to be collected by respective units
to ensure direct delivery to avoid transhipment/double handling etc.

(vii) Prior to moving to new location, clearance/ NOC from
Depots/RODs is mandatory thus resulting in early clearance of RVs.”

55



5.23 The Committee desired to know what action had been taken to strengthen the
internal control mechanism to ensure (a) resolution of backlog in receipt of the
acknowledgement from the consignees, and (b). the acknowledgment is received in
time from the consignees. The Ministry gave the following written reply:-

“(a) Concerted efforts have been made by the depots to clear the linking of
outstanding RVs through DO letters, interaction with concerned units and
expediting by concerned officials as evident from the progress on the issue.
Depots have been _ instructed to give due diligence to updation of RVs and has
been included in the technical KRAs of the depot commandants.

(b) | With implementation of CICG, the data visibility has further increased and
all outstanding RVs are thereof being monitored regularly, almost on real time
basis. This has ensured timey corrective actions by the depot to viz expediters to
respective consignees and personal interactions on tele between the depot
Comdts and consignee unit COs.

(c) Certain pre-emptive actions have been started to ensure timely
acknowledgement of receipts. These are as follows: -

(i) Withholding transactions for units for excessively delayed RVs
(over 3 years).

(ii) Obtaining RVs through AOC portal to ensure faster clearance.

(iii) Designing ERP/ interim solutions to ensure RVs are being given on
time.

(iv) Increase impetus on regular clearing of RVs and same being
monitored during regular insp/performance audits to ensure timely
clearance.

(v) Slowly transitioning to digital way of documentation & information
updation (incl audit approvals).”

B Discrepancies in issue and receipt of stores

5.24 Defence Service Regulations (DSR), stipulate that on accepting the discrepancy
in receipt of stores at consignee level by the consignor, the latter should replace the
stores on nominal vouchers. In case of non-acceptance, the original copy of the
discrepancy report should be returned to the consignee, together with a statement of
reasons for not admitting responsibility and the consignee should proceed with action to
obtain orders of the CFA converting the provisional loss statement into a regular one.
Details of Discrepancy Report (DRs) in two central depots are given in Table below.

Details of Discrepancy Reports (DRs) in central depots during 2014-19

56


7 a No. of DR No. of DR Unaccepted | Value of
No. received by accepted cases unaccepted
the depot by the where value | DRs (Rs. In
depot was lakh)
available
1. CAFVD Kirkee [215 15 154 80.80
2. COD Dehuroad_ | 597 48 494 76.25

5.25 It could be seen from the above that, in majority of cases, the discrepancies
raised by consignees were not accepted by the consignor. Audit observed that in
respect of CAFVD Kirkee and COD Dehuroad, the number of unserviceable items
received by consignee and reported in DR was 26 and 188 respectively. It was further
observed that after investigation of the above discrepancies, the consignor depot
authorities invariably stated that the stores were correctly dispatched; there was no
surplus/deficiency found in the stores of the depot; and discrepancy of the stores should
be regularized/settled/adjusted at the consignee’s end. Accordingly, the consignee
units, in accordance with the provisions of DSR, regularized the cases in a routine
manner as loss without any further investigations whereas these discrepancies could
have been due to theft, fraud or neglect.

5.26 Ministry stated that cases of discrepancies were centrally dealt by the depot with
concerned OFs and consignee units. It was added that any deficiency in transit is
clearly mentioned in the minutes of the Board of Officers meeting, based on which
discrepancy is raised and that there is provision of charging loss from transit agency.
Ministry contended that there was no case of damage in transit reported at CAFVD
Kirkee during 2014-15 to 2018-19.

5.27 Ministry's reply was silent about unserviceable items reported in the other depot.
In case of CAFVD Kirkee, it did not offer plausible reasons for the items to be reported
as unserviceable by the consignee.

5.28 The Ministry submitted the following information in their background note:-

“The cases of discrepancies are centrally dealt by the depot with concerned
Ordnance Factories and the consignee units. The agency for transit is only
responsible for total number of packages and any change in condition of stores.
Any deficiency in transit is clearly mentioned in the Board of Officers based on
which discrepancy is raised and there is a provision of charging off the loss from
the transit agency. There is no case of damage in transit reported at CAFVD
during 2014-19.

Out of a total number of 215, the discrepancies against 15 accepted Discrepancy
Reports (DRs)have already been settled by dispatching the stores to the
consignee and no action is pending for settlement against them. For rest of the
cases action for the settlement of provisional DR as per procedure have been
initiated at consignee side.

57


5.29

Raising and resolution of DRs is an ongoing process due to large quantum of
spares being required and despatched each yr on Pan India basis. The various
reasons for these provisional discrepancies are :-

(a) In most cases, spares are received in sealed packages from Ordnance
Factories only a sample check of the same is feasible.

(b) | Change of condition of certain slow moving items though forming part of
the scales but demanded only intermittently/ held up in transit during Advance
Winter Stocking period.

(c) Receipt Discrepancies. There is only one receipt discrepancy against
COD Jabalpur for 07 items as on date and is under resolution.

Due to concerted efforts put in by the depots, Ordnance Factories and the
consignee units the trend of provisional DRs for the last three years has come
down and is as under :-

(a) 2018-19 - 33
(b) 2019-20 - 22
(c) 2020-21 - 16.”

In case of non-acceptance of discrepancy by both consignor as well as

consignee, the Committee desired to know how the malpractice involved was ruled out

in absence of investigation. The Ministry replied with the following:-

5.30

“Discrepancies are raised in less than one percent of transactions. It is
highlighted that the stores are received in the depots in packed/ sealed boxes
from DPSUs/ trade and their internal mechanisms ensure that requisite quantities
are packed and supplied. The depots carry out percentage checks of the stores
received and these are then stacked in the warehouses. Huge quantum of stores
are received by the depots on regular basis. In addition to this, at times due to
oversight or breakages during transportation or change in condition due to
prolonged storage, the stores come under discrepancy when checked at
consignee end. The depots supervise the dispatch of stores through a Board of
Officers and whenever a discrepancy is raised, an investigation is carried out by
the depots either to accept or decline the DR. All cases of discrepancies are
processed further based on investigation only.”

The Ministry was asked for their comments on the Audit observation that there

are number of items which have been reported as serviceable but according to the

users they are unserviceable when received. The Ministry furnished the following

comments:-

“A miniscule number of items when dispatched from depots are reported as
unserviceable and defect reports for the same are raised. In this regard,

58


comments have been rendered in question No. 47 above. Changes in condition
occur due to numerous reasons like prolonged storage, multiple handlings,
damages during transportation etc. These are identified by the consignees during
the receipt checks and processed for resolution. Quantum of such cases are
negligible if compared with the overall quantity of stores despatched by CODs.”

c Discrepancy in PRFs reviewed and vetted by Inventory and Budgetary
Control Cells

5.31 All PRFs with demands valued over Rs. 5,000 should be referred to the
respective Inventory and Budgetary Control (8807) cell attached to respective depot
for independent assessment of liabilities and assets. DGOS in August 2013 had
informed all CODs that every PRF whether demand bearing or otherwise has to be
vetted by I&BC cell after completion of provision reviews.

5.32 From the details of PRFs held vis-a-vis PRFs vetted by 1&BC cell at COD Agra
for the period 2015-16 to 2018-19, it was noticed that there were PRFs ranging between
48 per cent and 92 per cent which were not forwarded to 1&|BC cell and consequently
resulted in their non-vetting. Record towards submission of all PRFs valuing over Rs.
5,000 got vetted from I&BC was not maintained at CAFVD and COD Dehuroad, hence
adherence of instructions of Army HQ could not be vouchsafed in Audit.

5.33 In reply, Ministry stated that the non-adherence was primarily due to the time and
manpower constraints because of which only demand bearing PRSs were being vetted
by I&BC cells on priority. Ministry, however, accepted the audit contention and agreed
to ensure compliance.

5.34 The Ministry submitted the following in their background note:-

“The audit point is agreed to.

As per DGOS Technical instruction, all demand/ non demand bearing PRFs are
to be vetted by 1&80 attached with respective Depots after completion of APR for
independent assessment/ re-assessment of liabilities and assets. This is a two
stage activity involving vetting at first stage of 1&BC and allotment of U.O.
number at second stage of demand bearing indents.

Implementation of ERP where qty vetting is now being introduced online for
faster completion of process.

The non adherence is primarily due to the time and manpower constraints
because of which demand bearing PRFs are being vetted by the I&BC cells on
priority.

The compliance is now being ensured.”

*31&BC cell is an independent cell in respective depots and reports directly to DDG (Technical Finance & Budgetary
Control) and DGOS. They ensure correctness of data in Provisioning Review Form (PRF).
59


PART-II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee

Introduction

The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that Army Ordnance Corps
(AOC) is a very integral and essential part of Indian Army and as such assumes
special significance. The Committee note that Audit conducted a performance
audit to assess the efficiency of the supply chain management of Central
Ordnance Depots in meeting the requirements of the Indian Army between 2014-
15 to 2018-19. The Committee observe from audit findings that there were
instances of both deficiency and surplus in Class A stores; deduction from
reimbursement by United Nations owing to non-availability / unserviceability of
equipment in UN Mission Areas; holding of non-moving and surplus inventory by
three central depots; high outstanding demand for stores and inordinate delay in
implementation of the Computerised Inventory Control Project. The Committee
also observe from audit findings that there were discrepancies in data relating to
Class B Vehicles; over-provisioning of stores due to non-reduction of dues-in
quantity; delay in procurement of critical items; outstanding supplies against
various supply agencies; cases of extra expenditure on account of failure to
accept the tender within the validity period; procurement at higher rates; non-
exercise of repeat/ option clause; inordinate delay in meeting the demands for out
of action equipment and vehicles off-road by the depots and non-receipt of
confirmation of receipt of stores at consignee end etc.

The Committee are of the considered view that inventory management has
a key role to play in the defence preparedness of the country. With the Indian
Army managing a humongous inventory of approximately 4.5 lakh items, it is
imperative that the lacunae ailing the inventory management be urgently plugged
and the process streamlined. It is in this trajectory that the Committee have
recorded their observations and recommendations on the issues in the audit
report that merit consideration and after examining the subject, the findings are

brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.

60


Provisioning- Deficiency and surplus

1. The Committee find that provisioning for Class- A stores (major and minor
equipment and ammunition) is done at Army headquarters and for Class - B
stores (related spares, accessories, general stores and clothing) the same is
done at Central Ordnance Depots. The Committee note that out of 63 items which
were deficient as per APR of 2018-19, in case of 15 items there was continuous
deficiency for two to five years ranging between 24 Percent and 100 percent of
respective Unit Entitlement. On the other hand, the Committee also note that 23
items were surplus in 2018-19 and out of these, Army was holding six items as
surplus up to 19 times of the respective UE for two to five years. The Committee
note from the Ministry’s reply that deficiency existed due to upgradation of
electronic equipment on account of technological obsolescence and non
recommendation for procurement by the user directorate. Further, according to
the Ministry, surplus arises because certain items are being replaced by new
equipment and their authorization in units is reduced resulting in surplus. The
Committee are not convinced with the reasons given by the Ministry for
continuous presence of deficiency and surplus in important stores. The
Committee, while opining that periodical review of the inventory be invariably
undertaken and the deficient stocks, if any, be procured to avoid “stock-outs”
impacting critical functions and the surplus stocks disposed of regularly as they
have a sizeable recurring inventory holding costs, recommend that stocks that
need upgradation due to technological obsolescence should be accounted for/
recorded while calculating inventory requirements. This will enable an objective
and transparent analysis of the inventory.

Discrepancy in data relating to Class B Vehicles

2. The Committee note that Management Information System Organisation
(MISO) of Army HQs acts as a repository of data of UE and UH of all equipment
used by the Army. MISO data of UE and UH are used for carrying out provisioning
by DGOS. The Committee note that in 19 Group of vehicles, the increase in unit
holdings in a particular year compared to the previous year was not
commensurate with the anticipated supplies against already placed supply
orders. To be precise, in six cases, unit holdings increased to an extent more

than the dues-in quantity of previous year, and in 13 cases, unit holdings

61


increased where there was no dues-in quantity in the previous year. A case in
example is the number of 2.5 Ton SPL (3) vehicles increased from 0 to 99 and
then 111, 182 and 222 in each successive year from 2014-15 to 2018-19 without
any dues-in for the years; and Crane 5-10 Ton (501) increased to 4 in 2015-16 and
to 76 in 2016-17 without any dues-in for the years.

Further, the Committee note that In APRs of 500 KG Special 4X4’ vehicle,
UE/Reserve figures changed every year in the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19.
Further, the total holding of vehicles decreased by 645 from 1632 in 2014-15 to
987 in 2018-19 despite the fact that the total number of vehicles projected for
being discarded during the above period was only 125. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that there were changes in the scaling (UE) of various
weapons & equipment and changes in the number of units from year to year
arising out of new raising/disbandment, etc. The Committee also find from the
submissions that variation in data observed by Audit was of pre-computer
Inventory Control Project (CICP) roll out and since 2019, the UE and UH data was
being directly imported from CICP. Noting Audit’s finding that integration of MISO
application and connectivity with User Directorates had not been achieved, the
Committee recommend that the MISO application be integrated with all the User
Directorates on priority and in a strict timeframe. The Committee also recommend
that the Units where there is discrepancy in Unit Holdings be identified and the
entries reconciled. The Committee are dismayed to find that no explanation was
forwarded by the Ministry for inconsistent changes in UH and desire to be

apprised of the same.

Delay in procurement of critical items of DGOS

3. The Committee note that during the period under review, there were ten
cases of delays in procurement process of Class A and Class B stores ranging
between 13 and 301 weeks. The Committee further note that according to DPM
2009, every individual in the chain of the procurement process is accountable for
taking action in a specified time period so that the requirements are met on time.
The prescribed time frame, laid down in DPM, for placement of supply order or
signing of the contract since vetting of indent under single bid and two bid

system is 17 to 19 weeks and 20 to 23 weeks, respectively. The Committee note
62


with concern that there were inordinate delays in procurement of such critical
items stretching upto 301 weeks as against the norm of approximately 20 weeks.
The Committee also observe that orders for certain important items were not
even placed despite the delay. The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry
that in case of delays, the system has provision of reserve and stocks at various
echelons, which meet the critical requirements of the field army. Further, since
maximum dependency of A vehicles and technical spares was on Ordnance
Factories and DPSUs, the delays were not only attributed to
procedures/documentation but also to slippage in meeting targets by Ordnance
Factories and DPSUs. The Committee, therefore, enjoin upon the Ministry to
streamline the processes of procurement to reduce delays and_recommend that
strict_action be taken against_every echelon /individual_accountable for any
delays_in_ the process of procurement_particularly for fixing eligibility and
technical criteria, specification changes, trials _and_for_ documentation. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken against the DPSUs/
Ordnance factories for slippages in meeting the targets. The Committee desire
that_the existing monitoring mechanism be made _more_stringent_and_ expert
teams be constituted for training/ upgrading specifications to expedite
procurement.

Procurement for UN Mission

4. The Committee are happy to note that the Indian Army contingents are
deployed in United Nations Peacekeeping Missions in Congo, South Sudan,
Lebanon etc. The Committee observe that Contingent Owned Equipment (COE)
system was adopted by the UN by which countries are reimbursed for providing
equipment and personnel to the contingents in peacekeeping missions.
Reimbursement is limited to the items of serviceable major equipment (including
associated minor equipment and consumables) specifically agreed to by the UN.
In case a unit provides less equipment than stipulated in the MOU, the
reimbursement is only made for the equipment actually provided. The
reimbursement rates are based on the generic fair market value of equipment
which is determined by the General Assembly. The Committee observe that
Indian Army contingents deployed on UN Missions were not adequately equipped

63


with major equipment. Delays in meeting the demand of the units resulted in
deduction in reimbursement due from the UN. The Committee note that the
primary reason advanced by the Ministry for inadequately equipping or delay in
the meeting the demands of Indian Army Contingents deployed on UN Missions
was that UN procurement is governed by provisions of GFR and DPM-2009. The
Committee have been informed by the Ministry that these provisions are more
suited for procurement where there is no financial penalty due to procurement
delays and focus is on following elaborate procedures to achieve competitive
rates even by re-tendering multiple times. The Committee also note that the other
reasons given for inadequately equipping etc are, non-availability of equipment
asked for by UN in India and non-provision of Customs Duty exemptions by the
host country. In this regard, the Committee recommend that in such cases the

Ministry of Defence, in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs must
negotiate _with the host countries to allow customs duty exemptions for
equipment being used for UN peace keeping missions. Further, India_being
committed to peacekeeping and peace building since the pre-independence
period, the Committee earnestly recommend that_a procurement procedure,
specific to UN requirements may be considered to obviate procedural delays.

Monetary value of items

5. The Committee note that the issue of valuation of ordnance inventory by
converting tonnage held into money terms has been raised time and again by
Audit since the year 2000. They also take note of the fact that despite lapse of
more than 20 years since the Ministry’s long standing assurance and
implementation of CICP at COD level since July, 2018, the pricing details of
complete inventory have not been updated, due to which the real valuation of
inventory could not be made. The Committee are concerned to note that only the
value of 26,950 items out of total 3,56,717 items could be worked out by Audit in
the inventory of the three selected central depots where last purchase price was
available. From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find that
pricing of 4.5 lakh items of inventory was taken up only in the last one year and
pricing of approximately 3.5 Lakh items has been done. The Committee feel there
has been inordinate delay in pricing of inventory and this should have been

64


carried out much before. The Committee, while opining that the Ministry have
taken far too long to carry out this important process which will aid_in better
overall management of inventory recommend that pricing of all the remaining

inventory be done on priority basis and completed in a time bound manner. completed in a time bound manner.

Holding of non-moving and surplus inventory

6. The Committee observe from audit findings that a whopping 31% of
authorized inventory of the three central deports comprised of non-moving items
(Items which have neither been demanded nor issued for more than five years)
which included, obsolete/obsolescent and surplus items. The Committee are
alarmed to note that the value of 22.44 % of non-moving inventory (where rates
were available) in the central depots was Rs 272.05 crore along with non-
moving/surplus inventory valuing Rs. 32.50 crore. As is being highlighted since
2000 by Audit, while on one hand, major resources such as storage space and
manpower of these depots were engaged in maintaining a large quantum of
ineffective inventory, on the other hand depots were facing shortage of
accommodation and serviceable stores were lying in the open. The Committee
are disappointed to note that despite a lapse of more than 23 years, the problem
of deficient storage accommodation has not been resolved yet. The Committee
note from the Ministry’s reply that while there has been an urgent necessity to
create and modernize the storage infrastructure, due to budget constraints,
fructification of projects of modernization has been taking considerable time. The
Committee further note that approximately 80,000 items have been identified for
disposal during last two years out of which 40,000 have been removed from
inventory and that impetus is being given to dispose non moving inventory within
next two years. The reply of the Ministry also reveals that infrastructure as part of
modernisation has been created at COD Kanpur, COD Agra and COD Jabalpur
and modernisation of CASD Delhi Cantt has been planned in the next phase. The
Committee urge upon the Ministry / Army to carry out an extensive review of their
inventory and dispose _non-moving inventory which would bring down holding
costs _and_also_ free ७७ storage space. The Committee desire that 150
certifications of storage management also be referred/adhered to and SOPs for

managing stocks are prepared and followed.
65


Computerised Inventory Control Project (CICP)

7. The Committee learn that the Computerised Inventory Control Project or
CICP was planned in 3 phases to automate the inventory management functions
of the AOC. However, there have been extensive delays in execution and
implementation of the project since the beginning. The Committee observe from
Audit findings that Annual Provision Review of Class A stores was not being
conducted through ERP Application of CICP (Phase-ll) owing to non-integration
of all stakeholders and was being carried out manually. Besides, other activities
like issue of Supplementary Provision Review Directives (SPRD) to central
depots, obtaining stock position of Class A stores from the holding depots,
approval of higher Competent Financial Authority (CFA) for cases of Class B
stores and placing of supply orders for Class A and B stores were also being
performed manually. Further, non-integration of the external agencies like MISO,
Electronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME) Directorate and user Directorates
was resulting in non-availability of crucial inputs that were needed online for the
provisioning and procurement of stores.The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that for speedy implementation of CICP Phase-lll, necessary measures
have been taken by Service Headquarters by enhancing internal controls of the
project with constitution of three empowered committees in addition to governing
mechanism sanctioned by CCS.The Committee also note that in terms of
integration with external agencies, CICG has on boarded MISO (Management
Information System Organisation), DGQA (Directorate General of Quality
Assurance), CQAs (Controllerate of Quality Assurance), PCDA (Principal
Controller of Defence Accounts) and LAO (Local Audit Officer) on CICG SAP
(Systems Applications and Products in Data Processing) system. The
functionalities of listed external agencies have been developed and external
agency users are working on CICG SAP ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning)
system to perform their official activities online. The Phase-lll of the project is
now at an advanced stage of RFP formulation. The Committee, here, recommend
that_integration of the necessary systems with the CICG be carried out on
warfooting and desire that continuous upgradation of the related software may
necessarily be made a part of the contracts during execution of the CICG. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry consider creation of a ‘Combined

Defence Logistics Organisation’ in view_of the rising trend of theaterisation of
66


command as is being done by the USA and UK. This would bring down the cost
of inventory in all three Forces and also enable optimum usage of all items.

Internal_controls- Non-receipt of confirmation of receipt of stores at consignee

end

8. The Committee observe that receipt of stores at the consignee end is
confirmed by the consignee through return of a copy of issue voucher enclosed
with the stores. Issuing depots are required to monitor such return to ensure
receipt of issue voucher duly acknowledged by the consignees. The Committee
observe that there has been a huge amount of backlog in receipt of the
acknowledgement from the consignees since 2000. The Committee note from the
reply of the Ministry that backlog in confirmation was caused by various factors
such as stores being collected centrally by Regional ODs and distributed to the
units which finally clear RV (receipt voucher); moving of units to alternate
locations and non-availability of tracking facility in the package dispatched by
Army Postal Logistics. The Committee note that approximately 62000 RVs have
been cleared and various remedial measures taken. The Committee also note
Ministry's response that post implementation of SAP / ERP, all activities will be
on one platform and receipt vouchers will be cleared by Depots within time frame.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of RVs that are still pending
and the timelines fixed for their clearance and recommend that the SAP/ERP be
implemented urgently to obviate further increase in the pendency of receipt

vouchers.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

67