 
 
146 
 
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
ON GST REFUNDS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (UT) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY- SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
PAC NO. 2376   O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O R T Y -S I X T H  R E P O R T    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)   (SEVENTEENTH LO K S ABH A)                                        
  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS                                                        Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29.4.2024                                                                     Presented to Lok Sabha on:              ……………..                Laid in Rajya Sabha on:               ……………..   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I   April 2024/ Chaitra 1945 (Saka)   
 SUBJECT-SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE AUDIT ON GST REFUNDS 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)                        (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 PART- I  
    REPORT 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
   
 APPENDICES  
 *Minutes of the adoption of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) 
through digital circulation on 20.4.2024 
 
 
*Not appended in the report  

4 
 
                                                           
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 
2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18.    Shri Derek O’Brien 
19.    Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.    Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.    Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.    Vacant2 
 
 
                   SECRETARIAT 
 
        Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
        Shri Partha Goswami           -   Director 
        Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma  -   Deputy Secretary 
         
  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Forty-Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “SUBJECT-SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE AUDIT ON GST 
REFUNDS based on Para 3.3 of Comptroller and Auditor General's Report No. 24 of 2022.  
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of 
the House on 20.12.2022.   
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 20.11.2023. The Committee considered and adopted this 
Report vide digital circulation on 20.4.2024.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite 
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
PART – I 
INTRODUCTION 
 The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and 
Report Para 3.3 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022 on the subject “Subject-specific 
compliance audit on GST Refunds”. The above para relates to various irregularities 
viz inadmissible grant of refund, irregular grant of refund due to non-debiting the 
Electronic Credit Ledger and Cash Ledger, non-following the order of debit to IGST, 
CGST and UTGST, acknowledgment not issued/not issued within time in Goods & 
Services Tax (GST) refund cases under Pre & Post Automation Process, GST Refunds 
not sanctioned within the stipulated time, and improper maintenance of Records in 
office of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, UT, Chandigarh from July 2017 to July 
2020. 
2. The Committee learnt that in order to streamline and standardise the refund 
procedures under GST regime, it was decided (18 November, 2019) by Central Board 
of Indirect Taxes and Customs that the claim and sanctioning procedure would be 
completely online. Due to unavailability of electronic refund module on the common 
portal, a temporary mechanism was devised and implemented. In this electronic-cum-
manual procedure, the applicants were required to file the refund applications in Form 
GST RFD-01A on the common portal, take a print out of the same and submit it 
physically to the jurisdictional tax office along with all supporting documents. Further 
processing of those refund applications, i.e. issuance of acknowledgement, issuance of 
deficiency memo, passing of provisional/final refund orders, payment advice etc. was 
being done manually. In order to make the process of submission of the refund 
application electronic, the refund applications in Form GST RFD-01A, along with all 
supporting documents, had to be submitted electronically. However, various post 
submission stages of processing of the refund applications continued to be manual. 
3. The Committee further learnt that with effect from 26 September 2019, the refund 
procedure has been made fully electronic, wherein all the steps from submission of 
applications to processing thereof could be undertaken electronically (also called 

7 
 
Automation of Refund Process). Accordingly, the Circulars issued earlier laying down 
the guidelines for manual submission and processing of refund claims have either been 
superseded or modified. A fresh set of guidelines have been issued for electronic 
submission and processing of refund claims vide Master Circular No.125/44/2019-GST 
dated. 18 November 2019. In order to ensure uniformity in implementation of the 
provisions of law across field formations, several earlier Circulars have been 
superseded vide para 2 of the aforesaid Master Circular. However, the provisions of the 
said Circulars shall continue to apply for all refund applications filed on the common 
portal before 26 September 2019 and the said applications shall continue to be 
processed manually, as were done prior to deployment of new system.  
4. While examining the Audit Para, the Committee found that on the basis of GST 
refund data, the Audit had selected 112 GST refund cases, processed in office of the 
Excise and Taxation Commissioner, UT, Chandigarh from July 2017 to July 2020 for 
examination. Various audit objections were pointed out by Audit viz, inadmissible grant 
of refund, irregular grant of refund due to non-debiting of the Electronic Credit Ledger 
and Cash Ledger, non-following of the order of debiting out of various heads of GST 
(when application for refund is filed), acknowledgement not issued/not issued within 
time in GST refund cases under Pre & Post Automation Period, GST Refunds not 
sanctioned within the stipulated time, and improper maintenance of records. These 
objections have been examined by the Committee in detail in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Inadmissible grant of refund 
5. The Committee have found from Audit para that M/s Kalima Shoes had 
submitted refund claim of ₹ 8.61 lakh (IGST) for the period July 2017 to March 2018 in 
February 2020 and M/s Positive Automation submitted refund claim of ₹ 0.95 lakh 
(UTGST) for the period July 2017 to March 2018 in June 2020 on account of inverted 
duty structure. Accordingly, the Proper officer i.e. Excise and Taxation Officer allowed 
refunds of ₹ 8.58 lakh to M/s Kalima Shoes and ₹ 0.95 lakh to M/s Positive Automation. 
However, Audit scrutiny revealed that M/s Kalima Shoes had submitted refund claim of 
₹ 3.37 lakh out of refund claims of ₹ 8.61 lakh and M/s Positive Automation submitted 
refund claims of ₹ 0.95 lakh after the expiry of two years from the relevant date. The 

8 
 
Proper officer in the office of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, UT, Chandigarh, 
allowed these refund claims without verifying the date of submission of refund claims, 
thereby resulting in inadmissible grant of refund claims of ₹ 4.32 lakh (₹ 3.37 lakh and ₹ 
0.95 lakh, respectively). 
6. The Committee learnt that in these cases, after being pointed out by the Audit, 
due recoveries have been made from the concerned applicants alongwith interest. 
Irregular grant of refund  
7. Audit highlighted that due to no debiting the Electronic Credit Ledger and Cash 
Ledger in two cases, whereby refunds were allowed but the said amount was not found 
debited from their electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger. The Proper officer in 
both the cases allowed refund of ₹ 0.80 lakh and ₹ 0.09 lakh without verifying the debit 
entry in the electronic credit ledger and electronic cash ledger respectively, thereby 
resulting in irregular grant/ allowance of refund of ₹ 0.89 lakh. 
8. The Committee learnt that on being pointed out (August 2021 & September 
2021) by the Audit, the Department of Excise and Taxation, Chandigarh Administration, 
while admitting the objection, stated (January 2022) that M/s MID Town Associates had 
debited the objected refund amount of ₹ 0.80 lakh from the electronic credit ledger and 
in respect of M/s Genius Computer Systems, the taxpayer had paid the amount of ₹ 
0.09 lakh, with interest of ₹ 0.03 lakh.  
 
Non-following the order of debit to IGST, CGST and UTGST 
9. The Committee note that the Board vide Circular dated 4 September 2018 
clarified that after determination of amount refundable, the equivalent amount is to be 
debited to electronic credit ledger by the taxpayer in the following order: First, against 
Integrated Tax to the extent of balance available and thereafter to Central tax and 
State/Union territory tax equally to the extent of balance available and in the event of 
shortfall in the balance available in a particular electronic credit ledger, the differential 
amount is to be debited from the other electronic credit ledger (i.e., State tax/Union 

9 
 
Territory tax, in this case). Further, this procedure was to be followed for all refund 
application filed after the date of issue of aforesaid circular. 
10. Audit observed that the Department of Excise and Taxation, Chandigarh 
Administration, had not followed the order of debiting the refund amount from electronic 
credit ledger in the refund cases as envisaged in circular dated 4 September 2018. 
Acknowledgement not issued within time in GST Refund cases under Pre & Post 
Automation Period.  
11. The Committee learnt that that in pre-automation period acknowledgement was 
not issued in 38 GST Refund cases and in post-automation period, acknowledgment 
was delayed in 13 cases. 
12. The Committee further learnt that, in post automation period, various GST online 
portal issues cropped up, which was duly informed to the Infosys Production Support 
Team by raising tickets, which led to delayed acknowledgement of refunds. 
13. During oral evidence of the representatives of the Chandigarh Administration, the 
Committee desired to know about the reasons for non-issuance or delay in issuance of 
acknowledgement to the refund applicants under the pre-automation process. In 
response, the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Chandigarh Administration submitted 
as under: 
“…..in pre-automation period, since GST was a new law, there were issues of 
lack of knowledge on the part of the officers who were dealing with this, and also, 
there was issue of lack of knowledge on the part of the tax payers also. Hence, 
there was this issue that in the pre-automation time period, acknowledgement 
was not given.” 
14. When further queried on the matter, he added as under: 
“I admit that there have been issues in the starting period of the GST, but after 
the post-automation, things have improved a lot. In the post-automation period, 
whenever the Department faces any issue, it is immediately highlighted. Now, 
since we have a post-audit mechanism also in place for each and every case, 

10 
 
these things are checked, so that in future we do not have these kinds of 
occurrences.” 
15. The Committee further desired to know whether post automation, 
acknowledgment is auto-generated for refund cases. In this regard, the representative 
of the Chandigarh Administration submitted as under: 
“..the acknowledgement is to be generated by the concerned proper officer who 
receives the refund application. It has been done in a way so that the officer 
concerned acknowledges it himself that there is something pending in his inbox 
which has to be processed. So, to put responsibility on the concerned officer 
itself, this has been kept in such a manner, and when we found this post Audit 
Cell, these issues are highlighted on a real-time basis.” 
GST Refunds not sanctioned within the stipulated time period of 60 days 
16. Audit highlighted that for pre-automation period there was a delay in 19 cases 
which was mainly due to delayed submission of manual files by the applicants and for 
the post-automation period delay was mainly on account of onset of COVID pandemic. 
Various amendments were brought by the GST Council to extend the time limit for 
issuance of orders keeping in view the COVID pandemic. 
17. Further, in some cases Show Cause Notices were issued to provide certain 
additional documents, the response to which was not submitted by the applicants 
timely, thus resulting in delayed processing of refund. 
18. The Committee learnt that since delay was attributable to the applicants, so 
interest has not been claimed by applicants from the Department for delay in processing 
of refund. 
19. The Committee have been informed that to avoid such lapses in the future, 
directions have been issued by the Competent Authority to the Ward in-charge that 
such irregularity does not occur in future and procedure as per extant Act and Rule 
must be followed. Further, an internal review mechanism in the form of Post Refund 
Audit Cell has also been created. 
 

11 
 
20. Explaining upon the Audit objection, the representative deposed as under: 
“In these cases, GST refund was not sanctioned within the stipulated time. As 
per the law, GST refund has to be done within 60 days of the receipt of the 
application. In the cases which were audited, it was found that in some cases, 
there was a delay in sanctioning of the refund and primarily when we examined 
it, we realized that the delay has been primarily in the pre-automation and the 
post-automation period because of the queries which were raised by the officers 
while processing these refunds. Initially there was no concession given for 
deducting this timeline from the 60 days’ timeline, but subsequently CBIC now 
has issued a circular, wherever there is any query given by the proper officer to 
any assesse for clarification of their refund case, that amount of time is deducted 
from 60 days and that is not calculated for calculating the 60 days’ timeline.” 
21. Adding to the issue, he further stated: 
“..whenever there is a query raised, the time taken by the assesse to reply to the 
query is not added to the 60 days’ timeline. Now, the change in the software has 
been done and 60 days’ timeline does not include the time taken by the applicant 
or the assesse to answer the query.”  
22. To a specific query regarding the steps taken by the Department to ensure timely 
submission of offline files by the tax payer in the pre-automation refund cases, he 
submitted as under: 
“Sir, in pre-automation refund period, there was a system of manual submission 
of files and whenever a file is submitted, then the time period of 60 days started. 
In few cases where the queries were not answered or the proper files were not 
submitted, the concerned officer should have rejected the refund which they did 
not, but now this anomaly has been corrected by the automation of the system. 
Hence, we do not face those pre-automation type period problems.” 
Improper maintenance of Records 
23. Audit pointed out that the Department had not maintained records related to 
payment advise forwarded and received from the concerned counterpart tax authorities 

12 
 
of the central jurisdiction. Point No.6.0 of Circular No.24/24/2017 dated 21.12.2017 
provided that the Nodal Officer of Centre and State would be required to share the 
information via email. Since, there were no specific guidelines laid down to maintain any 
register same was not maintained. 
24. The Committee have learnt that there is no financial implication related to this 
para and now, after introduction of automation system of GST refunds through common 
GST Portal, this record is being maintained on the common portal itself. 
 
25. When asked about measures been taken to ensure proper maintenance of 
records relating to the date of communication of payment advice, timeline for payment 
of sanctioned amount of tax or cess, etc., the representative of Department of Excise & 
Taxation, Chandigarh Administration submitted as under: 
 “Sir, this issue was primarily before the automation started. Before automation 
what used to happen is that GST Central and State used to issue refunds and 
used to transfer or communicate to their counterpart for giving their part of 
refund.  So, a common refund will be calculated which will have Centre and State 
part.  If Centre is issuing that refund, then they will advise the States to issue 
their part of the refund.  This used to happen in the pre-automation period.  In the 
post-automation period, this is being done automatically, electronically.    
We have taken corrective measures.  An institutional mechanism has been 
made. Action has been taken against the erring officials.” 
26. Elaborating on the disciplinary action against the erring officials, he submitted as 
under: 
“Sir, in these cases there are two kinds of officials, one who are still working with 
us and those who came on deputation.  Those who came on deputation, their 
cadre controlling authorities have been requested for taking action.  Those who 
are with us, their chargesheets have been issued and disciplinary action has 
been initiated.” 
 

13 
 
27. The Committee further learnt from oral submission of the representative of the 
Chandigarh Administration that the proceedings are on the final stage and necessary 
action will be taken. The Committee also note the candid submission of the 
representatives of the Chandigarh Administration that the erring officials were detected 
on the findings of the audit. 
Recommendation for post Audit of Refund Orders 
28. The Committee have learnt that the Central Board of Excise and Customs (now 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs) had instructed all Central Tax Authorities 
to continue post audit of refund orders as per extant guidelines vide circular no. 
17/17/2017-GST dated 15 November 2017. They have also learnt that a Post Audit Cell 
has been created for U.T. Chandigarh. All refund cases are being put up before the 
Post Audit Cell, which are thoroughly being checked and the irregularities in the refund 
cases are being communicated to the concerned Proper Officer for taking necessary 
action under GST law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1.  Consequent to sifting of all the information and documents 
available before them, the Committee note that timely refund 
mechanism is a significant aspect of tax administration. To 
streamline and standardise the refund procedures under GST 
regime, Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs decided (18 
November, 2019) that the refund process would be completely 
online. Audit Scrutiny of 112 GST refund cases processed in office 
of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, UT, Chandigarh from 
July 2017 to July 2020 revealed various irregularities viz 
inadmissible grant of refund, irregular grant of refund due to non-
debiting the Electronic Credit Ledger and Cash Ledger, not 
following the order of debit to IGST, CGST and UTGST, 
acknowledgment not issued/not issued within time in GST refund 
cases under Pre & Post Automation Process, GST Refunds not 
sanctioned within the stipulated time, and improper maintenance 
of Records. 
2. In regard to the audit para under reference, the Committee note 
from oral submission of the representatives of the Chandigarh 
Administration and the information available before them that in 
certain cases scrutinized by Audit, there was either no financial 
implication or due recoveries have been made from the concerned 
applicants alongwith interest. The Committee, in this regard  
cannot ignore the fact that such lapses were highlighted only after 
being pointed out by C&AG. Therefore, at this stage the Committee 
recommend that internal audit mechanism may be strengthened 
by the Department of Excise & Taxation, Chandigarh 
Administration to obviate any possibility of loss of revenue sans 
intervention of C&AG in future.   

15 
 
3. The Committee learn that consequent to Audit observations in 
certain cases, necessary action under disciplinary rules has been 
initiated against erring Officials. The Committee while expressing 
satisfaction that disciplinary proceedings against officials 
concerned have been initiated, nevertheless, recommend that 
such proceedings should be completed in a time-bound manner in 
order to fix responsibility for the lapses so that it serves as  a 
deterrent for other Officials too. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard at the earliest.  
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI             ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
    20 April, 2024              Chairperson, 
31 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 