9

IRREGULARITIES IN PROCUREMENT OF
GOODS AND SERVICES, AWARD OF WORK
TO NON-EXISTENT FIRMS, UNREALISED VAT
REFUND AND EXCESS PAYMENT OF
DEPARTMENTAL CHARGES

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-second Report (167
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF TOURISM

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

NINTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

ness
सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2190

NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

IRREGULARITIES IN PROCUREMENT OF GOODS
AND SERVICES, AWARD OF WORK TO NON-

EXISTENT FIRMS, UNREALISED VAT REFUND AND
EXCESS PAYMENT OF DEPARTMENTAL
CHARGES

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-second Report (16 Lok
Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF TOURISM

'सत्यमेद जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 16. 03.2020

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: (6.03. 2020
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2020/ Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)


"y


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTERI Report

CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES
r Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of Public Accounts Committee

(2019-20) held on 12 March, 2020.

I Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-second
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha).

* Not appended to the Report

PAGE


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri T. R. Baalu
3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
ds Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
10. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Th: Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
i. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
tt. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri P. Bhattacharya!
20. Shri C. M. Ramesh
21: Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav
SECRETARIAT
lL. Shri 1. 6. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. M.L.K. Raja - Director
a: Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director

" Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from Rajya Sabha on 05
August, 2019.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-second Report(Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Irregularities In Procurement of Goods and Services, Award of Work
to Non-Existent Firms, Unrealised VAT Refund and Excess Payment of
Departmental Charges’ relating to the Ministry of Tourism.

2: The One Hundred and Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
on the table of Rajya Sabha on 21 December, 2018. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 25
September, 2019 and 4 February, 2020. The Committee considered the draft Report
on the subject and thereafter adopted the Report at their sitting held on 12 March,
2020. Minutes of the sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-second
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13 March, 2020 Chairperson

24 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Thirty-second Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Irregularities in
procurement of goods and services, Award of work to non-existent firms, Unrealised
VAT refund and Excess payment of departmental charges" relating to the Ministry of
Tourism.

2, The One Hundred and Thirty-second Report which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 21% December, 2018 contained six Observations/Recommendations. The Action
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Tourism and are categorized as under:

i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 3, 4 and 6

Total: 03
Chapter - Il

ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill

iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration:
Para No. 5
Total: 01
Chapter - IV
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para Nos. 1 and 2
Total: 02
Chapter -V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain

shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of Ministry of Tourism which included inter-alia
issues of irregularities in procurement of goods and services by India Tourism Office
(ITO), Beijing; award of work to non-existent firms by ITO, London; unrealised VAT
refund by ITO, Tokyo; and excess payment of departmental charges by Dr. Ambedkar
Institute of Hotel Management Catering and Nutrition, Chandigarh .


4. The final Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Tourism have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with
action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations which either
need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Tourism to furnish Action Taken
Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter | and
final action taken replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter V for which interim reply has been given by the Government within six
months of the presentation of the Report to the House.

Unrealised VAT refund relating to India Tourism Office, Tokyo
(Recommendation No. 5)

6. The Committee noted that ITO, Tokyo had engaged (May 1999) M/s Sugiyama
Accountant Office, Tokyo for filing Consumption Tax (VAT in Japan) returns for
payments made in Japan and receiving the refund for the same. The agency
discontinued its services from January 2013. The Committee found that ITO did not
claim tax refunds for the period from January 2013 to March 2015. As per Audit, an
estimate of the amount of refunds to be claimed for the period October 2013 to March
2015 worked out to Rs 25.63 lakh. The Committee observed that the Ministry allowed
engagement of a tax accountant only from October 2013 till July 2016 and for the
subsequent period, directed ITO, Tokyo to devise a mechanism to recover tax on its
own or adopt a mechanism for nonpayment of VAT in consultation with the Indian
Mission and local authorities concerned. The Committee also noted that the tax
accountant could only be appointed after February 2017 and that following the
appointment ITO, Tokyo had recovered total VAT refund for the period January 2013 to
June 2016 and July 2016 to December 2017. The Committee found from the
submission of the Ministry that the ITO, Tokyo failed in devising a mechanism to
recover tax on its own and were dismayed to note that the Ministry was not able to
enforce its own directions. The Committee desired the ITO, Tokyo to adopt a
mechanism for exemption from VAT in coordination with India Mission and local
authorities urgently. Further, the responsibility for the lackadaisical approach of the
officials of ITO, Tokyo and Ministry may be fixed and action taken against those found
responsible in this regard.

. The Ministry of Tourism in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“M/s Sugiyama Accountant Office, Tokyo was engaged by ITO Tokyo in 1999 for
filing VAT returns and the agency discontinued its services in January 2014.
Based on the information received from ITO Tokyo, the agency recovered VAT
amounting to JPY 69,308,262 (Rs. 3,26,02,352.00 approx.) from Japan for the
period January 1999 to September 2013.

Subsequently, ITO Tokyo engaged M/s Saito Tax Accounting Office and received
VAT refunds as follows:


October 2013 to June 2016: JPY 1,64,50,675.00 (Rs. 95,29,993.00)

July 2016 to December 2017: JPY 73,54,853.00 (Rs. 45,16,613.00)

January 2018 to December, 2018: JPY 50,42,131 (Rs. 33,41,815.00)

As per Audit, an estimate of the amount of refunds to be claimed for the period

October 2013 to March 2015 worked out to Rs 25.63 lakh. However,ITO Tokyo
received VAT refund amounting to JPY 8032045.00 (Rs.46,53,021.00 approx. as
per rate of exchange on the date of receipt of the recovery i.e. 12" January,

2018. JPY 1= Rs. 1.7262.00).

ITO Tokyo has informed that it has confirmed from the Office of Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Government of Japan, that ITO Tokyo is not eligible for tax
exemption in Japan. However, the office can claim tax refund.

In view of the above, ITO Tokyo has been successful in claiming VAT refund
totalling JPY 98155921.00 (Rs. 4,99,90,774.00) for the period from January 1999
to December 2018. Details of VAT claimed is at Annexure."

8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Ministry has not replied on fixing the responsibility of the officials of both
ITO Tokyo and Ministry for lackadaisical approach in the matter. Action
taken on these recommendations may please be informed to PAC.”

9. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-
“ITO Tokyo has been successful in claiming VAT refund totalling
JPY98155921.00 (Rs. 4,99,90,774.00) for the period from January 1999 to
December 2018. Details of VAT claimed are at Annexure. Since there has
been a total recovery for the period January 1999 to December 2018, there
is no lapse on part of ITO Tokyo/Ministry of Tourism.”

10. The Committee observed in their earlier Report that the Ministry allowed
engagement of a tax accountant only from October 2013 till July 2016 and for the
subsequent period, directed ITO, Tokyo to devise a mechanism to recover tax on
its own or adopt a mechanism for nonpayment of VAT in consultation with the
Indian Mission and local authorities concerned. The Committee note in this
regard that following the appointment of a certified Tax Accountant, in February
2017, ITO, Tokyo had recovered VAT refund for the period October 2013 to
December 2018. The Committee are dismayed to note that instead of devising its
own mechanism to recover VAT etc., the accountants were retained well beyond
July 2016, which is contrary to the directives of the Ministry. The Committee
would like to be apprised whether Ministry’s prior approval for engaging the
accountants for the succeeding years was taken or not.

The Committee note from the submission made by the Ministry that though
Audit had estimated refunds to be claimed for the period October 2013 to March
2015 at Rs 25.63 lakh, ITO Tokyo, received VAT refund amounting to JPY
8032045.00 (Rs. 46,53,021.00 approx. as per rate of exchange on the date of


receipt of the recovery ie. 12"January, 2018. JPY 1= Rs. 1.7262.00). The
Committee cannot help noting in this regard that the Ministry’s approach to its
tourism offices appears to be lackadaisical. The Committee also emphasise on
the need for exercising caution against succumbing to allurement of exchange
rate fluctuation and desire that timelines be prescribed within which refunds may
be claimed by the tourism offices. Any delays need to be invariably brought to the
notice of the Ministry.

The Committee are astonished to note that ITO, Tokyo did not make any
efforts to devise any mechanism for recovery of tax and waited for the Ministry to
appoint tax accountants. The Ministry, on its part, has failed to enforce its own
directions, has allowed engagement of tax accountants for claiming refunds even
after July 2016 and has refrained from even responding to the failure of the ITO in
devising a mechanism. The Committee, while rejecting the contention of the
Ministry that since the total recovery for the period January 1999 to December
2018 has been made, there is no lapse on part of ITO Tokyo/Ministry of Tourism,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the responsibility for the lackadaisical
approach of the officials of both ITO, Tokyo and Ministry may be fixed and action
taken against those found responsible in this regard.

Excess payment of departmental charges by Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel
Management Catering and Nutrition, Chandigarh
(Recommendation Para No. 6)

11. The Committee noted that the Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel Management,
Catering and Nutrition (AIHM) Chandigarh accorded (January 2010) administrative
approval for construction of an additional block at Rs.9.91 crore. The Committee
observed that the executing agency, i.e. Engineering Department, UT Chandigarh,
charged departmental charges at 14.30 per cent as against seven per cent as
stipulated in CPWD Works Manual resulting in excess payment amounting to Rs.61.46
lakh. The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that Engineering Department
had revised the cost estimates to Rs.9.26 crore by bringing down the departmental
charges to the prescribed 7%. The Committee also noted that the building was taken
over by the AIHM in August 2015 and an amount of Rs.8.85 crore was paid by the
AIHM to the Engineering Department, Chandigarh. However, the final utilization
certificate in respect of above payment was awaited. The Committee were shocked to
note from the reply of the Ministry that the incorrect application of the charges was
mainly a failure of the Engineering department, Chandigarh Administration which was
supposed to charge as per CPWD Manual. The Committee were of the view that AIHM
should have vetted the cost estimates properly as the onus lied on it also to ensure that
payments are made according to the Government manuals. The Committee opined that
instead of shifting the responsibility, the Ministry should set the affairs of organizations
under its aegis avoid recurrence of such mistakes. The Committee desired that
Utilization Certificate from the Engineering Department Chandigarh be obtained at the
earliest and the departmental charges adjusted while making final payment for the
works. The Committee were of the view that the lapse pointed out by the Audit indicated
deficiency in the prevalent system of internal controls and internal audit and casual
approach of the officials concerned in AIHM and desired that to avoid recurrence of
such mistakes the systems be reviewed and strengthened and responsibility fixed.


12.

The Ministry of Tourism in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

" The Ministry of Tourism took up the matter with its all Autonomous Bodies to
ascertain whether there are cases of excess payment of departmental charges
as per CPWD works Manual to the executing agencies other than CPWD. In
response to this, so far no instance of overcharging the departmental charges
(except one case of AIHM, Chandigarh) has come to the notice of the Ministry of
Tourism.

In Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel Management, Chandigarh (AIHM) for

construction of additional block projects for augmenting their existing physical

infrastructure to cater to their need for additional space for classrooms & labs

arising from increased intake to students due to 27% reservations for OBCs, the
whole project was fully funded by the Government of India, through Ministry of
Tourism and the cost estimates were prepared based on the departmental
charges @14.3%. As the cost of the estimates was above Rs. 5.00 crore, the
Departmental charges @ 7 percent was to be paid. Accordingly, the matter was
taken up by the institute vigorously and then after, the Engineering Department
(Executing agency) revised the original estimates bringing down the
departmental charges from 14.3 percent to 7 percent.

The excess amount towards departmental charges was not actually paid to the
Engineering Department. Against the revised cost estimates of Rs. 9.26 crore, till
date, an amount of Rs. 8.85 crore is only deposited with executing agency.

Further, while furnishing utilization certificate for an amount of Rs. 7.40 crore by
the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration vide their Memo No.
11963 dated 25.09.2018, they have levied 7 percent as departmental charges on
total expenditure of Rs. 6.92 crore (upto July, 2018). Executive Engineers, C.P.
Division No. 2 Roads, Chandigarh has also informed to AIHM, Chandigarh that
their office has taken up the matter with concerned wings i.e., Public Health and
Electrical to supply the utilization certificate of amount deposited by their office
but the same is still awaited. They have also informed that the balance amount
shall be refunded after receiving the actual figures of expenditure from Electrical
and Public Health Wing.

To review and strengthen the system, the Ministry of Tourism has also issued a
letter dated 28" January, 2019 to all Central autonomous bodies as well as State
implementing agencies which have received grant-in-aid to set up State IHMs,
FCls informing inter-alia that for award of works to any PSU/State Govt.
organization (other than CPWD/ State PWD), the implementing agencies
including Central IHMs shall ensure competition among such PSU/Organizations.
The competition shall be essentially on the lump sum service charges to be
claimed for execution of works. Those who have already awarded the works to
other than CPWD/State PWD, it may be ensured that departmental charges
levied should be at par or below than that of CPWD rate manual."

aig =


13. | While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Engineering department had prepared a revised Utilization Certificate for Rs.
885.00 lakh for total expenditure including departmental charges amounting to
Rs. 744.33 lakhs thus leaving balance of Rs. 140.67 lakhs vide Memo no. 4732
dated 15/03/2019.

The balance amount of Rs. 140.67 lakhs has been refunded by the Sub
Divisional Engineer, Road Sub Division No. 3, Chandigarh and credited vide bill
no. CP00000985 dated 05.03.2019 in the account no. 10004492493 pertaining to
the Principal Incharge Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh.

Further the Principal Incharge Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh requested Ministry
of Tourism vide ADM/IHM/2K19/3562 dated 29.03.2019 to provide detail of
account number of Ministry of Tourism for transfer of Rs. 140.67 lakh.

This may be brought to the notice of PAC.

Latest position of transfer of fund to the Ministry by Principal in charge AIHM may
please be informed to PAC. Ministry's reply is silent about fixing of the
responsibility in this case and strengthening the system of internal controls and
internal audit.”

14. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-

“The Ministry of Tourism took up the matter with its all Autonomous Bodies to
ascertain whether there are cases of excess payment of departmental charges
as per CPWD works Manual to the executing agencies other than CPWD. In
response to this, so far no instance of overcharging the departmental charges
(except one case of AIHM, Chandigarh) has come to the notice of the Ministry of
Tourism.

In Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel Management, Chandigarh (AIHM) for
construction of additional block projects for augmenting their existing physical
infrastructure to cater to their need for additional space for classrooms & labs
arising from increased intake to students due to 27% reservations for OBCs, the
whole project was fully funded by the Government of India, through Ministry of
Tourism and the cost estimates were prepared based on the departmental
charges @14.3%. As the cost of the estimates was above Rs. 5.00 crore, the
Departmental charges @ 7 percent was to be paid. Accordingly, the matter was
taken up by the institute vigorously and then after, the Engineering Department
(Executing agency) revised the original estimates bringing down the
departmental charges from 14.3 percent to 7 percent.

The excess amount towards departmental charges was not actually paid to the

Engineering Department. Against the revised cost estimates of Rs. 9.26 crore, till
date, an amount of Rs. 8.85 crore is only deposited with executing agency.

—b-


Further, while furnishing utilization certificate for an amount of Rs. 7.40 crore by
the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration vide their Memo No.
11963 dated 25.09.2018, they have levied 7 percent as departmental charges on
total expenditure of Rs. 6.92 crore (upto July, 2018). Engineering department
had prepared a revised Utilization Certificate for Rs. 885.00 lakh for total
expenditure including departmental charges amounting to Rs. 744.33 lakhs thus
leaving balance of Rs. 140.67 lakh vide Memo no. 4732 dated 15.03.2019.

The balance amount of Rs. 140.67 lakh has been refunded by the Sub Divisional
Engineer, Road Sub Division No. 3, Chandigarh and credited vide bill no.
CP00000 dated 05.03.2019 in the account no. 10004492493 pertaining to the
Principal In-charge Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh.

Further, the Principal Incharge, Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh has deposited
the amount of Rs. 1,69,37,072/- in Government Account along with accrued
interest (Rs. 140.67 Lakh + Rs. 28.70 Lakh).

To review and strengthen the system, the Ministry of Tourism has also issued a
letter dated 28" January, 2019 to all Central autonomous bodies as well as State
implementing agencies which have received grant-in-aid to set up State IHMs,
FCls informing inter-alia that for award of works to any PSU/State Govt.
organization (other than CPWD/ State PWD), the implementing agencies
including Central IHMs shall ensure competition among such PSU/Organizations.
The competition shall be essentially on the lump sum service charges to be
claimed for execution of works. Those who have already awarded the works to
other than CPWD/State PWD, it may be ensured that departmental charges
levied should be at par or below than that of CPWD rate manual.

Further, the concerned institute has been given strict instructions to follow norms
while proposing the details project proposal.”

15. The Committee noted in their earlier Report that the Engineering
Department had revised the cost estimates to Rs.9.26 crore by bringing down the
departmental charges to the prescribed 7% and the building was taken over by
the AIHM in August 2015. An amount of Rs.8.85 crore was paid by the AIHM to the
Engineering Department, Chandigarh; however, the final utilization certificate in
respect of above payment was awaited. The Committee opined that AIHM should
have vetted the cost estimates properly as the onus lies on the Institute to also
ensure that payments are made according to the Government manuals and
desired that Utilization Certificate from the Engineering Department, Chandigarh
be obtained at the earliest and the departmental charges adjusted while making
final payment for the works. As the lapse pointed out by the Audit was indicative
of deficiency in the prevalent system of internal controls and internal audit, and
adopting a casual approach by the officials concerned in AIHM, the Committee
desired that the systems be reviewed and strengthened and responsibility fixed.
The Committee note from the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry that
against the revised cost estimate of Rs. 9.26 crore, an amount of Rs. 885 lakh was


paid to the executing agency. The executing agency furnished a utilization
certificate for total expenditure including departmental charges amounting to Rs.
744.33 lakh and made a refund of Rs. 140.67 lakh to the AIHM. The Committee
also note that AIHM has deposited an amount of Rs. 169.37 lakh in Government
Account which includes accrued interest of Rs. 28.70 lakh. The Committee are
disappointed to note that the submission regarding receipt of refund was made
by the Ministry only after it was pointed out by the Audit. The Committee, while
noting that the Ministry received refund in April, 2019 whereas Action Taken
Replies were sent to Audit in May, 2019, expect the Ministry to furnish details of
actual status to the Committee and to the Audit on issues raised by them. The
Committee observe that actual expenditure incurred on the project was only Rs
744.33 lakh, whereas Rs 885 lakh , i.e. more than 95% of the cost estimates were
deposited by the AIHM with the executing agency during 2009-10 to 2014-2015.
The Committee note that executing agency made a refund of Rs 140.67 lakh in
2019 implying that neither these funds were available for use by the Ministry nor
any interest was earned on the amount for the period it remained with the
executing agency. The Committee exhort the Ministry to issue guidelines to the
organization under its aegis to ensure timely receipt of the utilization certificate
from the executing/ implementing agencies. The Committee are of the view that
the Ministry may think of withholding at least 10 percent of the estimated costs till
final utilization certificates are submitted by the executing/ implementing
agencies.

Further, the Committee, while noting that the Ministry has also issued a
letter dated 28"January, 2019 to all Central autonomous bodies as well as State
implementing agencies which have received grant-in-aid to set up State IHMs,
FCls informing inter-alia that for award of works to any PSU/State Govt.
organization (other than CPWD/ State PWD), the implementing agencies including
Central IHMs shall ensure competition among such PSU/Organizations, reiterate
that internal controls and internal audit need to be strengthened and Standard
Operating Procedures issued to ensure that the above instructions are followed
scrupulously.

हैंड


CHAPTER II
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee while opining that the scale of malpractices in the ITOs
indicates connivance of the officials of Ministry and, therefore, desired that the
independent inquiry into the same may be conducted and those responsible be
brought to book. The Committee were of the considered opinion that the Ministry
had failed to monitor the ITOs adequately and desire that a robust mechanism for
the same be developed to keep a check on such instances. Further, regular
monitoring including periodical inspections by the Ministry will act as a deterrent
for the unscrupulous elements. The Committee also desired that internal controls
and the internal audit may be strengthened and SOPs be developed and
circulated and mandatorily followed by the ITOs.

[Observation/Recommendation Nos. 3 of the 132" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16" Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
Decision to examine the case from the Vigilance angle was taken on 25.01.12

Charge-sheet was issued on 06.3.2013.

FIR has also been filed by MoT with the Parliament Street Police Station under
Prevention of Corruption Act and relevant sections of IPC i.e. 420/210 B r/w Sec. 13 of
PCA, 1988 on 24.01.2013. Delhi Police visited London in the March-April, 2016 to cross
check the documents.

Disciplinary proceedings are underway.

10 had earlier advised MoT to make arrangements for regular Hearing (RH) through
video conferencingAs various issues cropped up due to the decision of hearing of
Defense witnesses via video conferencing, an OM was sent seeking advice of CVC on
making arrangements for the visit of 10, PO, CO and Defense Assistant to country
where the defense witnesses are based.

CVC advised CVO/MoT to decide the issue as deemed fit, in consultation with the
Disciplinary Authority as it is an administrative matter in the domain of MoT.

The matter was re-examined and this proposition of arranging for the visit of 10, PO, CO
and Defense Assistant was found to be difficult. A letter was sent to Secretary, CVC


requesting to look into the matter and direct the concerned 105 to complete the inquiry
on the basis of documents/files and defense witnesses available locally.

CVC again stands on advice given earlier, accordingly, the advice of Hon'ble Minister
(T) on the matter is being sought.

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Reply is silent on a robust mechanism to keep a check on such instances, monitoring
including periodical inspections by the Ministry, to strengthen internal control and to
develop SOPs. Further, disciplinary proceedings are still underway. The latest status of
above may please be informed to PAC.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

With regard to robust mechanism to keep a check on such instances, monitoring
including periodical inspections by the Ministry, to strengthen internal control and to
develop SOPs, it is stated that Internal audit of the India Tourism Offices (ITOs)
overseas is carried out from time to time.
The overseas offices are also inspected by the senior officers of the Ministry whenever
they are on official tour to the concerned country where the ITO is located.
Further, all proposal of high value are forwarded to the Ministry.which are examined and
concurred by the Integrated Finance Division and approved by the competent authority
in the Ministry.
In addition all ITOs Overseas have also been issued instructions regarding procedures
to be followed especially in matters related to incurring of expenditure etc (copy
enclosed).
As regards to information about latest status against part Il of remarks given against Sl.
No. 2&3: Para 18.1 and 18.2, it is intimated that proposal seeking direction on the issue
of conducting hearing of defense witnesses who are based abroad in their respective
countries of residence has been put for consideration of Disciplinary Authority i-e.,
Hon’ble Minister (1), decision on which is yet to be taken.
In the meantime, a request to grant extension of time for continuing the proceedings
further as per the extant rule considering the specified period of 06 months for
completion of subjected inquiry is over, has been received from Inquiry Officer and the
same has been put up for the approval of Hon’ble Minister (T).
Inquiry Officer and the same has been put up for the approval of Hon’ble Minister (T).
Inquiry will be proceeded further on receipt of final decision / direction of Hon’ble
Minister (T) on the issue put up for his consideration.
[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/O Tourism
(Ministry of Tourism OM No.16/03/2017-Parlt. Dated 25.09.2019 ]


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that Diplomatic Missions/Posts and the offices
abroad were entitled to refund of Value Added Tax (VAT) paid on expenditure
incurred on running and maintenance of the offices. However, India Tourism
Office (ITO), Tokyo having jurisdiction over Japan, North Korea, South Korea and
Taiwan, did not claim tax refunds for the payments made to firms at South Korea
since introduction of VAT in South Korea (August 2011) on the ground that ITO
was not registered in South Korea and was therefore, not eligible for tax refund.
Notably, Embassy of India (Eol), Seoul regularly claimed VAT refunds during this
period and had no objection to ITO’s bills being routed through Mission. The
Committee noted that ITO stopped payment of VAT with effect from 1st
September 2015 and recovered VAT paid for the period from 1st April 2014 to 31
August 2015. However, as per local laws, refund claims pertaining to the period
prior to March 2014 was declared time barred rendering payments made by ITO
during the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 amounting to Rs 62.18 lakh unrealizable.
The Committee were astonished to note from the reply of the Ministry that ITO,
Tokyo was unaware about the requirement for claiming tax refund from South
Korea authorities as the issue of tax refund from Korea was raised by audit in
2015 as the same was not pointed out during audit of accounts in 2012. The
Committee were appalled to note the callous approach of the Ministry in dealing
with the lapse on part of its Tokyo office and shifting the responsibility on to the
Audit. The responsibility squarely lied on the Ministry to develop a mechanism
whereby its staff were aware of the prevalent rules, regulations, procedures,
facilities etc and updated of every development. The Committee further noted
from the reply of the Ministry that ITO Tokyo had, subsequently, made efforts to
recover amount of VAT refunds and had sent communications to the service
providers/ agencies that had provided services to its offices. However, the
communications were returned by Korean post. The Committee were aghast to
note that instead of taking the issue up with the Korean service providers,
earnestly , the Ministry was giving lame excuses that the communications were
returned and desired that the same may be done through India Mission in Seoul
and apprise them about the efforts made in this regard. The Committee while
noting that the language and lack of expertise in dealing with the accounting
system in a foreign country were issues that hinder the implementation of
prevalent rules, regulations etc. desired that appropriate staffing may be done in
the ITOS to cater to such needs.

[Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of the 132" Report of Public Accounts

Committee (167 Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Tourism has noted the recommendations of the Committee and directed

the India Tourism Office (ITO) Tokyo to consult/coordinate with the Embassy of India in
Seoul to recover VAT for the period 2012-13 and 2013-14 amounting to Rs. 62.18 lakh

—i~—


from the service providers in Korea, and also apprise the Mission about the efforts
made by ITO Tokyo in this regard.

ITO Tokyo has apprised the Embassy of India in South Korea regarding the recovery of
VAT in Korea and the efforts made by the office related to the said recovery. As advised
by the Mission, ITO Tokyo has submitted all the documents relating to the Tax recovery
to the Indian Mission. ITO Tokyo is in touch with the Mission and has been informed
that the related documents have been sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA),
Republic of Korea and a reply is awaited from the Korean Administration.

ITO Tokyo has not been paying VAT in Korea since September 2015 and all invoices
raised to ITO Tokyo are without tax. ITO Tokyo has informed that as per Article No. 24
of Chapter Ill Zero Tax Rate and Tax Exemption of the Value Tax Act (enforcement
date 01 January 2017), ITO Tokyo is exempt from payment of VAT in Korea.

Vetting Comments of the Audit

Ministry has not replied on the Committee’s recommendations for appropriate staffing in
the ITOs with person having knowledge of local language and accounting system of the
concerned country. Action Taken on this recommendation may please be informed. to
PAC

Final Action taken by the Ministry

The Ministry of Tourism has noted the recommendations of the Committee and action
is being initiated for approval of an administrative solution at the level of the competent
authority.

[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/O Tourism
(Ministry of Tourism OM No.16/03/2017-Parlt. Dated 25.09.2019 ]

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that the Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel
Management , Catering and Nutrition (AIHM) Chandigarh accorded (January 2010)
administrative approval for construction of an additional block at Rs 9.91 crore.
The Committee observed that the executing agency, i.e. Engineering Department,
UT Chandigarh, charged departmental charges at 14.30 per cent as against seven
per cent as stipulated in CPWD Works Manual resulting in excess payment
amounting to Rs 61.46 lakh . The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry
that Engineering Department had revised the cost estimates to Rs 9.26 crore by
bringing down the departmental charges to the prescribed 7%. The Committee
also noted that the building was taken over by the AIHM in August 2015 and an
amount of Rs 8.85 crore had already been paid by the AIHM to the Engineering
Department, Chandigarh. However, the final utilization Certificate in respect of
above payment was still awaited. The Committee were shocked to note from the

— सिह


reply of the Ministry that the incorrect application of the charges was mainly a
failure of the Engineering department, Chandigarh Administration which was
supposed to charge as per CPWD Manual. The Committee were of the view that
AIHM should have vetted the cost estimates properly as the onus equally lies on
it to ensure that payments are made according to the Government manuals. The
Committee opined that instead of shifting the responsibility, the Ministry should
set the affairs of organizations under its aegis in order so that such mistakes do
not recur. The Committee desired that the Ministry may ensure that the Utilization
Certificate from the Engineering Department Chandigarh is obtained at the
earliest and the departmental charges are adjusted while making final payment
for the works. The Committee opined that the lapse pointed out by the Audit
indicate deficiency in the prevalent system of internal controls and internal audit
and casual approach of the officials concerned in AIHM and desired that to avoid
recurrence of such mistakes the systems be reviewed and strengthened and

responsibility fixed.
[ Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of the 132" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16 Lok Sabha) ]

Action taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Tourism took up the matter with its all Autonomous Bodies to ascertain
whether there are cased of excess payment of departmental charges as per CPWD
works Manual to the executing agencies other than CPWD. In response to this, so far
no instance of overcharging the departmental charges (except one case of AIHM,
Chandigarh) has come to the notice of the Ministry of Tourism.

In Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel Management, Chandigarh (AIHM) for construction of
additional block projects for augmenting their existing physical infrastructure to cater to
their need for additional space for classrooms & labs arising from increased intake to
students due to 27% reservations for OBCs, the whole project was fully funded by the
Government of India, through Ministry of Tourism and the cost estimates were prepared
based on the departmental charges @14.3%. As the cost of the estimates was above
Rs. 5.00 crore, the Departmental charges @ 7 percent was to be paid. Accordingly, the
matter was taken up by the institute vigorously and then after, the Engineering
Department (Executing agency) revised the original estimates bringing down the
departmental charges from 14.3 percent to 7 percent.

The excess amount towards departmental charges was not actually paid to the
Engineering Department. Against the revised cost estimates of Rs. 9.26 crore, till date,
an amount of Rs. 8.85 crore is only deposited with executing agency.

Further, while furnishing utilization certificate for an amount of Rs. 7.40 crore by the
Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration vide their Memo No. 11963 dated
25.09.2018, they have levied 7 percent as departmental charges on total expenditure of
Rs. 6.92 crore (upto July, 2018). Executive Engineers, C.P. Division No. 2 Roads,
Chandigarh has also informed to AIHM, Chandigarh that their office has taken up the

गा ८


matter with concerned wings i.e., Public Health and Electrical to supply the utilization
certificate of amount deposited by their office but the same is still awaited. They have
also informed that the balance amount shall be refunded after receiving the actual
figures of expenditure from Electrical and Public Health Wing.

To review and strengthen the system, the Ministry of Tourism has also issued a letter
dated 28" January, 2019 to all Central autonomous bodies as well as State
implementing agencies which have received grant-in-aid to set up State IHMs, FCls
informing inter-alia that for award of works to any PSU/State Govt. organization (other
than CPWD/ State PWD), the implementing agencies including Central IHMs shall
ensure competition among such PSU/Organizations. The competition shall be
essentially on the lump sum service charges to be claimed for execution of works.
Those who have alteady awarded the works to other than CPWD/State PWD, it may be
ensured that departmental charges levied should be at par or below than that of CPWD
rate manual.

Vetting Comments of the Audit
Engineering department had prepared a revised Utilization Certificate for Rs. 885.00
lakh for total expenditure including departmental charges amounting to Rs. 744.33 lakhs
thus leaving balance of Rs. 140.67 lakhs vide Memo no. 4732 dated 15/03/2019.

The balance amount of Rs. 140.67 lakhs has been refunded by the Sub Divisional
Engineer, Road Sub Division No. 3, Chandigarh and credited vide bill no. CP00000985
dated 05.03.2019 in the account no. 10004492493 pertaining to the Principal Incharge
Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh.

Further the Principal Incharge Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh requested Ministry of
Tourism vide ADM/IHM/2K19/3562 dated 29.03.2019 to provide detail of account
number of Ministry of Tourism for transfer of Rs. 140.67 lakh.

This may be brought to the notice of PAC.

Latest position of transfer of fund to the Ministry by Principal in charge AIHM
may please be informed to PAC. Ministry reply is silent about fixing of the
responsibility in this case and strengthening the system of internal controls and
internal audit.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

The Ministry of Tourism took up the matter with its all Autonomous Bodies to
ascertain whether there are cases of excess payment of departmental charges
as per CPWD works Manual to the executing agencies other than CPWD. In
response to this, so far no instance of overcharging the departmental charges
(except one case of AIHM, Chandigarh) has come to the notice of the Ministry of
Tourism.

In Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Hotel Management, Chandigarh (AIHM) for
construction of additional block projects for augmenting their existing physical
infrastructure to cater to their need for additional space for classrooms & labs

-14-


arising from increased intake to students due to 27% reservations for OBCs, the
whole project was fully funded by the Government of India, through Ministry of
Tourism and the cost estimates were prepared based on the departmental
charges @14.3%. As the cost of the estimates was above Rs. 5.00 crore, the
Departmental charges @ 7 percent was to be paid. Accordingly, the matter was
taken up by the institute vigorously and then after, the Engineering Department
(Executing agency) revised the original estimates bringing down the
departmental charges from 14.3 percent to 7 percent.

The excess amount towards departmental charges was not actually paid to the
Engineering Department. Against the revised cost estimates of Rs. 9.26 crore,
till date, an amount of Rs. 8.85 crore is only deposited with executing agency.
Further, while furnishing utilization certificate for an amount of Rs. 7.40 crore by
the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration vide their Memo No.
11963 dated 25.09.2018, they have levied 7 percent as departmental charges
on total expenditure of Rs. 6.92 crore (upto July, 2018). Engineering department
had prepared a revised Utilization Certificate for Rs. 885.00 lakh for total
expenditure including departmental charges amounting to Rs. 744.33 lakhs thus
leaving balance of Rs. 140.67 lakh vide Memo no. 4732 dated 15.03.2019.

The balance amount of Rs. 140.67 lakh has been refunded by the Sub
Divisional Engineer, Road Sub Division No. 3, Chandigarh and credited vide bill
no. CP00000 dated 05.03.2019 in the account no. 10004492493 pertaining to
the Principal In-charge Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh.

Further, the Principal Incharge, Dr. Ambedkar IHM, Chandigarh has deposited
the amount of Rs. 1,69,37,072/- in Government Account along with accrued
interest (Rs. 140.67 Lakh + Rs. 28.70 Lakh).

To review and strengthen the system, the Ministry of Tourism has also issued a
letter dated 28" January, 2019 to all Central autonomous bodies as well as
State implementing agencies which have received grant-in-aid to set up State
IHMs, FCls informing inter-alia that for award of works to any PSU/State Govt.
organization (other than CPWD/ State PWD), the implementing agencies
including Central IHMs_ shall ensure competition among = such
PSU/Organizations. The competition shall be essentially on the lump sum
service charges to be claimed for execution of works. Those who have already
awarded the works to other than CPWD/State PWD, it may be ensured that
departmental charges levied should be at par or below than that of CPWD rate
manual.

Further, the concerned institute has been given strict instructions to follow
norms while proposing the details project proposal.

[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/o Tourism
Ministry of Tourism OM No. 16/03/2017-Parlt dated 04.02.2020 ]

mf रू


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

- NIL -

-16-


CHAPTER-IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

Further, the Committee noted that ITO, Tokyo had engaged (May 1999) M/s
Sugiyama Accountant Office, Tokyo for filing Consumption Tax (VAT in Japan)
returns for payments made in Japan and receiving the refund for the same. The
agency discontinued its services from January 2013. The Committee find that
ITO did not claim tax refunds for the period from January 2013 to March 2015. As
per Audit, an estimate of the amount of refunds to be claimed for the period
October 2013 to March 2015 worked out to Rs 25.63 lakh. The Committee
observed that the Ministry allowed engagement of a tax accountant only from
October 2013 till July 2016 and for the subsequent period, directed ITO, Tokyo to
devise a mechanism to recover tax on its own or adopt a mechanism for
nonpayment of VAT in consultation with the Indian Mission and local authorities
concerned. The Committee observed that the tax accountant could only be
appointed after February 2017. The Committee also noted from the reply of the
Ministry that following the appointment of a certified Tax Accountant for recovery
of VAT in Japan, ITO, Tokyo had recovered total VAT refund for the period
January 2013 to June 2016 and July 2016 to December 2017. The Committee
found from the submission of the Ministry that the ITO, Tokyo had miserably
failed in devising a mechanism to recover tax on its own and were dismayed to
note that the Ministry had not been able to enforce its own directions. The
Committee desired that ITO, Tokyo may adopt a mechanism for exemption from
VAT in coordination with India Mission and local authorities urgently. Further, the
responsibility for the lackadaisical approach of the officials of both ITO, Tokyo
and Ministry may be fixed and action taken against those found responsible in
this regard.

[Observation/Recommendation No.5 of the 132" Report of Public Accounts

Committee (16° Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
M/s Sugiyama Accountant Office, Tokyo was engaged by ITO Tokyo in 1999 for filing
VAT returns and the agency discontinued its services in January 2014. Based on the
information received from ITO Tokyo, the agency recovered VAT amounting to JPY
69,308,262 (Rs. 3,26,02,352.00 approx.) from Japan for the period January 1999 to
September 2013.

Subsequently, ITO Tokyo engaged M/s Saito Tax Accounting Office and received VAT
refunds as follows:

October 2013 to June 2016: JPY 1,64,50,675.00 (Rs. 95,29,993.00)

July 2016 to December 2017: JPY 73,54,853.00 (Rs. 45,16,613.00)

-I7 —


January 2018 to December, 2018: JPY 50,42,131 (Rs. 33,41,815.00)

As per Audit, an estimate of the amount of refunds to be claimed for the period
October 2013 to March 2015 worked out to Rs 25.63 lakh. However, ITO Tokyo
received VAT refund amounting to JPY 8032045.00 (Rs. 46,53,021.00 approx. as per
tate of exchange on the date of receipt of the recovery i.e. 12" January, 2018. JPY 1=
Rs. 1.7262.00).

ITO Tokyo has informed that it has confirmed from the Office of Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Government of Japan, that ITO Tokyo is not eligible for tax exemption in Japan.
However, the office can claim tax refund.

In view of the above, ITO Tokyo has been successful in claiming VAT refund totalling
JPY 98155921.00 (Rs. 4,99,90,774.00) for the period from January 1999 to December
2018. Details of VAT claimed is at Annexure.

Vetting Comments of the Audit
Ministry has not replied on fixing the responsibility of the officials of both ITO
Tokyo and Ministry for lackadaisical approach in the matter. Action taken on
these recommendations may please be informed to PAC.

Final Action taken by the Ministry
ITO Tokyo has been successful in claiming VAT refund _ totalling
JPY98155921.00 (Rs. 4,99,90,774.00) for the period from January 1999 to
December 2018. Details of VAT claimed are at Annexure. Since there has been
a total recovery for the period January 1999 to December 2018, there is no lapse
on part of ITO Tokyo/Ministry of Tourism.

[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/O Tourism
(Ministry of Tourism OM No.16/03/2017-Parlt. Dated 25.09.2019 ]

—l8—


CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that ITO, Beijing had not adhered to the GFR while
procuring goods and services valuing Rs 7.17 crore during the period 2009-12.
Further, the office splited the orders frequently to keep the value of work awarded
within the powers of the Director of the office. The ITO also paid Rs 74.90 lakh @
15% as service fee upto April 2012 whereas from April 2012 onwards none of the
vendors claimed any markup fee. The Committee were shocked to note from the
reply of the Ministry that while admitting the procedural lapse it has qualified the
same by stating that the goods and services procured by ITO Beijing were related
to participation in travel fairs/ exhibitions, organizing Know India seminars and
other tourism related promotional activities undertaken by the office. The
Committee were of the view that any expenditure from the Government of India
funds should not be incurred without following proper financial procedures and
purpose of the procurement cannot be an excuse for expending casually in gross
violation of the financial rules. The Committee while noting that an administrative
inquiry had been initiated by the Ministry and the charge sheet was issued way
back on 14.01.2015 are aghast to find that the matter is yet to see finality even
after lapse of almost four years. The Committee, therefore, desired that the
process may be expedited and the guilty be punished for the grave offences

committed by them.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of the 132" Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16"" Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
Decision to examine the case from the Vigilance angle was taken on 05.03.14.

Charge-sheet was issued on 14.01.2015.

Disciplinary proceedings are underway.lIO had requested MoT to explore the legality of
holding video conference in the case for additional 9 witnesses in Beijing.

Same led to certain legal issues and concerns from DA. Therefore, the advice of CVC
was sought on making arrangements for the visit of 10, PO, CO and Defense Assistant
to country where the defense witnesses are based.CVC advised CVO/MoT to decide
the issue as deemed fit, in consultation with the Disciplinary Authority as it is an
administrative matter in the domain of MoT.


The matter was re-examined and this proposition of arranging for the visit of 10, PO, CO
and Defense Assistant was found to be difficult. A letter was sent to Secretary, CVC
requesting to look into the matter and direct the concerned IOs to complete the inquiry
on the basis of documents/files and defense witnesses available locally.

CVC again stands on advice given earlier, accordingly, the advice of Hon'ble Minister
(T) on the matter is being sought.

Vetting Comments of the Audit
Final disciplinary action as and when be taken may please be informed to PAC

Final Action taken by the Ministry

As and when disciplinary proceedings are concluded and final decision on the same is
taken, it will be intimated to PAC for remarks given against SI.No.1; Para 18.1 and 18.2.

[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/O Tourism
(Ministry of Tourism OM No.16/03/2017-Parlt. Dated 25.09.2019 ]

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee noted that the ITO, London did not invite open tenders for
construction of India Tourism stands in 18 travel fairs and exhibitions held in UK
and Ireland during 2010-11 even though the value of work was more than Rs 25
lakh. The ITO awarded work to M/s RAR without receiving the bid, commenced
the work without formally executing the agreement and released payments
including VAT without verifying its whereabouts. Further, for organizing a dinner
for 550 guests for the India evening during World Trade Market (WTM) in
November, 2010, ITO, London had obtained quotations from three agencies.
Subsequently, it was decided to serve only snacks during the event. Instead of
calling for fresh tenders, ITO London asked the lowest bidder i.e. Mis SLEC
Limited ,amongst the above three agencies to offer their quote for snacks only.
However, payment was made even before the revised quote was received. No
supply order or agreement was executed with M/s SLEC Limited and the
invitation cards had the name of altogether different entities casting doubts on
the existence of the supplier. The Committee were astonished to note from the
reply of the Ministry that though there was a procedural lapse on the part of the
office, the goods and services procured by ITO, London were related to
participation in travel fairs/ exhibitions which is one of the promotional activities
undertaken by the ITOs overseas for promoting of tourism in India. The
Committee emphasised that the award of work to a non-existent firm cannot be
justified under any premise and, therefore, Ministry should refrain from making


such callous statements. The Committee were shocked to find that though the
charge sheet was issued long back on 6.3.2013, the case has been lingering on
for more than 5 years now. The Committee were of the view that taking unduly
long time in completing a departmental inquiry points toward lack of urgency in
deciding cases of apparent frauds and desired that the process be urgently
expedited so that those responsible are punished without further delay. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the efforts made by the Ministry to
claim VAT refunds from M/s Orange Events, to which the trade name M/s RAR
belonged, and amount realized so far.

[Observation/Recommendation Nos. 2 of the 132"? Report of Public Accounts
Committee (16 Lok Sabha)]

Action taken by the Ministry
Decision to examine the case from the Vigilance angle was taken on 25.01.12

Charge-sheet was issued on 06.3.2013.

FIR has also been filed by MoT with the Parliament Street Police Station under
Prevention of Corruption Act and relevant sections of IPC i.e. 420/210 B r/w Sec. 13 of
PCA, 1988 on 24.01.2013. Delhi Police visited London in the March-April, 2016 to cross
check the documents.

Disciplinary proceedings are underway.

10 had earlier advised MoT to make arrangements for regular Hearing (RH) through
video conferencingAs various issues cropped up due to the decision of hearing of
Defense witnesses via video conferencing, an OM was sent seeking advice of CVC on
making arrangements for the visit of 10, PO, CO and Defense Assistant to country
where the defense witnesses are based.

CVC advised CVO/MoT to decide the issue as deemed fit, in consultation with the
Disciplinary Authority as it is an administrative matter in the domain of MoT.

The matter was re-examined and this proposition of arranging for the visit of 10, PO, CO
and Defense Assistant was found to be difficult. A letter was sent to Secretary, CVC
requesting to look into the matter and direct the concerned IOs to complete the inquiry
on the basis of documents/files and defense witnesses available locally.

CVC again stands on advice given earlier, accordingly, the advice of Hon'ble Minister
(T) on the matter is being sought.

—Dip


Vetting Comments of the Audit

Reply is silent on a robust mechanism to keep a check on such instances, monitoring
including periodical inspections by the Ministry, to strengthen internal control and to
develop SOPs. Further, disciplinary proceedings are still underway. The latest status of
above may please be informed to PAC.

Final Action taken by the Ministry

With regard to robust mechanism to keep a check on such instances, monitoring
including periodical inspections by the Ministry, to strengthen internal control and to
develop SOPs, it is stated that Internal audit of the India Tourism Offices (109)
overseas is carried out from time to time.
The overseas offices are also inspected by the senior officers of the Ministry whenever
they are on official tour to the concerned country where the ITO is located.
Further, all proposal of high value are forwarded to the Ministry which are examined and
concurred by the Integrated Finance Division and approved by the competent authority
in the Ministry.
In addition all ITOs Overseas have also been issued instructions regarding procedures
to be followed especially in matters related to incurring of expenditure etc (copy
enclosed).
As regards to information about latest status against part II of remarks given against Sl.
No. 2&3: Para 18.1 and 18.2, it is intimated that proposal seeking direction on the issue
of conducting hearing of defense witnesses who are based abroad in their respective
countries of residence has been put for consideration of Disciplinary Authority i.e.,
Hon’ble Minister (T), decision on which is yet to be taken.
In the meantime, a request to grant extension of time for continuing the proceedings
further as per the extant rule considering the specified period of 06 months for
completion of subjected inquiry is over, has been received from Inquiry Officer and the
same has been put up for the approval of Hon'ble Minister (T).
Inquiry Officer and the same has been put up for the approval of Hon’ble Minister (T).
Inquiry will be proceeded further on receipt of final decision / direction of Hon'ble
Minister (T) on the issue put up for his consideration.
[ Additional Director General (Parlt.), M/O Tourism
(Ministry of Tourism OM No.16/03/2017-Parlt. Dated 25.09.2019 ]

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
13 March, 2020 Chairperson
225 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

—-22 -


Anexure fe Reply. to
5 27)- C Rie No- 4)

Government of India
Ministry of Tourism
(Overseas Marketing Division)

Transport Bhawan,
1 parliament Stree,
New Delhi-110 001

No. 15-OM (25)/2019 Pt Dated: 19.09.2019
OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Further to instructions issued vide OM of even number dated. 03.01.2019
(copy enclosed), it is to inform that the same has been further revised as under:-

le The ITOs will follow General Financial Rules (GFR) for incurring
expenditure under Plan Head

ii. The revised Delegated Financial Powers (DEP) of Officers in charge of
the ITOs overseas circulated vide letter No. 15-0५ (22)/08 dated
07.06.2018 should be adhered to until further orders.

iii, The Hand book of Financial and Accounting Procedures compiled by
the then Financial Controller circulated vide the then JS & FA (T) Sh.
Bharat Bhushan's letter 17th July 2009 and re-circulated to all iTOs
overseas on 11.03.2012.

iv. No Regional Director/Director/Assistant Director will incur/commit
expenditure beyond the budget allocated to the office within the
financial year for undertaking various activities approved in the Annual
Action Plan.

v. No officer will incur expenditure beyond his/her Delegated Financial
Powers (DFP) under any circumstances. All cases where the
expenditure is beyond the DFP of the Regional
Director/Director/Assistant Director as the case may be, should be
referred to the Ministry for concurrence of the Integrated Finance
Division (IFD) and approval of the competent authority.

vi. In case any expenditure incurred by the Regiona
Director/Director/Assistant Director as the case may be, is more than
the delegated financial powers, the matter should be brought to the
notice of the Ministry of Tourism with proper justification, within
fifteen days positively.



vii.

viii.

ix.

xi.

xii.

xiil.

xiv.

XV.

Xvi.

1९) मे

In cases of recovery in respect of officers/officials posted overseas, the
concerned Regional Director/Director/Assistant Director of the ITO
overseas will effect recovery within thirty days (30) on receipt of
directions from the Ministry of Tourism.

The Diplomatic Missions/Posts and offices overseas are entitled to
refund of Value Added Tax (VAT) paid on expenditure incurred in
running, maintenance of the offices etc. Similarly, the ITOs overseas
may also be entitled to recovery of VAT in the countries within their
jurisdiction. The issue regarding VAT refunds has been viewed very
seriously in the Ministry and accordingly, all concerned ITOs overseas
are directed to claim VAT refund in a timely manner.

All ITOs overseas are advised to adopt a mechanism for exemption
from VAT in coordination with the concerned Indian Mission abroad
and local authorities; or devise a mechanism to recover tax on its own.
All [105 are advised to train the local staff handling account work, with
the local tax rules to enable recovery of tax on its own from the
countries within its jurisdiction.

In the event of a vacancy of local based staff, the concerned ITO
overseas is advised to engage an appropriate person possessing
knowledge of accounts, rules and regulations and tax rules to enable
recovery of tax by the concerned [10 overseas.

All ITOs Overseas will maintain the records of Cheque Books
including cancelled cheques, if any for Plan & Non-Plan.

All ITOs overseas will maintain Cash Book properly and close the
same on a daily basis.

iTOs overseas will reconcile Plan and Non-Plan expenditure with bank
statements on a monthly basis.

All ITCs overseas to ensure that Statements of expenditure along with
vouchers reach the Pay & Accounts Officer, Ministry of Tourism
positively by the 7" of each month. Scanned copies of the same along
with dispatch details are to be mailed to the Overseas Marketing
Division each month.

There are provisions for accounting adjustment of Gain/Loss in
exchange as per revised accounting procedure for release of funds and
booking of expenditure in respect of overseas offices. Ali ITOs will
follow the said procedure strictly and will not utilise Gain/Loss in
exchange at any cost.

All ITs Overseas will transfer all receipt such as participation fee,
VAT etc to the Ministry invariably.


xviii, All ITOs Overseas will undertake various promotional activities strictly
as per approved Annual Action Plan (AAP). They will maintain the
record of AAP on yearly basis.

xix. ITOs overseas should ensure obtain the approval of the Ministry of
Tourism for any activity that is not approved in the Annual Action Plan.

xx. All ITOs Overseas will maintain the record Hospitality guests
sponsored and Publicity returns received on yearly basis.

xxi, All ITOs Overseas will maintain Office lease agreement, House lease
agreement, Storage lease agreement (if any), AMCs for office
equipment such as Xerox machine/Franking machine/Computer etc.

xxii. All ITOs overseas will follow the guidelines/instructions of Mission
Abroad in respect of entitlement of Telephone charges, House rent,
Heating charges, etc for their officers at various level.

6. All India Tourism Offices overseas are directed to follow aforesaid
instruction/procedure strictly and exercise due diligence while incurring
expenditure of any nature.

7. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Tourism) and is for strict

compliance by all officers posted in the ITOs overseas. lh
heen

Deputy Director General

To,

The India Tourism Offices Overseas


es

Government of Indi
¥ of Tour

¥ oi
(Gversezs Marieth

. 15-OM (252809 Pt Dated: 03.01.2019

zw
i)

As you are aware, the Ministry of Tourism had decided to re-organise its
offices on the basis of an in-depth analysis by consolidating its 14 overseas India
Tourism offices into $ offices which would function as global marketing hubs to
cover varicus important source markets contributing te foreign tourist arrivals.

a preferred tourism destination in the tourism generating markets to promote
various tourism products and destinations and to increase India’s share in the
gfobal tourism market. The objectives are met through an integrated marketing and
promotional strategy and a synergized campaign ia association with the Travel
Trade, State Governments and Indian Missions overseas ¢tc.

2 The objective of these India Tourism Offices Overseas is to position India as

3, Though the performance of these offices has been satisfactory im achieving
try’s objectives, some serious irregularities have been noticed through

sorts etc. ft has been observed that lack of understanding of the Ruies and
ignorance about the procedures to be followed by the officers in the India Tourism
ces overseas may have been one of the reasons for such irregularities.

Ministry of Tourism vide CM No. No. [5-OM (25)/2009 Pt. dated 30 July,
ad issued Standard Cperating Procedures regarding Functioning of India
Offices (IFOs) overseas. The said SoP was laid down in respeci of such
‘ork, specific to the Ministry of Tourism with the objective to recuce the
chances of committing errors/irregularities by the officers of the 51708 overseas.

5. The Ministry of Tourism is in the process of revising the earlier SoP.

However, till such time, all ITOs overseas are directed to adhere to the following:

The [TOs will follow General Financial Rules (GFR) for incurring
expenditure under Plan Head

The revised Delegated Financial Powers (WFP) of Officers in charge of the
[TOs overseas circulated vide letter No. 15-0M (22/08 dated 07.06.2018
will be scrupulously followed until further orders.

-26-



if,

ye

vi.

vii.

viii.

xi.

xii.

The Hend book of Financial and Accounting Procedures compiled by the
then Financial Controller circulated vide the then JS & FA (T) Sh. Bharat
Bhushan's letter 17th July 2009 and re-circulated to ali ITOs overseas on
11.63.2012.

Ne Regicnal Directox/Directer/Assistan: Dixector will incuy/commit
expenditure beyond ihe budget allocated to the office within the financial
year for undertaking various activities approved in the Annual Action Plan.
IfOs overseas should ensure obtain the approval of the Ministry of
Tourism for any activity that is net approved in the Annual Action Plan.
No officer will incur expenditure beyond his/her Delegated Financial
Powers (DFP) under eny circumsiances. All cases where the expenditure is
beyond the DFP of the Regional Director/Director/Assistant Director as the
case may be, should be referred to the Ministry for concurrence of the
Integrated Finance Division (FD) and approval of the competent
authority,

In case any expenditure incurred by the Regional
Director/Director/Assistant Director as the case may be, has been more
than the delegated financial powers, the matter will be brought to. the
notice of the Ministry of Tourism with proper justification, within fifteea
days positively.

In cases of recovery in respect of officers/officials posted overseas, ihe
concerned Regional Ditector/Director/Assistant Director cf the ITO
overseas will effect recovery within thirty days (0) on receipt of
directions fom the Ministry of Tour
The Diplomatic Missions/Posts and offices cverseas are entitled to refund
of Value Added Tax (VAT) paid on expenditure incurred in running,
maintenance of the offices etc. Similarly, the ITOs overseas may also be
entitied to recovery of VAT in the countries within their jurisdiction. The
issue regarding VAT refunds kas usen viewed very seriously in the
Ministry and accordingly, all concerned ITOs overseas are directed to
claim VAT refund in a timely mannez.

All ITOs overseas are advised to adopt a mechanism for exemption from
VAT in coordination with the concemed Indian Mission abroad and local
authorities; or devise a mechanism to recover tax on its own.

All ITOs are advised to frain the iocal staff handling account work, witl
the locel tex rules to enable recovery of tax on its own fiom the countries

within its jurisdiction.

In the event of a vacancy of local based staff, the concemed ITO overseas
is advised to engage an appropriate person possessing knowledge of
accounts, rules and regulations and tax vules to enabie recovery of tax by
the concerned ITO overseas.

All ITOs overseas will close Cash Books on 2 daify basis.

-27 -


| AJLETOs overseas will close Cash Books on a daily basis.

xiv, ITOs overseas will reconcile Pian and Non-Plan expenditure with bank
statements on 2 monthly basis.

xv. All ITOs ovesseas to ensure’ thet Statements of expenditure elong with

vouchers reach the Pay & Accounts Officer, Ministry of Tourism positively

by the 7 of each month. Scanned copies of the same along with dispatea

details are to be mailed to the Overseas Marketing Division each moath,

6 All India Tourism Offices overseas are advised to exercise due diligence

while incurring expenditure ef any nature.

ah This issues with the approval of Secretary (T) and is for strict compliance by
all officers posted in the TPOs overseas.

fhe ;
DDG (CM)
To,

The India Tourism Offices Overseas

-aF -


Year Period Amount in JPY Received ROE Amount in INR
1999 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,946,650 14 Jul,1999 2.7620 704,797
2Q Apr. - June 2,140,866 29 Sep ,1999 2.6340 812,781
3Q July - Sep. 1,172,247 29 Dec,1999 2.4020 488,030
4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,146,517 29Mar,2000 2.5270 453,707
Total 6,406,280 2,459,315)
2000. 1Q__Jan.- Mar. 864,745 4 Jul,2000 2.3710 364,717
2Q_ Apr. - June 1,591,532 28 Sep ,2000 2.3580 674,950)
30 July- Sep. 1,603,511 27Dec,2000 2.3100 694,161)
4Q 06. - Dec. 468,942 30Mar,2001 2.4730 189,625
Total 4,528,730 1,923,453
2001 1Q  Jan.- Mar. 958,478 29Jun,2001 2.6020 368,362
२० Apr.- June 663,786 10Oct,2001 2.4820 267,440)
3Q  July-Sep. 756,957 6 Feb 2002 2.7340 276,868
4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,027,737. 29 Mar ,2002 2.7110 379,099:
Total 3,406,958 1,291,769
2002... 1Q_Jan.- Mar. 2,552,297 1 Jul,2002 2.5340 1,007,221
20. Apr. - June 474,373 7 Oct ,2002 2.5070 189,219
3Q  July- Sep. 413,826 27Dec,2002 2.4900 166,195
40. 06. - Dec. 924,738 14Apr,2002 2.4630 375,452
Total 4,365,234 1,738,087
2003 1Q गंगा, - Mar. 781,762 1Jul,2003 2.5290 309,119
2Q Apr. -June 762,450 30Sep,2003 2.5890 294,496
30. July- Sep. 535,683 29 Dec ,2003 2.3700 226,027
4Q Oct. - Dec. 894,747 31Mar,2004 2.3910 374,215
Total 2,974,642 1,203,856
2004 1Q  Jan.- Mar. 591,918 17 Jun,2004 2.4760 239,062
20. Apr. -June 488,815 30Sep,2004 2.3500 208,006,
3Q July -Sep. 658,926 20Dec,2004 2.2700 290,276
4Q 06. - Dec. 959,930 28Apr,2005 2.3880 401,981
Total 2,699,589 1,139,325
2005 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,711,335 4 101 ,2005 2.4850 688,666
2Q Apr. -June 452,588 15Nov,2005 2.5270 179,101
30 july-Sep. 633,055 28Dec,2005 2.5890 244,517
4Q 06. - Dec. 1,315,515 3 Apr,2006 2.6000 505,967
Total 4,112,493 1,618,251
2006 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,816,656 30Jun,2006 2.4350 746,060
20. Apr.-June 1,107,730 12Sep,2006 2.4700 448,474
3Q_ July-Sep. 1,291,268 27Dec,2006 2.6120 494,360
4Q 06. - Dec. 804,338 6 Apr ,2007 2.6420 304,443
Total §,019,992 1,993,336
2007 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,682,146 18Jun,2007 2.9560 569,062
20. Apr. - June 686,471 23 Oct,2007 2.8280 242,741
3Q ‘July-Sep. 980,918 26Feb,2008 2.6940 364,112
4Q 06. - Dec. 969,030 16May,2008 2.5760 376,176
Total 4,318,565 1,552,091)



-38-

; 2008 1Q Jan. - Mar. 874,996 25 Jul,2008 2.5010 349,858
i 2Q Apr. -June 793,987 14Nov,2008 2.0560 386,180)
3३6. July-Sep. 798,998 28Jan,2009 1.8700 427,272

4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,167,703 17 Mar ,2009 1.8570 628,812

Total 3,635,684 1,792,122

2009... 146 _ 19. - Mar. 1,212,188 8 Jul,2009_ 1.9920 608,528
2Q Apr. -June 1,170,226 28 Oct,2009 1.8780 623,124

3Q July - Sep. 1,194,200 15Jan,2010 1.9030 _ 627,535

4Q Oct. - Dec. 3,162,446 15 Apr,2010 1.9600 1,613,493

Total 6,739,060 3,472,680

2010 1Q 19. - Mar. 3,998,792 8 Jul,2010 1.9600. _ 2,040,200
2Q Apr. -June 1,726,776 15 Oct,2010 1.8510 932,888

3Q _July- Sep. 1,842,386 17 Jan,2011 18130. 1,016,208

4Q 06. - Dec. 1,287,306 28 Mar,2011_ 1.8140 709,650

Total 8,855,260 4,698,947)

2011 46 Jan. - Mar. 2,430,665 8 Jul,2011 1.7610 1,380,275
2Q Apr. - June 637,816 14 Oct,2011 1.5920 400,638

3Q July-Sep. 1,149,452 27Jan,2012 1.4490 793,273

4Q 06. - Dec. 1,030,217 12 Apr,2012_ 1.6460 625,891

Total 5,248,150 3,200,077’

२072... 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,627,535 9 Aug,2012 1.4250 1,142,130
2Q Apr. - June 707,002 29 Oct,2012 1.4370 491,999

3Q July - Sep. 561,616 29 Jan,2013 1.5220 368,999

4Q 06 - Dec. 1,222,907 17 Apr ,2013_ 1.7235 709,549

Total 4,119,060 2,712,676)

2013. 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,373,306 23 jul,2013_ 1.6197 848,247
2Q Apr. -June 644,076 28 Oct 2013 1.5620 412,341

30 July-Sep. 860,583 25 Dec,2013 1.5768 545,778

Total 2,878,565 1,806,366

1999 Apr-2013 Sep Total 69,308,262 32,602,352


4Q 06८. - Dec. 415,441
2014 1Q Jan. - Mar. 961,721
2Q_ Apr. - June 980,409
3Q July - Sep. 1,352,260
4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,722,700
2015 1Q Jan. - Mar. 2,599,514
2Q Apr. -June 1,576,368
3Q_ July - Sep. 1,806,059
4Q 06६ - Dec. 2,398,692
2016 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,898,219
2Q_ Apr. - June 739,292
Total 16,450,675 12Jan,2017 1.7262 9,529,994
3Q July - Sep. 2,059,669
4Q 06. - Dec. 1,045,912
2017 1Q Jan. - Mar. 1,280,836
20. Apr. -June 459,165
3Q July -Sep. 1,291,404
4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,217,867 धर
Total 7,354,853 13 Mar ,2017_ 1.6284 4,516,613
2018 1Q Jan. - Mar. 2,320,709
20. Apr. - June 649,200
30 July - Sep. 580,960
4Q Oct. - Dec. 1,491,262 .
Total $5,042,131 26 Feb,2018 1.5088 3,341,815
2013 Oct - 2018 Dec. Total 28,847,659 17,388,422

~ Bl ~


छः


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SECOND (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 3, 4 and 6
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 5
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim

replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 1 and 2

Total : 03
Percentage: 50%

Total : 0
Percentage:0%

Total : 01
Percentage:17%

Total : 02
Percentage: 33%


oP a
» कटी,
Pp