 
 
       133 
 
 
SHORT CLOSURE OF ELECTRIFICATION 
WORKS DUE TO INCOMPLETE PRE -
REQUISITE WORKS: SOUTH EAST 
CENTRAL RAILWAY 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
PAC NO. 2363 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  
T H I R D  R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(20 23-24) 
 
(SEVEN T EENT H  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
                                       
   
      P re se nte d to Hon’ ble  S pea ke r,  Lok Sa bha  on 2 3. 02. 202 4                                                                                   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
 
            Laid in Rajya Sabha on:     
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)  
 
SHORT CLOSURE OF ELECTRIFICATION 
WORKS DUE TO INCOMPLETE PRE-
REQUISITE WORKS: SOUTH EAST 
CENTRAL RAILWAY 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II Short closure of electrification works due to incomplete p re-requisite 
works: South East Central Railway 
1 
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  05-06 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 21st November, 2023. 
 
II Minutes of the sitting of  the Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) 
held on 19th February, 2024. 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023 -24) 
 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
3.  Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
8.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9.  Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
10.  Shri Brijendra Singh 
11.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12.  Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
13.  Shri Jayant Sinha 
14.  Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
15.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.  Dr. K. Laxman 
18.  Shri Derek O’ Brien* 
19.  Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma    -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. Partha Goswami   -   Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad    -   Under Secretary 
3. Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand  -   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 
18.08.2023. 
 
(ii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023 -24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty -Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Short closure of electrification works due 
to incomplete pre-requisite works: South East Central Railway” based on Para 
4.4 of C&AG Report No.  25 of 2022, relating to the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) 
 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 was laid on the Table of  the House 
on 21.12.2022 
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (2023 -2024), selected the aforesaid 
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject matter on 21 
November, 2023. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the 
Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
4. Public Accounts Committee (2023 -2024) considered and adopted the 
Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 19.02.2024. 
The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form 
Part- II of the Report. 
 
7.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them 
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with 
the examination of the subject. 
 
8.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and 
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 February, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
  
 
(iii) 

 
 
PART-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
  
1. This Report of the Committee is based on Para 4.4  of C&AG Report 
No. 25 of 2022 on the subject, “ Short closure of electrification works due to 
incomplete pre-requisite works: South East Central Railway”. Public Accounts 
Committee (2023-24) selected the aforesaid C&AG Para for examination and 
report. The PAC (2023 -24) considered the subject for detailed examination 
and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on 
21.11.2023. 
  
SHORT CLOSURE OF ELECTRIFICATION WORKS DUE TO INCOMPLETE 
PRE-REQUISITE WORKS: SOUTH EAST CENTRAL RAILWAY 
2. The Committee have learnt that the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
instructed in October 2006 that the contracts should not be awarded without 
completion of the pre -requisites such as clearance of site, preparat ion of plans 
and drawings, etc.  
AUDIT FINDINGS 
3. Audit findings in Para No. 4.4 of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2022 noted that 
in case, such an action is warranted for expeditious completion of the work, the 
pre-requisite may be completed in time to hand over the same to contractor 
immediately so that the progress of work is not hampered. Failure to do so 
would result in fixing responsibility for any extra expenditure incurred. 
Earthwork and finalization of Engineering Scale Plan (ESP)/Signal Interlocking 
Plan (SIP) etc. are pre -requisites for undertak ing electrification works. Audit 
further revealed that the Chief Administrative Officer (Construction), South East 
Central Railway (SECR) instructed in May 2018 that as and when formation is 
ready in stretches of minimum 500 meters, Deputy Chief Engineers would 
advise Deputy Chief Electrical Engineers to execute Overhead Equipment 
(OHE) without any delay. Audit thus noted that two similar works having 
contract value of ₹ 35.36 crore were awarded without ensuring the completion 
of pre -requisite works. The contractors supplied materials worth ₹ 9.0 crore 
during the currency of the contract (2017 -18) but could not execute works due 
to non -availability of clear work site. SECR Administration could not provide 
various approved drawings like ESP, SIP to the contractor during the currency 
period of the contracts (i.e. 24 months from the date of issue of LOA) for the 
execution of the project. The site was not ready to execute the OHE work. This 
led to short closure of contracts without any progress of execution portion. 
Supplied materials worth ₹ 9.0 crore could not be full y utilised for the intended 
purpose. Out of ₹ 9.0 crore, materials worth ₹ 2.49 crore were consumed for 
other electrification works and the remaining materials worth ₹ 6.51 crore are 
still lying idle at Store. Audit also noted that the guarantee certificate121 against 
the supplied material had also expired. A Special Letter was issued to the 
SECR Administration in February 2021 on the subject. In reply (June 2021), 
Railway Administration stated that after award of tender, materials were 
supplied as per cond ition of contract. Supplied materials against these tenders 
were consumed for other electrification works. Supplied materials are mainly 
made of iron and steel having very long deterioration period and has been 
stored in safe and secure position. The above  reply of Railway Administration 

 
 
was not acceptable as procured material worth ₹ 6.51 crore was still lying idle 
at Store. Railway Administration could not ensure availability of clear site to the 
contractors even after lapse of target date of completion ( 24 months from the 
date of issue of LOA). Thus, award of Railway electrification works without 
ensuring sufficient progress of civil works resulted in short closure of 
electrification works after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 9.0 crore. 
3. The Committee al so learnt following issues from the Ministry through 
their background: 
 The Engineering tender for the Anuppur to Singhpur section was initially 
invited in March 2016 but was discharged and re -invited, later awarded 
in April 2018, after a gap of about 24 months. 
 Tender for OHE work for the same section was awarded in February 
2017, after 11 months of inviting the Civil Tender. However, due to the 
civil contractor's inability to complete the site for execution of OHE 
works, the OHE contract was short-closed in November 2019. 
 Similar delays and issues were observed in the Singhpur to 
Badhwabara and Mudaria to Karkeli sections, where Engineering 
contracts were awarded in December 2016 but discharged and re -
invited and awarded again in September 2020. 
 OHE contracts for these sections were awarded in July 2017, but due to 
the civil contractor's delays, they were short-closed in November 2020. 
 The decisions for short closure were made due to non -availability of 
clear sites, including reasons like non -completion of b ridge work and 
forest clearance. 
 Long lead materials, such as OHE structures and insulators, were 
supplied by the contractors before the short closure of the contracts. 
These materials were accepted without PVC and issued to the new 
agencies for the same sections. 
 As per material utilization tabulation prepared by 
SSE/OHE/C/Store/BSP, the present status of material supplied is given 
below:- 
 
 The cost of materials supplied by the Firms (M/s -Angelique, 
M/s-Enterprises & M/s- New Bitco) for APR -KTE 3rd line work 
is Rs. 10,92,37,581/-. 
 
 The cost of supplied materials issued to firms (M/s - BCPL 
Railway Infra. Ltd, Kolkata, M/s - Jayant InfraProjects 
Bilaspur& M/s - Tricolor) for APR -KTE 3rd line work is 
Rs.5,08,80,023/- (50.83%). 
 
 The cost of balance materials, ava ilable in Railway Store is 
Rs.5,83,57,558/- (49.17%) 
 
 The present status of the supplied materials indicates that more than 
50% of the OHE materials have already been utilized during the 
commissioning of the sections, and the remaining balance will be 
utilized completely during the commissioning of the remaining sections.  
The Ministry have finally submitted that despite delays and issues with 
site readiness, efforts have been made to utilize the supplied materials 

 
 
efficiently, and steps have been taken to e nsure the completion of the 
electrification works in the respective sections. 
 
4. When the Committee asked the Ministry about the reasons for awarding 
contract for electrification works without ensuring the progress of pre -requisite 
civil works as instructed by the Ministry, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“The contract for OHE work pertaining to Singhpur - Badhwabara and 
Mudaria section was awarded on 12.07.2017 i.e. after 07 months of 
inviting the Civil Tender, with a good intension for complet ing the OHE 
work of Anuppur-Katni 3rd line within targeted time.”  
5. Upon enquiring whether the Ministry and South East Central Railway 
have fixed responsibility for non -compliance to the instructions of the Ministry 
and what action has been taken by them against the officials for deviating from 
the stipulated instructions, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Disciplinary action has been taken against three officials.” 
6. On being asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry and 
the zonal railway to ensure that pre -requisites like clearance of site, 
preparation of plans and drawings, etc. are complied with before awarding of 
contracts, the Ministry furnished as below: 
 
“A checklist has been prepared in this regard. Compliance of this 
checklist to ensu re completion of pre-requisite work like 
clearance of site, preparation of plans and drawings, etc.  
shall be  ensured before floating of the tenders to avoid such 
instances.” 
7. Given the fact that the validity of the original contract for OHE work 
expired on 11.07.2019 and fresh tender was invited and contract was awarded 
only on 17.06.2020, the Committee noticed the delay and asked the reasons 
for the same. The Ministry reasoned as under:  
“Civil contract of this section was discharged on 28.11.2019 and re -
awarded on 23.09.2020 after a gap of 10 months. As the civil 
contractor could not complete the site of any section for execution of 
OHE work, hence, the award of fresh OHE tender was delayed and 
later awarded on 17.06.2022.  
(The date of award of contract  is 17.06.2022 & not in 17.06.2020, 
accordingly reply has been prepared).” 
8. Considering the fact that fresh tender was invited and a contract was 
awarded only on 17.06.2020, when the Committee asked the Ministry whether 
all pre -requisites for undertaking  electrification work was met before the 
contract was awarded in 2020, they replied as below: 
 
“All Pre-requisite works were under taken before electrification work 
was awarded in 2022.  
(The contract was awarded in 2022 & not in 2020, accordingly reply 
has been prepared).” 
9. Considering that more than 50% of OHE materials have already been 
utilized and balance materials would be utilized during the commissioning of 
the remaining sections, as reflected in the background note, when the 

 
 
Committee desired to k now about the current status of utilization of the OHE 
materials, the Ministry furnished the information as below: 
 
“77% OHE materials have already been utilized. Balance materials 
shall be utilized completely during commissioning of the remaining 
sections.” 
10. Considering that the guarantee certificate against supplied materials 
has expired,  when the Committee enquired whether there has been any 
instance where the supplied materials had to be disposed off/scrapped due to 
wear and tear, the Ministry stated as below: 
 
“No please, none of the supplied materials had to be disposed 
off/scraped due to wear and tear. 
100% of the supplied materials is being utilized in the section.” 
11. When the Committee desired to know about the status of the work of 
electrification, the Ministry furnished as under: 
 
“The Entire section of Anuppur-Katni 3rd line including Civil & Electrical 
works is planned for commissioning in 3rd quarter of 2024-25.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1. Consequent to the sifting of all the material and information , mainly from 
the written information and depositions made by the Ministry , Committee 
have made certain observations and recommendations which are contained 
in the succeeding paragraphs of this part of the Report. 
 
2. The Committee have  reviewed the audit findings concerning railway 
electrification works, particularly focusing on the oversight and management 
of contracts awarded by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). The 
Committee note lacu nae in coordination between the Civil and Electrical 
departments within the South East Central Railway (SECR), leading to 
inefficiencies and financial losses. The failure to ensure completion of 
prerequisite civil works before awarding electrification contracts showcases a 
lack of effective oversight and coordination among departments.  The 
Committee also note that despite clear instructions from the Railway Board to 
complete pre-requisite tasks such as site clearance and preparation of plans 
before awarding contracts, several contracts, totaling a value of ₹35.36 crore, 
were awarded without ensuring these essential prerequisites. Consequently, 
contractors faced challenges in executing the works due to non -availability of 
clear work sites and failure to provi de approved drawings essential for 
project execution. Furthermore, materials worth ₹9.0 crore, supplied by the 
contractors during the currency of the contracts, could not be fully utilized 
due to the inability to execute the works. The Ministry, in their b ackground 
note, have reflected on the outlining delays encountered in various sections, 
attributing them to site readiness issues, delayed completion of civil works, 
and subsequent short closures of contracts. In  the light of these 
observations, the Commi ttee recommend that the Ministry need to ensure 
strict adherence to comprehensive compliance che cklists for tendering 
processes which should include verification steps to confirm the completion 

 
 
of pre -requisite civil works before awarding contracts for ele ctrification 
projects which will prevent instances of short closures and wastage of public 
funds due to incomplete site readiness.  The Committee also recommend  
improved coordination between civil and electrical departments within the 
railway administration to avoid delays and discrepancies in project execution. 
The Committee are also of the view that m echanisms for regular 
communication and collaboration should be established by the Ministry 
between civil and electrical departments to ensure timely completi on of pre -
requisite works and seamless handover between different phases of the 
project which can be facilitated through regular progress meetings and the 
implementation of a comprehensive project management system. 
 
3. The Committee note  from audit observ ation that materials valued at 
₹6.51 crore s were lying idle due to delays and mismanagement , leading to 
additional financial losses  and t he inability to utilize supplied materials 
efficiently not only le d to fi nancial losses but also reflected  poorly on 
resource management practices within the ministry. Despite concerns raised 
by audit, the Railway Administration's response was inadequate, emphasizing 
the procurement of materials as per contract conditions and storage in 
secure facilities, which does not address the inefficiency in re source 
utilization. The Committee also note that despite efforts to utilize supplied 
materials efficiently, substantial portions remain unused, further highlighting 
the mismanagement of resources. The expiry of guarantee certificates against 
supplied mater ials, as highlighted in the audit, indicates a lapse in material 
management. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry need to 
strengthen its monitoring mechanisms to track the utilization of supplied 
materials accurately by implementing robust inventory tracking systems and 
conducting periodic audits which will prevent instances of material wastage 
and ensure optimal utilization of resources.  The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry need to c onduct a thorough review of its 
material ma nagement policies and practices which  includes implementing 
stringent inventory management procedures, timely disposal of expired 
materials, and ensuring effective utilization of resources across all projects. 
 

 
 
4. The Committee note that d elays in awarding c ontracts indicate systemic 
inefficiencies within the procurement process. These delays not only impede 
project timelines but also contribute to cost escalations and undermine the 
overall efficiency of project delivery.  From the  Ministry's response, t he 
Committee take note of  efforts to address shortcomings and ensure project 
completion. The Committee, h owever, feel that there is a need for enhanced 
monitoring and reporting mechanisms to track progress effectively and 
mitigate risks associated with project delays and cost overruns. Therefore the 
Committee desire the Ministry to  streamline their procurement proces ses to 
expedite contract awards which may  involve conducting timely assessments 
of project requirements, ensuring adequate staffing and resources for  
procurement activities, and implementing measures to address bottlenecks in 
the tendering process.  The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry 
should implement robust project monitoring and reporting systems to track 
progress, identify bottleneck s, and proactively address issues impacting 
project delivery.  
****** 
NEW DELHI:                           ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 February, 2024                          Chairperson, 
 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                             Public Accounts Committee 
 