 
 
127 
 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership 
Project at Chhatrpati Shivaji International 
Airport, Mumbai 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 46th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
PAC NO. 2357   H U N D R E D  A N D  T W E N T Y  S E V E N T H  R E P O R T    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24)   (SEVENTEENTH LO K S ABH A)                                         
  MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 46th Report (16th Lok Sabha)]                                                                                    Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 23.2.2024                               Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ……………….             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I   February 2024/ Phalguna 1945 (Saka)   (i) 
Implementation of Public Private Partnership Project at Chhatrpati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai  (CGTMSE)

 
 
CONTENTS 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                  (iii) 
COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                   (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report  
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
    desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the    
               Government 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                 replies of the Government have not been accepted   
                 by the Committee and which require reiteration 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                the Government have furnished interim replies 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I*   Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023- 24) held on                  
09 February 2024 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained 
in their Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report 
(ii) 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri  Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Brijendra Singh 
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13. Shri Jayant Sinha 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien* 
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma           -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja           -   Director 
3. 
4. 
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi      -   Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Mishra                -   Committee Officer 
 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 
18.08.2023. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
(iv) 
 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this 127th Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained 
in their 46th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “ Implementation of Public 
Private Partnership Project at Chhatrpati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai.  
 
2.     The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 28 th April, 2016. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The 
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
Sitting held on 9th February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix 
I. 
 
3.   For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of 
the Report. 
 
4.     The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
09    February, 2024              Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1945 (Saka)       Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Forty- sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on "Implementation Of Public Private Partnership 
Project At Chhatrpati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai”. 
 
2. The Forty- sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 28th April, 2016, contained 20 Observations and Recommendations.  The 
Action Taken Notes  received from the Ministry have been broadly categorized as under : 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1-20 
 
                  Total:       20 
Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
Total:         0 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
             NIL 
Total:  0  
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/no replies: 
            NIL  
Total:      00 
Chapter – V 
1 
 
 

 
 
3.  During the detailed examination of the subject "Implementation Of Public Private 
Partnership Project at Chhatrpati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai”, the Committee had 
identified certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
which inter-alia included issues of design constraint, Right of first refusal, Change in scope 
of work and master plan, Increase in project cost etc.   
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The 
Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I within 
six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
6. At Recommendation No. 9 : Airport Development Fee  
The Committee in their original report had recommended as under: 
"As per OMDA, MIAL was to arrange for financing through suitable debt and equity 
including listing of its shares on Mumbai/National Stock Exchange.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that instead of finding ways of debt and equity contribution, MOCA allowed 
MIAL to levy a Development Fee (DF) at CSIA for the purpose of funding or financing the 
cost of up-gradation, expansion or development of the Airport in contravention of the 
provisions of OMDA.  The Committee appreciate that though OMDA provides for listing 
options, MOCA opted for levying of development fee to ensure share holding of AAI does 
not fall below 26%, considering its strategic interest and desire that there is no change in 
shareholding pattern in violation of OMDA.  The Committee also note that DF is determined 
by AERA under section 13(1)(b) of AERA Act 2008 read with section 22A of AAI Act 1994.  
2 

 
 
However, as per Rules of the Airports Authority of India (Major Airports) Development Fee 
Rules, 2011, framed by the Government, the money deposited in the Development Fee 
Receipt Account can be used to pay for the servicing of debt to the lenders raised against 
Development Fees.  Accordingly, in pursuance of these provisions of the Development Fee 
Rules, 2011, interest on loan raised against DF has been allowed by AERA and included in 
the quantum of DF to be levied on the passengers.  The PAC in their 94th Report (15th LS) 
had made certain observations on the same issue and Committee would like the MOCA to 
respond to those observations.  They also feel that AERA is competent to fix DF and expect 
it to determine DF in future keeping in view the revenue interest of the Government of India 
in PPP projects and also that of the interest of the  passengers." 
7. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under: 
"The 15th Lok Sabha PAC, in its 94th Report on Delhi airport presented in 
Parliament on 06.02.2014, wanted to know the circumstances and the rationale for 
fixing such a high Development Fee which was later reduced substantially. MoCA 
has already furnished its ATR which has been referred by this Committee at 
several places of the present Report. 
It is reiterated that the basic rationale for levy of Development Fee is aimed at  
funding or financing the cost of upgradation, modernisation or development of the 
airport under section 22A of the AAI Act, 1994.Development Fee collected was to 
be utilised for the development of Aeronautical Assets only, which are ‘Transfer 
Assets’ to Airport Authority of India (AAI) in terms of OMDA. Since the airport will 
come back to AAI after the expiry of the concession period, AAI will need to make 
transfer payments to MIAL to be arrived after independent calculation of the assets 
created by MIAL. However, since Development Fee is levied by AAI under AAI Act, 
1994, and merely collected by MIAL, the asset created from Development Fee 
shall not form part of the Transfer Payment to be made by AAI. Further, as 
submitted by MoCA during Oral Evidence before the Committee, levy of 
Development Fee is in the interest of the passengers as being a pre-funding 
mechanism, it is the cheapest mode of project financing. The assets funded 
through DF are not included in RAB by AERA while determining the tariff.  
3 

 
 
Hence, passengers are saved from the cost of depreciation, interest component 
etc. which forms part of the aeronautical tariff. AERA has been authorized by the 
Parliament to determine rate of development fee at major airports under Section 
13(1) (b) of AERA Act, 2008. 
One of the objectives of the philosophy of AERA for tariff determination is to ensure 
that the passengers are not unnecessarily burdened on account of high airport 
charges and at the same time ensuring viability of the airport. Based on its 
philosophy, AERA determines rate of Development Fee after detailed scrutiny and 
open stakeholder consultation including from airport associations, airlines 
associations, passenger’s association and the Government agencies." 
8.  In response to the replies of the Ministry, the Audit has made the following 
observation.  
"Though levy of DF may not be violation of statute, Levy of DF as means of finance 
was not envisaged in OMDA which specified funding the project through mix of 
Debt and Equity. Thus financing risk of project was passed to MIAL through 
OMDA. However in levying DF to meet the financing gap due to escalated project 
cost, financing risk of MIAL was diluted. Hence the comment remains." 
9. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their further comments stated as under:- 
"There is no negative covenant in the OMDA prohibiting the JVC from resorting to 
levy of DF and other means of finance. Article 13.1(a) of OMDA refers to financing 
arrangements wherein MIAL is supposed to arrange for financing of the Project, 
through “suitable debt and equity contribution”. It is pertinent to note that the words 
“debt” and “equity” used in Article 13.1(a) are generic terms. The position becomes 
obvious from the fact that every means of financing that has been employed by 
MIAL, for the Project such as, internal accruals, deferred tax amounts, refundable 
security deposit and depreciation have been appropriately considered by AERA as 
part of internal resource generation, for the purpose of ascertaining the means of 
finance for the Project. Such funds would not fall within the definition of “Equity” or 
“Debt” as defined under the OMDA, nevertheless they have been considered 
towards means of finance in line with Article 13.1(a) of the OMDA. MIAL has 
ploughed back all internal resources and accruals, which has indefinitely postponed 
the payment of any return to shareholders. 
4 

 
 
Moreover, it may be noted that the OMDA does not limit MIAL’s option to finance 
the Project through other means of finance including DF since the terms “debt” and 
“equity” are not suffixed by the word “only”. Further, there is no negative covenant in 
the OMDA prohibiting MIAL from resorting to levy of DF and other means of finance. 
In the absence of any such prohibition, MIAL is permitted to approach AERA for 
levy of DF under Section 22A of the AAI Act, 1994. Amount of DF is subtracted from 
the allowable project cost (on aeronautical side) to arrive at net allowable 
aeronautical project cost on which fair rate of return is granted to the Airport 
Operator. It also follows that no depreciation is 
available on this amount, since the depreciation is given only on the net allowable 
aeronautical project cost (net aeronautical RAB). Hence, by grant of DF, no unjust 
enrichment or extra monetary benefits accrue to the airport operator." 
10. The Committee initially recommended adherence to the financing provisions 
outlined in the Operation, Maintenance, and Development Agreement (OMDA), 
emphasizing suitable debt and equity contributions and the listing of shares. 
However, the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) allowed Mumbai International Airport 
Limited (MIAL) to levy a Development Fee (DF) instead, citing strategic interests in 
maintaining AAI shareholding. In response to the Committee's concerns, MoCA 
highlighted that the Development Fee collected would be utilized exclusively for the 
development of aeronautical assets, considered 'Transfer Assets' to the Airport 
Authority of India (AAI) under OMDA. The rationale for the levy was reiterated as a 
pre-funding mechanism, deemed the cheapest mode of project financing, and 
passengers were purportedly spared from additional costs. Audit further observed 
that while the levy of DF might not violate statutes, it was not envisaged in OMDA, 
however, it shifted the financing risk to MIAL. In their further comments, MoCA 
asserted that OMDA did not prohibit MIAL from resorting to the levy of DF and other 
means of finance. The terms "debt" and "equity" in OMDA were deemed generic, 
encompassing various financing methods employed by MIAL. MIAL's utilization of 
internal resources and accruals was justified, and the absence of negative covenants 
allowed them to approach AERA for DF under Section 22A of the AAI Act, 1994. 
MoCA clarified that the amount of DF was subtracted from the allowable project cost 
on the aeronautical side, ensuring no unjust enrichment or extra monetary benefits 
for the airport operator. The depreciation was claimed to be available only on the net  
5 

 
 
allowable aeronautical project cost. Considering the final audit comment, the 
Committee find it evident that the disagreement still persists regarding the 
compatibility of the Development Fee levy with the OMDA provisions. They would 
therefore like to recommend that Operation, Maintenance, and Development 
Agreement (OMDA) be reviewed to clearly define permissible means of financing, 
addressing any ambiguities related to generic terms such as "debt" and "equity." 
Additionally, there should be a comprehensive assessment of the financial 
implications of using Development Fee as a financing mechanism, considering the 
potential impact on project costs and risks. The Ministry should always work towards 
aligning financing methods with the agreement. The Committee desire to be apprised 
of the efforts made by the Ministry to mitigate financing risks for MIAL, ensuring 
transparency and adherence to statutory provisions. The Ministry may also review 
the levy of DF in other PPP airports and remove the ambiguities in accordance with 
the Operation, Maintenance, and Development Agreement (OMDA).  
11. The Committee would also like to observe here, that  with the change of hands in 
controlling interest in Mumbai International Airport Limited (MIAL) in February 2021, 
it is essential now to evaluate the impact of these ownership changes on the 
operations, efficiency, and overall performance of the airport. In light of the changes 
in ownership and the evolving nature of PPP projects, there is a need to strengthen 
oversight mechanisms. They would also like to recommend that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should work towards enhancing its monitoring and evaluation processes to 
ensure effective implementation and compliance with best practices in PPP projects. 
The Committee would also recommend Ministry of Civil Aviation to collaborate with 
various stakeholders, industry experts, including the feedback from the flight 
passengers and their associations (like APAI) to ensure a holistic approach to the 
management and development of Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the status of the Airport being built at Navi 
Mumbai. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 9   February, 2024              Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1945 (Saka)       Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
6 
  