11

ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSEES IN PHARMACEUTICAL
SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 136" Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

ELEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2192

ELEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2019-20)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSEES IN
PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 136" Report (16! Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
REVENUE)

'सत्यमेष जयते

!
Presented to Lok Sabha on: ..0.7.22:526

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: $4.2.032.2.0

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2020 /Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2019-20)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II*

CHAPTER IIl*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........................

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government tess
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
शॉशिबा0णा ..................... ०-०० ५-५ ००००५५--

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TOPICS ........................ ५ ७०००००००--०-------...........

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 12" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2019-20) held on
12" March, 2020.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One
Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha)

“Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri T. R. Baalu
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
Shri Jagdambika Pal
5
5
Ss

pe NA wR wD

hri Vishnu Dayal Ram
hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
ri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

S

12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

4. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
5. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

hri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

rof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda

hri P. Bhattacharya”

hri C. M. Ramesh

hri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav -

5.
P.
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
5
Ss
5

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri fT. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K Raja - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Deputy Secretary

" Elected w.e.f. 10 February, 2020 in lieu of vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita from
Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 2019.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2019-20), having been -
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok

Sabha) on " Assessment of Assessees in Pharmaceutical Sector ".

2. The One Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 5" February, 2019. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Eleventh Report at their Sitting held
on 12" March, 2020. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

13 March, 2020 Chairperson,
23 Phalguna,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART -।

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and ‘Thirty-Sixth Report (16 Lok Sabha) on "Assessment of
Assessees in Pharmaceutical Sector".

2. The One Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report (16" Lok Sabha) which was presented
to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 5" February, 2019, contained 8 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) are broadly categorised as follows:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1-8
Total: 8
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter - IV
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para Nos. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter -V

3. The One Hundred and Thirty-Sixth Report of the Committee was based on Audit
review of assessment of assesees in Pharmaceutical Sector. Audit had observed
plethora of deficiencies in systemic issues as well as compliance issues relating to
assessment of assesses in this sector. It contains non-maintenance of data of
incentives given to Pharmaceutical sector, non- maintenance of data of assessees in
this sector, allowing of weighted deduction on expenses towards R&D without verifying
the claims from the form 3CL/3CM issued by D/O Scientific & Industrial Research who
is the competent authority to grant approval of such claims, non-payment of TDS by
assessees, taking undue benefit of section 80 IC deduction, absence of any mechanism


for ITD to correlate and verify carry forward of losses/depreciation especially of the unit
availing 806 deductions, absence of any mechanism for ITD to correlate and verify the
turnover declared in Income Tax Returns with the turnover declared in Central Excise
Returns, allowing expenditure towards gifts/freebies to medical professionals, non-
evolving a system of sector-wise data for tax planning, misuse of the ambiguities in the
legal provisions/lacunae in the Act etc. The Committee had accordingly given their
Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report.

Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations

4. Some of the important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee
in their 1367" Report (16" Lok Sabha) are as under:

1) The Committee recommended that henceforth a comprehensive data of
Pharmaceutical sector be maintained. The Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research and National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority should capture PAN
details of the sector to facilitate its linking with ITRs.

2) Action should be taken against the assessing officers who allowed weighted
deduction on expenses towards R&D without verifying the claims from the Form
3CL/3CM issued by DSIR.

3) Ministry should issue clear instructions to ensure that the Pharmaceutical
companies deduct the TDS on payments to contract manufacturers.

4) The Committee recommended that not only the cases highlighted by the Audit
but also similar such cases in the field should be thoroughly inquired into so as to
find out as to how and why such lapses occurred, to what extent they were
bonafide mistakes and exemplary stern action taken against the officers
concerned.

5) Ministry should look into the reasons for failure on the part of the Internal Audit
wing for detecting lapses leading to huge revenue loss to the exchequer and take
suitable steps so as to ensure that this wing performs efficiently in exercising
effective control to find out mistakes in assessment and thereby to prevent
leakage of revenue.

5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding Paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which need reiteration or
merit comments.

1. Allowance of R&D_expenditure without _approval_from Department_of of R&D expenditure without approval from Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR)
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

6. In their 136" Report, the Committee had found 22 cases in six States involving
tax effect of € 570.59 crore where weighted deduction on expenses towards R&D was
allowed without verifying the claims from the Form 3C/3CM issued by Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) which is the competent authority to grant


3

approval of such claims. In this regard, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the
action taken against the assessing officers who allowed such deduction without
verification in the aforesaid 22 cases resulting in loss to the exchequer.

7. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note
have submitted as follows:
"Regarding 22 cases, explanation have been called in 16 cases in which audit
objection has been accepted by the Department.”

8. Upon noticing that weighted deductions on R&D expenses was allowed
without verifying the claims from the form 3C/3CM, the Committee had desired
that the action may be taken against the Assessing Officers who allowed such
deductions. In this regard, the Committee are informed that out of 22 cases,
explanation has been called in 16 cases in which Audit objection has been
accepted by the Department. While appreciating the action initiated by the Income
Tax Department by way of seeking explanation of Assessing Officers in 16 cases,
the Committee desire to know details of further action taken in the remaining 6
cases. The Committee also recommend that stringent action should be taken
against such Assessing Officers who are found guilty so as to convey a strong
message to all departmental officers and thereby avoid such losses to the
exchequer. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.

Il. Deduction of TDS in respect of contract entered by assessee company with
a manufacturing company for manufacture of products
(Recommendation Para No. 5)

9. Section 194C of the Act provides for deduction of TDS at the rate of two percent
from the payment to the contractor for carrying out any work in pursuance of a contract
between the contractor and an assessee. The Committee are constrained to observe
that the Pharmaceutical companies, by just not supplying raw materials directly to the
contract manufacturers, treated such contracts as supply contracts and did not pay TDS
taking advantage of exclusion clause of Section 194C. Since entire control of
manufacturing process remained with the Pharmaceutical companies which made it
akin to works contract only, attracting TDS, the Audit recommended that the CBDT
should consider issuing instructions to bring under the ambit of section 194C of the Act
such work contracts where the entire control of manufacturing process vests with the
assessee companies. In reply thereto, the Ministry stated (January 2015) that
implementation of C&AG suggestion would require legislative change in Section 194C
as it is possible that some assessees may take advantage of the definition of work
contract as defined in Section 194C. The Committee were distressed to note that
despite the issue being pointed out by the C&AG way back in 2015, no concrete steps
have been taken thus far by the Ministry in this direction. Since a large number of
potential tax payers can be identified in the Pharmaceutical sector, non-deduction of
TDS in these cases resulted into huge revenue loss to the exchequer. Since the case
pointed out by the Audit are only test checked and only tip of the iceberg, the net tax


effect would be much. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
take legal advice on the matter and amend the Section 194C of the IT Act, if required, at
the earliest besides issuing clear instructions to ensure that the Pharmaceutical
companies deduct the TDS on payments to contract manufacturers.

10. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note
have stated as follows: —
“A. In this regard, it is stated that the matter was examined and it is found that
Explanation Ill to Section 1940 before amendment vide Finance (No. 2) Act,
2009 defined “work” as:

“Explanation Ill: For the purpose of this section, the expression “work” shall also
include-

(9)... Advertising;

(b) Broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for such
broadcasting or telecasting;

(c) Carriage of goods and passengers by any mode of transport*** other that

by railways;
(d) Catering”
B. Above definition of “work” did not differentiate between “work contract” and

“Contract of sale”. In order to remove the ambiguity in the above issue, an
amendment was made vide Finance (No. 2) Act, 2009 to the definition of “work”
contained in Explanation to Section 194C which is now read as:

“(iv) “work” shall include —
(a) Advertising;
(b) Broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for such
broadcasting or telecasting;
(c) Carriage of goods and passengers by any mode of transport*** other that
by railways;
(d) Catering;
(e) Manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or
Specification of a customer by using raw material purchased from such customer,
but does not include manufacturing or supplying a product according to the
requirement or specification of a customer by using raw material purchased from
a person other than such customer”

C. Explanatory notes to the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2009 circulated vide O.M
No. 142/13/2010-SO (TPL), dated 03rd June, 2010, with regards to definition of
“work” it was mentioned that:

“49.4 Clarification regarding “work” under section 194C

A) There is ongoing litigation as to whether TDS is deductible under section
194C on outsourcing contracts and whether outsourcing constitutes work or not.
To bring clarity on this issue, it is provided that “work” shall not include
manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or


specification of a customer by using raw material purchased from a person other
than such customer as such a contract is a contract for ‘sale’...” .
Dz. As can be observed, the amendment in the definition of “work” was
already carried out in order to bring clarity on the issue of “work contract” vis-a-
vis “contract for sale” which was a subject matter of several litigations. The
difference between work contract and contract for sale has been very clearly
discussed in the Explanatory Notes to the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2009. It has now
been observed by C&AG that this is still being misused. This was examined in
the Ministry and it was felt that further amendment is not proper as we need to
maintain difference between “work contract” and “contract for sale”, It is also
noted that provisions of TDS do not impose final tax liability which is on the
person doing the contract manufacturing and the income would, in any case, get
taxed in the hands of the recipient manufacturer. However, if a monitoring
mechanism is put in place to get information about such taxpayers above a
threshold, it will prevent possible misuse. The proper monitoring mechanism
which can be incorporated in the law is currently being examined."

11. The Committee in their 136" Report had noted that the Pharmaceutical
companies, by just not supplying raw materials directly to the contract
manufacturers, treated such contracts as supply contracts and did not pay TDS
taking advantage of exclusion clause of section 194C. The Committee had,
therefore, recommended that the Ministry should take legal advice on the matter
and amend Section 194C of the IT Act. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) submitted that the amendment in the definition of ‘work’
was already carried out in order to bring clarity on the issue of work contract vis-
a-vis contract for sale. The Ministry have also stated that further amendment is
not proper as they need to maintain the difference between ‘work contract’ and
‘contract for sale’. The Ministry are of the view that, if a monitoring mechanism is
put in place to get information about such tax payers above a threshold, it will
prevent possible misuse. The Committee are constrained to observe that they
have not been provided with the details of the efforts made for incorporating
provisions enabling proper monitoring mechanism in the law. The Committee,
therefore, recommend initiation of a vigorous action to establish a strong
monitoring mechanism to keep a check on such cases at regular intervals. The
Committee also believe that with the use of an effective monitoring mechanism,
prevention as well as pursuit of these cases will be easier, faster and more
decisive.

Ul. Allowance of expenditure towards gifts, freebies etc. to Medical
Professionals
(Recommendation Para No. 7)

12. The Committee were constrained to observe that in 36 cases, involving tax effect
of % 55.10 crore in seven States where the expenditure towards gifts/freebies to medical
professionals were allowed despite being made irregular by the Income Tax Act,
Medical Council of India regulations, CBDT/Judicial pronouncement etc. Out of 36


cases, the Committee found 21 cases in five States (Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
New Delhi, Tamil Nadu) in which the AO had allowed the expenses which were in the
nature of freebies given to doctors involving tax effect of ¥45.43 crore. Further, in 11
cases in Uttaranchal and Maharashtra the AOs had allowed the expenses on freebies
given to doctors included in sales promotion without examination of the detailed
breakup. The Committee also noticed three cases in Maharashtra in which the AO had
allowed the expenses on Physician samples given free to doctors involving tax effect of
₹ 1.57 crore. Again, in one case in Andhra Pradesh the AO had allowed the expenses
on the penalty levied by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) involving tax
effect of € 8.10 crore.

13. | While deploring such an unhealthy practice in the Income Tax Department, the
Committee recommended that not only the cases highlighted by the Audit but also
similar such cases in the field should be thoroughly inquired into so as to find out as to
how and why such lapses occurred, to what extent they were bonafide mistakes and
exemplary stern action taken against the officers concerned. The Committee were
perturbed to note that the AOs were taking divergent views for disallowance of
expenses in the nature of freebies as CBDT had not clearly specified in its circular the
effective date of disallowance of such expenses. Since the failure to mention the
effective date in the circular by the CBDT led to divergent views of the AOs on a same
issue result in litigation and finally to loss of revenue, the Committee desired that the
Ministry should take immediate corrective action in this regard.

14. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note

have stated as under:
"With reference to the findings of the Hon'ble PAC that the failure to mention the
effective date in the circular by the CBDT led to divergent views of the AOs on a
same issue result in litigation and finally to loss of revenue, itis stated that the
circular No.5/2012 issued by the CBDT was only clarificatory in nature and
therefore, even before the issuance of the said clarificatory circular, as per the
provisions of section 37 of the Income-tax Act,1961, such freebies given to the
doctors by the Pharma companies were required to be disallowed by the A.O as
the said expenditure are prohibited by law. In this context, it is also submitted that
it may not be fruitful to specify that the said circular no.5/2012 will be applicable
retrospectively now as the period of limitation for taking any remedial action
under section 148 of the Act is only within six years from the end of the relevant
assessment year. Therefore, remedial action is not possible in cases belonging
to assessment year 2012-13 and years prior to it now. However, it is submitted
that the observations made by the Hon'ble PAC will be duly considered while
issuing clarificatory circulars in future. Out of 36 cases mentioned in above
recommendation, in 12 cases explanation has been called where audit objection
has been accepted by the department."

15. The Committee, in their 1367 Report (167 Lok Sabha) had found that in 36
cases in seven States the expenditure towards gifts/freebies to medical
professionals involving a tax effect to the extent of = 55.10 crore were allowed


despite being made irregular by the Income Tax Act, Medical Council of India
regulations, CBDT/Judicial pronouncement etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that these cases should be thoroughly inquired into so as to find
out as to how and why such lapses occurred, to what extent they were bonafide
mistakes and exemplary action taken against the officers concerned. Now, the
Committee have been informed that out of 36 cases, explanation of Assessing
Officers has been called in 12 cases where Audit objection has been accepted by
the Department. In view of the fact that a significant amount of tax is involved in
these cases, the Committee recommend that expeditious and stern action should
be taken against the Assessing Officers concerned as mere calling for
explanation would not result in avoidance of such cases in future.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
13 March, 2020 Chairperson,

23 Phalguna,1941 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee