 
 
 
 
 152 
 
 
ISSUES RELATED TO ACCOUNTING OF CESS AND 
LEVIES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 69th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
PAC NO. 2292   
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F I F T Y -
S E C O N D  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(202 3-24 ) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 69th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
                                         
        Presented to H on’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on: 29 .04.2024                                                                       
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
 
 
 
April 2024/ Vaisakha 1946 (Saka) 
  
ISSUES RELATED TO ACCOUNTING OF CESS 
AND LEVIES 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Governmnet on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-Ninth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
   
 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
                                                           
1 Shri Brijendra Singh resigned w.e.f 12 March 2024 
2 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2 April 2024 
 Till 21 March 2024 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3.    Shri ThalikkottaiRajuthevar Baalu 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri GowdarMallikarjunappaSiddeshwara  
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
15. Vacant1 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
19. ShriTiruchi Siva 
20.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
22. Vacant2 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma            -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja  -   Director 
3. Shri Partha Goswami           -   Director 
4. Ms. Malvika Mehta             -   Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Pragya Nama                -   Assistant Committee Officer 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2022 -23) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One hundred and fifty -second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in 
their Sixty-Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) "Issues Related to accounting 
of Cess and Levies" relating to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure. 
 
2. The Sixty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 202 3. Replies of the Government to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The 
Committee considered and adopted  the draft preliminary report  on the subject  vide 
digital circulation on 26 April 2024, and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
same and present it to the Hon'ble Speaker.. 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by th e Committee Secretariat and the Office of the  Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-ninth Report ( Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                       ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27  April, 2024             Chairperson, 
 7  Vaisakha 1946 (Saka)                                           Public Accounts Committee
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Sixty -ninth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on " Issues Relating to 
Accounting of Cess/Levies". 
2. The Sixty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
10.08.2023. It contained eleven Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9      
     
      Total: 8 
         Chapter - II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         NIL     
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. 2        
         Total: 1 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. 10 and 11     
           
           
           Total: 2 
     Chapter -  V 
 

 
 
 
 
3. On detailed examination of the subject, the Committee had observed a 
number of issues viz. non finalization of accounting procedure, issues related to 
nomenclature and lack of coordination mechanism to finalize accounting procedure. 
The Committee had observed that since cesses are to be imposed for only specific 
purposes, the use of broad and general language for their imposition and collection 
may lead to discrepancies in utilisation of the proceeds. Impressing upon the need to 
ensure specificity, the Committee had been of the view that cesses should be levied 
for well defined purposes and for limited periods. In light of the fact that burden of 
taxes/cesses/levies eventually falls on the common man, the Committee had been of 
the belief that for ef fective decision making, a review of cesses be periodically 
undertaken to determine the extent of achievement of the intended purpose by 
prescribing a specific timeframe. Highlighting the recommendation made by the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission that the Ce ntre shall review the surcharges and 
cesses in order to reduce its share in the gross tax revenue, the Committee had 
urged the Ministry to include within provisions of Cesses, a clause for timely review 
of Cesses, through a sunset clause or any other metho d as deemed suitable by the 
Ministry so that discontinuation of the Cess may be considered if its objectives have 
been achieved.  Observing that accounting procedures could not be finalized for 
some of the cess funds, the Committee had noted that since each  cess may require 
deliberations in respect of achievement of objectives of the cess as enshrined in the 
law, there is an urgent need for enhancing cooperation among all the agencies 
involved in finalization of accounting procedure so that concerns and issu es 
wherever arising, may be highlighted at an early stage and the same may be 
resolved promptly within a specific time frame.  
 
4. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Sixty-ninth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this 
Report. The Committee will now deal with  the Action Taken by the Government on 
their Observation/Recommendation made in the original Report.  
 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observation/ 
Recommendation contai ned in Chapter I and Chapter V within six months of 
the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
Non-creation of Oil Industry Development Fund 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
6.  The Committee observe that for the development of Oil Industry, Oil Industry 
(Development) Act, 1974 provides for levying a duty of excise on crude oil and 
natural gas as a cess and establishment of Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB). 
Further, the Act a lso provides for crediting the cess first in the Consolidated Fund of 

 
 
 
 
India (CFI) and thereafter paying to the Board such sums as Parliament may 
approve to be kept in the Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF). The Committee 
also note that Section 18(2) of t he Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides 
that "the Fund shall be applied - (a) for meeting the salaries, allowances, honoraria 
and other remuneration of the officers and other employees of the Board and of the 
advisers, consultants or other agencies  whose services are availed of by the Board; 
(b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board; (c) for rendering 
assistance under section 6; (d) for repayment of any loans taken by the Board or for 
meeting other liabilities under this Act." T hrough Audit scrutiny for the period FY 10 
to FY 20, the Committee note that since 1974, the total cess on crude oil collected 
was ₹ 1,28,461 crore, however only ₹ 902.40 crore had been transferred to OIDB 
and since 1991 - 92, no funds out of the cess colle cted by the Government were 
transferred to OIDB. According to the Ministry, implementation/operation of schemes 
is not affected by delay in finalization of accounting procedure of any fund, only 
transactions are not routed through respective Reserve Funds.  Further, the 
Government has been financing various activities from the budget that qualify as 
being aimed development of oil industry within the purview of the OID Act, 1974 and 
in view of the emergent  situation of the energy security, expenditure on ene rgy 
security is likely to increase in the near future. Also, these activities are financed 
from the resources of the Government of which the Cess under the Act is a part. The 
Committee also, while noting the Ministry's response that the reasons for non - 
constitution of a reserve fund in public account in favour of Oil Industry Development 
Board from inception in 1974 could not, readily, be ascertained, wonder how 
payments were made for meeting the liabilities as specified in Section 18(2) (d) of 
the Oil Ind ustry (Development) Act, 1974, when the fund was not created. The 
Committee opine that the Ministry's response regarding non creation of OIDF not 
only questions the rationale of collection of the cess but also the actual utilization of 
the same for the int ended purposes. The Committee feel that absence of binding 
provisions regarding specific timeline for creation of reserve funds also contributed to 
the non creation of OIDF. The Committee, therefore, while expressing concern over 
the Ministry's lackadaisic al reply on non -creation of OIDF in terms of the provisions 
of OIDB Act 1974, desire that besides strengthening compliance mechanism in the 
Ministry, the reasons for non -constitution of a reserve fund in public account in 
favour of Oil Industry Development Board from inception in 1974 may be ascertained 
urgently and the Committee may be apprised thereof. The Committee, also, 
recommend that to obviate recurrence of such lapses in future, the Ministry revisit 
the provisions of the OIDB act and take necessary action for ensuring 
adherence to the Act both in letter and spirit. 
 
7.  The Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs,  in their Action 
Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
  
 “The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee have been noted. 

 
 
 
 
 
2. Section 16 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides that 
„proceeds of duties of excise levied under Section 15 shall first be 
credited to the Consolidated fund of India and the Central 
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation ma de by law in 
this behalf, so provides, pay to the board from time to time, from 
out of such proceeds, after deducting the expenses of collection, 
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized exclusively 
for the purpose of the Act‟. 
 
3. Section 17 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides that 
the Central Government may also, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants 
or loans such sums of money as  the Central Government may 
consider necessary. 
 
4. Section 18 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides for 
source of the Oil Industry Development Fund which includes sums 
of money paid under Section 16 or Section 17, grants, borrowings 
and any sum realized by the Board in carrying out its functions or in 
administration of the Act. 
5. Keeping in view the legislative provisions, it may be observed that 
the payment to be made to the Oil Industry Development Board 
(OIDB) is discretionary at the end of the Government.. 
6. OIDB generates its own re sources by way of interest income on 
loans given to various oil sector companies and short -term 
investment of surplus funds in Fixed Deposit receipts. 
 
7. A considered decision was taken by Ministry of Finance not to 
earmark the cess collected under the Oil I ndustry Development Act 
1974 towards OIDB. Hon‟ble Finance Minister vide his DO No. 
22(01)/PF.II/2008 dated 15.01.2015 conveyed the extant decision 
to the Hon‟ble Minister of State, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas that the Government has been financing various activities from 
the budget that qualifies as development of oil industry within the 
purview of the act and in view of the emergent situation of the 
energy security, such expenditure is likely to increase in the near 
future. These activities are financed from the resources of the 
Union Government of which the Cess under the Act, is a part. 
Since Government cannot withdraw itself from these activities the 
Cess receipts already stand committed. 
 

 
 
 
 
8. In view of the huge expenditure being incurred by the Government 
in oil sector, additional fund transfers to the Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB) was considered not necessary.” 
 
8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 
“The references mentioned by the Department in it‟s r eply has already been 
examined by PAC while adopting the PAC Report. No dedicated Reserve 
Fund i.e. OIDF has been created so far in the Public Account.” 
9. The Committee had observed that for the development of Oil Industry, 
Oil Industry (Development) Act,  1974 provides for levying a duty of excise on 
crude oil and natural gas as a cess and establishment of Oil Industry 
Development Board (OIDB). The Committee while noting that no dedicated 
Reserve Fund i.e. OIDF had been created in the Public Account had 
recommended that besides strengthening compliance mechanism in the 
Ministry, the reasons for non -constitution of a reserve fund in public account 
in favour of Oil Industry Development Board from inception in 1974 may be 
ascertained and to obviate recurrence of such lapses in future. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that a considered decision has been taken 
by Ministry of Finance not to earmark the cess collected under the Oil Industry 
Development Act 1974 towards OIDB.  The Committee do not f ind the 
contention of the Government that it has been financing various activities from 
the budget that qualifies as development of oil industry within the purview of 
the act convincing as non creation of the reserve fund and not earmarking the 
funds meant  specifically for oil industry questions the very rationale of 
imposition and collection of the cess itself. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the receipts from oil cess should be channelized by 
creating the reserve fund as enshrined in OIDB  Act. The Committee while 
opining that provisions of OIDB Act need to be followed in letter as well as in 
spirit reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry may take 
necessary action for ensuring actual utilization of the cess collected for th e 
intended purposes. 
 
 
B. Road and Infrastructure Cess- Issues related to nomenclature 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
10. The Committee note that cesses in the nature of additional excise duties on 
petrol and diesel collected under the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 are to be credited 
to the Central Road Fund (CRF) to the extent provided by Parliament through 
appropriation by la w. Further, the Committee note that the Finance Act 2018 re -
designated the Fund as the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) with effect 

 
 
 
 
from 01 April 2018, enlarging its scope of deployment and increasing the quantum of 
cess. Audit scrutiny revealed that Statement 13 continued to depict the Fund as CRF 
instead of CRIF. As per the Ministry of Finance Background Note, the Central Road 
Fund was still functional in the Ministry and the proposal for change of name from 
the Central Road Fund (CRF) to Centr al Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) is 
under process with the concerned authorities. In this regard, the Ministry further 
stated that efforts are being taken to resolve the issue in consultation with office of 
the CAG and that two meetings were held (on 27.4.2022 and 14.7.2022) with officers 
of CAG to impress upon the need to have a procedure suitable to address the 
pending issues. The Ministry also stated that the Office of the CAG and CGA both 
were requested to re- consider this issue. The Committee are concerned to note that 
the issues related to nomenclature of funds not only remained unnoticed until 
pointed out by the Audit but have not been resolved also as yet. The Committee 
desire that before making changes to the provisions underlying a cess fund  all the 
agencies concerned be taken on board. Highlighting the need for enhanced 
cooperation between various agencies, the Committee desire that issues may be 
resolved at the earliest. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the in itiatives taken 
for changing the name from the Central Road Fund (CRF) to Central Road and 
Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) and bolstering the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry. 
 
C. Road and Infrastructure Cess - Erroneous transfer 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
11. The Committee observe from audit scrutiny that against total collection of 
cess of ₹1,22,440 crore under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved ₹1,22,369 crore 
for appropriation, however actual transfer to the Road and Infrastructure Cess Fund 
was ₹90,252 crore only. The Committee have been informed that part of the short 
transfer was due to erroneous transfers of ₹17,250 crore and ₹4,380 crore to the 
Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to 'Other Funds' by the Ministry 
of Power, respectively and these funds were, however, fully utilised for the purposes 
for which the CRIF had been created. On a request for providing year -wise details of 
funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries, the Committee note with 
dismay that the Minist ry furnished an account of receipts and disbursements but the 
Ministry-wise data remained unavailable. The Committee insist that to ensure 
accountability and transparency, a thorough analysis of the transfers made to and 
from CRIF is necessary. Moreover, s ince the data available shows only the receipts 
and disbursements, erroneous transfers, if any, cannot be determined. The 
Committee, therefore desire that a detailed statement regarding transfers made to 
and from CRIF by various Ministries may be prepared and sent to Audit, under 
intimation to this Secretariat, for in-depth scrutiny. 
 

 
 
 
 
12. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs in their Action Taken 
Notes have stated as under:- 
 “The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Commit tee have 
 been noted. 
 
 2. The renaming of “Central Road Fund” as “Central Road and 
 Infrastructure Fund” has been made effective from accounts of FY 2021-22. 
 3. The accounting procedure for operationalizing CRIF was held up for 
 want of concurrence from the office of the C&AG for transfers from Major 
 Head „3601 -Grants-in-aid to State Governments', „3602 -Grants-in-aid to UT 
 Governments with legislature' and Capital Expenditure Major Heads. While 
 the issue regarding transfers from MH 3601/3602 has been r esolved, the 
 transfers from capital expenditure Major Heads are under active consideration 
 in the office of the C&AG. The revised accounting procedure will be made be 
 effective after resolution of the aforementioned issue. 
 4. With regard to the Ministr y-wise year-wise details of funds transferred 
 to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries, the same are enclosed as Annexure.” 
 
13. While vetting the above ATNs, Audit made the following comments:- 
 “As recommended by the PAC a detailed statement regarding tran sfers made 
 to and from CRIF by various Ministries be shared with PAC secretariat with a 
 copy to Audit.” 
14. The Committee were concerned to note that the issues related to re -
designation of the Central Road Fund as the Central Road and Infrastructure 
Fund (CRIF) remained unnoticed until pointed out by the Audit and had desired 
that before making changes to the p rovisions underlying a cess fund all the 
agencies concerned be taken on board. The Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the final outcome of the initiatives taken for changing the name 
from the Central Road Fund (CRF) to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
(CRIF) and bolstering the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry. Further, the 
Committee had observed that against total collection of cess of ₹1,22,440 
crore under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved ₹1,22,369 crore for 
appropriation, however actual tran sfer to the Road and Infrastructure Cess 
Fund was ₹90,252 crore only. The Committee were informed that part of the 
short transfer was due to erroneous transfers of ₹17,250 crore and ₹4,380 
crore to the Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to  'Other 
Funds' by the Ministry of Power, respectively . The Committee, however, noted 
that year -wise details of funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various 
Ministries was not provided to them and  had , therefore, insisted that to 
ensure accountability an d transparency, a thorough analysis of the transfers 
made to and from CRIF is necessary. The Committee had desired that a 
detailed statement regarding transfers made to and from CRIF by various 

 
 
 
 
Ministries may be prepared and sent to Audit, under intimation  to the 
Committee, for in -depth scrutiny.  The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that the renaming of “Central Road Fund” as “Central Road and 
Infrastructure Fund” has been made effective from accounts of FY 2021 -22. 
The Committee while noting that the accounting procedure for operationalizing 
CRIF has been held up for want of concurrence from the office of the C&AG 
and while the issue regarding transfers from MH 3601/3602 has been resolved, 
the transfers from capital expenditure Major Heads are under active 
consideration in the office of the C&AG desire that the accounting procedure 
may be finalized and opeartionalized at the earliest. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the specific steps taken for bolstering monitoring mechanism in 
the Minis try.The Committee find that the Ministry -wise year -wise details of 
funds transferred  to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries have not been 
enclosed and desire that the same may be provided to the Audit for in depth 
scrutiny. 
****** 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that Government imposes levies/cesses and other 
charges to raise funds for specific purposes; and accounting of collection of such 
receipts is, in most cases, regulated by legislation and rules which often provide for 
creation of reserve funds to ensure that these levies/charges/cesses are used for 
intended purposes. However, the Ministry in a written reply stated that 
creation/operationalization of Reserve Funds in Public Account pertaining to cesses  
/levies are based on the provisions of the enabling act (e.g., USOF, CRIF etc.) or 
based on executive decision if a need is felt for creation of the same (e.g., PSK, 
MUSK, PMSSN). Further, in case when the nature of levy is very broad and generic 
in nature and not relatable to a specific function of any Ministry, Government may 
take a decision not to create the Reserve Fund e.g. Social Welfare Surcharge. As 
regards importance of cre ating Reserve Funds in Public Account, the Ministry in a 
separate reply underlined that the purpose of establishing a reserve fund in Public 
Account is to transparently demonstrate the flow of funds from CFI and its utilisation 
on intended purposes. While observing that creation/operationalization of Reserve 
Funds in Public Account pertaining to Cesses /Levies is subject to provisions of the 
Act governing them and executive decision of the Government to create them. The 
Committee are of the view that non- creation/non operation of Reserve Funds makes 
it difficult to ensure that cesses and levies have been utilised for the specific 
purposes for which they were intended and levied. The Committee are of the opinion 
that to ensure utilization of levies/charges/c esses for their intended purposes, the 
provisions for creation/ operationalization of reserve funds in public account in the 
designated acts/rules/legislations should be clearly defined. Further, the Committee, 
recommend that earnest efforts in the matter be taken so that the reserve funds in 
Public Account are invariably created and the flow of funds from CFI and its 
utilization and accomplishments on intended purposes in a time bound manner 
ensured. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 1 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted for compliance. 

 
 
 
 
 
2. The Reserve funds „Madhyamik and Uchhtar Shiksha Kosh‟ and „Pradhan Mantr i 
Swasthya suraksha Nidhi‟ have been operationalized from 2022 -23 and the flow of 
proceeds from „Health and education Cess‟ reflected in Union Government Finance 
Accounts for 2022 -23. Further, it has been decided to create reserve fund 
'Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Fund' to channelize the receipts of the 
„Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Cess‟ being levied on goods imported 
and on goods manufactured or produced for the purposes of financing the agriculture 
and other development. The Accounting Procedure for operationalization of the 
same in the Financial Year 2023 -24 has been forwarded to the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India for concurrence. 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN 
In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer. 
 
(Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee observe that some of the provisions for crediting of sum from 
cess collection to Consolidated Fund of India, are open to interpretation viz. in The 
Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 (giving statutory status to the Universal 
Service Oblig ation Fund (USOF)) wherein it has been provided that the sums of 
money received towards the Universal Service Obligation under section 4 shall first 
be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if 
Parliament by appropriati on made by law In this behalf so provides, credit "such 
proceeds" to the Fund from "time to time" for being utilised exclusively for meeting 
the Universal Service Obligation. The Committee in this regard, would draw 
reference to a recent judgement of the Division Bench of Madras High court where in 
they have maintained that "The purpose and collection of any cess remains distinct, 
as any cess amount collected, is liable to be spent for the avowed and dedicated 
purpose for which such imposition was made, unl ike in the case of collection of 
taxes. Such distinction is a settled principle of law and the Supreme Court has 
upheld it in various decisions." Further, as explained in V. Nagappa v. Iron Ore 
Mines Cess Commissioner, the legislation imposing a cess must spell out its 
earmarked purpose. The purpose must not be vague or uncertain, as it could lead to 
a claim of excessive delegation of power. The Committee also opine that the nature 
of the levy should be specific, the provisions governing the cesses need spe cific 
details regarding frequency of their appropriation and utilisation for the 'specific 

 
 
 
 
purposes' and should be achievable in a given timeframe. Since cesses are to be 
imposed for only specific purposes, the use of broad and general language for their 
imposition and collection may lead to discrepancies in utilisation of the proceeds. 
Impressing upon the need to ensure specificity, the Committee are of the view that 
cesses should be levied for well defined purposes and for limited periods.  
  
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
  
Action Taken 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer. 
(Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note from the Audit observation that out of the ₹ 2,74,592 
crore received from 35 cesses, levies and other charges in 2018 -19, only ₹ 1,64,322 
crore had been transferred to Reserve Funds/ Boards during the year and the rest 
was retained in the CFI leading to the understatement of revenue/ fiscal deficit for 
the year. The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Ministry of Finance 
for the period from FY 2012 -13 to FY 2021 -22 that in the Year 2021 -22, the number 
of cesses appearing in Union Government Finance Accounts (UGFA) was 25 and 
the total Revenue from cesses was ₹ 4,17,340.30 crore. The Committee also note 
from the same data that total Cess/Levy as percentage of gross tax revenue stood at 
20.56% in the FY 2020 -21. Th e Committee note that in terms of the provisions of 
Article 270 and Article 271, revenues collected from certain sources such as income 
tax are necessarily part of the divisible pool while cesses and surcharges can be 
kept outside the divisible pool. While  observing that there have been many 
discrepancies pertaining to the administration and utilisation of the proceeds from 
cess taxes which gives the impression that the proceeds are being levied to finance 
the revenue deficit of the Government, the Committe e opine that prior to imposition 
of levy, a scientific study should be conducted about the quantum of money required 
and the likely time period within which the same is expected to be collected through 

 
 
 
 
the proposed levy. Further, in light of the fact that burden of taxes/cesses/levies 
eventually falls on the common man, the Committee believe that for effective 
decision making, a review of cesses be periodically undertaken to determine the 
extent of achievement of the intended purpose by prescribing a specif ic timeframe. 
Highlighting the recommendation made by the Thirteenth Finance Commission that 
the Centre shall review the surcharges and cesses in order to reduce its share in the 
gross tax revenue, the Committee urge the Ministry to include within provisio ns of 
Cesses, a clause for timely review of Cesses, through a sunset clause or any other 
method as deemed suitable by the Ministry so that discontinuation of the Cess may 
be considered if its objectives have been achieved. 
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 4 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
 
2. With regard to the statement regarding a total number of 35 cesses, levies and 
other charges indicated in the report, it is submitted that with the roll out of 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) w.e.f. 1 st July, 2017, most of the cesses levied 
stood abolished. 
 
3. It may be seen with regard to major cesses/ surcharges being levied as duty of 
customs and duty of excise are Agriculture infrastructure & Development Cess, 
Health Cess, Social Welfare Surcharge (SWS), National Calamity Contingent 
Duty, Road and Infrastructure cess (RIC), Cess on Crude Oil and Special 
Additional Excise Duties (SAED) that t he scope of these cesses is limited as 
most of these cesses are applicable only on select goods. 
 
4. Specific reference is invited to the GST Compensation Cess which was levied 
as part of compensation to States for a period of five years for loss of revenue 
due to introduction of GST. The Cess is primarily being levied on items like pan 
masala, tobacco, coal, cars, etc,. The Cess so collected has been duly 
transferred/credited to the GST Compensation Fund as per the GST 
(Compensation to States) Act 2017. GST c ompensation to States for the 
financial years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 have been released on a regular 
basis out of the Compensation Fund. However, from 2020 -21 onwards, due to 
the economic impact of the pandemic, compensation requirement went up due 
to lower GST collection but the States‟ protected revenue has been growing at 
14% compounded growth. At the same time, collection of GST compensation 

 
 
 
 
cess went down due to covid. To ensure that States have adequate and timely 
resources to combat covid and r elated challenges, Centre borrowed ₹ 1.1 lakh 
crore in 2020-21 and ₹ 1.59 lakh crore in 2021 -22 taking into account the need 
for resources and overall macro -economic stability and passed it on to States 
on a back -to-back basis after all the States agreed. The Cess is being 
continued to be levied to repay loan taken by Central Government that has 
been passed on to States on back to back basis to States in 2020-21 and 2021-
22 in lieu of GST Compensation and for payment of full GST compensation to 
States for p eriod up to June, 2022 including arrears of previous FYs based on 
AG reconciled figures. 
5. It is ensured at the time of imposition of the cesses that the same are structured 
in such a way that the tax incidence broadly remains the same and do not put 
additional burden on consumers. For example, while levying Road & 
Infrastructure Cess in 2018, government abolished Additional Duty of Excise 
(Road Cess). Similarly, with the imposition of Social Welfare Surcharge (SWS), 
Education Cess and Secondary & Higher Educ ation Cess on certain imported 
goods were abolished in 2018. 
6. With regards to the recommendation for “sunset clause”, it is stated that 
Agriculture Infrastructure & Development Cess, Health Cess, Social Welfare 
Surcharge, National Calamity Contingent Duty a nd Road and Infrastructure 
Cess have been imposed with objective of financing agriculture infrastructure, 
other development expenditure, health infrastructure and service, to provide 
and finance education, health and social security, and to fund National D isaster 
Response Fund. The transformative power of new infrastructure is a pre - 
condition of high economic growth that India aspires to achieve. The critical role 
played by infrastructure is crucial for accelerating economic growth & sustaining 
it in long term. More pertinently, the cesses collected by the Central 
Government are primarily used for funding various Centrally Sponsored 
schemes, whereby funds are transferred to the States for implementing these 
schemes in their States. 
7. With regard to the recommendation for “review of Cesses”, it may be mentioned 
that the cesses are reviewed periodically as part of annual budget exercise. 
 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 
In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer.  
 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee observe that accounting proced ures could not be finalized for 
some of the cess funds viz. the National Mineral Exploration Trust Fund, Madhyamik 
& Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK), Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF) and 
Road and Infrastructure Cess. The Committee also observe that the M inistry has 
been silent over the timeline of finalization of accounting process of funds created for 
Cesses. Instead, the Ministry apprised the Committee about the current status of the 
extant proposals for the same. Regarding Madhyamik & Uchchatar Shiksha  Kosh 
(MUSK), the Ministry's response indicates that the accounting procedure is under 
process. As regards Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF), the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas has stated that the same has not been created yet. 
Further, for Road and Infrastructure Cess, the process of finalization of accounting 
procedure was still under process as the same was pending with Budget Division, 
DEA. Regarding reasons for delay in finalization of accounting procedure, the 
Ministry stated that based on t he broad accounting guidelines issued by Department 
of Economic Affairs (Budget Division), the detailed accounting procedure is proposed 
by the Ministry/Department administering the fund and is sent to the office of the 
Controller General of Accounts (CGA) . After due examination, Office of the CGA 
forwards the draft accounting procedure to the office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (CAG) for concurrence. After concurrence of the accounting 
procedure by the office of CAG under Article 150 of the Constitution, the same is 
notified by administrative Ministry/Department. Similarly, Audit had noticed that as no 
new reserve funds had been created for the Health and Education Cess, BE and RE 
for FY 2020 continued to provide for transfer of proceeds of this cess to the 
Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh (PSK), and Madhyamik and Uchchatar Shiksha Kosh 
(MUSK) that were created for Primary Education Cess, and Secondary and Higher 
Education Cess, respectively. The Ministry also stated that the Accounting 
Procedure f or MUSK and Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) is 
pending finalization in the office of the CAG and the pending issues with office of the 
CGA/CAG are being resolved in consultation with them. The Committee are of the 
opinion that accounting pro cedures is one of the foundational aspects of creation 
and monitoring of cess and funds. Therefore, its non -finalization/delay in finalization, 
inhibit the overall monitoring of the Inflow and outflow of moneys from the designated 
funds which hinders executive accountability to the Parliament. While acknowledging 
the importance of the subject matter, Secretary, Ministry of Finance, during the oral 
evidence admitted that "it should not take us so long to finalise the accounting rules". 
The Committee observe that since each cess may require deliberations in respect of 
how objectives of the cess as enshrined in the law are to be achieved, there is an 
urgent need for enhancing cooperation among all the agencies involved in 
finalization of accounting procedure so  that concerns and issues wherever arising 
may be highlighted at an early stage and the same may be resolved promptly within 
a specific time frame. The Committee also desire that all the agencies involved in 
finalization of accounting procedures for a cess  fund may also deliberate upon the 

 
 
 
 
possibility of having an accounting standard/ guidance note on treatment and 
disclosure of various issues related to the management of cess funds. 
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 5 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
  
Action Taken 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
 
2. With regard to the Madhyamik and Uchhatar Shiksha Kosh (MUSK) and Prime 
Minister Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN), the fun ds were not operationalized 
due to non -finalization of Accounting Procedure resulting from differing/ 
divergent view points on the issue of transfers of funds from Major Heads „3601 
– Grants-in-aid to State Governments‟/ `3602 – Grants-in-aid to Union Terr itory 
Governments with Legislature‟. The issue has since been resolved and the funds 
stand operationalized in the FY2022-23 
 
3. The accounting procedure for operationalizing CRIF was held up for want of 
concurrence from the office of the C&AG for transfers fr om Major Head „3601 -
Grants-in-aid to State Governments', „3602 -Grants-in-aid to UT Governments 
with legislature' and Capital Expenditure Major Heads. While the issue regarding 
transfers from MH 3601/3602 has been resolved, the transfers from capital 
expenditure Major Heads are under active consideration in the office of the 
C&AG. The revised accounting procedure will be made be effective after 
resolution of the aforementioned issue. 
 
4. With regard to the recommendation on preparation of accounting 
standard/guidance note, it may be submitted that the accounting procedure(s) in 
operation conforms to the accounting framework as provided in the 
Manuals/Rules. 
 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer. 
 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that the 'Universal Access Levy' (UAL) was set up in 
April 2002 for achieving universal service objectives by providing access to 
telephone services in rural and remote areas and creation of infrastructure for mobile 
services and broad band in these areas. The Comm ittee also note that the levy is 
first credited to the CFI and subsequently, transferred, based on the appropriation 
approved by Parliament, to a non -lapsable Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund 
created in the Public Account for being utilized exclusiv ely for the aforementioned 
purposes. Audit scrutiny revealed that during FY 2020, although, Parliament had 
approved the transfer of UAL amounting to ₹ 8,350 crore to the USO Fund in the 
budget, there was short transfer of UAL to the USO Fund amounting to ₹  5,035.53 
crore. Audit also pointed out that issue of short transfer of the levy to the USO Fund 
had been brought out in earlier reports of the CAG on the Union Accounts for the 
years 2009-10 to 2014-15 and 2018-19 but the matter remained unresolved. In th eir 
reply, the Ministry stated that the USO Fund is financing two schemes viz. for 
providing compensation to telecom service providers for creation and augmentation 
of telecom infrastructure and access to various telecom services to people in the 
rural and  remote areas including operation and maintenance of Village Public 
Telephones and for implementation of Bharatnet project towards creation of telecom 
infrastructure required for providing broadband connectivity to all the Gram 
Panchayats in the country an d facilitating non -discriminatory access to service 
providers, for provisioning of broadband services in rural areas. The Ministry also 
stated that the purpose of such Funds is, inter -alia, to ensure utilisation for the 
earmarked purpose over a period of y ears, but not necessarily, within each financial 
year and that transfer of funds depend, mainly, on the absorptive capacity of the 
Department to spend in any particular year. Further, Section 9C of Indian Telegraph 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 provides that the C entral Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament credit such sums of money as that Government 
may consider necessary in the Fund. Thus, transfers to USOF are made in line with 
the statutory provisions. From the information provided by the Ministry regarding 
funds allocated and disbursed through USOF since the year 2002 -03 to 2022-2023, 
the Committee note that as against a total collection of ₹ 130923.91 crore, only ₹ 
68683.44 crore was utilized leaving ₹ 62240.46 crore (47.5%) as unspent. Observing 
that almost fifty percent of the UAL collected for the designated purpose remains 
undisbursed, the Committee would like to be apprised of the accounting procedure 
adopted by the Ministry to reflect the undisbursed amount in the Government 
Accounts. 
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 6 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Further, the Committee are of the considered view that the extent of collection of 
UAL may be revisited to ascertain whether the rate of UAL needs adjustment so that 
instead of short transfers, an amount more in tune with the absorptive capacities of 
the Department may be collected. 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 7 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Besides, as a part of initiatives for gainful utilization of the significant portion of 
amount lying undisbursed and also for the achievement of avowed objectives 
envisaged under UAL and specifically under the two schemes, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry come up with a perspective plan so that time bound utilization of the 
financial resources collected under UAL may be ensured. 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 8 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
2. The following submissions are made with regard to the accounting procedure 
being followed in respect of undisbursed amount of cess: 
i. All the cesses and levies during a year stand credited in the 
Consolidated Fund of India in pursuance of Article 266 of the 
Constitution and reflected in the Union Government Finance Accounts of 
the corresponding year; 
ii. All transfers to the reserve funds and expend iture there from for specific 
purposes are carried out by the respective administrative 
Ministries/Departments through their Programme Divisions after due 
appropriations authorized by Parliament and the same are reflected in 
the audited accounts of that particular year. 
iii. The provisions of expenditure and the transfers from and to Reserve 
Fund are done based on the estimates of cess receipts during the given 
year and the absorptive capacity of the Ministry/Department; 
iv. In the case of Universal Access Levy, Sec tion 9C of Indian Telegraph 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 provides that the Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament credit such sums of money as the 
Government may consider necessary in the Fund. Thus, transfers to 
USOF are made in line with the statutory provisions. 

 
 
 
 
v. With this established procedure, the collection of cesses and their 
utilisation are monitored. 
vi. Any mismatch between cess collected during the year and amount 
utilized during the same year is acknowledged and taken note of for  
transfers during the ensuing years; 
3. The assessment/review of the Cesses being levied during the year is done as 
part of the budgetary exercise. 
4. The difference between the cess collections and the utilizations thereof has 
reduced considerably in recent years. In the case of Universal Service Obligation 
Fund (USOF), with an additional transfer of ₹ 50,000 crore during 2022 -23, the 
balance UAL collection to be transferred to USOF stand at ₹ 14,775.23 crore at 
the end of March 2023. 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM No. 
7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
 
 Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer. 
 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that in accordance with the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, the National Mineral Exploration Trust which 
was set up in 2015 -16 is funded through payments made by holders of mining 
leases as a percentage of royalty pa id which is collected by State: Governments 
and thereafter paid to the Union Government. Audit observed that the collection 
towards this trust was ₹ 664.85 crore and transfer to the fund was ₹ 100 crore, 
resulting in short transfer of ₹ 564.85 crore. As re gards the reasons for short 
transfer of funds, the Ministry of Mines in their response stated that during the year 
2021, Ministry submitted a proposal to the Department of Economic Affairs in third 
and final Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants 2021 -22 for transfer of 
balance NMET fund of ₹ 2271.82 crore (accumulated upto Dec 2021) which has 
since been transferred including the short transfer of ₹ 564.82 crore. The Ministry 
further stated that with the higher transfer of ₹ 2,872 crore in 2021 -22, NMET Fund 
is having a positive (credit) balance of ₹ 2,862 crore, pending utilisation, in Public 
Account as on 31.3.2022. The Committee opine that the practice of short transfers 
and subsequent recuperation of the designated funds with higher transfers at one 
go is not prudent viz -a-viz of the principle of sound financial management. The 

 
 
 
 
Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for non -transfer of funds previously 
and the utilization of funds by the NMET since its creation.  
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 9 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
2. The following submissions are made with regard to the non- transfer of funds to 
the NMET Fund since its creation: 
 
a) In terms of Section 9(C) 4 of the MMDR (Amendment) Act 2015, every 
mine lease holder is supposed to contribute a sum equivalent to 2% of 
the royalty paid to the State Government to the NMET Trust; 
b) The funds in the trust is used for regional and detailed mineral 
exploration; 
c) The NMET Fund was previously being maintained in the nationalized 
Bank outside the Government Account; 
d) A decision was taken with due approval of the Hon‟ble FM that additional 
levy payable by the mine lease holders may be credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India and withdrawals be made therefrom through 
appropriations authorized by the parliament; 
e) The NMET was accordingly established as a reserve fund in the public 
Account so that additional levies credited into CFI is transferred after 
taking due approval of the Parliament through Demands for Grants, to 
National Mineral Exploration Trust Fund. 
 
3. With regard to the expenditure provisions made available to Ministry of Mines 
towards transfer to National Minera l Exploration Trust Fund (NMET), it is 
submitted that the same is regulated as per the absorptive capacity of the 
Ministry of Mines. The NMET Fund is however having a positive  (credit) balance  
of  ₹ 2,469  crore, pending utilisation, in Public Account as on 31.3.2023. 
 
 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
In view of the Department‟s reply, Audit has no further comments to offer.  
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee observe that for the development of Oil Industry, Oil Industry 
(Development) Act, 1974 provides for levyi ng a duty of excise on crude oil and 
natural gas as a cess and establishment of Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB). 
Further, the Act also provides for crediting the cess first in the Consolidated Fund of 
India (CFI) and thereafter paying to the Board su ch sums as Parliament may 
approve to be kept in the Oil Industry Development Fund (OIDF). The Committee 
also note that Section 18(2) of the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 provides 
that "the Fund shall be applied - (a) for meeting the salaries, allowan ces, honoraria 
and other remuneration of the officers and other employees of the Board and of the 
advisers, consultants or other agencies whose services are availed of by the Board; 
(b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board; (c) for re ndering 
assistance under section 6; (d) for repayment of any loans taken by the Board or for 
meeting other liabilities under this Act." Through Audit scrutiny for the period FY 10 
to FY 20, the Committee note that since 1974, the total cess on crude oil co llected 
was ₹ 1,28,461 crore, however only ₹ 902.40 crore had been transferred to OIDB 
and since 1991 - 92, no funds out of the cess collected by the Government were 
transferred to OIDB. According to the Ministry, implementation/operation of schemes 
is not affected by delay in finalization of accounting procedure of any fund, only 
transactions are not routed through respective Reserve Funds. Further, the 
Government has been financing various activities from the budget that qualify as 
being aimed development of oil industry within the purview of the OID Act, 1974 and 
in view of the emergent  situation of the energy security, expenditure on energy 
security is likely to increase in the near future. Also, these activities are financed 
from the resources of the Government of which the Cess under the Act is a part. The 
Committee also, while noting the Ministry's response that the reasons for non - 
constitution of a reserve fund in public account in favour of Oil Industry Development 
Board from inception in 1974 could  not, readily, be ascertained, wonder how 
payments were made for meeting the liabilities as specified in Section 18(2) (d) of 
the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, when the fund was not created. The 
Committee opine that the Ministry's response regardin g non creation of OIDF not 
only questions the rationale of collection of the cess but also the actual utilization of 
the same for the intended purposes. The Committee feel that absence of binding 
provisions regarding specific timeline for creation of reserve funds also contributed to 
the non creation of OIDF. The Committee, therefore, while expressing concern over 
the Ministry's lackadaisical reply on non -creation of OIDF in terms of the provisions 
of OIDB Act 1974, desire that besides strengthening complia nce mechanism in the 
Ministry, the reasons for non -constitution of a reserve fund in public account in 

 
 
 
 
favour of Oil Industry Development Board from inception in 1974 may be ascertained 
urgently and the Committee may be apprised thereof. The Committee, als o, 
recommend that to obviate recurrence of such lapses in future, the Ministry revisit 
the provisions of the OIDB act and take necessary action for ensuring adherence to 
the Act both in letter and spirit. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 2 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
2. Section 16 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides that „ proceeds 
of duties of excise le vied under Section 15 shall first be credited to the 
Consolidated fund of India and the Central Government may, if Parliament by 
appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides, pay to the board from 
time to time, from out of such proceeds, after ded ucting the expenses of 
collection, such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized exclusively 
for the purpose of the Act’. 
 
3. Section 17 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides that the Central 
Government may also, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants or loans such sums of money 
as the Central Government may consider necessary. 
 
4. Section 18 of the Oil Industry Development Act 1974 provides for source of 
the Oil Industry Development Fund which includes sums of money paid under 
Section 16 or Section 17, grants, borrowings and any sum realized by the 
Board in carrying out its functions or in administration of the Act. 
5. Keeping in view the legislative provisions, it may be observed that the 
payment to be made to the Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) is 
discretionary at the end of the Government 
6. OIDB generates it s own resources by way of interest income on loans given 
to various oil sector companies and short -term investment of surplus funds in 
Fixed Deposit receipts. 
 
7. A considered decision was taken by Ministry of Finance not to earmark the 
cess collected under t he Oil Industry Development Act 1974 towards OIDB. 
Hon‟ble Finance Minister vide his DO No. 22(01)/PF.II/2008 dated 15.01.2015 

 
 
 
 
conveyed the extant decision to the Hon‟ble Minister of State, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas that the Government has been  financing various 
activities from the budget that qualifies as development of oil industry within 
the purview of the act and in view of the emergent situation of the energy 
security, such expenditure is likely to increase in the near future. These 
activities are financed from the resources of the Union Government of which 
the Cess under the Act, is a part. Since Government cannot withdraw itself 
from these activities the Cess receipts already stand committed. 
 
8. In view of the huge expenditure being incurred  by the Government in oil 
sector, additional fund transfers to the Oil Industry Development Board (OIDB) 
was considered not necessary. 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM No. 
7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 The references mentioned by the Department in it‟s reply has already been 
examined by PAC while adopting the PAC Report. No dedicated Reserve Fund i.e. 
OIDF has been created so far in the Public Account.  
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   
 Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that cesses in the nature of additional excise duties 
on petrol and diesel collected under the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 are to be 
credited to the Central Road Fund (CRF) to the extent provided by Parliament  
through appropriation by law. Further, the Committee note that the Finance Act 2018 
re-designated the Fund as the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) with 
effect from 01 April 2018, enlarging its scope of deployment and increasing the 
quantum of c ess. Audit scrutiny revealed that Statement 13 continued to depict the 
Fund as CRF instead of CRIF. As per the Ministry of Finance Background Note, the 
Central Road Fund was still functional in the Ministry and the proposal for change of 
name from the Cent ral Road Fund (CRF) to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
(CRIF) is under process with the concerned authorities. In this regard, the Ministry 
further stated that efforts are being taken to resolve the issue in consultation with 
office of the CAG and tha t two meetings were held (on 27.4.2022 and 14.7.2022) 
with officers of CAG to impress upon the need to have a procedure suitable to 
address the pending issues. The Ministry also stated that the Office of the CAG and 
CGA both were requested to re - consider this issue. The Committee are concerned 
to note that the issues related to nomenclature of funds not only remained unnoticed 
until pointed out by the Audit but have not been resolved also as yet. The Committee 
desire that before making changes to the provi sions underlying a cess fund all the 
agencies concerned be taken on board. Highlighting the need for enhanced 
cooperation between various agencies, the Committee desire that issues may be 
resolved at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of  the final 
outcome of the initiatives taken for changing the name from the Central Road Fund 
(CRF) to Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) and bolstering the monitoring 
mechanism in the Ministry. 
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 10 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 

 
 
 
 
2. The renaming of “Central Road Fund” as “Central Road and Infrastructure 
Fund” has been made effective from accounts of FY 2021-22. 
3. The accounting procedure for operationalizing CRIF was held up for want of 
concurrence from the office of the C&AG for transfers from Major Head „3601 -
Grants-in-aid to State Governments', „3602 -Grants-in-aid to UT Gov ernments 
with legislature' and Capital Expenditure Major Heads. While the issue 
regarding transfers from MH 3601/3602 has been resolved, the transfers from 
capital expenditure Major Heads are under active consideration in the office of 
the C&AG. The revise d accounting procedure will be made be effective after 
resolution of the aforementioned issue. 
4. With regard to the Ministry -wise year-wise details of funds transferred to CRF 
and CRIF by various Ministries, the same are enclosed as Annexure. 
 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 As recommended by the PAC a detailed statement regarding transfers made 
to and from CRIF by various Ministries be shared with PAC secretariat with a copy to 
Audit. 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   
 Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I 
  
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee observe from audit scrutiny that against total collection of 
cess of ₹1,22,440 crore under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved ₹1,22,369 crore 
for appropriation, however actual transfer to the Road and Infrastructure Cess Fund 
was ₹90,252 crore  only. The Committee have been informed that part of the short 
transfer was due to erroneous transfers of ₹17,250 crore and ₹4,380 crore to the 
Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to 'Other Funds' by the Ministry 
of Power, respectively and these funds were, however, fully utilised for the purposes 
for which the CRIF had been created. On a request for providing year -wise details of 
funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various Ministries, the Committee note with 
dismay that the Ministry furnis hed an account of receipts and disbursements but the 
Ministry-wise data remained unavailable. The Committee insist that to ensure 

 
 
 
 
accountability and transparency, a thorough analysis of the transfers made to and 
from CRIF is necessary. Moreover, since the data available shows only the receipts 
and disbursements, erroneous transfers, if any, cannot be determined. The 
Committee, therefore desire that a detailed statement regarding transfers made to 
and from CRIF by various Ministries may be prepared and sent to Audit, under 
intimation to this Secretariat, for in-depth scrutiny. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 11 of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have 
been noted. 
2. The renaming of “Central Road Fund” as “Central Road and Infrastructure 
Fund” has been made effective from accounts of FY 2021-22. 
3. The accounting procedure for operationalizing CRIF was held up for want of 
concurrence from the office of the C&AG for transfers from Major Head „3601-
Grants-in-aid to State Governments', „3602 -Grants-in-aid to UT Governments 
with legislature' and Capital Expenditure Major Heads. While the issue 
regarding transfers from MH 3601/3602 has been resolved, the transf ers from 
capital expenditure Major Heads are under active consideration in the office of 
the C&AG. The revised accounting procedure will be made be effective after 
resolution of the aforementioned issue. 
4. With regard to the Ministry -wise year-wise details of funds transferred to CRF 
and CRIF by various Ministries, the same are enclosed as Annexure. 
 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM 
No. 7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 As recommended by the PAC a detailed statement regarding transfers made 
to and from CRIF by various Ministries be shared with PAC secretariat with a copy to 
Audit. 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   
 Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I 

 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 The Committee observe from audit scrutiny that against total collection of 
cess of ₹1,22,440 crore under the CRIF Act, Parliament approved ₹1,22,369 crore 
for appropriation, however actual  transfer to the Road and Infrastructure Cess Fund 
was ₹90,252 crore only. The Committee have been informed that part of the short 
transfer was due to erroneous transfers of ₹17,250 crore and ₹4,380 crore to the 
Railway Safety Fund by the Ministry of Railways and to 'Other Funds' by the Ministry 
of Power, respectively and these funds were, however, fully utilised for the purposes 
for which the CRIF had been created. On a request for providing year -wise details of 
funds transferred to CRF and CRIF by various  Ministries, the Committee note with 
dismay that the Ministry furnished an account of receipts and disbursements but the 
Ministry-wise data remained unavailable. The Committee insist that to ensure 
accountability and transparency, a thorough analysis of th e transfers made to and 
from CRIF is necessary. Moreover, since the data available shows only the receipts 
and disbursements, erroneous transfers, if any, cannot be determined. The 
Committee, therefore desire that a detailed statement regarding transfers m ade to 
and from CRIF by various Ministries may be prepared and sent to Audit, under 
intimation to this Secretariat, for in-depth scrutiny. 
 
[Conclusion of 69th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
have been noted. 
 
2. Article 149 of the Constitution on „Duties and Powers of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General‟ provides that the Comptroller and Auditor -General shall 
perform such duties and ex ercise such powers in relation to the accounts of 
the Union and of the States and of any other authority or body as may be 
prescribed by of under any law made by Parliament…. . Further, Article 151 of 
the Constitution provides that „…the reports of the Com ptroller and Auditor 
General of India relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the 
President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament‟. 
3. Rule 90 of the General Financial Rules 2017 read with Provisions of Section 
11 & 13 of the C&AG‟s (DPC) Act, 1971 provides for audit and certification of 
Annual Accounts by the Comptroller & Auditor General of India and 
submission of the same to the President which includes audit of all 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of Ind ia, ascertaining whether the 

 
 
 
 
moneys shown in the accounts as having been disbursed were legally 
available for and applicable to the service or purpose to which they have been 
applied or charged and whether the expenditure conforms to the authority 
which governs it. 
4. It is accordingly submitted that the extant poers of the Comptroller & Auditor 
General of India include in its ambit the audit of utilization of the proceeds 
from the collection of various cesses. Besides, sufficient internal controls/ 
mechanisms exist in the Government financial system to ensure 
transparency. 
(Ministry of Finance/ Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division); OM No. 
7(4)-B(AC)/2023; Dated 6.02.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 As per the recommendations of the honourable PAC, detailed Audit of 
utilization of the proceeds from collection of various Cesses would be considered in 
ensuing years. 
Audit Letter No AMG-II/DP/VettingofATRs/2023-24/352 dated 20.02.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                       ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY 
 27 April, 2024             Chairperson, 
 7 Vaishakha, 1946 (Saka)                                           Public Accounts Committee
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-NINTH REPORT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  11 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee        Total : 8  
which have been accepted by the Government:           Percentage: 73 
 Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  - Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 1 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 9 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos. - 2 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 2 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 18 
  
 Para No.   - 10 and 11  
 
 