123

IRREGULARITIES IN AWARDING OF MAJOR
WORKS OF SEEPZ, SEZ AUTHORITY, MUMBAI

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 7214 Report (17" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & _ INDUSTRIES
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2353

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IRREGULARITIES IN AWARDING OF MAJOR WORKS

OF SEEPZ, SEZ AUTHORITY, MUMBAI

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRIES
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08.02.2024
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08.02.2024.
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION ........................... ७०५७ ०००० ००००० "०००००
CHAPTER! Report
CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have been

CHAPTER Ill

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

accepted by the Government .........................-

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Feiteration o.oo... cece cee >> ०5955 ५55५

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim

=) ©) (<n

APPENDICES

Minutes of the 18" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) held on 67" February, 2024.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Seventy-
second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

*Will be appended at the time of printing of the report

PAGE


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

11. Shri Brijendra Singh

12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K Laxman
18. Shri Derek O'Brien’
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

PNOAARWD

©

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
3. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Under Secretary

1 Elected w.e-f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twenty third Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Seventy-second Report on ‘Irregularities in awarding of major works of SEEPZ SEZ
Authority Mumbai’ relating to Ministry of Commerce and Industries, Department of
Commerce.

2. The Seventy-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
10.08.2023. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the One Hundred and Twenty third Report at their sitting held on 6th February
2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4, The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5 An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-Il

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__06 February, 2024 Chairperson,

17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Seventy-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Irregularities in awarding of
major works of SEEPZ SEZ Authority Mumbai’ relating to Ministry of Commerce &
Industries, Department of Commerce.
2. The Seventy-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the
Parliament on 10.08.2023. It contained one Observation/Recommendation. Action
Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Commerce & Industries,
Department of Commerce in respect of the Observation/Recommendation and are

broadly categorised as follows:-

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government

Para Nos. 1.
Total: 01

Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from.the Government
NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

Para Nos. NIL
Total:Nil

Chapter IV
(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies

NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter V
3. On detailed examination of the subject, the Committee had observed from Financial

Accounts of Santacruz Electronics Export Processing Zone (SEEPZ) Authority that
during the year 2015-16°and 2016-17 substantial amount was booked under ‘Advances
on Capital Account’ (% 637.08 lakh in 2015-16 and % 3304.39 lakh in 2016-17) and
under Capital works in progress’ (% 3087.41 lakh in 2015-16 and & 5197.56 lakh in


2016- 17). Hence, during the regular compliance audit (January/February 2018) of the
SEEPZ SEZ Authority (herein after referred as “the Authority”) special focus was given
to the transactions reported under these heads. During scrutiny, Audit had noticed
following major issues:-

(i) Awarding of works to ineligible agency;
(ii) Issue of work order without approval of Authority;
(iii) Weak mechanisms for quality control;

(iv) Letter of Permission (LOP)/Letter of Agreement (LOA) issued to SEZ units
without scrutinizing mandatory norms and other miscellaneous irregularities.

4. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Seventy-second
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on their
Observation/Recommendation made in the original Report.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Commerce & Industries, Department
of Commerce to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observation/
Recommendation contained in Chapter | within six months of the presentation of

the Report to the House.

Recommendation No. 1
6. The Committee note that Santacruz Electronics Export Processing Zone
(SEEPZ) Authority, in violation of Rule 7 of SEZ Rules and sub rule 2 and 3 of Rule 133
of GFR, 2017, had awarded in February 2017 the works of structural repair and allied
civil works and water proof treatment amounting to ₹ 74.85 crore to National Co-
operative Construction and Development Federation (NFCD) of India Ltd, an agency -
registered under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act 2002, Department of Agriculture
and Co-operation, Ministry of Agriculture and made advance payment of हैं 56.14 crore
to the agency upto December 2017. Audit added that NFCD being an agency registered
under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act was not eligible to be on the list of agencies
notified by MoUD for carrying out the maintenance works of a government autonomous
body. Moreover, no competitive process was followed while selecting the agency.
Further, the Authority had approved an expenditure of 40.48 crore including a five per
cent contingency amount for. structural repair and allied civil works of Standard
Designed Factories (SDF) buildings and Gems and Jewellery buildings. However,
NFCD was issued work order in February 2017 for = 44.58 crore. Thus, work order was
2


issued in excess by an amount of % 4 crore without approval of the Authority. An
additional amount of = 7.77 crore was also sanctioned for structural repairs without
approval of the Authority. It has also been pointed out that the Institute of Technology
(IIT), Mumbai which conducted a third party structural audit had, in its report, attributed
the escalation in cost to the fact that the structural and non-structural repair works in the
buildings had been carried out at the places which appeared to be good at the time of
initial audit and inspection.

The Committee observe that Disaster Management Advisor (DMA) of the Authority had
inspected (November 2017) all the structural and waterproofing works of SDF and
Gems and Jewellery buildings completed by NFCD’s contractors. They submitted the
inspection report highlighting major structural discrepancies in all the buildings which
included defective columns and beams as also incomplete work. Though the Authority
had taken up the matter with NFCD several times for rectifying the deficiencies, no
action was taken by NFCD. Since no MoU was signed between the Authority and NFCD
and no Bank Guarantee (BG)/Performance Guarantee (PG) was taken, the Authority
could not enforce remedial action against NFCD.

The Committee further observe that the Authority had invited (May 2017) applications
for allotment of units in building SDF VIII (New Tower) even before occupation
certificate was issued by the MIDC. Approvals were accorded to 18 SEZ Units (12 fresh
LOPs, six existing units were allowed broad banding/ additional space) in July 2017 by
Unit Approval Committee (UAC) although the requisite clearances like Occupation
Certificate (OC), water and power connection, pollution control clearance, fire clearance
and RCMC certificates had not been obtained. Allotment of units in the SDF VIII prior to
getting the OC was irregular. Further, no business operation could be commenced by
any SEZ Unit as there was no water and power connection and allotments were put
under review because of non-submission of requisite approval certificates by the units.
Audit noticed that the subsequent UAC held in August 2017, decided to review all
allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-fulfilment of terms and
conditions laid down in the Provisional letter of SEEPZ authority e.g acceptance of
conditions by the allottee, making of payment within stipulated time and also cases of
application for additional space because of capacity enhancement on the grounds that
“there appears to be no-correlation between projected export and space allotted to the
units with respect to their past performance, existing installed capacity and space
utilized by them”. .

The Committee note from the Ministry's reply that the matter of entrusting the work to
NFCD was referred to the Ministry's Vigilance section after various complaints on
irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai were received from
different quarters including the PMO and DoPT. Further, a team of officers from the
Department of Commerce had also pointed out the irregularities in their report submitted
on 5.1.2018. During the examination by vigilance Division, it was found that prima facie
three officers two of whom being former Development Commissioners and one a
former Joint Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ Mumbai were involved in the
irregularities. The Vigilance Division, Department of Commerce had proposed putting

3


these officers under suspension and referring the matter to CBI for detailed
investigation. However, as per rules, it was decided by the Disciplinary Authority to seek
the preliminary explanation of former Development Commissioners of SEEPZ SEZ,
Mumbai. It was further submitted by the representative of Ministry of Commerce during
the oral evidence that one charge sheet was issued to a Development Commissioner
initially and that the matter was also referred to CVC and on the basis of the
recommendation of the CVC, charge sheet had been issued to the other former
Development Commissioner as well, and role of other officers was also being inquired
into.

The Committee took serious note of the fact that appointment of NFCD was made in
outright violation of the GFRs and that there were blatant irregularities in the functioning
of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai viz. awarding of work of structural repair and allied
civil works and water proof treatment work to an agency not on the list of agencies
notified by MoUD on nomination basis without following due procedure of competitive
bidding; making an advance payment of = 56.14 crore (75%) for a work whose total cost
was %74.85 crores; sanctioning of additional amount of % 7.77 crore for structural repairs
without approval of the Authority; not signing/ finalizing an MoU with the NFCD; not
insisting on submission of Bank Guarantee/ Performance Guarantee by NFCD; cost
escalation due to structural and non-structural repair works at places which appeared
good at the time of initial audit; inadequate monitoring that led to major structural
discrepancies in all the buildings including defective columns and beams and
incomplete work. The Committee on the basis of the oral evidence tendered by the
official representatives, expressed the view that the role of the officials of NFCD and
other stakeholders in misappropriation of public property need to be enquired into, and
therefore, felt that an investigation of the matter by the Central Investigative Agency was
required.

Subsequently, the Ministry informed the Committee that matter relating to irregularities
observed in the C&AG Paras 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit Report No. 17 of 2019 has been
referred to CBI for detailed investigation and CBI investigation is on-going. While
acknowledging that in pursuance of the view expressed by the Committee, the matter is
since under probe by the CBI, the Committee would expect the Ministry and SEEPZ-
SEZ Authority, Mumbai to ensure all possible support to CBI in its inquiry by providing
all relevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority,
Mumbai as required by them so that the culprits are booked and prosecuted as per
prevalent law. ;

In view of the flagrant lapses observed in the award of major works of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority due to issue of work order without approval of Authority, weak quality control
mechanism and issue of LOP/LOA to SEZ units without scrutinizing mandatory norms
and scant regard to GFR and CVC Guidelines were accorded, the Committee desire
that the Ministry devise a robust administrative monitoring mechanism to ensure
scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the
Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual to the extent applicable
by autonomous bodies like SEEPZ SEZ. Further, the Committee desire that necessary

4


action should be taken for strengthening the internal audit control and quality control
mechanism to obviate recurrence of such lapses in other SEZs in future.

7. The Ministry of Commerce & Industries, Department of Commerce furnished the
following action taken replies to the recommendation of the Committee:-

“The matter relating to irregularities observed in C&AG Para 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on
Audit Report No. 17 of 2019 has been referred to CBI for detailed investigation
and CBI investigation is on-going. The Committee is apprised that the
Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai has been requested vide this
Department's letter dated 30th August, 2023 (Annexure-l) to ensure all possible
support to CBI in its inquiry by providing all relevant records of alleged
irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ SEZ Authority, Mumbai as required by
them so that culprits are booked and prosecuted as per prevalent law.

Further, based on the observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee, all Zonal Development Commissioners of Special Economic Zones
have been requested vide letter dated 30th August, 2023 to take appropriate
action immediately in compliance of recommendations of the Committee to
ensure scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the-GFR
2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual and
for strengthening the internal audit control and quality control mechanism.

8. Audit gave the following comments:-

The committee desired that the Ministry may devise a robust administrative
monitoring mechanism to ensure scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and
rules specified in the GFR 2017, the Manual of procurement of works and the
CPWD works Manual to the extent applicable by Autonomous Bodies like SEEPZ
SEZ. Further, the committee desired that necessary action should be taken for
strengthening the internal audit control and quality control mechanism to obviate
recurrence of such lapses in other SEZs in future.

Whether ZDCs have responded to Ministry's letter dated 30/08/23 and taken any
action thereon. Whether Ministry has taken any action for strengthening the
internal audit control and quality control mechanism to obviate recurrence of such
lapses in other SEZs in future

9. The Ministry gave the following response to audit remarks:-
“All Zonal Development Commissioners of Special Economic Zones have
responded to Ministry's letter dated 30.08.2023 ensuring that guidelines and
rules specified in the GFR 2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works and the
CPWD Works Manual are being followed for procurement of any goods/services.
They have also taken action to strengthening the internal audit control and quality
control mechanism.”


10. In view of the apparent lapses observed in the award of major works of
SEEPZ-SEZ Authority due to issue of work order without approval of Authority,
weak quality control mechanism and issue of LOP/LOA to SEZ units without
scrutinizing mandatory norms and scant regard to GFR and CVC Guidelines, the
Committee had recommended that the Ministry devise a robust administrative
monitoring mechanism to ensure scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and
rules specified in the GFR 2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works and the
CPWD Works Manual to the extent applicable by autonomous bodies like SEEPZ
SEZ. Further, the Committee had desired that necessary action may be taken for
strengthening the internal audit control and quality control mechanism to obviate
recurrence of such lapses in other SEZs in future. The Committee note from the
reply of the Ministry that the Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai
has been requested to ensure all possible support to CBI in its inquiry by
providing all relevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ
SEZ Authority, Mumbai as required by them so that culprits are booked and
prosecuted as per prevalent law. The Committee further note that all Zonal
Development Commissioners of Special Economic Zones have been requested to
take appropriate action immediately in compliance of recommendations of the
Committee to ensure scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and rules specified
in the GFR 2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works
Manual and for strengthening the internal audit control and quality control
mechanism. The Committee are of the considered opinion that merely issuing
instructions will not suffice and the Ministry should instead hand hold the SEZs
in streamlining the systems to ensure scrupulous compliance of the quidelines
and__rules. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier
recommendation that_a robust administrative monitoring mechanism may be
devised, desire to be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard and also
to strengthen the internal audit control and quality control mechanism.



CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that Santacruz Electronics Export Processing Zone (SEEPZ)
Authority, in violation of Rule 7 of SEZ Rules and sub rule 2 and 3 of Rule 133 of GFR,
2017, had awarded in February 2017 the works of structural repair and allied civil works
and water proof treatment amounting to हैं 74.85 crore to National Co-operative
Construction and Development Federation (NFCD) of India Ltd, an agency registered
under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act 2002, Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Ministry of Agriculture and made advance payment of = 56.14 crore to the
agency upto December 2017. Audit added that NFCD being an agency registered
under Multi State Co-operatives Society Act was not eligible to be on the list of agencies
notified by MoUD for carrying out the maintenance works of a government autonomous
body. Moreover, no competitive process was followed while selecting the agency.
Further, the Authority had approved an expenditure of * 40.48 crore including a five per
cent contingency amount for structural repair and allied civil works of Standard
Designed Factories (SDF) buildings and Gems and Jewellery buildings. However,
NFCD was issued work order in February 2017 for ‘ 44.58 crore. Thus, work order was
issued in excess by an amount of * 4 crore without approval of the Authority. An
additional amount of * 7.77 crore was also sanctioned for structural repairs without
approval of the Authority. It has also been pointed out that the Institute of Technology
(IIT), Mumbai which conducted a third party structural audit had, in its report, attributed
the escalation in cost to the fact that the structural and non-structural repair works in the
buildings had been carried out at the places which appeared to be good at the time of
initial audit and inspection.
The Committee observe that Disaster Management Advisor (DMA) of the Authority had
inspected (November 2017) all the structural and waterproofing works of SDF and
Gems and Jewellery buildings completed by NFCD's contractors. They submitted the
inspection report highlighting major structural discrepancies in all the buildings which
included defective columns and beams as also incomplete work. Though the Authority
had taken up the matter with NFCD several times for rectifying the deficiencies, no
action was taken by NFCD. Since no MoU was signed between the Authority and NFCD
and no Bank Guarantee (BG)/Performance Guarantee (PG) was taken, the Authority
could not enforce remedial action against NFCD.
The Committee further observe that the Authority had invited (May 2017) applications
for allotment of units in building SDF VII! (New Tower) even before occupation
. certificate was issued by the MIDC. Approvals were accorded to 18 SEZ Units (12 fresh
LOPs, six existing units were allowed broad banding/ additional space) in July 2017 by
Unit Approval Committee (UAC) although the requisite clearances like Occupation

7


Certificate (OC), water and power connection, pollution control clearance, fire clearance
and RCMC certificates had not been obtained. Allotment of units in the SDF VIII prior to
getting the OC was irregular. Further, no business operation could be commenced by
any SEZ Unit as there was no water and power connection and allotments were put
under review because of non-submission of requisite approval certificates by the units.
Audit noticed that the subsequent UAC held in August 2017, decided to review all
allotments already made by earlier UAC on the grounds of non-fulfilment of terms and
conditions laid down in the Provisional letter of SEEPZ authority e.g acceptance of
conditions by the allottee, making of payment within stipulated time and also cases of
application for additional space because of capacity enhancement on the grounds that
“there appears to be no-correlation between projected export and space allotted to the
units with respect to their past performance, existing installed capacity and space
utilized by them”.

The Committee note from the Ministry's reply that the matter of entrusting the work to
NFCD was referred to the Ministry’s Vigilance section after various complaints on
irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai were received from
different quarters including the PMO and DoPT. Further, a team of officers from the.
Department of Commerce had also pointed out the irregularities in their report submitted
on 5.1.2018. During the examination by vigilance Division, it was found that prima facie
three officers two of whom being former Development Commissioners and one a
former Joint Development Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ Mumbai were involved in the
irregularities. The Vigilance Division, Department of Commerce had proposed putting
these officers under suspension and referring the matter to CBI for detailed
investigation. However, as per rules, it was decided by the Disciplinary Authority to seek
the preliminary explanation of former Development Commissioners of SEEPZ SEZ,
Mumbai. It was further submitted by the representative of Ministry of Commerce during
the oral evidence that one charge sheet was issued to a Development Commissioner
initially and that the matter was also referred to CVC and on the basis of the
recommendation of the CVC, charge sheet had been issued to the other former
Development Commissioner as well, and role of other officers was also being inquired
into.

The Committee took serious note of the fact that appointment of NFCD was made in
outright violation of the GFRs and that there were blatant irregularities in the functioning
of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority, Mumbai viz. awarding of work of structural repair and allied
civil works and water proof treatment work to an agency not on the list of agencies
notified by MoUD on nomination basis without following due procedure of competitive
bidding; making an advance payment of % 56.14 crore (75%) for a work whose total cost
was * 74.85 crores; sanctioning of additional amount of * 7.77 crore for structural repairs
without approval of the Authority; not signing/ finalizing an MoU with the NFCD; not
insisting on submission of Bank Guarantee/ Performance Guarantee by NFCD; cost
escalation due to structural and non-structural repair works at places which appeared
good at the time of initial audit; inadequate monitoring that led to major structural
discrepancies in all the buildings including defective columns and beams and

8


incomplete work. The Committee on the basis of the oral evidence tendered by the
Official representatives, expressed the view that the role of the officials of NFCD and
other stakeholders in misappropriation of public property need to be enquired into, and
therefore, felt that an investigation of the matter by the Central Investigative Agency was
required.

Subsequently, the Ministry informed the Committee that matter relating to irregularities
observed in the C&AG Paras 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit Report No. 17 of 2019 has been
referred to CBI for detailed investigation and CBI investigation is on-going. While
acknowledging that in pursuance of the view expressed by the Committee, the matter is
since under probe by the CBI, the Committee would expect the Ministry and SEEPZ-
SEZ Authority, Mumbai to ensure all possible’ support to CBI in its inquiry by providing
all relevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ-SEZ Authority,
Mumbai as required by them so that the culprits are booked and prosecuted as per
prevalent law.

In view of the flagrant lapses observed in the award of major works of SEEPZ-SEZ
Authority due to issue of work order without approval of Authority, weak quality control
mechanism and issue of LOP/LOA to SEZ units without scrutinizing mandatory norms
and scant regard to GFR and CVC Guidelines were accorded, the Committee desire
that the Ministry devise a robust administrative monitoring mechanism to ensure
scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the
Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual to the extent applicable
by autonomous bodies like SEEPZ SEZ. Further, the Committee desire that necessary
action should be taken for strengthening the internal audit control and quality control
mechanism to obviate recurrence of such lapses in other SEZs in future.

Action taken

The matter relating to irregularities observed in C&AG Para 6.2.1 to 6.2.4 on Audit
Report No. 17 of 2019 has been referred to CBI for detailed investigation and CBI
investigation is on-going. The Committee is apprised that the Development
Commissioner, SEEPZ SEZ, Mumbai has been requested vide this Department's letter
dated 30th August, 2023 (Annexure-l) to ensure all possible support to CBI in its inquiry
by providing all relevant records of alleged irregularities in the functioning of SEEPZ
SEZ Authority, Mumbai as required by them so that culprits are booked and prosecuted
as per prevalent law.

Further, based on the observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee, all Zonal Development Commissioners of Special Economic Zones have
been requested vide letter dated 30th August, 2023 to take appropriate action
immediately in compliance of recommendations of the Committee to ensure scrupulous
compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the GFR 2017, the Manual of
Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual and for strengthening the internal
audit control and quality control mechanism

Vetting comments by Audit
9


The Committee desired that the Ministry may devise a robust administrative monitoring
mechanism to ensure scrupulous compliance of the guidelines and rules specified in the
GFR 2017, the Manual of procurement of works and the CPWD works Manual to the
extent applicable by Autonomous Bodies like SEEPZ SEZ. Further, the committee
desired that necessary action should be taken for strengthening the internal audit
contro! and quality control mechanism to obviate recurrence of such lapses in other
SEZs in future.

Whether ZDCs have responded to Ministry's letter dated 30/08/23 and taken any action
thereon. Whether Ministry has taken any action for strengthening the internal audit
control and quality control mechanism to obviate recurrence of such lapses in other
SEZs in future

Ministry’s comments on Audit observations

All Zonal Development Commissioners of Special Economic Zones have responded to
Ministry's letter dated 30.08.2023 ensuring that guidelines and rules specified in the
GFR 2017, the Manual of Procurement of Works and the CPWD Works Manual are
being followed for procurement of any goods/services. They have also taken action to
strengthening the internal audit control and quality control mechanism.

10


CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE RERPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

il


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPOECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-

12


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
New Delhi; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,

17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

13


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 01

(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 01
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage:100%
Para Nos. - 1

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 00
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 00

the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. — NIL

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 00
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage:00
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. -NIL
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 00
which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 00

Para Nos. — NIL