21

IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY
AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2202

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2020-21)

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY AND

STANDARDS ACT, 2006

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

सत्यमेंब जयते
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 22.7.02.7207

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 92.02.2021

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)



४ ९२ 1 9 एफ की YN

फी की फ NS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

ने ७० 9 ++

(2020-21)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Ajay (Teni) Misra

hri Jagdambika Pal

hri Vishnu Dayal Ram
hri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

2 ८2? ०? ७? ७५०2

hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri
Shri
Shri

ayant Sinha

Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
hri Naresh Gujral

hri C. M. Ramesh

S
S
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Vacant

Vacant

SECRETARIAT

Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Smt. M.L.K. Raja - Director

Shri U.C, Bharadwaj - Additional Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary



Composition of Sub-Committee-II_ - Report
No. 37 of 2017 — Implementation of Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006

Chairperson : Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

Convenor > Shri TR. Baalu

Members : Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh
Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri C.M. Ramesh


CONTENTS

PAGE
1४०.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ॥ OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE (2020-21)
INTRODUCTION
PART ।
CHAPTER -।
INTRODUCTION

Introductory

Deficiencies in the formulation of standards

|

Failure to monitor and cancel licenses issued under ‘the
product approval declared unlawful by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India

Iv Licensing, Registration, Inspection and Sampling
Vv Food Testing Laboratories
vi Human Resources
PART - Il
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
APPENDICES

Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2019-
20) held on 01.10.2019

Minutes of the First sitting of the Sub-Committee II of Public
Accounts Committee (2019-20) held on 10.02.2020

Minutes of the First sitting of the Sub-Committee-ll of Public
Accounts Committee (2020-21) held on 27.08.2020

IV. | Minutes of the Second sitting of the Sub-Committee-Il of
Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) held on 11.09.2020
V. | Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee

(2020-21) held on 01.12.2020



°


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, present this 219 Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on "Implementation of

Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006" relating to the Ministry of Health and Family

Welfare,

2. The Sub-Comrittee-Il on ‘Implementation of Food Safel
2006’ was constituted by the Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) (17 Lok Sabha)
examine the subject in detail. The Sub-Committee-Il took up ॥
examination and report thereon.

3. The Sub-Committee-II took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Heal
and Family Welfare on the Implementation of Food Safety and S
examined the subject at their sittings held on 10.02.2020 and
Committee-II of PAC (2020-21) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on
11.09.2020. The Report was considered and adopted by the Pub
(2020-21) during their sitting held on 1.12.2020. The Mi
Commitiee/Commitiee form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference ani
of the Committee have been printed in bold at the end

Report.

5. The Committee

y and Standards Act,

ठ

he subject for detailed

andards Act, 2006 ani
27.08.2020. The Su

Tas

ic Accounts Committee

he Sittings of the Sub-

convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the

-Committee-I| (Implementation of Food Safety and

Standards Act, 2006) for taking oral evidence of the concerned Ministries and obtaining

information on the subjects,

6, The Committee would also
Ministry of Health and Family We

ike to express their thanks to the representatives of the
are and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India

(FSSAI) for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subjects.

7 he Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and

Auditor General of India

NEW DELHI;

___ February, 2021
Magha 1942 (Saka)

ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

Chairperson,

Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

PART- |
CHAPTER - |
I. INTRODUCTION
1. Food safety covers the entire food chain, and includes the stages of manufacturing,

preparation, handling, transportation and storage of food in ways that prevent contamination
and food borne diseases. Any relaxation of food safety standards and their enforcement
may lead to proliferation of illegal, dishonest manufacturers and suppliers, which is
detrimental to public health. Good understanding among governments, producers and
consumers may contribute towards ensuring food safety along with efficient and effective
enforcement.

2, ° To overcome the confusion among consumers, traders, investors and manufacturers
due to proliferating laws on the subject of food adulteration, Parliament enacted the Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 to consolidate and subsume the existing Acts and orders
and form a single point reference system in the country and to establish the Food Safety
and Standards Authority (Food Authority) for laying down science based standards and
regulating the manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import of food products to ensure
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. The Act does not apply to
any farmer or fisherman or farming operations or crops or livestock or aquaculture or
supplies used or produced in farming or products of crops produced by a farmer/fisherman
at initial production level.

3. The C&AG in their Report No. 37 of 2017 reported the results of the performance
audit on food safety with a view to assess the performance of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Food Authority (FSSA!) and the State Food Authorities in ten selected
States.

4, For brevity, the salient points emerging from the C&AG Report are reproduced

hereunder:-

a) Even after more than a decade of the enactment of the Act, the Ministry and FSSAI
are yet to frame regulations governing various procedures, guidelines and
mechanisms enunciated in different sections of the Act.

b) FSSAI failed to devise action plans to identify areas on which standards are to be
formulated/revised within specified time frames and the manner of selection of food
products for formulation of standards.

०) FSSAI continues to issue directions without following the procedure of previous
approval of the Central Government, previous publication and notifications (as



2

contained in Section 92 of the Act), the placing of such regulations and rules before

Parliament (as contained in Section 93 of the Act), despite the Supreme Court
declaring such procedure as mandatory.

d) Despite recommendations of the Central Advisory Committee (CAC) that at least 75

these activities.

percent of the food license fee collections should be used for information, Education
and Communication (IEC) activities, most States had not allocated any budgets for

e) Licenses were issued on the basis of incomplete documents in more than 50 percent

of cases test checked in Audit.
f) FSSAI has failed to ensure

g) 65 out of the 72 State food

authorities sent food samples
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation.
h) FSSAI has no data on publ

that the Customs authorities follow up the Non-

Conformance Reports issued by the FSSAI, and take appropriate action to ensure
that unsafe foods do not enter t

8 country,
aboratories to which FSSAI and state food safety
or testing do not possess National Accreditation

ic analysts declared eligible under the erstwhile

Prevention of Food Adulteration Act who continue to function under the FSS Act.
FSSAI also has no data on whether all the notified empanelled food laboratories

have qualified food analysts.

checked food laboratories did not have qualified food analysts.
i) There were significant delays
Further, a significant portion of the penalty imposed remained uncollected. हि
) Failure of the Ministry and the FSSAI to frame the recruitment regulations even after

a decade of the enactment of
various levels,

Audit test check found that 15 out of the 16 test

in finalization of cases by Adjudicating Officers.

he Act, resulted in acute shortages of regular staff at

5... In a power Point Presentation before the Committee during the course of oral

evidence, the Ministry of Health and
pointed out by Audit with respect to
representative of FSSAI updated the s'

Out of 32 areas, 28 regulations

1 regulation being framed (GM

1 regulation will be taken up aft

(Financial Regulations)

Family Welfare and FSSAI noted the deficiencies
undue delay in notification of final regulations. The
atus as under:-

notified.
Food)

er provision of corpus in the Act after its amendment

1 regulation not necessary as per Ministry of law advice (urgency)
1 regulation also not considered necessary/conducting survey of enforcement and
administration of the Act) and provision proposed to be deleted.


6.

7.

having been formulated out of 32 required regulations, the Ministry of Health & Family

3

In their background note, the Ministry has further elaborated as under:-

"FSSAI has covered all the areas in respect of framing of regulations and is in fu
compliance with directives in various Sections of the Act. In addition, as envisaged in
Section 92(2)(v) of the Act with respect to regulations on other matters, FSSAI has
also framed 5 regulations based on the need. Out of these, four regulations
(related to “Prohibition and restriction for sale”, “approval of non-specified foods’,
“food packaging" and “recovery and distribution of surplus food”) have bee
notified and remaining one regulation (related to “Safe food and healthy diets for
School Children”) is in the process of draft notification."

When asked about the delay in formulation of regulations and only 6 regulations

Welfare in their written reply furnished that after the establishment of FSSAI, the primary
responsibility was to make Rules and Regulations so as to implement the FSS Act. During
the integration of the various Acts/ Orders under the FSS Act, 2006, the rules and
regulations made under these Acts/ Orders and implemented since 50 years were the
primary source to frame the Rules and Regulations. Accordingly, the draft Food Safety and
Standards Rules and six principal Regulations were developed with the available human
resource and infrastructure within the FSSAI so as to initiate the implementation of FSS Act,

2006.
8,

-standards/formulation of new standards, the Food Authority generally followed a

The Ministry has further in their reply elaborated as under:-

"After the Notification and implementation of the FSS Rules and six principal
Regulations, the Food Safety standards/ regulations were reviewed taking into
account the latest developments in food science, food consumption pattern, new
products and additives, advancement in the processing technology and food
analytical methods, and identification of new risks. In the context of revision o

prioritization approach to address the issues of food safety first. Accordingly, FSSA\
revised/framed majority of the horizontal standards.

This was followed by revision of existing standards for various food products as wel
as new standards for certain other foods/food categories based on the requirement
of stakeholders and also with a view to bridge the gap between national and other
international standards for food products.

Earlier, the Food Authority had constituted 8 Scientific Panels in the year 2009.
Thereafter one additional panel regarding. fish and fishery products has been
constituted in the year 2013, With the augmentation of-several scientific bodies and
external expertise FSSAI has framed notified the regulations in other areas as
required under the FSS Act, 2006. Now all major regulations as in the Act have been
notified."



9. FSSAI fo
additives) and

4
CHAPTER - Il
DEFICIENCIES IN THE FORMULATION OF STANDARDS

rmulates standards for various food articles (including their constituents and
processes of manufacture, storage, transportation, sale etc., to ensure

availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. The C&AG in its Report

No. 37 of 2017

observed that though FSSAI has framed standards through regulations,

such standards were framed at different periods of time from 2011 onwards, and there is no
clarity on the reasons underlying the identification of food products that were standardised,
identified ahead of others, and some food products like organic foods remain to be
standardised. Though FSSAI has framed regulations on the working of Scientific Panels and

Scientific Comm
are determined
procedure (SOP

by the Scientifi

process/steps in

ittee, the areas on which the Panels/Committee deliberate and offer opinion
by the executive of FSSAI, and are not based on any defined operating

).

0, The Ministry informed (March 2017) that the identification of areas for examination

c Panels/Committee and for framing standards is based on scientific

evidence. Further, in response to the audit observation, the Ministry had delineated the

volved in framing regulations.

1. Audit observed that there is no clarity on the first step itself (involving identification of
food products on which standards are to be developed/ reviewed), since there is no
information on the process through which such identification takes place.

2, The Ministry in their final Action taken Notes on Audit Paras stated that Standard

Operating Procedure would be finalised after detailed deliberation in the Scientific
Community and the Food Authority. They also stated about constitution of eight (8)
Standards Review Groups (SRGs) by broad food category to get the industry inputs and
suggestions from industry to ensure that there are no gaps in food standards

13. FSSAI set up eight Standards Review Groups (SRGs) in December 2016 to review
existing standards applicable to different food categories and to propose broad new

standards; the report of t

he SRGs would be placed before the concerned scientific Panels

for review and necessary action. However, the Audit further noted that there is no such

provision in the
FBOs only. The

Act to entrust this work to other groups comprised of representatives of
Audit also noted that this gives additional credence to the audit observation

that identification of areas of examination was not based on scientific process, They also
stated that the opinions/recommendations of FBOs cannot be considered to be unbiased

and beneficial to

the interest of food safety affecting the common man.


5

14. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated that
"suggestions received from SRGs are deliberated upon by the Scientific Panels, which use
these suggestions as one of the several inputs in their work of standards setting and have
complete freedom to disregard any or all of the suggestions of the SRGs, if not found

appropriate.

15. Asked whether there would be any reliability of the inputs given on Food Standards
by Standards Review Groups (SRG) comprised of representatives of Food Business
operators (FBOs) only, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), in their written

reply stated as under:-

"Besides receiving requests from stakeholders for development of standard for new

food products, FSSAI has also constituted Standa

td Review Groups (SRGs) for

various food commodities, which identify the gaps towards framing new standards as
per the need of domestic and international market from industrial perspective. Their
recommendations are evaluated by Scientific Panel concerned which not only

prioritise the work but also suggest new areas based
enhance the reliability of input given by SRGs, they

on requirement/emergency. To
are also being reconstituted to

include Consumer Rights and Civil Society Organizations, However, it may be added

that the recommendations of these SRGs have to
Scientific Panel, Scientific Committee and_ finally
Moreover, the suggestions and objections of stakeho

pass a three tier system viz.
at the Food Authority level.
ders are also taken mandatorily

whenever any regulation on standards etc. is formulated. Hence, the process of

decision making on developing any standard is
unbiased and transparent."

16.  Elaborating further, the Ministry in their reply to addi
under:-

quite elaborate, democratic,

ional list of points submitted as

"These Standard Review Groups (SRGs) merely provide suggestions/advises from a

technological and industry point of view. The Scienti

ic Panel(s) and/or the Scientific

Committee is not bound to accept their suggestions. The suggestions of the SRGs
are deliberated in depth in the concerned Scientific Panel, mainly from the scientific

points of view; and, panels consider only those sugg

estions which are scientific and

evidence based. Despite the affirmation by the Scientific Panel, the suggestions

have to be accepted by the Scientific Committee be
by the Food Authority. Hence, there are adequate

ore recommending its approval
checks and balances and the

profiteering or business interest motives are thus ru
comprise FBOs."

led out, even though the SRGs


6

CHAPTER - Ill

FAILURE TO MONITOR AND CANCEL LICENSES ISSUED UNDER THE PRODUCT
APPROVAL DECLARED UNLAWFUL BY THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

17,
scientific advice to the Food Safety.
18,

observed that bypassing the requirement for
Committee/Scientific Panels, the Product Approval division act

PA&SC and issued NOCs. Moreover, FSSAI had neither fra

Procedures (SOP) to determine the authority competent to ap
delegate such powers to the Product A\
been issued only on the receipt of comp
observed, however, instances where
information received was incomplete. In
FSSAI had withdrawn the NOCs issued
complete information by the FBOs. Aud
call for the missing informa
information.

it also observed that

9.

जी
erstw

response to
hile product approval sys
the directions of the Hon'ble Bi
that these replies are
concern that the FSSAI
the product approval system
recalls, resulting in possibly
manufacture
Ministry that
defects in the functioning of
systemic functioning of the FSSAI itself.

20, The
course of ora
“a) A

unsafe — food

evidence before the Committee stated that:-

As per section 13 and 14 of the Food Safe
Committee/Scientific Panels have been entrusted with th

The C&AG in their Audit Report No. 37 of 2017 noted ¢
a Product Approval and Screening Committee (PA&SC) headed by the Director, Prod
Approval Division to screen the proposals based on preliminary risk assessment. Audi
examination

y Act

hat the

ed on

FSSAI

ion promptly, and to ensure prom

he Audit observations, the Ministry had replied that the issue 0
lem appeared to be redundant in view of the withdrawal upon
ombay High Court & Supreme Court. The C&AG has no
not acceptable, since they have not addressed the primary audi
had failed to ensure the cancellation of the licenses issued under
declared unlawful by the Supreme Court, and order prod
continuing
/distributed/sold in the country. Audit has observed the response of
he issue was now redundant cannot be used to brush away the serious
he product approval system, which reflects poorly on the

inistry of Health & Family Welfare in their Power Point Presentation during

9 responsibility of providi

med ani
prove food products, nor di
pproval division. Moreover,
ete information required for
FSSAI issued NOCs even when the prod
1 20 cases (9 per cent of tl
earlier for reasons Including non-furnishing of

ific
ing

, only the Scien

FSSAI has constitute

UC!

a

by the Scientific
he recommendation 0
y Standard Operating
id |
he NOCs should have
roduct approval. Audi
uci
he 212 NOCs issued),
the
॥ to
ing

had no mechanis
pt receipt of wan

ed

uct
imported/
he

to be

he

cases of NOC granted under Product Approval have been reviewed and out
of 212 cases in 204 cases NOC has been withdrawn & 8 cases were re-evalua

ied


21.

advisories issued
found them unlawful,

under the new Regulations on sp
approval,
(b) Enquires were conducted aga
been advised

was rejected and the res

7

ecified foods and food ingredients. 2 were granted
5 are under process.
inst defaulting officers. The parent department has

0 initiate action against one officer and for another officer, CVC advice

has been received and inquiry is in progress".

Asked to he action

before FSSAI

urmish
earlier

"The system of Product Approva
Supreme Court on the ground thal

FSSAI and not under regulations. Fur

Safety and Standards (Approva
Regulations, 2017 with effect from
and conditions and other criteria

non-standardized food articles bu
which are important aspects
In 212 cases of NOCs, Foo!
Food Safety and Standards Regu

Food Safety and Standards (Appr
Regulations, 2017. Out of these

withdrawn on 27" Septembe

under:

was issued.

n 51 cases, licenses exist and in

aken

products. The Regulations not only

or the Foo

heir NOCs as per Food Safety and Standards
Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017, Subsequently, the remaining 204 NOCs were
, 2018 and Central Licensing Authorities were advised
10 ensure compliance from these NOCs holders. The status of these 204 cases is as

License does not exist in 47 cases.
n 106 cases, licenses exist, however these do no

by FSSAI to withdrew licenses issued under
came into being and the Hon'ble Supreme Court

he Ministry in their written reply furnished as under.~

s/ NOC was suspended on the directions of the
it was carried out on the strength of advisories by
her, FSSAI has framed and notified Food
of Non-Specified Food and Food Ingredients)
September, 2017 to specify the procedures, terms
hat govern the approval of non-standardized food
streamline the entire process of approving the
eeps in mind food safety and public health
Regulator,

850

Business Operators were directed to confirm whether
heir products were in complete compliance with the requirements of the subsequent

ations or apply afresh for product approval under
‘oval of Non-Specified Food and Food Ingredients)
8 NOC holders requested for re-examination of
‘Approval of Non-Specified Food and

cover the product for which NOC

clude the NOC product(s). Inspection was carried

out in respect of these 51 NOC cases which related to 37 FBOs. The Central
Licensing Authorities of FSSAI inspected all 37 units. Out of these 37 cases, 27
FBOs applied for modification in their license, 3 FBOs license have since expired, 6

FBOs were found to be compliant

and license of 1 FBO was cancelled.


Out of the 8 NOCs
examination under Foo

and request of 1 was

and Central Licensing
hese FBOs."

8

retained for re-examination, 3 submitted Form 1 for re-
0 Safety and Standards (Approval of Non-Specified Food and

Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017 and out of the three, 2 were granted approval

rejected. The remaining 5 FBOs did not submit Form 1 to

examine their NOC applications and their NOC was withdrawn on 1st 00008, 2019

Authorities were advised to take necessary action against

22, In their final action taken notes on the Audit Paras, the Ministry of Health & Family

Welfare, has in response to

a query on the details of internal inquiry conducted for

irregularities in the product approval matters, furnished that the Preliminary Inquiry was
conducted against three officials who included the then Director (PA) who was on
deputation with FSSAI, an Assistant Director (PA) level officer who was an FSSAI employee

as well as one contractual
21.05.2014, wherein serious

employee. The Committee submitted its final report on
lapses were found against the then Director and Assistant

Director (PA) while processing Product approval applications. Nothing incriminating was

found against the contractual employee.

23... Asked abou
operators having erstwhile NO
notified by FSSAI, the Ministry

the monitoring mechanism put in place to ensure that all Food Business

Cs have aligned their products as per subsequent regulations
in their written reply submitted as under:-

"i. In order to address the situation arising after discontinuation of the product
approval system, FSSAI has amended the provision pertaining to proprietary foods

in relevant regulation to simplify approval for proprietary foods

ii. FSSAL has notified the Food Safety and Standards (Health Supplements,
Nutraceuticals, Food for Special Dietary Use, Food for Special Medical Purpose,
Functional Food and Novel Food) Regulations, 2016 and Food Safety and Standards
5 (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Thirteenth Amendment Regulations,
2016 w.r.t. standards of caffeinated beverages. With these developments, a larger

number of products, t
Food Authority, got cov

hat would have otherwise required specific approvals from
ere

ili, Further, with regard to several food products/ ingredients which are still not

covered in the any o
streamlined the 1008

the regulations made under FSS ‘Act, 2006, FSSAI has
ure for product approval and licensing. In this regard, FSSAI

has brought out the Food Safety and Standards (Approval of Non-Specified Food
and Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017 with effect from September, 2017 to govern
the approval of non-slandardized food products. These regulations specify the

procedures, terms and

conditions and other criteria that govern the approval of non-

standardized food pro

ucts. The Regulations not only streamline the entire process

of approving the non-siandardized food articles but also keep in mind food safety

and public health.


24,

25,

Approval
under:-

3)

9

iv. All Food Business Operators (FBOs) having erstwhile NOCs for Product Approval
are required to align their products as per subsequent standards/ regulations or
apply afresh for product approval under Food Safety and Standards (Approval of

Non-Specified Food and Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017. All such
also have to quote their previous application number.

ections have been carried out by
provisions of FSS Act 2006,

Regular surveillance, sampling and ins
Officials to check the compliance o

FBOs will

‘ood safety
Rules and

Regulations made thereunder, in case any violations are observed penal actions

have been initiated against the defaulting food business operators."

When asked as to what action has been taken by FSSAI
now issued based on the recommendations 0
reply submitted as under:-
"FSSAI has brought out the Food Safety and Standards
Food and Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017 with effec!
‘ood products.
other criteria t

govern the approval of non-standardized

the procedures, terms and conditions and
non-standardized food products. The Regulations not only streamline the entire
process of approving the non-standardize
safety and public health. Non- Specified F
to exam
after due diligence, recommends for approval of the product.
rova
Food Safety Commissioner of the State, co
Officer, concerned Divisions of FSSAI (RCD and Imports Division) for Information

by an Expert Committee constituted

from the Competent Authority, the ap

nd for issuance of License accordingly."

As regards the updated status of action

"West Bengal State Fisheries Development Corporation
nquiry Report was sent on 17.02.2015 wit
penalty proceedings, has not responded to the requests of FSSAI to apprise it of the
status of action taken despite reminders. However, it may be mentioned

m

Official has since retired.

and Assistant Director (PA), the Minis

scientific panels,

a

oods and Food

0 ensure that licenses are
he Ministry in their written

Approval of Non-Specified
from September, 2017 to
These regulations specify
at govern the approval

५2

but also keep in mind foo
ingredients are examine
he Expert Committe
After taking approva
0 the FBO is granted with a copy to the
ncerned Designated officer, Authorised

a

ood articles

roy

ine the same.

en against the then Director (Product

ry in their background note furnished a

0 whom Preliminary

recommendation for instituting major

hat the

As regards the Additional Director level officer, major penalty proceedings have been
instituted against him after obtaining first stage advice of CVC. Inquiry
Officer/Presenting Officer have been appointed and Inquiry is presently on. (sic)"


10

26. When asked whether the service conditions/rules provide for taking penal action
against a retired officer on whom charges or allegations of serious wrong doing are

framed/pending, the Ministry in their additional list of poin

s stated that as per Chapter Il,

Section 3 of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Salary, Allowances and other

Conditions of Service of
service of the eligible em
of pay, increment, joining

Officers and Employees) Regulal
loyees of the Authority in the ma
time, joining time pay, age of su

tions, 2013. "The conditions of
ters of pay, allowances, fixation
erannuation, modified assured

career progression scheme, medical facilities, leave, leave travel concession, conduct,
disciplinary matters and other conditions of service, shall be regulated in accordance with

such other rules and regulations as are, from time to ti

employees of the Central

Government belonging to Grou

me, applicable to officers and
p ‘A’, Group 'B' and Group 'C’

posts, as the case may be, in the corresponding pay scale." Thus, penal action can be

initiated against a retired
applicable from time to
(Pension) Rules, 1972, as
instituted while the Gover
during his re-employment,

ime. It may be mentioned that

FSSAI employee as per the Central Government Service rules

under Rule 9(2)(b)(ii) of CCS

four years before such ins

27,. Further asked abo!

5

itution.

ut the current s

amended from time to time, the departmental proceedings, if not
nment servant was in service, whether before his retirement, or
shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than

atus of the major penalty proceedings initiated

against the then Assistant Director level officer the Ministry in a written reply submitted that:-

the then Assistant Director, FSSAI (

process of preparing the report.”

Safety mechanism of imported Food in india

"The then Deputy Director is an employee of FSSAI and is currently posted at FSSAI
(HQ). The inquiry for Major Penalty against the then Deputy Director, FSSAI (HQ)
HQ) has been completed and Inquiry Officer is in |

28. — Accritical aspect of ensuring quality of food and food items in the country is to closely
monitor and examine import of food and food items/articles. Keeping this important aspect
of ensuring import of quality food and food articles, particularly in the context of the Covid-
19 pandemic that is a matter of grave concern, the Sub-Committee made a focused and
detailed inquiry with the Ministry as well as FSSAI by obtaining replies to a detailed
questionnaire as also taking evidence of the officials concerned.

Aspects relating to the examination are delineated in the subsequent paragraphs.

29. When asked whether any checking mechanism and balance system has been
installed to test the quality of such food items and if they meet the FSSAI Standards at



these import entry points, the

stated as under:

11

inistry of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply

The imported food products are examined for their safety and quality as per the risk

matrix decided by FSSA\
Physical condition for vi

elabel claims,
eingredients,

ebalance shelf life etc.
Quality & Safety throug

Lab testing is done for quality an

. Aconsignment is examined for:
isible insects, mould growth, spoilage & storage conditions,

h laboratory testing.

safety parameters as per Food Safety and

Standards Regulations. For the purpose of testing, FSSAI has notified 188 NABL
accredited laboratories and 18 referral laboratories across the country. To ensure
harmony in testing, CBIC, vide instruction dated 12th Feb., 2020, has directed

C

ad

30. Posed with the query on th
items, the Ministry in their written reply sta
‘ood consignments is verified for compliance with provisions of
Labelling) Regulations, 2011 and compliance with labeling
regulations in

stage, label of the imported
FSS (Food Packaging &
provisions notified in other

common practices in internationa
examination a

Officer at the time of import

visual inspection, then sample is d

reports non compliance wi
Report is issued.

stoms to utilize only FSSAI notifies

h res

31, During the sitting of the Sub Commit

9 basic.

trade. TI

rawn and

abs for testing of imported food products.

idea behind ‘label inspection’ of imported food
ed as under: “during scrutiny/visual inspection

his regard. This is in consonance with the
he ‘balance shelf life’ is verified by Authorised
nd clearance. If label is found compliant after
ested at FSSAI notified laboratories. If the lab

ect to label declarations, then the Non Conformance

ee on the issue of Safety Mechanism of Food

in India, it was asked whether the Countries, irrespective of their respective official
languages, that export food and food articles to India, comply with the regulations of
- language requirements for import of food in India, the Chief Executive Officer, FSSAI in his
oral evidence deposed as under:

“Then they will put a sticker to correct it. That is ensured. When we say
that we check the labelling, this is one of the things that we check.
Suppose we have to say that this is not suitable for children, then it should
bein English and Hindi or whatever language we specify.”


32,

33.

34,

35,

12

Asked whether any language training is imparted to Authorised Officers, the
Chairperson, FSSAI deposed as under:~

"The question o
mandatory for the |
or Indian language.
Korean or Japanes
Japan’s rule says
exporters will com
the packaging w
said which is non-

Elaborating her sta’

is, all the labelling,
Subsequently, the
“The imported foo!
and Labe
imported food, whic!

The particulars of
on the labe'

ling) Regula

ha

hs

herein contained s

language required under

, Asked to state the effort
increase automa’
stated as under:

ed veri

hal

fication

declaration
shall be in Englis

ement, the C
“Sir, we will give you a formal wri
is manda

product shal

ions, 20
ates tha

preven
this re

5

of food

a

1

language training
mporter to comply with. My labelling
He has to write
8 and all tha
hat exports
ly. Similarly,
hich is not complied with, they can pas
etachable. It

does not arise. Just as
India must have labels in
ly or if

from
im

can

r

ten reply on this point wi
ory in India, has to be in our own language.”

does not arise.

it. The question of th

orters have to comp!

not be detached.”

erson, FSSAI further

inistry in their written response submi
| comply to Regulation 2.2.1.2 of FSS (Packaging
1 with respect to labelling language requirement for

Our la

‘egula
89 cus

e tha

elling regulation is
ion requires English
‘oms officer knowing

if | export to Japan, and if

Japanese, then our
there is anything in
label as has been

submi
hin 24

ted as under:
hours. But the point

ted as under:

required under these Regulations to be specified
h or Hindi in Devnagri script: Provided that nothing

the use of any other language in addition to the

gulation."

being taken by FSSAI to reduce subj
items Imported, the ministry in th

"FSSAI has implemented Risk Management System (RMS). For

food
h Cus

profiling o
shared wi
based on
origin, etc.
developed

roducts

the risk profi
Risk based im

has

been done as high risk & low ris!
‘oms. The RMS analyzes the risk associated
ing of product, compliance history of
ort clearance system has been imp
countries like EU, USA, Russia etc. To increase efficiency at point of

ective checking and
eir written reply

his purpose, the risk

food products and
with a consignment
importer, country of
emented by several

entry, FSSAI has recognized the labs at Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh so that if
consignments from these countries are accompanied with analysis report from these
labs , these may not be subjected for repeat testing at importing end.”



13

36. When asked to furnish whether there is any timeline prescribed under the
Regulations for an Authorized Officer to pass an order regarding 'No Objection Certificate’
or 'Non Conformation Report’ in respect of the food items getting imported, the Ministry of

Health and Family Welfare in their written reply submitted as under:

37.
9000 cases were found wi

"Timelines are not prescribed in Food Safety and Standards (Import) Regulations,

2017. However, it may
automatically issued o

be noted that once testing is complete by lab, NOC/ NCR is
nline and transmitted to ICEGATE & importer in real time

without any manual intervention. Average time taken by FSSAI in scrutiny, visual

inspection, sampling & testing was 142 hrs. in FY 2019-20."

Asked to furnish comments on the Audit observations that in a test check more than

here AQ had not made and communicated any final safety

assessment, it was stated by the Ministry in a written reply that the FICS was integrated with

ICEGAT!

E only in 2015. Subsequently, there were some glitches in the integration leading to

multiple entries by importer, transmission of bill of entry with non-food end use, inactive

applica

ions, incomplete applications, improper port selection etc. Now necessary changes

have been made in FICS and ICEGATE to address such issues. Further, observations of
audit point to a need for provision of “out of charge” message transmission from Customs
ICEGATE to FSSAI's FICS, so that status of a food consignment may also be captured in
FICS. IT teams of FSSAI and CBIC are working on complete integration of both the systems.

38,

39,

Systems, the Ministry in their w
Window System team of CBIC

‘The Ministry in their writ
FICS has been integrated with ICEGATE and consignments are referred to FSSAI

en reply further stated

as per RMS and NOC/ NCR are transmitted to ICEGATE. Further, there is a need for

provision of “out of ch
FSSAIl's FICS, so that s
teams of FSSAI and CB

arge” message transmission from Customs ICEGATE to
atus of a food consignment may also be captured in FICS. IT
C are working on complete integration of both the systems."

Asked to state the expected time for arriving at a complete integration of both the

ritten reply stated that CBIC & FSSAI are working with Single

or out of charge message exchange in FICS expeditiously.

Since this is a system issue involving modification in ICEGATE, efforts will continue for early
completion.


40.

observations that test chec!
Interchange System revealed that the
against them.

under:

41,

The comments of the Ministry

14

of Health and Family Welfare was solicited on the Audit

k of FSSAI offices with online Indian Customs Electronic Data
‘ood consignments had been released despite NCR

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in this regard, in a written reply stated as

“Regarding audit observations, it wa
were either re-exported or detained.
has now issued ins

private labs. CBIC

used for testing of imported food
team of Customs for integrating [|

Asked to furnish the presen

released despite NCR against them,

42,

“The FICS was integrated wi

transmission of bill of entry wi
applications, improper port se

a

observed that 19 out of 24 such consignments
5 were released on the basis of testing by
ructions that only FSSAI notified labs shall be
products. FSSAI is also working with Single Window
he “Out of Charge” message exchange with FICS.”

status of all those food consignments which were
he Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

h ICEGATE only in 2015. Subsequently, there were
some glitches in the integration leading to multiple entri
h non food end use, inactive applications, incomplete
lection etc. Now necessary changes have been made

ies by importer,

in FICS and ICEGATE to address such issues. Out of 24 consignments identified

by Audit, 19 were either re-exported or were still under detention a

On a query of FSSAI regar

complaints about the quality of im|

grievance redressal mechanism it was stated that Food Safety Connec

mobile

43,
where
FSSAI

app to receive grievances. —

Requested to furnish areas/issues in food import process with
overlap in regulations and standards and implementation has
he solutions to minimize these overlaps, the Ministry of

and

ing creating a mobile App system

orted or otherwise food and other ed

that time.”

to receive instant
ble items for
Android App is a

multiple agencies,
en identified by
Health and Family
m

oO

Welfare replied that FSSAT ensures quality & safety of imported food, Animal Quarantine

Certification Service

AQCS) and

Plant Protection, Quarantine and

Storage (PPQS)

prevents ingress of animal and plant disease respectively. The role of each organization is
distinctively defined as it requires specialized function to be performed. There is some
regulatory overlap with Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD) for import of

products 0
Further, G

animal origin. FSSAI and DAHD are working on same to address the issue.
import is also regulated by Genetically Engineered Appraisal Committee,


15

44. — Posed with a query of eliminating the possible instances of Authorised Officers not
referring the doubtful lot of imported food from safety perspective to FSSAI and directly
allowing clearance with possible connivance with the importers, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:-
“It may be noted that a consignment is referred automatically to FSSAI for
examination through RMS which is implemented at Customs ICEGATE without
any manual Intervention, Therefore, potential for clearance outside the system have
been removed, Further, FSSAI officials have been Interacting wlth customs officials
on regular basis and also participating in Custom Clearance Facilitation Committee
(CCFC) meetings in which all the issues related to import clearance of food
products are discussed.”

45. During the sitting of the Sub Committee, the Convener posed the query as to
whether the training of Authorised Officers would suffice, and whether the Authorised
Officers have an academic and educational background in science. To this, the Chief
Executive officer, FSSAI replied that it was not necessarily the case.

46. When asked whether the Customs department have any responsibility/accountability
to FSSAI towards clearance of imported food items, the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare in their written reply stated as under: ,
"The Customs officials while working as Authorized Officers for food import
clearance purpose are mandated to function as per the responsibilities and duties as
stipulated in Food Safety and Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017."

47, Asked to furnish the mechanism whereby FSSAI ensure administrative control of
Customs Officers to act as AOs, the Ministry of Health and family Welfare stated as_ under:

“Duties and responsibilities of Authorised Officers as stipulated in Food Safety and
Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017 are equally applicable to Custom Officials
working as AQ.”

48. The FSSAI in their deposition before the Sub Committee stated as under-
“Sir, in 22 ports, our officers are there. In 128 ports, Customs Officers are there.”
When asked as to whether there is a plan to make all points of entries being directly
controlled by FSSAI officials to safeguard imported food items in India, the Ministry in their
post evidence written reply stated as under:
“Manning all entry points will require additional resources. The number of point of
entries directly controlled by FSSAI is being increased in a gradual manner. This
year 28 additional ports will be covered leading to total 50 ports under direct control


16

of 79501 New import offices will cover major point of entries at locations like
Mundra/Kandla, Ahmedabad, Raxaul, Attari, Krishnapatnam, Vishakhapatnam,
Bengaluru & Hyderabad. With these new offices, FSSAI would directly control
approx, 80-85% of total food imports in the country.

49. Asked about the FSSAI Regulations not stipulating any timeline for an Authorised
Officer to pass an order regarding 'No Objection Certificate’ or 'Non-Confirmation Certificate!
in respect of Food items getting imported, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
their post evidence written reply stated as under:

“Time taken for clearance of imported Food Articles depends on several factors like

type of product imported, whether the importer has availed the facility of advance
filing at ICEGATE, timely submission of all information/ documents etc. by importer.
Also, the time taken for analysis differs from product to product based on. the
parameters to be analysed such as microbiological, chemical, physical etc.
However, once testing is complete, NOC/ NCR is issued automatically in real time
without any manual intervention.”

50. Asked to detail the issues stalling the process of integration of FICS with online
platform for Indian Food Laboratories Network, it was replied by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare that the FICS & INFOLNET portal were developed at different times for
different purposes and with different system architecture. While FICS is integrated with
ICEGATE, INFOLNET provides an integrated platform for FSSAI notified laboratories. The
process of integration of FICS with INFOLNET has been initiated. The baseline work for
data integration of FICS and INFOLNET has been done and integration is expected to be
completed within six months time.



52,
before

2017 to approximately 67.5 lakhs in September 2019."

53.

17

CHAPTER IV

LICENSING, REGISTRATION, INSPECTION AND SAMPLING

The C&AG observed that:-

FSSAI and state food safety authorities did not conduct survey for enforcement and
administration of the Act and of the FBOs under their jurisdiction, though required to
do so under the Act. ;

Licenses were issued on the basis of incomplete documents in more than 50 per
cent of cases test checked in Audit.

either FSSAI nor the state food authorities have documented policies and
procedures on risk based inspections, and the FSSAI does not have any database
on food business.

FSSAI has failed to ensure that the Customs authorities follow up the Non-
Conformance Reports issued by the FSSAI, and take appropriate action to ensure
hat unsafe foods do not enter the country.

The Ministry in their Power point presentation during the course of oral evidence
he Committee submitted that:-

"Licensing/Registration of all FBO's mandatory and States/UTs take up
survey/special drives for licensing/registration from time to time resulting in steep
increase in total licenses and registrations from approximately 40 lakhs in December

The Ministry during the oral evidence has further submitted that a complete

rationalisation has been done to eliminate repetitions and unnecessary document, reducing
requirement to upto 5 documents approved by Food Authority on 218 February, 2018. They
further submitted that training is being imparted to State Food Regulatory Staff. 1253

persons were trained in 18 States/UTs.

54,
regard

In this Context, the Ministry has in their written reply stated that all processes in
to licensing and registration are computerised throughout the country except

Nagaland. All applications and documents are required’ to be submitted online and
licenses/registrations are also issued online. Efforts are being made to bring Nagaland on
board for online licensing and registration. Inspections are being carried out in 5 States/UTs


and all Regional Offices of FSSAI with submission of reports online. Other S
been encouraged for online submission of inspection reports. FSSA! has

18

lates/UTs have
also made the

process of submission of test reports by laboratories online. FSSAI has developed an IT

So
Ma
of

ution platform for India Food Laboratory Network (INFOLNET). TI
nagement System (LMS) is a centralized system that connects and colla
aboratories. At present 340 labs have registered of which 160 have been approved and

his Laboratory
es the network

another 30 labs are under process. INFOLNET has been made mandatory for all

laboratories recognise
out and a number of a

55.
wri

Fur
ten rep

ly submitted

"FSSAI has
System) based
food
regulations.

the Food Sa
Regulations,
compliance.

Tal

her, in response

identifie
businesses about

fety and S

d by tl
pproved labs are already uploading test resul

04 query on improvement in online F
as under:

on various inputs received from the regula
functional issues related to the
0 account the feedbacks, FSSAI is in

king in

LRs, the

8 FSSAI u/s 43(1) of FSS Act, 2006. System has been rolled
$s on the

NFoLNeT.

inistry in their

aps in the online FLRS (Food Licensing and Registration
ory staff as well as the

implementation of the
8 process of amending

andards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses)
2011 so as to further simplify and rationalize it and ensure effective
This includes perpetual license and registration subject to submission of

Annual Returns and Declarations respectively, reduction in documents, realignment

of various KoBs, rational
provision for new emerg
methodology of license i
existing methodology of

56.

The Ministry in their written reply further submitted as under:-

ization of license fee, reduction of modification fee, special
ing models such as e-commerce, direct sellers etc. Further,
5 proposed to be shifted to product standard based against
food products (Additives wise) category."

"The Food Authority has reviewed the need and feasibility of conducting survey for
FBOs. Since all food businesses are required to be either registered
or licensed under the FSS Act, 2006, therefore FSSAI has advised States/UTs to

identification o

carry out speci

ial drives for registration & licensing of Food Business operators at

regular intervals so that any Food Business operators don not operate their business

without registra

57. 118 C&AG int
controlled by FSSAI b

t

ion/license."

heir Report has observed that the import of food products into India is
y Section 25 of the Act , which stipulates that no unsafe misbranded

or substandard product is to be imported into India. Audit noted that out of the total 635
FSSAI had its presence at only 21 points in six ports, and for 135

entry points in India,


points, FSSAI had appointed Customs
under Section 47(5) of the Act. The a
the regulations, which required AOs/
disciplines from a recognised univel
inadequate, since it was done for the

enacted; also, there is no FSSAI 9
representatives at the remaining point of entries, leaving the food products enterin
these entry points unregulated under th

the functioning of the Customs official
2017) the facts.

58.

response to additional Lis

"The food articles,

fficers of FSSAI

{e)

pe
clearance. If samp!
then consignment i
re

Food Safety and 5
FSSAI is also developing an E
Officers of Customs Departme
Imports to ensure t
different ports in the country.”

that:-
“In our 10

from 2013
increased

approxima
conformity
proportion

ely 25 per cent are n

when referred to Authorised Officers 0
or clearance are subjected to food import clearance process as
t FSS (Import) Regulations, 2017 which includes sampling and testing be
le is found conforming to the prescribed standards and norms,
is released and if fond non-conforming, then consignment is no
leased by Custom Authorities. Customs Officials are imparted trainings to enable
hem to effectively carry out necessary checks and processes as prescribed under
andards Act, 2006 and Rules & Regulations made ||

19

officials by designation as Authorised 0
FSOs to have a degree in any of the
rsity. Further, the appoin
irst time in March 2016, a decade after t
esence either directly, or through its

8 Act. Further, FSSAI had

pointment by designation is not in compl

ment was. bel

no mechanism

ficers (AO)
lance with
prescribed
ated and
he Act was
authorised
g through
[0 monitor

s appointed as AOs, The Ministry acce

In response to a query on guidelines/standards prescribed and to be fo
Custom officers in granting "import c
of points stat

learance to food items,"
ed as:-

he Ministry in

Customs or

-Training module for regular training of
nt. Also, FSSAI has published Manual

hat consistent approach is applied in food import cle

During the oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family We

8, we have given a statement showing the number of sample
consolidated statement but we can give the State-wise version also. This 8
-14 onwards to 2018-19. The total number of samples col
from 72,200 to over one lakh in 2018-19. Out of these samples,

on-conforming. However, | want to clari

ed (June

lowed
1a wri

by
ten

Authorised

ore

ereunder.
Authorised
for Food
arances a

are stated

s. This is a
‘atement is
lected has

y that non-

would be sometimes from the standards perspective and in a lesser
rom the safety perspective. So, these are two different aspects of how the

samples are being treated. If it is a question of non-compliance of a standard, it would

be inviting
more serio’
were conc

fine as laid down under the Act. If it is a safety issue, it becomes much
us. Out of the cases that came to a conclusion in 2017-18, 7,627 cases
uded in which penalties were imposed and a total amount of Rs. 26.35


60. In
number of
61,

highlighted. |
and Standar
The represen

62.

representa

20

crore was levied in the year 2017-18. So, there is a year-wise break-up given in the

statement.”

was pointed out t

ative of FSSAI sta

Elaborating further, to a q
ive of FSSAI stated a

“Actually e-commerce
manufacturing foods. In
heir p
layers both Swiggy and
asked

and al

of the
hat Amazon and Grofers

his regard, the Chairperson, PAC during the oral
samples found to be non-conforming has been growing alarmingly.

uery regarding regulation of

s under:-

During the course of oral evidence, the matter of low rate of conviction was ६
hat the number of cases registered under the Food Safety
s Act has increased whereas the conviction rate
ed that normally conviction takes two to three years.

evidence pointed out that th

000 safety in e-commerce,

ro)

SO

has substantially reduced.

he

players or platforms themselves are not producing
act, there are kitchens and res!

jatforms. So, we have come ou

Zomato. In

cannot sell

fact, a year ago,

hem to delist 10,000 restaurants across the count
icenced by FSSAI. They took some time, but they com
10,000 restaurants were delis
arty audit whether their systems are in place to ensure
ood are maintained by e-commerce players. We
ood, which is having a shelf life of less than
hree months. Otherwise, they often sell on the last date; and when you receive it,

you have only one day to take the food. So, we are

" issues. This is a very new developmen

to grapple with this situation."

ed. Now, we have

‘aurants, who are listed on

with regulations to take care of e-commerce

we worked with them and
, who are not registered or
lied with this requirement;
begun to conduct a third-
hat the safety and hygiene
have also kept a condition

basically addressing these

in the food sector in India, and we are trying


63.

Management System (LMS) is a cen
of laboratories. At present 340 labs hi

64.

65.

FOOD T

Asked about the number of

The Audit in their Report has 0

“Only seven out of 72 state
‘ories were NABL accredited as 0

laboral

and Family Welfare informed

in 00
accred

ober 2016, al

accreditation is not a pre-condition for notification

21.

CHAPTER

ered with [|

served as u

March 201
aboratories

| state

itation within two years. It was further sta’

food laboratories and only eigh
1 September 2016.
7) that under

-V

ESTING LABORATORIES

aboratories recognised by FSSAI for tes
samples, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in a written reply stated that the
ralised system that connects and collates
ave registered of which 160 have been ap
other 30 labs are under process. The Ministry has later revised their data sta
present there are 173 such labs regis

nder:

The
he new
be required
ed by the
of referral

would

he Laboratory Management System.

out of
Ministry

scheme a
to acqu

ing 0

p

Labo

ing [|

6 re
of Hi

ire

inistry tl

aboratories

hat

food
atory
he network
roved and
at at

erral
ealth
nnounced
ABL
ABL
under the

Act. Itis observe’
hat, referral laboratories are not mandated
8 Food Authority. H
ysis) Regulations, 2011 s'
ity, credibili

2
al

(

$

015,

re only to be notified by th
jaboratory and sample ana
h standards of accuracy, reliabil

hall maintain

hig

that FSSAI/Ministry had

similarly inform

owevel

‘o be accred
r, para

ate ||

ed the

Rajya Sabha in July
ited by the NABL, and
2.2.1(5) of the FSS
referral laboratory
in the operations of

a
y

labora
reliability. In view
IABL to establish and

he Audit has

TI urt
and approval
mechanism to promp'
status may include wi
tests for which accred

of appl

accreditation is accorded not

tiers or levels below,
broad disciplines (che!
enforcement arms of

ory and achieving and main’
of such regulations, i

prove their accu

her in succeeding paragrap
“FSSAI had not framed any Standard

ications for empane

itation is given) of ||
only for the s|
FSSAI notifies emp
mical and biological)

samples to the empanelled laboratories, wi
accreditation of the laboratory, or the speci

aining re’
became desirable that
racy, reliabi

Operating Proced
ly update the status of NABL accre

hdrawal of NABL accreditation or
he empanelled

he FSSAI and the states. Hence,

uired level 0

ity and credibili

hs observed as und

ures (SO!

laboratori
ecific discipline but a
anelled laboratories 0
without providing tier/

on the food product [

accreditation and

vy.

er

ies. Thol

nly for
level del

the enforcement
hout knowing the current statu
ic tests that are required to be
hat is proposed to be sampled and analysed, or w

h upda

ails to

ether

they are accredited by

P) for examination
ment. FSSAI also does not have any
itation (suc
addition/deletion

ed

of specific
ugh NABL
so for the multi
'0 of the

ple

he

arms sent
s of NABL
conducted

he


66.
the representative of FSSAI has stated as under:-

67,

22

concemed laboratory has NABL accreditation for the specific food category,
parameter or tests that are required to be conducted. In their replies (May 2017 and
June 2017 respectively), the FSSAI and the Ministry stated that they are putting a
system in place to address the issue.”

During the oral evidence, when posed with the issue of accreditation of laboratories,

“The hon'ble Member has made a very valid point. We are constrained to denotify 14
of the State food labs that they will no more be able to do any enforcement activities
with those labs and there was a lot of protest from those States...”

The Ministry in their Power Point Presentation has submitted a few more points:~

“Out of 88 State Food Labs (in place of 72 reported in C&AG Report), 13 are now
NABL accredited and balance 61 State Labs are notified under the transition
provision (Section 98 of FSS Act). Balance 14 have been discontinued under Section
98. Thus, 74 State Labs are under FSSAI.

Since, NABL accreditation is a time-taking process, these labs would need to be
accredited within 2 years or be de-notified by September 2020.

FSSAI is also providing mobile testing labs to the States/UTs.”


68.

FSSAI at various
most of these pos

I

I.

॥|,

‘In terms of Section 36 of t

Audit in their Report has observed

s remained unfil

Audit has further noted the
Even after
recruitmen
FSSAI
administrative & general ca
were performing routine fu
employees only for specific
A retired Joint 58018
single source basis,

regulations.

on tl

a decade of enactment 0

ad on its rolls, 26

ary to t

23
CHAPTER - VI
HUMAN RESOURCES

ed

following shortcomings:-
the Act, the Food

contractual employees
egories. Audit observed that
nections, defeating the intent
tasks of defined duration.

he

January 2016. FSSAI invo
source selection for w

the compe’

CMSO in April 2016,
the original condition

Division, a
sanction of
specific to tl

post which was
the Minis

food authorities are,
Business Operators

samples received from Food Safety 0

prosecution under the Act.

empowered to lift food samples and have them inspected, to inves
and to maintain data bases of all
recommendation (August 2014) of the Central Advisory Commit
॥ block in rural areas and for every thousand
FBOs in urban areas, FSSAI conducted a gap analysis (September 2016), and found
per cent in 12 States; against requiremen
17,003 only 2,952 FSOs were available in all the states, with shortfalls ranging from

for every district and one

shortfalls of DOs ranging

33 to 99 per cent in all the

States. Audit observed shortfalls of DOs ranging from 7 to 81

hich full justification should
ent authority. The person was appoin
Management Services Officer (CMSO). When a regu
he services of the consulta
of urgency necessitating
longer existed, Instead, he was appointed as Head 0

ry was available. The rep
he audit observations.

he Act, Designated Of
inter-alia, empowered to issue
FBOs), to prohibit sale of food, to get analysed the food
icers (FSOs), an

FSO for eac

rom 5 to 80

carved out of the existing
ies of

icers (

hat the Ministry has 5810
levels. However, since FSSAI failed to finalize its recruitment regulations,
in all categories by regular employees,

he Government of India was appointed by FSSAI
grounds of urgency and temporary arrangemen
ed GFR 176 for the appointmen'
e recorded
ed against the vacant post of CI

nt were not
emporary fi

10180 356 posts for

Authori its

y has not notified

in the technical, scientific,
these contractual employees
ion of appointing contractual

on
in
, which permits single-
on file and approved by
ief
ar officer joined the post of
erminated even though
ling up of the post no
f the General Administration
ost of CMSO, for which, no
the Ministry/FSSAI were not

FSSAI and
icenses of

State
Food

DOs) under
or cancel

id fo recommend sanction of

In terms of section 38 of t

FBOs_ within

States, and with shortfall of

he Act, FSOs are, inter-alia,
igate complaints,
their areas. Following the
ee requiring one DO

of

12
es

more than 90 per cent in
er cent in six sta



69.

the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their background note submitted that the
recruitment regulations have been notified on 01.10.2018 and the process of filling up of
posts have been initiated. ह

70,
as on

declared and notified as qualified Food Analysts th

71.
a deca

reply submitted as under:-

24

(Assam, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha
shortfalls of FSOs ranging from 34 to 98 per cent in the

and Uttar Pradesh), and
test checked States. Such

shortages severely affected the functioning of the State food safety authorities as

discussed in paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3.1 of this report.
(May/June 2017) accepted the audit observations a
measures are being taken.

Updating the information furnished with respect to hiring

FSSAI/Ministry in its reply
nd stated that corrective

of contractual employees,

In their Power Point Presentation, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare stated that

30.09.2019, 391 candidates (including 31 Public Analy:

rough a duly constituted board.

sts from PFA) have been

Asked about the specific reasons for note framing recruitment regulations even after

de of enactment of the Act, the Ministry 0

Health & Family Welfare in their write

"Delay in formulation of Recruitment Regulations should be viewed in the backdrop

of evolving nature and unique functional profile of FSSA\

, for which there were no

established norms which could be readily relied upon. The mandate of the Authority

under the Food Safety and Standards Ac

, 2006 is extremely wide-ranging, which

calls for a variety of skill sets including scientific and technical , legal and
administrative, 1 and social & behavioural change. The

72.

representations received."

therefore, needed to be a comprehensive regulation w
provided for. Thus, while the first set of draft Recruitmen

n February, 2016, they had to be completely recast b

advertised on 25.01.2019 and 26.03.2019 to fill them up against [|
Computer Based Test (CBT) was conducted in July, 2019 and the result is likely to be

announced in third week of November, 2019. 3

posts a
basis.

various levels have been advertised on 16.10.2019 to

Recruitment Regulations,
here all skill sets can be
Regulations were notified
ased on several hundred

They have also confirmed that 307 posts (both technical and non-technical) were

he direct recruitment quota.

Directors have already joined. Further, 168

fill them up on deputation


73, — Ascertaining the number of sa

25

nctioned strength of posts and 135 persons in position,

the Ministry in their written reply confirmed 233 contractual staff managing the work of

FSSAI.

74, Asked whether any mechanism/system .of internal audit within FSSAI for internal

audit is in place, the Ministry has a

mitted to the absence of any such system in FSSAI.

However, on being asked again about need for such an internal audit system, the Ministry
has replied that an Internal Audit Cell has been established in FSSAI vide order dated

8.11.2019 in the defined duties. Cell

due approval of Competent Authority for its functioning in accordance with extan
rules/regulations in due course. Some officers have been posted in Internal Audit-Cell on

17.01.2020 to assist in proper workin

75. Asked to furnish the details 0
now the Ministry has in a written reply

“ESSAI at the end of March, 2019 had an accumulated fund of Rs. 2,57,66,79,360/-.

The Food Authority has in-pri

FSSAI for development and improvement of infrastructure and facilities of FSSA\
including development of composite facilities of FSSA! at Ghaziabad, JNPT
Mumbai), Kolkata and Chennai to include regional office space, food lab and training

centre."

76. The Ministry has further stated that they have taken up the proposal of creation 0

Public, Account within FSSAI to utilis

has been authorised to devise detailed procedure with

of the system

accumulated funds/revenues generated by FSSAI till
stated as under:-

nciple approved use of internally generated funds by

8 the funds internally generated by FSSAI. Giving an

updated status, the Ministry has furnished as under:-

"1475-Other General Econom|
consultation with the office

It is submitted that the proposal for the maintenance of Public Account and opening
of the two Minor Heads of Accounts for FSSAI ie. (i) 'FSSAI General Fund’ under the
Major Head 8235-General and Other Reserve Fund under Public Accounts and (ii)
"Penalties Realised under Food Safety and Standards Act" under the Major Head

ic Services" is under consideration of the Ministry in
of Controller General of Accounts (CGA) and the

Department of Economic Affairs. Presently, as desired by the Office of Chief
Comptroller of Accounts (CCA), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, the approval of

the Department of Economic

Affairs, Ministry of Finance Is being sought by the

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare."


26

PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Regulatory and Administrative Framework

The Committee note that providing safe food is. the primary responsibility of
the States. In order to ensure a robust regulatory and administrative
mechanism that secures safety of food consumed in the country, the Union
Government enacted a comprehensive Act viz. Food, Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 subsuming the prevalent Prevention of Adulterated Food Act, 1954
and the applicable orders/advisories/instructions issued by different Central
Ministries/Departments. The aims and objectives of this Act were to safeguard
people of the country against adulterated food as well as educating them
towards safe and nutritious food. They further note that even after seven
decades since independence, adequate protection has not been ensured to the
citizens against adulterated and unsafe food, nor the consumers appropriately
educated of the importance of wholesome and nutritious food.

The Committee are of the opinion that food being sine qua non to
human life, the basic human requirement, it is imperative that unadulterated
and safe food is accessible to all sections of society including the poorest.
They are of the considered view that safe food will not only reduce excessive
burden over heaith but will also have an impact on Public hygiene. Therefore,

‘the Committee strongly recommend a robust regulatory and administrative
mechanism for safe food in the country.

Identification of Areas and Regulations

The Committee are appreciative of the fact that the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and the FSSAI have identified 32 areas out of which regulations
on 28 areas already have since been notified. However, they observe that it has
taken nearly a decade to reach this level. The Committee note that the Food
Safety and Standards Authority of india, being the nodal Authority established
in 2008, is accountable primarily for regulating the availability of safe, hygienic
and healthy food to ail the citizens. The Committee note that FSSAI being the
national level apex agency for development of robust food standards and
codes of practice for safe food, is accountable to create a positive regulatory
environment, establish a credible and robust national food testing


27

environment and infrastructure to address the problem of adulteration and
unsafe food in the country. The delay in framing the regulations and their
proper enforcement and administration may cost heavily not only on the
precious lives of people but also on the national health Exchequer. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI must notify the regulations on
the remaining areas like organic food, financial regulations etc. and keep the
regulatory framework agile, progressive and updated. They also recommend
that a mechanism may be evolved for frequent and regular reviews of the
regulatory framework and regulations notified to keep pace with the changing
food processing technology and emerging new trends in consumer food taste.

Survey of FBOs and their database

The Committee note that there was 8 considerable delay of almost two years
following the passing of the Act in notifying the Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India in the year 2008. Moreover, the Food Safety and Standards
Authority started notifying their regulations as per mandate, only from the year
2011 onwards and the process is still continuing. These notifications have
brought the entire law into effect, making it mandatory for every food business
operator! petty food vendor to register or procure a license depending on the
annual turnover,

The Committee further note that sub-section 16(2)(g) of the FSSA Act
stipulates that it shall be the duty of the FSSAI to conduct survey for
enforcement and administration of the Act. The Committee express concern
over the fact that FSSAI are still not successful in identifying the relevant and
. new emerging areas of food and their processing mechanism.

The Committee note that there are about 67.5 lakh FBOs which are registered
with the Authority. The Committee feel that identification of new areas and
notification of regulations pertaining thereto and registering new food vendors
and licenses to identified food business operators is an ongoing process.
There is a possibility that some new FBOs may open and old ones close their
business. Therefore, there is no doubt that FSSAI needs to double its efforts to
make a comprehensive and exhaustive database of FBOs in the country by
digitizing the latter invariably. The Committee note that the FBOs are required
to apply for renewal of their food licenses before the license expiry. In this
regard, Committee strongly recommend that the Food Business Operators
should be taken into confidence to apply for fresh issue as well as renewal of
licenses well before the expiry of the license and the computerized system for


28

issue and conversion of licenses be updated, if the need be, to obviate the
necessity of any external intervention. The Committee feel that this will not
only avoid delay but prevent corrupt practices also. The Committee are of the
firm view that this will be possible only with the sustained and continued
efforts from 79901,

E-commerce Food Business

The Committee note that the apex food regulator ie. Food Authority of India is
grappled with the new emerging area of online food delivery platforms. They
feel that FSSAI cannot remain content with merely issuing regulations,
directives and advisories but shall have to be proactive to share the new
responsibility of food safety in e-commerce and online platforms for food
items and eatables. The Committee are of the view that in-addition to taking to
the regular recourse of consumer laws put in place to safeguard consumer
protection, the FSSAI will have to present an additional alternative e-platform
for expediting action in cases of complaints from consumers with regard to
quality and safety of food available on online platforms. The Committee further
note that in this fast moving world, there is an imperative need to ensure food
safety and quality standard of food available through online platforms. They
are of the considered view that FSSAI should evolve a scientific and digital
mechanism for expeditious resolution of consumer complaints and
grievances, touching all aspects of food safety, packaging for the healthy
growth and development of e-commerce food industry in the country. The
Committee recommend FSSAI to put in place an online mechanism, in
consultation with e-food retailers and consumer groups and other
_ Stakeholders, for speedy resolution and effective intervention in matters of
food safety thereby fostering a sustainable e-food ecosystem that is pre
dominantly organised. The Committee also desire that this effort of FSSAI
should find a right balance between self-regulation, voluntary checks and
regulatory supervision.

Stakeholders

The Committee note that although more than 10 years have elapsed following
the enactment of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and 5 years since
FSS regulations came into force, there are several loose ends which are still to
be fixed. The Committee also note that although the process of
standardisation is a continuous one and there are numerous challenges being
faced by the regulatory and enforcement divisions of FSSAI, however, it is also



29

a fact that action plans with a crystal clear Standard Operating Procedure
(SOPs) are lacking at many places to identify areas on which standards are to
be formulated/reviewed, if necessary, within specific timelines. The Committee
feel that involvement of FBOs as a first step towards identification of food
products is necessary, but at the same time, it may be fraught with the risk of
orientation towards safeguarding of their own business interests. Therefore,
the Committee recommend that for bringing about greater transparency in the
task of revision of standards for selection of food products, FSSAI should not
limit itself to consulting only with Food Business Operators, rather a wider
consultative group with the involvement of public from across various
spectrums of life, preferably elected representatives of the people from the
local bodies (Panchayat level) to the Members of Parliament, consumer groups
and eminent private individuals. The Committee are of the view that it is
necessary to appropriately take into consideration the diverse interests of the
stakeholders across a wide spectrum and devise effective SOPs (Standard
Operating Procedures) enabling stockholders to prepare their action plans and
implement them.

NOC and Product Approval

The Committee note that the FSSAI issued no objection certificates to FBOs
and renewed their licenses on the basis of Product Approval Mechanism not
under the regulations notified by the former but on the advisories issued
therein. This unhealthy practice continued till the intervention and directions
of Supreme Court of India, which set them aside as unlawful on the ground
that advisories do not empower the FSSAI to issue NOC and renew licenses.
.The Court held that only regulations issued by FSSAI empower the latter to
issue NOCs and renew licenses, The Committee are dismayed to note that
FSSAI had failed to ensure the cancellation of the licenses issued under the
product approval system, which was declared unlawful by the Supreme Court,
and order product recall. The Committee feel, FSSAI being the nodal agency
established for food safety, should have acted with agility in the matter, Had
there been no audit check, the matter of non-withdrawal of NOCs and licenses
issued on the basis of product approval, despite being turned down by the
court, would not have come to the light. The Committee feel that FSSAI should
not only be content with framing of regulations, but should also conduct the
assessment of the impact of the regulations in place and all interventional
measures should be taken to align the regulatory food safety ecosystem in
order to serve the final objective of food safety for the consumers in the
country.


30

As per information furnished, officials responsible for acting in violation of
Supreme Court's directions have been identified and steps taken to ensure
that they are brought to task. Yet, the Committee observe that there have been
certain administrative delays in the process as a result of which the officials
concerned could go scot free despite the recommendations of the fact finding
Committee instituted by FSSAI. The Committee, therefore, cannot but express
their displeasure about the way the matter was handled and recommend FSSAI
to aggressively pursue the matter by way of soliciting advisories from DoPT in
this regard, so as to enable in tackling all cases of irregularities in proper
perspective.

Accreditation and Testing Infrastructure

The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the shortage of quality
laboratories and lack of uniformity of standards across the country. The
Committee observe that though the responsibility of enforcement and
regulation of food safety and standards lies with the respective State
Governments/UTs, the poor and inadequate infrastructure for testing samples
in the absence of the financial resources with the States does not allow
effective and efficient functioning of the labs with clinical accuracy.
Recognizing the inadequacy of financial resources available with the. State
Governments, it would not be prudent to expect optimum improvement in the
laboratories in States/UTs without financial support from the Union
Government. The Committee take note of the existing food testing
infrastructure in the country and observe that given the exponential increase
in the magnitude of the problem of food adulteration in our country with

, complex food varieties, that an infrastructure of a mere 340 food testing
laboratories would not suffice. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
adequate financial support to the States/UTs be provided impromptu to create
a robust lab infrastructure duly accredited with National Accreditation Board
for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL). The Committee recommend
that in the interest of maintaining food testing standards, the number of mobile
food testing laboratories be enhanced till such time sufficient number of food
testing laboratories are established.

The Committee are further constrained to note that despite the Bombay High
Court's direction, most of the laboratories in the country are still not NABL
accredited. The Committee are of the view that NABL accreditation of labs
would ensure standards of testing and enhance reliability. The Committee feel
that this will ensure uniformity and accuracy in testing standards, which is


31

central to food testing. The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI must
ensure that all the labs approved by the Authority are NABL accredited within
the shortest time as feasible. The Committee further recommend that food
testing laboratories be equipped with necessary infrastructure and trained
manpower.

Safety Mechanism for Imported Food

Importance

Chapter V of the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 prescribes that all
imports of food articles are to be subjected to the provisions of the Act which
inter-alia prohibits import of any unsafe or misbranded or sub-standard food
or food containing extraneous matter into India. Though the Act, as claimed by
the Government, sufficiently empowers FSSAI, the Committee understand that
the mechanism for ensuring safety and.quality standards of food items at the
entry points at borders, ports and airports is not adequate and foolproof.

Entry points

The Committee note from the information furnished by the Government that
the number of entry points directly being controlled by FSSAI is being
increased gradually and the presence of Authorised Officers merely
supplements the efforts of FSSAL The Committee are of the view in this regard
that for ensuring effective regulatory contro! of the FSSAI, the Government
should strive to achieve 100 percent presence of FSSAI officials at all entry

_points of food import. This, the Committee feel is essential for safeguarding

the health of the citizens. The Committee also recommend that FSSAI must
examine and review the quality of training being imparted to all officials
handling the import of food items at each import entry point in India.

Technical Background for Authorised Officers at entry points

During the course of the deposition of the officials concerned, the Committee
were informed that even a person without appropriate qualifications could be
working as FSSAI Authorised Officer at the entry points. The Committee note
in this regard that in our country, availability. of persons with appropriate
professional credentials/qualifications would not pose a problem. However,
there is a need of integration and collaboration among the Universities,
Educational Institutions and Industry for development of skills in this area. The


32

Committee are of the view that the linkage between the Industry and the
Educational Institutions needs to be fostered and strengthened. The
Committee note that in the present situation, any normal graduate who may.
not possess appropriate or suitable qualifications can become an Authorised
Officer and be entrusted with the work of safety of food import in India. The
Committee are of the view that for ensuring effective handling of matters of
food safety, the Authorized Officer should be professionally qualified to
effectively discharge the duties prescribed.

Audit findings of results of assessment of food safety

The Committee note that the FSSAI has endeavored to rationalise the number
of entry points of import of food items. The Committee are of the view that
rationalisation of entry points should be combined with effective monitoring of
these entry points in the matter of safety of imported food items. The
Committee further note the findings of the Audit that in approximately 9000
cases, the Authorised Officers have neither issued No-Objection Certificates
(NOC) nor Non-Conformation Report (NCR) despite assessing the safety of
food being imported. As pointed out by the Audit, it is the mandate of the
FSSAI to regulate the import of food under the Act. The Committee are of the
firm view that the Authorised Officers should either issue No-Objection
Certificates (NOC) or Non-Conformation Report (NCR), as the case may be, and
no food item should be allowed to be imported without the safety assessment
done by the officials designated by FSSAI. The Committee feel that not issuing
either of the two certifications would be grossly improper. The apprehension
of unsafe food getting imported cannot be entirely ruled out in view of such

. instances of non-issue of the prescribed certification going unnoticed. The

Committee, therefore, recommend that accountability of officials responsible
for such lapses be fixed. In this regard,. the Committee also note that the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have ascribed the ‘lapses or
irregularities’ to the incomplete integration of the Food Import Clearance
System (FICS) with Indian Customs Electronic Gateway (ICEGATE). The
Committee note in this regard that, at present, the status of a food
consignment as reflected in ICEGATE is not captured in FICS on real time
basis. They, therefore, recommend that the FSSAI and Central Board of
Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC) may accelerate the process of complete
integration of both the systems of ICEGATE and FICS. A definite timeline for
such integration needs to be submitted to the Committee.


33
Administrative Control over Authorised Officers

The Committee have taken note of the reply of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare which states that the duties and responsibilities of the
Authorised officers are equally applicable to the Custom Officials working as
AO. However, the Committee note that the FSSAI is silent on the aspect of
administrative and regulatory control in case of non-compliance by any
Authorised Officer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare must ensure that the Charter of Duties of the
Authorised Officers of CBIC which should invariably include the role and
responsibilities of the Authorised Officers as envisaged in the Food Safety and
Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017.

Labeling

The Committee have also taken note of the information furnished by the
Ministry on the issue of the requirement in regard to labeling of imported food
items in India, The Committee, in this regard, express its view that FSSAI must
check all imported food items in India for strict compliance with the regulatory
conditions. The Committee have also taken note of the fact that the labeling for
packaged food provides many a vital information about the food item being
imported and that the regulations prescribe that the label should either be in
English or Hindi. It would be essential to ensure that no food item is ‘allowed to
enter the country without all requisite details on the label in accordance with
the prescribed regulations.

‘The Committee further note from the reply of the Government that there is an

element of regulatory overlap with the Department of Animal Husbandry and
Dairying (DAHD) for import of products of animal origin and recommend that
FSSAI should sort out the issue by holding active meetings with their
counterparts in DAHD.

Conviction Rate

The Committee express grave concern over the fact that the rate of conviction
is low despite the increasing number of failed samples. One of the reasons for
this phenomena, the Committee feel is attributable to inadequate training of
the Food Safety Officers. The Committee feel that the performance of Food
Safety Officers needs to be judged not only on the basis of number of samples
collected but also on the basis of the number of successful convictions


34

relating to the failed cases. The Committee are of the view that poor
infrastructure for storage of samples, particularly in the case of perishable
commodities, is a contributory factor for the low conviction rate. The process
of sampling should be methodically defined in a scientific way based upon the
food item sampled and there should be adequate training in regard to sample
collection, handling and storage protocols. The Committee urge upon the
FSSAI to function as a scientific repertoire and technically credible authority to
ensure food safety standards in india.

The Committee would also like to see the standards of FSSAI at par with and in
harmonisation with those of the international/codex standards and reiterate
that state-of-the-art laboratories be established, where any
stakeholder/business operator can retrieve the samples for further testing and
verification by referral labs in the country.

Manpower

The Committee note with concern the contents of the section of the report of
the C&AG on FSSAI regarding human resources, They have been apprised by
FSSAI that nearly 300 contractual employees including technical staff who
have been hired are continuing in service for more than five years. The
Committee feel that there is a legitimate expectation from contractual
employees to continue on the posts, although hired on short term basis. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend FSSAI to identify all such areas
accurately where the nature of work is of a perennial nature and in accordance
with the recruitment regulations and extant laws of the land, expedite the

_ process of recruitment of officers/staff at various levels in FSSAI in permanent

capacity, wherever required.

The Committee further take note of the gap analysis done by FSSAI in regard
to'the post of Designated Officers (DOs) under FSSAI and State Food
Authorities. While the Designated officer is one of the key posts, the
Committee are astonished to note that State level Authorities are continuing
with the shortage of DOs, The Committee feel that FSSAI should regularly
undertake persuasive measures with the State Authorities and emphasise on
them the urgency to expedite the recruitment of DOs, whose shortage ranges
from 5 to 80 percent in 12 States. The Committee feel that continuing with such
a shortage of staff will definitely tell upon the work of the existing staff and the
quality of their performance. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that


35

the Ministry, in consultation with State Authorities, take necessary steps to
overcome the shortage of staff especially at the key positions.

Internal Audit

19, The Committee note that sustained scrutiny has finally yielded the desired
result whereby an Internal Audit Cell has now been established in FSSAI, The
Committee believe that the Internal Auclit Cell will act as a catalyst to the
efforts of FSSAI to function as an organization of undoubted credibility.

Internal Resources

20, The Committee note that an unspent amount collected mainly in the form of
license fee to the tune of €300 crore is lying idle with FSSAI for want of
procedural approval/nod from Ministry of Finance for utilizing the same. The
Committee recommend the Government to intervene and expedite the
examination of setting up of separate public account with FSSAI to enable the
latter to gainfully utilize these internally generated funds for discharging its
mandated duties.

debbie

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Chairperson
Public Accounts Committee

NEW DELHI
February, 2021
Magha, 1942 (Saka)


MINUTES OF THE FOURTH

y
rl

Confidential

SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 47 OCTOBER, 2019.

eNO aR OD

10.
11.

मो ७9 ७ :+

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18 October, 2019 from 1100
hrs to 1530 hrs in Committee Room "0", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

LOK SABHA
hri T. R. Baalu

8

5

Shri Sudheer Gupta
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Dr. Satya Pal Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
5

hri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Gujral
Shri C. M. Ramesh

5|

hri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri Abhijit Kumar
Shri Arvind Sharma
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja
Shri U.C.Bharadwaj

11 Subhash Chandra Baheria

- Chairperson

Additional Secretary
Director

Additional Director
Additional Director


¢

>-2+ -
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR :
GENERAL OF INDIA

1 Smt. Anita Pattanayak - Dy. C&AG (RC)

2. Shri S.Dadhe - DG (O/o DGACE)

3. Shri K. Srinivasan - DG (RC)

4 Shri Sandeep Lall - Principal Director (PC)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE AND ESSAI

1... Shri Arun Singhal - Additional Secretary, MOHFW

2. Smt. Rita Teaotia - Chairperson, FSSAI

3. Shri Pawan Agarwal - CEO, FSSAI

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee

and the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee,
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare (Department of Health & Family Welfare) and Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI) on the subject "Implementation of Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 (FSS Act)" based on C&AG Report No, 37 of 2017. In his opening remarks he
desired that views/suggestions from experts/stakeholders/organisations may be invited on
one of the prioritised subjects i.e. Goods and Services Tax (GST) subject to the consent of
the Members. The Members of the Committee unanimously endorsed this proposal. The
Chairperson desired that a press advertisement to that effect would be issued. Audit
officials then briefed the Committee on important issues related to the subject scheduled

for discussion.

3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
(Department of Health & Family Welfare) were called in. The Hon'ble Chairperson while
welcoming the representatives of the Ministry put forth certain findings of Audit Report
while carrying out the performance audit of FSSAI such as delays and deficiencies in the
framing of various regulations and standards; amendments to regulations in violation of the
Act and specific directions of the Supreme Court; conditions of State food laboratories
entrusted with food testing and certification functions, which were found ill-equipped and


~38-
not possessing accreditation of the National Accreditation Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (NABL), and inadequate enforcement activities relating to
licensing, registration, inspection, sampling and prosecution etc. highlighting the
importance of food safety and security. He asked’ the representatives of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India to explain to
the Committee their position with regard to Audit findings and also to give a brief account

of the follow-up action taken thereon for effective implementation of the FSS Act.

4. The representatives of 75501 made a power point presentation before the
Committee whereby they shared the details on corrective and preventive actions

undertaken by them on the issues raised in the Audit Report.

5. Thereafter, the Members raised the queries relating to the granting of accreditation
of state laboratories from NABL; parameters of Codex Alimentarius Commission; delay in
issuance of notification of regulations pertaining to Genetically modified food; draft
notification for Section 92(2) regarding safe food and diet for school children; number of
samples of food collected for testing and prosecution and adjudication in case of those
found adulterated, reasons for delay in banning of chemicals used in food products;
teasons for defiance of Bombay High Court order (1 August 2014) or the Supreme Court
order (19 August 2015) on continuance/renewal of licenses; unauthorised and wrong
issuance of NOC for energy drinks; utilisation of funds for IEC (Information, Education and
Communication); check on the quality and safety of street food vendors and food caterers;
mechanism with FSSAI to inspect 32 lakh food establishments; issues related to safe
packaging and single use plastic; licensing of country liquor; verification of claims made
through advertisement of products; availability of database in public domain on number o
cases detected and fines imposed; issue of licenses despite incomplete documentation,
remedial procedure for licenses given wrongfully by states and for states not enforcing

provisions of the Act; training of food safety officers at the district level; creation o
standards at the district level consultative committees; appointment of local level teams for
spreading awareness of food standards; deficiencies in the required infrastructure for safe
custody of samples; reasons for not framing recruitment regulations; and instances o'

adulteration of milk in the country.

6. Replying to the above queriés of the Members, Chairperson, FSSAI submitted tha’
India is represented in the Codex Alimentarius Commission since the time it was set up


-3h- कक
and that India is a signatory to the WTO; notification of genetically modified food products
is at draft stage and hence not enforced yet. She shared with the Committee that there
was requirement of public partnership in laboratory testing of samples due to increase in
sampling. She emphasised that enforcement is the responsibility of the states. She tried
to clarify on the issues inter-alia the challenge of countering fake news; details of
measures being taken to strengthen the infrastructure of. state laboratories; provision of
Food Safety Officer in every block and Designated Officer to cover every district as
regulatory Supervisory Officer and finally monitoring of action plan prepared by every state

and its implementation.

7. The Hon’ble Chairperson also desired that standing instructions may be issued to
all the concerned Ministries that Hindi version of the power point presentation may be

mandatorily made available to the Members of the Committee.

8. The Hon'ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and FSSAI for
appearing before the Committee for giving free and frank replies to the queries of the
Members and further directed them to send written replies to queries raised by members

during the sitting, which remained uncovered or partially answered.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then adjourned for lunch.

Contd.


glo e

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

dees yoke ene

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION AND BANGALORE
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT LIMITED (BIAL)

Seok fete Yeh
9 inion wn tea
0 erred fein ekki
4, hike tree अऋऋरूओ
2, tile soe ceed
3... tien tek toe
4... ee Yohei eb
5... tiie eed अखमऋक

The Committee, then, adjourned.



Yin

MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB cee Or THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB COMMITTEE - Il OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 10™ FEBRUARY, 2020, COMMITTEE (2019-20) HELD ON 108 FEBRUARY, 2020.

The Sub-Committee ~ ॥ of Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 10%
February, 2020 from 1530 hrs, to 1630 hrs in Committee Room No. ॥ Block A, Extension

Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T. R. Baalu - Convenor
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri'Sudheer Gupta

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri MLK Raja - Director

Shri U. C. Bharadwaj - Additional Director

Shri Alo Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary


-y2-

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR

GENERAL OF INDIA

1.
2.

Shri Manish Kumar

Shri Praveen Kumar Saxen,

DG (PC)

a Dy. Director

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

1, Ms. Preeti Sudan

2. Shri Arun Singhal

3. Shri Mandeep Kumar Bhandari
4, Ms, Rita Teaotia

5. Shri Pawan Kumar

2. At the outset, the Hon'b

and the representatives of the
Committee, convened to take o
and Family Welfare on the su
006" based on C&AG Repor
x

nN

oO

amination of the subject so fa
action for the Sub-Committee

subject.

3,
cal

Thereafter, the represen

review of the irnplementation of

ed in. In his introductory re

- Secretary

- Special Secretary
- Joint Secretary

- Chairpeson, FSSAI
- CEO, FSSAI

Office of the C&AG of India

ral evidence of the representati
bject "Implementation of Food
No. 37 of 2017. Briefly ou
by PAC, Hon'ble Convenor e:

0 further examine and conc!

atives of the Ministry of Hea

marks, Hon'ble Convenor too

le Convenor welcomed the Members of. the Sub-Committee

0 the first sitting of the Sub-

ves of the Ministry of Health
Safety and Standards Act,

ining the developments on

xplained the future course of

ude the examination of the

th and Family Welfare were
॥ note of the fact that Audit

Food Safely and Standards Ac!

of FSSAI revealed systemic ine

, 2006 as well as functioning

fficiencies, including delays and deficiencies in the framing

of various regulations and standards; amendments to regulations in violation of the Act and


-43-

specific directions of the Supreme Court; state foods laboratories entrusted with food testing

and certification functions being ill equipped and not possessing accreditation of the
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL); inadequate

enforcement activities relating to licensing, registration, inspection, sampling and

prosecution; irregularity in the appointment of Contractual employees etc. He asked the

representatives of the Ministry to brief

address the concerns in effective sampli

food safety in India; and delays in framing of Guidelines in remaining areas out of 32 areas

listed in the Act. He also drew attention o

of the proceedings of. the Sub-Committee.

4. The representative of Ministry of

Standards Authority of India a
Corrective action taken stated that the major reason for delay was due to non-availability 0
‘ separate food safety department in Several States, lack of adequate manpower and

Infrastructure and financial resources, in addition to the work being done in the areas 0

food tes

problems concerning food sa

namely, e-commerce, apart from direct sel

5, T

utilisation

relating to food and healthy diet of schoo

ing

he
0

and Sta

Government to scrupulously follow up [|

e

department

convictiot

with that

distribution companies in the ambi

no

of

ter giving an outline about the timelines defined and

he Sub-Committee about the initiatives taken to

ng and framing of requisite regulations regarding

the witnesses to the provisions on confidentiality

Health and Family Affairs and Food Safety and

and enforcement and survel

lembers of the Sub-Commit!

the fund of approximately

evel, appointment of Food

ety in India and the recent developments in distribution of food

ance. He further highlighted the magnitude of the

lers and food carts.

ee desired to be apprised of the reasons for non-
Rs 300 Crores, delay in frarning of regulations
children, good quality laboratories both at Centre

Safety Officers, emphasising upon the State

he FSS Act, 2006 and guidelines issued to Customs

both at Sea and Airports
cases under FSS Act, hi

D

or checking up the standards of food, rate of

rmonisation of Food Safety Standards in India at par

he standards prevalent in the World, bringing the e-commerce, and other food

of provisions of the Act, countering the fake news, etc..


~ Wan

6. The representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare replied to various
queries raised by the Members on the subject matter including migration limits of food
packaging material used in the unorganised Sector as well as companies like Swiggy and

Zomato etc,

7. The Hon'ble Convenor, while allowing the Ministry to submit written replies to
unanswered queries, thanked their representatives for the free and frank views expressed

on the subject and the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Sub-Committee in their

deliberations.

The witnesses, then, withdrew. -

Acopy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been Kept on record,

The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.



न+ण

Confidential

SECOND
MINUTES OF THE ':)_SITTING OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-Il_ OF PUBLIC

The Sub Committee-Il on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act,
2006 met on Thursday, the 27th August 2020 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs in Committee
Room '3', Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T.R.Baalu - Convener
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
3. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

RAJYA SABHA
4, Shri C.M.Ramesh
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

. hri T.G Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Additonal Director

=
५0

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Shri Sunil = Shreekrishna - Director General of Audit
Dadhe
2. At the outset, the Convener, Sub Committee-I| welcomed the Members and Audit

Officers to the sitting of the Committee, convened to consider and adopt the Draft


LUG

Report on the Subject Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 based
on C&AG Report No 37 of 2017.

3. The Sub Committee-il on ‘Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act,
2006’ based on C&AG Report No 37 of 2017, considered the Draft Report on the
subject. The Sub  Committee-ll adopted the draft Report except
recommendation/observation on Safety Mechanism for Imported Food (Para Number
8).

4, The Sub Committee desired that further oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India (FSSAI) may be taken by the Sub-Committee to get updated information on the
matter-'Safety Mechanism for Imported Food’. This, the Sub-Committee felt necessary,
particularly in the backdrop of prevailing pandemic Covid-19. The Sub Committee also
desired that the recommendation/observation on Safety Mechanism for Imported Food
may be reconstructed /recast in light of the deliberations to be held during the oral
evidence and suitably incorporated in the draft Report to be placed before the entire

Committee.

‘A copy of the transcript of audio recordings of the verbatim proceedings of the

sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.



धन

1]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21) HELD ON 117 SEPTEMBER, ACCOUNTS CO
2020.

The Sub-Committee - ॥ of Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 117
September, 2020 from 1500 hrs, to 1600 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘2, Extension

Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri T.R. Baalu - Convenor

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ajay (Teni) Misra
3. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

4. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri MLK Raja - Director
2. Smt U.C. Bharadwaj - Additional Director
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms. J, Mahalekshmy Menon - Dy. C&AG

2. — Shri K. Srinivasan - DG


“४८
a

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE AND FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(FSSAI)

1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan - Secretary, MoHFW.

2. Ms. Rita Teaotia - Chairperson, FSSAI

3. Shri Arun Singhal - CEO, FSSAI

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee

and the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Sub-
Committee, convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India on the
subject "Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with specific reference to
Safety of Imported Food in India" based on C&AG Report No. 37 of 2017. The Audit,
thereafter, briefed the Sub-Committee on the issues pertaining to the subject that still
remained unaddressed. Following the. briefing, the Convener desired that the

representatives of the Ministry and FSSAI be ushered in.

3. In the Introductory remarks, the Convener, Sub Committee-Il greeted the
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India and asked the officials to explain to the Sub Committee their
position with regard to Audit findings and give a brief account of the follow-up action taken
thereon for effective implementation of the Food Safety and Standards Act and the ‘Safety

Mechanism of Imported Food in India’.

4. The CEO , FSSAI briefed the Sub Committee through a Power Point Presentation
detailing the various. food. import statistics in terms of volume and value alongwith the
number of samples referred to FSSAI during the last 5 years, international best practices for
food control systems and regulatory provisions related to Food Import, food import
clearance training of the Authorised Custom Officers, international Cooperation on safety of
imported food, and the FICS model adopted by other partner Government Agencies for

Import Clearance.


wo

-५१.

BR

5. Members of the Sub Committee raised certain issues viz., the, digital clearance
systems, the testing of imported food and the samples taken and whether Customs Officers
designated by FSSAI as Authorised Officers possess a degree in any of the prescribed
disciplines, status of food consignments released despite ‘Non-Conformatory’ Report
against them, the purpose behind the rationalisation of the Points of Entry and the non

presence of FSSAI at the border areas of India, especially at the Nepal border etc.

6. The representatives replied to various queries raised by the Members on the
Subject, including the regulatory contro! over food imports through cross border haats, the
practice in other countries regarding the pre-requisite qualifications of the Authorised

Officers, the training being imparted to Authorised Officers and sample testings etc.

7. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Convener, while allowing the Ministry and FSSAI to submit
written replies to unanswered queries within 7 days, thanked the representatives for their
free and frank views on the subject and the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Sub-

Committee in their deliberations.

8. The Sub-Committee, then, directed the PAC Secretariat to come up with a
restructured draft recommendation on the above aspect, keeping in view the outcome of the
discussion of the Sub-Committee~II with the representatives of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and FSSA! and the draft report incorporating the above draft
recommendation be subsequently placed before the Public Accounts Committee for its

consideration.

The witnesses, then, withdrew,

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the
sitting has been kept on record.

The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.



Confidential

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2020-21) HELD ON 1S" DECEMBER, 2020. = °° HELD ON 14

DECEMBER, 2020

& ON Oat ०

10.
11.
12.

The Committee sat on Tuesday the 11 December 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1415

hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Jayant Sinha
$

hri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
Shri C.M. Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T.G Chandrashekhar
Shri M.L.K. Raja

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

Chairperson

- Joint Secretary
- Director
- Additional Director

TJiase


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

sk debe seer

REPRESENTATIVES OF INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
(ICAI)

kk tebe ke

REPRESENTATIVES OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (Cll)

tek sok इक फेक

REPRESENTATIVES OF FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE &
INDUSTRY (FICCI)

Yeo fekdoek अऋमेअअ
2 seh sok seek
3, see see seek
4, teietoek sok seek
5. आफ हक अऋम है tet
6. dee soho doe
7. ऋऋऋरक seek eR
8. Feet अज ek see
9, अऋआइअऋ thickiek seek
10. tokio deel dete
41. dee Jee Jee
42. seleioink soe dete
43. eek ened sete
14, ऋऋऋरूओ dork etek
45. Heel sete Yeetobk

2leus


7 Sa

16. अखफरऋ ses week
17 dene seek Jobe
18 we wee eee
19 see vee week
20 अजऋऋमे अफ& ८ seek
see आज अर Joe

21. Then, the Committee took up the following reports of the Committee for

consideration:
a) Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006;

b) ei seek ****«. and

shiek eer आऋऋऋ

०)
22... 118 first two Draft reports mentioned at (a) and (b) above, were adopted by the
Committee without any modifications. Minor changes were suggested in the last line of
Para 30 in the third report mentioned at (c).

23 deine see dice

24, The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid reports
on the basis of factual verification, suggestions of the Members and present the same to

the Hon'ble Speaker/ Parliament.

25. The Committee also proposed that three Sub-Committees viz. Sub-Committee 1
to 3 (2020-2021) may be re-constituted after the Reports on the subjects allocated to

them were finalized.

26. The Chairperson thanked the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Committee in

their deliberations.

The Committee, then, adjourned.