107

TRAINING OF OFFICERS IN INDIAN NAVY

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

HUNDRED AND SEVENTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2337

HUNDRED AND SEVENTH
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

| TRAINING OF OFFICERS IN INDIAN NAVY |

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024 -

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
PART- I
REPORT
PART — Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

a

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
18-07-2023.

| |

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
05-02-2024.

“Not appended in the report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

9० 3 9?  # ४२ ०

2

11.
12.
13.

15.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

ही ४ २:०४

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara

Dr. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

hri Shaktisinh Gohil
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O’Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

५2

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami - Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

*Elected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on
18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Hundred and Seventh Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “TRAINING OF OFFICERS IN INDIAN NAVY” based
on "Para - 2.2 of Report No 9 of 2018. है

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 07-08-2018.

3. The Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) on 18-07-2023. The Committee considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05-02-2024. The Minutes of the sittings of
the Committee are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
Part -।

Introductory

The Committee have learnt that Director of Audit (Navy), Mumbai
under instructions of Director General of Audit (Navy), New Delhi undertook an
audit review on the subject ‘Training of Officers in Indian Navy' on behalf of
Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India. The audit was conducted from
Jun to Nov 2017, wherein the audit team visited XXXXX1. Based on the
observations during the audit, Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India's
has submitted "Audit Para - 2.2 of Report No 9 of 2018 (Navy and Coast Guard)",
which included 12 sub paras. C&AG Audit Report No. 9 of 2018 on Defence
Services, Navy & Coast Guard has been tabled in Parliament on 07 Aug 2018.

2. As per the information gathered by the Committee each officer trainee of the Indian
Navy undergoes training depending upon the scheme of his or her entry and the
branch allocated to the trainee. Indian Navy has 29 training schools/
establishments, imparting training to officers. The efficacy and productivity of the Indian
Naval training organization has a direct bearing on combat readiness and
operational effectiveness of Naval platforms/ Systems and is a crucial enabler to achieve
the desired results in combat.

3. Audit observed that the XXXXX°on the training being imparted to officers of Indian
Navy. XXXXX° existed for training crew on the aspects of XXXXX*, XXXXX° practical
training is imparted through attachment to the Indian Navy's DC and FF facilities, which
is based on XXXXX°layout. XXXXX’. The results of internal assessments of Training
Establishments and Weighted Input Output Analysis have XXXXX° in the XXXXX°.

4. The Public Accounts Committee took up the subject for detailed examination and
called the representatives of the Ministry of Defence for tendering evidence before the
Committee. The Committee also sought post-evidence replies on pertinent issues. The
subject as examined by the Committee is detailed in the ensuing paragraphs.

5. The Ministry of Defence in their reply had furnished that a new simulator roadmap
has been prepared for the Indian Navy. When asked to fumish if this new
roadmapaddresses the requirement of training as raised by Audit in their report, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

"Simulator Roadmap. During the last few years there has been a
significant increase in the numbers of simulators being inducted by
the Navy for training due to obtainability of more realistic simulators

Page | 2


due to advanced technology, cost effectiveness as compared to
operating and maintaining actual platforms and capability to achieve
increased the quality of training. In order to streamline the induction
process in and to transition from a system in which simulator
induction and training is in silos, to one in which it is coordinated and
in alignment with the Navy's Missions, a ‘Simulator Roadmap for
the Indian Navy’ was promulgated by IHQ MoD(N) on 29 Nov 21.
The Roadmap has been formulated to achieve the following: -

(i) 10 establish a system of classification for simulators.

(ii) To formally integrate simulators into training syllabus.

(iil) To enhance use of simulators in continuation training.

(iv) To integrate simulator training with live operations to create a live
cum virtual environment for training.

(v) To provide a system of oversight for procurement of simulators.

(vi) To provide a link with ‘Framework of Simulators’ under
formulation by HQIDS.

(vii) To eventually transition to a ‘system of systems’ model of
simulators, wherein networking is used to optimise simulator
usage.

(viii) To create a method by which progress on the above fronts is
regularly monitored.

(a) Standing Board for Simulator Training (SBST). Since the induction
and utilisation of simulators is a continuous process, the same would evolve
with technology advances and the missions of the Navy and it is therefore
necessary that these are monitored over time and modified. Towards same
the Standing Board for Simulator Training (SBST) has been constituted as
part of the Simulator Roadmap, which is responsible for all simulators in the
Indian Navy, XXXXX'® This Standing Board is headed by
XXXXX"'! and comprises representatives from Professional Directorates at
IHQ MoD(N), Operational Commands, Class authorities of /N and
NavalTraining Schools along with a Technical Sub-Committee.

(b) As mandated on SBST, two documents viz. Guidelines for New
Simulator Procurement and Guidelines for Utilisation of in-Service
Simulators have been prepared and are under promulgation. Once
promulgated, these guidelines aim to establish the following on
promulgation: -

(i) | Procedures/ methodology to be adopted at various levels for
procurement of Simulators for training. All issues to be considered
whilst procuring new simulators like inclusion with original contracts,
maintenance philosophy for each simulator, role of each stakeholder,
classification, design/ development methodology and obsolescence
management have also been elucidated.

Page | 3


(ii) Issues wrt in-Service simulators like classification, dovetailing into
syllabi, benchmarking of utilisation rate and minimum operating
standards, enhancement of utilisation of simulators for initial training at
training units and continuation training at other organisations,
maintenance methodology to be adopted to cater for obsolescence and
necessary upgrades, networking aspects and cross utilisation by
personnel from sister Services and other civil agencies.

(c) It is evident from the foregoing that /N has established procedures
towards effectively utilising the existing simulators in the /N inventory
including aspects of maintenance methodology, obsolescence, upgrades
and networking aspects as well as laying down the process for induction of
new simulators. The implementation of guidelines mentioned above would
address XXXXX"as all aspects of training have been catered right from AON
stage of the new induction, contract stage and till delivery. This would
ensure availability of the simulator/emulator for training at respective training
establishments for the personnel to be trained prior they are positioned
onboard these platforms. "

6. When asked about the shortage in the strength of Indian Navy, the
representative of the Ministry of Defence during the oral evidence stated as
under:
"That is correct. The total strength sanctioned for sailors is XXXXX".
So, we cannot have a shortage of one lakh. The sanctioned strength
itself is XXXXX""

He further stated as under:

"That is correct. There is a shortage... But approximately, the
shortage is XXXXX"®."

7. Explaining the details of the various training facilities and the shortcomings
pointed out by the Audit, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Indian
Navy) during the evidence stated as under:

"With regard to  non-procurement of new  XXXXX*,
it is submitted that five out six, identified by audit, have already been
procured. Procurement of XXXXX" was delayed due to
discontinuation of a procurement procedure called revenue to
capital procedure and Budget constraints during COVID years.
However, the XXXXX" is presently under procurement using
Government e-Marketplace at a much lesser cost. In addition,
XXXXX"? have been positioned from Original Equipment
Manufacturers as would be evident in this short video clip. So, this is
the Diesel Engine Wing Facility at XXXXx? where we have |
000" in ample numbers as is shown on the screen.

Page | 4


The next issue is with regard to XXXXX”. It is informed that the
facility was completed in March, 2019 and is fully functional. About
16,000 trainees have utilized the facility including about two hundred
trainees from fourteen friendly foreign countries. Shown on the
screen are two photographs of the facility.

With regard to: XXXXX*, it is submitted that all equipment are
operational after having them repaired in-house, and hence, now
there is ‘nil’ impact on training. A short video clip of the Industrial
Training Wing is now shown on the screen.

With regard to XXXXxX*, it is confirmed that twenty-four simulators,
emulators, and static models have been installed in addition to live
equipment. Further, Navy-wide standardization has resulted in
requirement of lesser number of equipment at the training school.
Notwithstanding, induction of live equipment of new induction
platforms is an institutionalized process and so our policies and
standing committees. ...we are exploiting state-of-the-art AR and VR
simulators, live equipment, theoretical classes and it is a
combination of this training continuum which we aimed to achieve.

The next issue is with regard to XXXXX**. It is confirmed that a new
software XXXXX*° was sourced from the Original Equipment
Manufacturer and it was upgraded and licensed in 2020, thereby
achieving full functionality of the simulator. A photograph of the
simulator is shown on the screen now. Procurement of simulators
for XXXXX”" was XXXXX""due to the facility being first-of-its-kind and
the need for careful development of the requirements. The Facility
was commissioned in May this year and is regularly being utilized to
impart training. Photographs of the XXXXX”* Facilities are shown on
the screen.

With regard to XXXXX feedback, it is submitted that Navy has
implemented online feedback management system in 2018 which
has resulted in percentage compliance of feedback from operational
units from nine per cent in 2017 to close to eighty per cent in 2022.
We have adequate data points, as feedback, to refine our training
processes.

In order to address the XXXXX*! by introducing a 26-week bridging
course including three weeks afloat attachment onboard ships. In
addition, a comprehensive policy for conduct of XXXXX*was issued
in February, 2018. All these measures have resulted in ‘nil’
withdrawals in the last three years.

With regard to an observation that there was an increasing trend of
XXXXX™ from 2012 to 2017, it is submitted that correlation
coefficient is a function of performance at the entry level and in the
final examination. However, in the quoted period, while entry-level
test was based on 10+2 certification on subjects like Physics and

Page | 5


Mathematics, the final test was on different subjects like
seamanship and navigation, which are service subjects leading to a
XX000C When the results were compared with similar subject,
positive corelation was observed."

8. Regarding XXXXX*, representatives of the ministry during the course of

examination

explained that the reason for XXXXX% was due to unavoidable

circumstances. The ministry has brought forward the following in explanation: -

“The Phase 1 of the project was completed by Oct 19 and to ensure that
the 20000 6 undertook altemate measures such as the commissioning of
a pre-fabricated XXXXX"and resorted to XXXXXthus allowing the
XXXXX” to cater to the designated strengths to meet immediate
requirements. The execution of infrastructure projects in a time bound
manner at XXXXx“lis a challenge due to its XXXXXof the country.
These have been experienced in projects which have been executed in
Phase-l and those that are completed/ being executed in Phase-IL
Further, COVID-19 pandemic restrictions and lockdowns between the
period Mar 20 - Jun 21 had resulted in non-availability of labour and
unprecedented delays in delivery of construction materials, both of which
had severely affected the work progress in all ongoing projects of Phase-
iL Based on the progress of works, the envisaged EDC of Phase II is
31 Dec 25”

9. Regarding XXXXX*%, representatives of the ministry during the course of
examination explained that the XXXXX“was related to infrastructure delays and has
been concurrently addressed. The ministry has brought forward the following in

explanation: -

X0OXX" requirement of XXXXxX*were completed in 2016 and meets
the demands of the 20000, In the interim period, the practical
classes for XXXXX® onwards were conducted through collaboration at
XXXXX® and YOO"? for 20000 Therefore, all lab requirements of
the XXXXx were met at all times.”

10. Regarding 20000, representatives of the Ministry during the course of
examination explained that there have been many procedural changes brought out to
ensure that this issue is addressed. The Ministry has brought forward the following in

explanation: -

“New Induction Training Committee (NITC)' formulated in 2004 has
been empowered and is currently chaired by a Rear Admiral (JS level
officer) to evolve a plan for equipping training establishments with live
equipment, training aids, viz emulators/ simulators/ CBTs and IETMs,
keeping in pace with the induction of new equipment. The committee
has been able to make considerable progress in procuremenv/ induction
of equipmenl/ simulators for training units and currently, training
requirements are included in the scope of each procurement contract
being processed by procurement Directorates at NHQ. A Simulator

Page | 6


Roadmap for the Indian Navy was promulgated by NHQ in Nov 21 to
streamline procurement and utilisation of simulators at various training
units and other organisations in IN. Additionally, Standing Board for
Simulator Training (SBST) headed by a Rear Admiral has been
constituted as part of the roadmap as a single point contact for all
simulator related requirements including preparation of two
guidelines (new simulator procurement & in-service simulator
utilisation).

11. Regarding XXxxx* for training at 20000* representatives of the Ministry,
during the course of examination explained that procurement efforts have been
generally affected due to the cost implications. The ministry has brought forward the
following in explanation: -

"There was constant impetus on procuring the training aids and five out
of the six requirements projected have been met and only one
procurement of XOXO is pending. Procurement of this XXXXX°’ was
delayed due to exorbitantcosting by OEM and also few procedural
delays. To mitigate the shortfall, altemate means such as Virtual
Reality, Interactive Electronic and Technical Manual (IETM) and other
simulators and CBT packages are being used to augment the practical
understanding on XXXxXx®."”

12. Regarding 20000, representatives of the Ministry during the course of
examination explained that Nuclear Biological Chemical (NBC) training facility
has been completed in Mar 2019 and the facility is being used for training.
The Ministry has brought forward the following in explanation: -

"The IN has been training officers and sailors on NBC aspects since
1950s through introduction to theoretical concepts followed by practical
training in detection, protection measures and drills. The NBC training
facility is a training aid which has augmented effective training being
imparted to personne! till the simulator was inaugurated. The concept of a
NBC simulator had its gestation time due to the complexity of design with
no reference system available and amiving at correct procedure for
procurement to evolve a cost effective and optimal solution.
Additionally, keeping with the drive for indigenisation, the project was
awarded fo an Indian firm. The simulator has been inaugurated in Mar
2019 and the facility has enhanced understanding of trainees and
helped in building confidence and understanding of various nuances
involved in Defence against NBC attacks and handling of NBC agents.
Indian Navy is the only Navy in Asia to hold such a training facility which
has trained over 17,000 trainees which includes over 500 trainees from
Friendly Foreign Countries.”

13. Regarding 2000067 representatives of the ministry during the course
of examination explained that defective machines have been repaired
through trade/ vendors /in-house efforts and currently 100% machinery is

Page | 7


available for training. The Ministry has brought forward the following in
explanation: -

"Procurement was initiated for 34 workshop machinery but was not
progressing due to poor vendor response as most machinery was specific
to naval use and thus suffered from lack of expertise in repair as well as
spare support. However, 30 out of 34 defective machines have been
repaired through trade/ vendors/ in-house efforts and the balance 04
machines are presently are not used in training due to change in syllabus
and obsolescence over time. Hence, training requirements are effectively
achieved through 100% availability of machinery. Towards addressing the
issue in future, the procurement and modemisation is being kept pace
with Commercially off-the Shelf (COTS) machinery so as to ease
maintenance and spare issues."

14. Regarding XXxxx*', representatives of the Ministry during the course
of examination indicated that most of the equipment has been installed
either as live equipment/ simulators. The representatives also gave a
detailed plan for induction of deficient equipment with timelines. The Ministry
has brought forward the following in explanation:-

"Training Equipment at XXXXX”are 20000 Whilst impetus is taken
on procurement of original equipment itself for training in an ideal
scenario, when not feasible, all efforts are being undertaken to
augment the training by Simulators, Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual
Reality (VR), etc. For future procurements, IN has already instituted as a
policy wherein the RFPs of new induction equipment are to include a
training model of the equipment for the concerned training unit. All new
induction equipment are being procured with a corresponding training
model.”

15. Regarding 20000 representatives of the Ministry, during the course of examination
indicated that the shortfall has been mitigated by using ~ XXXXx® Software’ The

Simulator is fully functional and is being utilised for training. The ministry has
brought forward the following in explanation: -

"The 'XXXXX*”' software which is used for post processing of data was
not installed due to contractual issues with OEM leading to audit
objection. However, system was fully functional and was extensively
used for hands on training on recording and operation. The substitute
Software, which does the post processing of data akin to
XXXXX® has been sourced from Indian reps of the OEM (XXXXxx”),
Additionally, in 2020 the XXXxx’"' software was upgraded and
licensed_through OEM and is now in-date. With XXXXx" software, the
“Simulator is fully functional and is being utilised for training.
The XXXXx"Software’ is currently fulfilling the extant requirement and
DOOXXX™ software is not being procured”
16. Regarding XXXXx’> representatives of the Ministry during the course of
examination indicated that the facility has been commissioned on 02 May 23 and the
delays were due to the project being a maiden venture. The Ministry has brought
forward the following in explanation: -

Page | 8


"The contract for XXXXX”’ was signed with an Indian firm, XXXXx”on
26 Aug 19 thereby boosting indigenisation law Gol policy. The facility
has been commissioned on 02 May 23 and about 350 personnel have
been trained till date. Delays were due to the project being a maiden
venture and concept, design and proving of this venture was purely
indigenous as no foreign country or firm assisted in the same.
Additionally, the restrictions imposed due COVID-19 pandemic further
delayed project completion. With commissioning of the facility, fully
designed and implemented in-house, IN has made a quantum leap in
XOX" safety training.”

17. In regard to XXxxxrepresentatives of the ministry during the course of
examination indicated that the Online Feedback Management System (OFMS) which has
been implemented in Indian Navy provides adequate data points as feedback on
training. These feedbacks are continuously and institutionally analysed and worked
towards improvements, if necessary. The Ministry has brought forward the following
in explanation: -

“With OFMS, the feedback chain has been strengthened and currently
79% compliance has been achieved. This combined with robust system
of syllabus review every three years adds value to the refinement in
training. A new version of OFMS 3.0 incorporating features based on
suggestions received from Feedback Initiator and Feedback
Rendering Units has been launched on 20 Sep 23, which is
expected to increase the percentage of feedback received.”

18. Asked to furnish the specific efforts made to improve compliance with the
utilization of OFMS, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

Efforts taken towards improvement in compliance of the utilisation of
OFMS are as follows: -

(a) Detailed advisories are being forwarded to all stakeholders
on regular basis.

(b) Provision has been made to upload remarks of offline
feedback.

(c) | Accounts on OFMS have been created using designation-
based IDs for better accountability.

(d) Provision of automated e-mail over Naval Unified Domain
(NUD) to the Commanding Officer of the concerned unit highlighting
pending feedback on monthly basis.

(e) Necessary steps have been initiated to achieve adequate
levels of feedback. It is pertinent to mention that ५269 compliance
may not be achieved due to many rendering units "which
may only XXXXxX®. Nevertheless, a marked increase in the
compliance rate of the utilisation of OFMS for rendering of external
feedbacks has been observed post hosting of the updated version in
Mar 2018, training imparted on utilising the software by the team

Page | 9


and issuance of Training Directives and implementation of feedback
monitoring mechanism. The same is expected to improve further.

(f) The Online Feedback Management System (OFMS) had to
be unplugged from the Naval Unified Domain in Jul 2021 due to
technical issues and remained unplugged till Nov 2021. During this
period, feedbacks were generated by the training units in the offline
mode of the application, resulting in a decrease in the compliance
tate of the feedbacks in Dec 2021. Subsequent to the system being
plugged back into the domain in Nov 2021, the feedback rendering
units are being continuously liaised with for the pending feedbacks.
The improvement in utilisation status and a comparison over the
past few years is as tabulated below: -

[ Ser | Month Ending Percentage Compliance
| j | Jun 17 8.87%
| (i) | Jul 17 11.28%
| (1) | Aug 17 19.68%
iv Nov 17 29.56%
Vv) Feb 18 33.97%
vi Apr 18 36.13%
vil Jul 18 38.03%
viii Aug 18 41.28%
ix Jul 19 53.00%
x) Jul 20 64.00%
xi Jun 21 72.00%
xii Dec 21 59.38%
xiii Jun 22 74.00%
xiv Dec 22 79.00%

(g) | Anew version of OFMS 3.0 incorporating features based on
suggestions received from Feedback Initiator and Feedback
Rendering Units is under development. With an EDC of Jan 2024,
this would increase the percentage of feedback received. It is
pertinent that OFMS provides adequate data points as feedback on
training. These feedbacks are continuously and_ institutionally
analysed and worked towards improvements, if necessary.
Therefore, the current system is considered adequate.

19. Regarding the XXXXX* in training pointed out by 2000064 representatives of the
ministry during the course of examination indicated that the 0 XXXXX® are parts of
internal feedback mechanism of training in Indian Navy and 20000" The
observations have been taken cognizance of, and a slew of measures have been
implemented which resulted in Nil failures subsequently. The Ministry in this regard

"Post detailed studies, new Marine Engineering Specialisation Course
(MESC) phase of 26 weeks (inclusive of 03 weeks afloat
attachment) has been introduced wef Dec 17 as part of Engineer

Page | 10


officer's ab-initio training. This additional MESC phase has acted as a
Bridging course and has improved the understanding of officers prior to
proceeding for XXxxx*’onboard ships. Additionally, a comprehensive
policy on conduct of XXXxx® has been promulgated by NHQ in Mar 18.
Strict implementation of policy and continuous monitoring of the efficacy of
the training through external feedback has been successful in achieving
100% pass in past few years."

20. When asked to furnish the improvements made to address the XXOXx®
since the implementation of the policy on XXXXX", the Ministry in a written reply

stated as under:

(a) Clarification. The observations brought out by various
XXXXX*" boards are parts of feedback mechanism in place and may
not be construed as only shortcomings and the same have been
taken cognizance of, while implementing course corrections.
Notwithstanding, a slew of measures were already being progressed
which are enumerated as actions taken.

(b) Syllabus for Training. Based on a study undertaken as part
of revision of B. Tech (ME) syllabus at Indian Naval Academy (INA),
a new Marine Engineering Specialisation Course (MESC) phase of
26 weeks (inclusive of 03 weeks afloat attachment) has been

introduced wef Dec 17 as part of Engineer officer’s ab-
initio training. Hence, the overall training duration of
MESC for Engineer officers has been increased from
XXXXX*. This additional MESC phase has acted as a
bridging course and has improved the understanding
of various concepts in engineering of young officers
prior to proceeding for XXxxxonboard ships. The
year wise details of board results are tabulated below:-

Year Course | Str 99222 Remarks
Cleared

(Attempt)

Ea ea

12-13 | 60.075 | 26 25 01 All Qualified.

60.076 | 45 42 03 All Qualified.

13-14 | 60.077 | 42 42 [- । All Qualified.

60.078

81 79 01 All qualified except one

Change of Branch due to
permanent Low Medical
Category (LMC).

Page | 11



14-15 | 60.079 Pe | 01 All qualified except two
who were withdrawn from
service.

60.080 | 37 37 [- | All Qualified.

15-16 | 60.081 | 52 44 | | All qualified except two
who were withdrawn from
service |

60.082 | 50 45 05 All Qualified.

16-17 | 60.083 | 55 48 05 All qualified except one
who expired during
training and one was
placed in LMC.

60.084 | 34 30 01 One change of Branch
due to PmtLMC, 02
cleared with 20000
17-18 | 60.085 | 40 38 | Two failures cleared with
2000006
60.086 | 48.1 43 | | 04 cleared with >ठठठठ2,
01 placed in LMC
18-19 | 60.087 | 03 03 [=| All Qualified
60.088 | 57 57 [- ।
19-20 | 60.089 | 52 48 | | Four failures cleared with
200000/
60.090 | 62 62 Nil All Qualified
Year | Course | Str 90052 P= |
Cleared
(Attempt)
Ea fd
60.091 | 31 26 02 Two failures conjoined with
2000060
20-21 | 60.092 | 50 43 07 All Qualified
60.093 | 32 32 | -- [101 Qualified
21-22 | 60.094 57 57 |-- | All Qualified
60.095 37 34 | 03 All Qualified
(c) Policy Measure. Comprehensive policy on conduct of XXXXX'has

been promulgated by IHQ MoD(N) in Mar 18. Strict implementation and
continuous monitoring of the efficacy of the bridging course through external
feedback including from examination boards is being incorporated.

(d) Eeedback. The recommendation of Boards along with other feedback
mechanisms continue to be the mainstay of inputs for periodic revision of
syllabus and training duration if there is a need.

Page | 12


(e) It can be seen that there has been a definite improvement in the
trainees post above actions.

21. Regarding XXxXxx'”output analysis and increasing trend of XXXXx'”,
representatives of the ministry during the course of examination indicated that the
observation was due to an erroneous calculation done between 20000/%" Further,
analysis done between similar subjects that is 10+2 and engineering subjects indicated a
positive correlation. The projected Extended Delivery Schedule (EDS) for various
equipment, such as XXxxx'® Asked to furnish the present status of these
projects, the MoD in a written reply stated as under:

2000060

Asked to state the impact of the 20000 of the Indian Navy and the 200006%66
the country, the Indian Navy in a written reply stated as under:

(a) Delay in delivery of above equipment is not envisaged.
(b)  XXXXx™ are available at XXXXX for training.
(c) 2000067 Trainer is available at XXXXx'? and is

available for use by trainees 0 20000677

22. Regarding the XXXxx"" the Ministry replied as under:

"The sanction and the procurement of the 2000067 was undertaken
in right earnest and the chronological sequence is enumerated
below:-

(a) XXXXx"® had directed XXXxx'to take up a SOC for
20000/7 XXKKX", as per XXXXXdirectives, forwarded specific
requirements and capabilities intended for 2000067 to various
firms. The firms requested to undertake a detailed study and forward
project reports to 20000/2 by end Oct 14. As the estimated cost
was beyond the financial powers of Command HQs, the case was
required to be taken up under the Capital Route by IHQ MoD(N).

(b) The following challenges were overcome prior accord of AoN
by Competent Authority: -

(i) Necessity for re-aligning the case with DPP-16 post promulgation.
(i) Non-availability of existing design of XOOX’™with any vendor.
Therefore, the technical requirements had to be determined through
extensive staff process.

(iii) | Requirement of accommodating XXXxx"* capabilities for
XXXXX"Sdifferent classes of 20000/2 operated by the IN in a single

Page | 13


training facility required extensive deliberations between IN and
DRDO.

(iv) Due to non-availability of any existing design, the
assessment of financial implication of the first of its kind Training
Facility required extensive deliberations with MoD (Fin).

(c) 116 contract for 2000007 Simulator for XXXxx'” was signed
with an Indian firm, M/s XXXXx'%on 26 Aug 19 at a total value of Rs
67.6 Cr inclusive of taxes thereby boosting indigenisation jaw Gol
policy. The Facility has been commissioned on 02 May 23 and
about XXXxx" personnel from various organisations like 2000067
have been trained till date.

(d) The chronological sequence of event towards the acquisition
of the said trainer in a tabulated form is as under:

Ser | Date | Event

(i) 26 Aug 19 Contract Signed

(ii) 06 Sep 19 Presentation by Firm at IHQ
MoD(N)/XXxxx"9?

(iii) 26 Sep 19 ‘| Visit to Fire Fighting Simulator at XXXx)

(iv) 03 Oct 19 Presentation by Firm to all board members

(५) 28 Nov 19 Scrutiny and final approval of Civil Drawings
by Board Members

(vi) 22 Jan 20 Scrutiny and final approval of Structural

Drawings of Building by Board Members

(vii) 10 Feb 20 Design of Internal arrangements of
simulators.

(viii) 25 Aug 20 Draft Design drawings by submitted by the

firm
(ix) 15 Sep 20 Foundation Stone laying by XXX"
(x) 15 Sep 20 Construction of Admin & Utility buildings
(xi) 13 Aug 21 Fabrication & Erection of XXxXXx’™sheds
(xii) 26 Nov 21 Readiness of draft software for simulation for
trials

(xiii) 02 May 23 ‘| Facility Commissioned"

Page | 14



23. Cooperative engagement with friendly foreign countries is mentioned as a
way to broaden the horizons of naval personnel. However, there have been
XXXXx"® for personnel to participate in such engagements. Asked to furnish
the plan of the Indian Navy to increase the scope and frequency of cooperative
engagements with foreign navies to facilitate knowledge sharing and skill
development, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

(a) Training of Foreign Personnel. IN 185 been __ providing
training to foreign personnel in India for more than five decades,

during which it has trained over 19000 (9412 Officers and 9710
sailors) foreign personnel from over 46 Friendly Foreign Countries.
During the present Training Year (TY) 2023-24 which commenced
on 01 Jul 23, XXXxx’vacancies has allocated to FFCs in the
various courses conducted at IN Training Establishments.

(b) Mobile Training Teams. Special impetus has been laid on
sending Mobile Training Teams (MTT) to Friendly Foreign
Countries. This endeavour has not only reduced the burden on our
own training infrastructure but also effectively increased our training
footprint in the FFCs.

(c) Visit of Training Delegation. In order toshowcase the
IN’sstandard of training as well as training facilities visit of Foreign
Training delegation is undertaken at regular basis. IN teams also
visit FFCs to understand the training methodology and exchange of
best practices.

(d) Admiral’s Cup. The Admiral’s Cup Sailing Regatta has
gained popularity over the years and each consecutive edition has
seen wider participation. The Admiral’s Cup 2022 edition was held
from 04 to 10 Dec 22, saw participation of 25 foreign Navies (28
teams). For the forthcoming edition of Admirals Cup 2023 scheduled
from 03 to 09 Dec 23, invites have been extended to 63 FFCs.

(e) Deputation of JN Personnel for Courses/_ Training
Abroad. Every year 20000/3 approx IN personnel are deputed

for various training courses. The courses include National Defence
Course, Higher Command Courses, Staff Courses and niche
technology / capacity building course. Personnel are also deputed
for Sea Training onboard foreign Naval Ships, Seminars, Cadet
exchange program with Naval academies and Sailing Regattas.
Other training visits include Foreign Study Tours for officers
undergoing NHCC course at NWC, Goa."

Joint Training and Collaboration with Other Services.

Page | 15


24. The Indian Navy emphasizes the importance of joint training and mentions
the identification of vacancies for subscription by three services in each other's
training facilities. However, the actual implementation and execution of joint
training programs have been limited.

In regard to the measures being taken to ensure effective utilization of joint
training opportunities, the Ministry in a written reply stated :

“Joint Training. A number of Joint courses are undertaken at
various levels between the three services, both at Tri - Services
Institutes (viz NDA, DSSC, MILIT, CDM, NDCetc) and at Service
specific training establishments (viz AFA, Diving School, CME etc).
All these courses significantly contribute towards Joint Training. The
Joint Training Committee (JTC) at HQIDS coordinates all the
requirements of individual services for the courses being conducted
in the Tri-Services Institutes. Further, the course content and syllabi
of these courses, coordinated under the aegis of HQIDS/ JTC,
focuses on Jointmanship and synergy.

(a) In addition, a large number of courses are conducted by
individual services with participation of personnel from the sister
services. The syllabi and vacancies are deliberated bilaterally
between services. The sharing of experiences, and deliberation of
inter-service training requirements at service specific institutes also
takes place at the highest level in the Tri-Services Training
Command Conference (TSTCC), which is a major forum to discuss
Joint Training. As a follow up of decisions of Combined
Commanders Conference 2017, a COSC Directive was issued for a
Study on XXxXxx" on Training bySHQs, with IN as lead service.
The study report was submitted to COSC on 25 Jul 17 and
approved thereafter in Aug 17. Based on the recommendations
brought out in the study report, subscription to additional courses by
the three Services in each other’s training establishments was also
discussed and highlighted during the Tri-Services Training
Commands Conference (TSTCC) held at HQARTRAC in early
Nov 17. Consequently, Services have commenced subscription
to the additional courses with each other, thereby enhancing
Jointmanship.”

Page | 16


PART - Il
Observations/Recommendations

Training

1 The Indian Navy is one of the most important arms of our Defence Forces. It
undertakes onerous duties not only during war time in combating the threat
perception but also plays an important role in safeguarding our maritime boun-
daries. Indian Navy works in consonance with several Navies of our friendly
countries and keeps a constant vigil in the Indian Oceans not only from the an-
gle of Defence but also by way of checking illegal trade and menace of pirates
etc. It is a multi-dimensional force that has been organized to safeguard India’s
maritime territorial integrity and other maritime interests. Indian Navy is a well
balanced and cohesive force capable of effectively safeguarding our national in-
terests.

Of all the elements that go into making an effective and vibrant Navy,
training of personnel is of paramount importance. Training equips the
personnel with the necessary skills, knowledge, and physical fitness to face a
diverse range of challenges and threats. From mastering advanced weaponry
and tactical strategies to developing teamwork and leadership abilities,
comprehensive training prepares personnel to handle complex and dynamic
situations with resilience and precision.

The Committee take note of the excellent training facilities and procedures

set in place by Indian Navy to ensure all round training of Officers. The training

Page | 17


done in multiple stages at varying seniority is carefully gradated to ensure well qualified
personnel for each job.
The Committee note that the audit observation regarding non- availability of
training aids and equipment for newly inducted platforms is being addressed by
Indian Navy through refining of procurement procedures and laying down
roadmap for induction and utilisation of simulators. The Committee further note
that cost implication is a major factor in capital procurement cases and
operational requirements are always prioritised over training. However, the
Committee emphasise that training is the most important peace time activity of
any fighting force and adequate impetus needs to be given for procurement of
training aids.
2 The mitigation measures adopted by Indian Navy in circumventing training
gaps caused due to delay in procurement of customised workshop machinery in-
clude, carrying out repairs through trade/ vendors /in-house efforts. These
efforts have led to considerable savings to exchequer. Such initiatives need to per-
colate to other wings/divisions to set an example and act as a motivating factor.
3 Training Budget

The Committee would like to recommend allocating a dedicated
budget head specifically for training purposes. This would ensure that
training programmes receive the necessary financial resources without
being compromised or overshadowed by other budgetary concerns. The

Committee would recommend the Directorate of Naval Plans and IHQ MoD

Page | 18


(Navy) to prioritize the creation of a dedicated training budget head to
enhance the training capabilities of the Indian Navy.

4, The Committee would like to recommend that Navy not only revisit its
funding structure and consider increasing the budgetary allocations for
training programmes but also facilitate specialized training initiatives on
the basis of specific requirements collated by the Commands concerned. A
thorough and comprehensive assessment of training needs should be
conducted across all Commands and Units within the Indian Navy. This
assessment should focus on identifying the specific areas where training
requires improvement. By understanding the training gaps, the Navy can
allocate resources more effectively, ensuring that the training budget is
utilized to address the most critical needs and areas for improvement.

5. The Committee feel that the effectiveness of training programmes
should be regularly evaluated to assess their impact on operational
readiness and performance. By implementing robust performance
evaluation mechanism, the Committee feel that the Indian Navy can
determine the return on investment for its training initiatives. This the
Committee feel, will enable informed decision-making regarding budgetary
allocations and ensure that resources are directed towards training
programmes that deliver the best results. In this regard, the Committee
also recommend that the Navy should allocate a portion of the training

budget towards mental skill development, leadership development and

Page | 19


stress management etc. This form of specialized training will contribute to
the overall competence and adaptability of the naval personnel.

6. REFINING OF PROCEDURES

The Committee are of the opinion that the procedures for capital
procurements are leading to considerable delays in materialising various projects.
Refining the process and induction of e-governance initiatives into the system should
aid in simplifying the procedures thereby ensuring timely provisioning. Additionally,
strict monitoring of timelines by the Ministry should be implemented and delays
should be identified and active corrective measures implemented.

7. SHARING OF BEST PRACTICES BETWEEN SERVICES

The Committee recommend that best practices followed in the Indian
Navy and other Services which has led to mitigation of shortfalls may be shared
between the Services through interactions at all levels. This will improve
interoperability and ensure collective improvement in providing services to
citizens.

8. THRUST ON INDIGENISATION

The Committee emphasise the need to provide adequate impetus to
indigenisation and recommend strengthening the industry-academia
collaboration for research and development. The efforts of Indian Navy in this area
are well appreciated but the delays could have been reduced with better cooperation at
all levels. The govemment may institute a framework for such cooperation and

provide avenues for mutual exchange of ideas to bridge the gap.

Page | 20


9, JOINT TRAINING

The Committee recommend that since the armed forces are on the verge
of shifting to Theatre Commands, a relook should be cast on aspects to promote
Jointmanship at both working and planning level. Implementation of
measures such as joint capsules by lead service, optimising training effort by re-
organising common training requirement by forming various Joint Services Training
Institutes and cross posting of staff at both training and operational levels will
pave way to smooth implementation of Theatre Commands.

10. | CYBER SECURITY & SPACE SECURITY

With the advent of weapons capable of even attacking space-based
assets, the Indian Navy need to prepare for such threats through adequate training.
Additionally, Cyber Space is the new medium of warfare and with all sophisticated
weapons being controlled by computers, the Indian Navy need to invest in training in the
field of Cyber security for preparing to meet the future challenges.

11. FUTUREPROOFING TRAINING REQUIREMENTS

On the above aspect, the Committee recommend that existing polices/
strategies! vision documents should continue to be evolved towards evaluating the
needs of Futuristic Warfare and catering to changes which may be required in
training paradigm to ‘futureproof training. This will ensure that the Indian Navy
continues to be a combat ready force in war-time based on the effectiveness and

high-standards of its training in peace-time.

Page | 21


12. CAPACITY BUILDING OF TRAINERS AND OPTIMIZATION OF RESOURCE ALLO-

CATION FOR TRAINING

The Committee emphasize the need to work on capacity building of trainers
and a review of the training module.. The Committee also recommend regular assessment
of training needs, focusing on effectiveness, and allocating resources accordingly.

The Committee would like to reiterate the critical need for a dedicated training

budget and recommend optimization of resource allocation for training purposes.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Page | 22