108

DREDGING ACTIVITIES IN KOLKATA PORT TRUST

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

HUNDRED AND EIGHTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO, 2338

HUNDRED AND EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DREDGING ACTIVITIES IN KOLKATA PORT
TRUST

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08-02-2024
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08-02-2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
' NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (v)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
PART-1
REPORT
PART - il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
31.10.2023.

| |

Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on
05-02-2024.

*Nol appended to the Report



PN OA Rw

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22,

PON >

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC SOMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Or. Satya Pal Singh

Shri Brijendra Singh

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha

Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil,
Dr. K Laxman

Shri Derek O'Brien*
Shri Tiruchi Siva

Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
Dr Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
Shri Partha Goswami ~ Director

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary
Shri Vijay Mishra - Committee Officer

Chairperson

" Blected w.e.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this hundred and Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Dredging activities in Kolkata Port Trust’ based on Para No. 6.1 of the C&AG Report
No. 10 of 2020 relating to the Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways.

2. The C&AG Report No. 10 of 2020 was laid on the Table of the House on 23.09.2020.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024), selected the aforesaid subject for
detailed examination and took briefing by Audit and oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways on the subject matter on 31-10-2023, Based
on the oral evidence and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail in

2023-24.

4. Public Accounts Committee (2023-2024) considered and adopted the Draft Report
on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 05.02.2024. The Minutes of the
Sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- Il of the Report.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information in connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
05 February, 2024 Chairperson,

16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


DREDGING ACTIVITIES IN KOLKATA PORT TRUST BASED ON PARA 6.1
OF C&AG REPORT NO. 10 OF 2020

Introductory

The Committee have learnt that Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port,
Kolkata (SMPK) (Formerly Kolkata Port Trust) is India's sole riverine port
and it features two docks: Kolkata Dock System (KDS) and Haldia Dock
Complex (HDC). Under the administration of the Kolkata Port Trust
(KoPT) and reporting to the Ministry of Shipping (MoS). This port plays a
crucial role in catering to a vast hinterland encompassing Eastern India,
North Eastern States, and landlocked nations such as Nepal and Bhutan.
Being a riverine Port the navigational channels experiences high rate of
siltation. In order to maintain depth, SMPK undertakes maintenance
dredging. The narrative provides an overview of the shipping channels
originating from Sandheads, with a focus on the Haldia Channel leading to
HDC and the Kolkata Channel leading to KDS. Additionally, it
acknowledge alterations in the shipping routes following the inauguration
of the Eden Channel in March 2016.

Lack of long term strategic plan

2. Audit observed that the navigation channel of KoPT experiences a
high rate of siltation. This causes clogging of the navigation channel which
requires periodic maintenance dredging. Therefore, a long term strategic
plan for dredging activity by KoPT was essential to combat deterioration in
the navigable depth of the channel. However, KoPT had not prepared any
long term strategic dredging plan, detailing guidelines such as interval of
conducting survey of spur and river, timeline for actions to be taken on the
basis of above survey, alignment and re-alignment of shipping channel,
steps to combat unwarranted situations like sudden fall in depth at a

2[ Page


specific bar etc.

3. When the Committee wanted to know about the clarity on the dredging

4.

policies and instructions issued by the Ministry of Shipping (MoS) to
KoPT, the Ministry in its written reply informed as under:-

“The strategic plans of SMPK as regards to maintenance
dredging involves hiring of dredgers for achieving the desired
depths for shipping movement which includes monitoring of
dredging activities by involving outside agencies and
consultants and in-house experts. Further, SMPK has abided
by all the instructions of the Cabinet/Ministry/PIB while
formulating the dredging contract. It is reiterated that SMPK
and MoPSW are on the same page in this regard”.The audit in
Para 6.1 of their report No 10 of 2020 observed a lack of a
long-term strategic plan for dredging activities at the Kolkata
Port Trust (KoPT). The navigation channel frequently
experienced siltation, requiring regular maintenance dredging
to prevent a decline in navigable depth. KoPT had not
formulated a comprehensive strategic dredging plan, outlining
crucial guidelines such as survey intervals, timelines for
necessary actions based on surveys, alignment adjustments
for the shipping channel, and strategies to address unexpected
depth issues. The absence of a long-term plan originating from
the strategic framework for dredging further compounded the
issue."

When asked about the reason for not developing a comprehensive,
long-term strategic plan for dredging despite awareness of high siltation
rates in KoPT, the Ministy’s reply highlighted the challenges of being a
riverine port subject to extreme hydro-dynamic changes. It emphasized
continuous monitoring and engagement of reputable institutes for scientific
studies to address depth-related issues. The reply outlined the historical
context, the deployment of dredgers since 1906, and the engagement of
experts to offer solutions. Regarding the query about KoPT striving to

3] Page


increase the target depth, the Ministry in their written reply referred to the
impracticality of fixing a 6.4 meters target, citing past experiences and the
absence of advice from consultants. In regard to the ad-hoc annual
dredging ‘plans not aligning with contractual obligations with DCIL, the
Ministry in their reply attributed the unpredictability of the River Hooghly,
necessitating year-round dredging. The reply emphasized the use of long-
term contracts and periodic adjustments based on expert advice.

Concerning the Board of Trustees (BoT) not being apprised of
dredging activities, the reply of the Ministry asserted that all contracts
were approved by the BoT, and detailed reports were communicated to
the Ministry. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways stated that
performance reports could be presented to the BoT, if advised. Regarding
dredging policies from the Ministry of Shipping (MoS), the reply of the
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways asserted compliance with their
own instructions, particularly highlighting alignment with guidelines and
policies issued in 2015, 2016, and 2021. The response to the omission of
performance analysis in the Annual Administrative Report explained that
the consultant conducts performance analysis, and future reports might
include it if advised.

The Management asserted in September 2019 that the delay in
finalizing the dredging tender was unavoidable due to various reasons,
including issues with benchmark depth and changes in scope advised by
the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways. However, these
contentions were deemed unacceptable as lapses in defining benchmark
depth and failure to consider quantity-based dredging payment terms
were identified. The delay of 33 months in finalizing the dredging contract
was considered avoidable, resulting from procedural lapses in the tender
document.

The Ministry's claim that guidelines issued in March 2001 stipulated
payment based on guaranteed minimum depth was countered, as there
was no restriction on incorporating quantity-based dredging payment

4|[Page


terms. Such terms were found beneficial after their inclusion in the
dredging contract effective from January 2017.

8. In the case of ineffective dredging at Jellingham, the Management
and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways argued that Audit's view
was based on post-dredging results, which couldn't be predicted in a
dynamic riverine environment. However, this contention was rejected,
emphasizing the importance of maintaining the required depth at
Jellingham for effective dredging.

Oversight of Board of Trustees

9. Audit has also revealed that the Board of Trustees (BoT) was not
informed about dredging performance, despite monthly presentations on
Port Operation Metrics. The Management's assertion in September 2019,
claiming that the dredging contract was awarded to the Dredging
Corporation of India Limited (DCIL) based on policies from the Ministry of
Shipping (MoS), and that annual dredging performance was included in
the Annual Administrative Report for the BoT, was found to be
unsubstantiated. The MoS had not formulated or circulated any such
dredging plan or policy.

Unsatisfactory Performance by DCIL

10. The audit also identified unsatisfactory performance by the
Dredging Corporation of India Limited (DCIL) in its dredging contracts with
Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT). Initially engaged for dredging in the Haldia
channel with a target depth of 6.4 meters at Jellingham, DCIL failed to
consistently maintain the specified depth, leading to subsequent contract
revisions with reduced target depths. The lack of achievement persisted
until December 2016. Despite open tender attempts, KoPT awarded DCIL
a contract in January 2017 with a target depth of 4.1 meters. The
incorporation of new payment terms, linking payment to the quantity
dredged, contributed to achieving the target depth. .

5| Page


11. When asked why KoPT is not striving to increase the target depth of
the navigation Channel to the desired 6.4meters, the Ministry in its written
reply informed as under:-

“SMPK fixes target depths for dredging contracts based on
scientific studies and considering the achievability of the same
in a complex dynamic river system with perennial siltation. In
this regard, it is relevant to refer to the case of additional
dredging being carried out at Jellingham in the year 1998-99
wherein the experts in the dredging field M/s. HAM Dredging of
Netherlands were deployed to achieve a depth of 6.1 m in a
period two years with a quantity to be dredged of about 16
million cubic meter. In spite of dredging a quantity of 18 million
cubic meter, the depth of 5.6 m only could be achieved and the
dredging contract was terminated as they could not achieve the
targeted depth even after dredging more than the tendered
quantity. This depth also could not be sustained being un-
maintainable in such dynamic river regime in spite of dredging
effort. In view of this, it would be unrealistic to fix a target of 6.4
m. Moreover, SMPK has never been advised by any of the
consultants and Advisory Committees to fix such targets. From
the existing records it could not be found out that targeted
depth was 6.4 Mtr ever’.

12. To a query as to why KoPT's ad-hoc annual dredging plans didn't
correspond with the contractual obligations set with the dredging
contractor, DCIL, the Ministry in its written reply informed as under:-

“River Hooghly is subjected to highly unpredictable dynamic
and morphological changes specially at the lower estuary
below Diamond Harbour necessitating dredging requirement
throughout the year for which SMPK has dredging contract with
DCIL in place with an annual plan on quantity and depth to be
achieved for safe shipping movement and reduction of dead
freighting. From 2002, SMPK entered into long term depth-

6|[Page


oriented contract (main objective of the dredging contract is to
maintain required depth) with DCIL where the projected depth
has been formulated considering hydraulic studies and
achievability. Since 2017, SMPK, as per the advice of IIT,
Madras, has entered into five yearly dredging contract, finalized
through open tender, with prefixed quantity to be dredged for
maintaining the depths at the governing bars with provision of
interim course correction”.

13. Audit has observed that the KoPT navigation channel faces
significant siltation issues, requiring periodic maintenance dredging to
prevent clogging. Despite this, KoPT lacked a crucial long-term strategic
plan for dredging activities. Notably, dredging at HDC began with a target
depth of 6.4 meters, but KoPT failed to establish an independent, long-
term vision to strive for achieving and maintaining this target depth.
Instead, KoPT relied on the depth achievable by DCIL. While KoPT
generated annual ad-hoc plans for dredging, these sometimes exceeded
the contracted target depth with DCIL. Furthermore, the Board of Trustees
was not kept informed. about dredging performance, despite receiving
updates on other port operations. In this regard, during the oral evidence it

‘was asked whether KoPT is maintaining the target depth as per the
dredger or dredging that can be done.

14. On the above point the representative of the Ministry during the
oral evidence replied as under:

"This is as per the scientific study as well as hydrological study.
We are also getting advice and technical inputs from IIT-
Madras. "

It was further stated:

"We have been policing the guidelines ofthe Ministry from
2001. We have been advised by the Ministryto give it to DCIL
on a nomination basis. On 2007, the policygot confirmed to

7[ Page


give it on a tender basis. But Kolkata Portwas exempted from
it. In 2013, we had been advised to go on atender basis. In
2014, we floated a tender. But DCIL quoted itat a higher rate, ©
that is, 73 per cent higher than theexisting rate. At the same
time, two studies were also being31-10-2023 Public Accounts
Committee undertaken. It was delayed. In 2016, the same. was
awarded on atender basis and also on quantity basis."

15. When asked whether a single entity will continue the job forever and
whether this aligns with the dredging policy, the representative of the
Ministry during the oral evidence replied as under:

"No, Sir. We had given it on an open tender basis in 2016. It
was also on the basis of a quantity."

Discrepancies in Target Depth and losses

16. Audit had specifically mentioned that the dredging was commenced
as HDC with a target depth of 6.4 metres. When queried whether KoPT’s
fixing of the target depth was based on the depth achievable by DCIL, the
representatives of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways stated that:

"Sir, the target of depth, which is crucial for our sedimentation
station, is achieved through the sedimentological and
hydrological methods of our sediment station. It has a cost. So,
we test how much million tonne cubic metre of dredging can be
done on a yearly basis. We cannot fix it arbitrarily. We have to
fix the depth which we can maintain. In 1998-99, a company
from Holland dredged it but they could also not maintain it.
They were asked to go to 5.7 and 6.3.They only went for 5.7.
They left the tender and it was closed."

17. However, the average achieved depth remained below the
envisaged comfort depth of five meters and the ideal target of 6.4 meters,
impacting vessel carrying capacities. KoPT estimated a loss of 45.27

8[ Page


million metric tons of cargo valued at 1,419.70 crore from 2013 to 2019
due to reduced utilization of cargo vessel capacities. Additionally, scrutiny
of DCIL's dredging activity from April 2013 to December 2016 revealed
operational deficiencies, including inadequate dredger deployment,
frequent breakdowns, and delayed replacement of old dredgers.

18. The Management's contention that target depth compromises were
based on achievability rather than DCIL's performance was rejected.
KoPT's negotiation of the 4.1-meter target in the 2017 contract
contradicted this claim. The Ministry's assertion that low depth between
2013 and 2015 was due to Island formation was disputed, as the islands
existed since 1997.

19. Audit also observed an additional expenditure of €2.71 crore was

incurred by KoPT in the monitoring work of dredging. In January 2017,
KoPT awarded_.a five-year maintenance dredging contract to DCIL, and
subsequently, WAPCOS was appointed in June 2017 for auditing the
dredging works at a cost of 21.76 crore over 54 months. The
Management, realizing the vast scope of the monitoring work, delayed
revising it to align with the dredging contract. This delay led to additional
expenses, and only in January 2019, the scope was revised, reducing the
contract price by 40 percent. The Management and Ministry contended in
September 2019 and December 2019 that the delay was due to gaining
experience and implementing further trimming of deliverables without
compromising quality, resulting in cost savings. However, this contention
was deemed unacceptable, as the Management was aware of the
vastness of the scope before finalizing the monitoring contract, and the
revision occurred after an 18-month delay, lacking justification.

Increase in Turn Round Time

20. Concerning the increase in Turn Round Time (TRT) of vessels, the
Syama Prasad Port Trust Management justified it by citing the dynamic
Hooghly Estuary and the necessity for frequent shifting and re-aligning of
the shipping channel. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways

9[ Page


added that despite additional costs, lighterage operations were cheaper
and preferable. However, these contentions were not accepted, and the
Audit in their report observed increase in TRT at KoPT was considered
detrimental to port efficiency, impacting port users who had to bear
additional demurrage charges and extra expenditures.

Shortcomings in Spur Construction and Maintenance

21. Regarding the new approach to spur maintenance and to ensure
that it follows a strategic plan including both preventive and reactive
measures, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:-

“SMPK proactively monitors the spurs as per well laid
examination regime, comprising close grid bathymetric survey
and examination. If such examinations detect any requirement
of nourishment or any correctional works, necessary schemes
are formulated and Civil Engineering Dept executes the
schemes. Above examinations are done in tandem with survey
of the adjoining reach and such routine examination and
monitoring help maintain stable channels.

As per extant examination regime (formulated in 2021), most of
the spurs are supposed to be inspected/surveyed 2 to 3 times
every year. However, in case of damaged spur, frequency of
survey is to be increased for monitoring and formulation of
nourishment scheme’.

22. The audit observed that short spurs, constructed in the 1970s to
prevent bank erosion and establish a stable channel, were not adequately
maintained and allowed to deteriorate. Despite the construction of 13
major spurs and 154 short spurs in the upper and lower reaches of the
Hooghly River, five short spurs were washed away, and many required
nourishment due to the gradual deterioration of the Haldia-Balari channel.
In October 2008, KoPT decided to execute nourishment/rebuilding works

10 |? ०8९


for these spurs in phases, excluding the Nischintapur area. The omission
of this area, as of August 2019, undermined the purpose of spur
construction and adversely affected the navigational channel's depth.
Additionally, the cost assessment in September 2016 indicated that the
project's cost would rise to approximately 30 to 35 crore, revealing an ad-
hoc and piecemeal approach without clear targets and committed
resources for completion.

23. When enquired about the steps taken by KoPT to ensure a strategic
and proactive approach to the construction and maintenance of spurs in
the future, the Committee were informed:

"It seems that the query is related to the short spurs at
Nischintapur area. There are altogether 154 short spurs
between Kulpi Pagoda and New Silver Tree Point. The short
spurs between Kulpi Pagoda and Nischintapur area have
already been embedded. In other words, such spurs have
served their purpose and stablised the river channel. Balance
spurs between Nischintapur and Silver Tree Point are
exposed to the open estuary and as a result, they are more
vulnerable to damage. Hence, nourishment works have been
carried out in 1992-93, 2009-10, 2019 onwards. However,
records of works, if any, before 1992 are not readily
traceable.

SMPK (KoPT) proactively monitors the spurs through well laid
examination regime, comprising close grid bathymetric survey
and examination. If such examinations detect any
requirement of nourishment or any correctional works,
necessary schemes are formulated and Civil Engineering
Dept executes of the schemes. Above examinations are done
in tandem with survey of the adjoining reach and such routine
examination and monitoring help maintain stable channels."

24. When asked to elaborate on the significance of maintaining spurs for
11 |? 98 ९


the stability of navigation channels, the Ministry in its written stated as

under:-

“Construction and maintenance of spurs are generally

carried out:

(i) to restrict widening of the river due to bank erosion.

(ii) 10 optimize / reduce / eliminate the requirement of
Dredging by channelizing the water flow in a
particular direction.

(iii) to hold the estuarine frame.

For stability of the navigational channel, spurs are surveyed
at a regular interval (health check) and any maintenance/
nourishment required is undertaken by River Training Cell of
SMPK through open tender. In certain cases, delay took
place due to non-availability of material and selection of
contractors”.

25. The Ministry also contended that the delay in spur repair and
nourishment did not affect the boundary condition or result in bank
erosion. When posed with the query as to why KoPT's assessment
contradict this, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:

"The navigable depth over the reach adjoining to
Nischintapur area are asfollows:

26. TimelYear | 27. Navigable depth
(Below Chart Datum)
in Mt

6. 2 14
014 .
2
छू 2 |
019 .
9
0, 2 Fol
023(October) 0

The reach does not require any dredging. Such

12|Page


observations indicate that there was no adverse effect."
Disposal practices and impact on navigation

26. The Audit also pointed out the shortcomings in the disposal
practices of dredged material at Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT). The report
emphasizes that the channels leading to HDC (Haldia Dock Complex)
experience heavy siltation, requiring ongoing dredging for navigability. The
two predominant methods of disposal are river dumping and shore
dumping. Despite the preferred effectiveness of shore disposal, KoPT
primarily relies on river dumping until February 2020.

27. Asked about the strategic adjustments in the pipeline to guarantee
that the maintenance of spurs and dredging operations are executed
punctually and in harmony with each other, the Ministry in their written
replies has furnished as under:

"The concerned departments of SMPK i.e. HSD, Marine
Department and Civil Engineering Department, though work in
coordination with each other in association with the NTCPWC.
Often construction/nourishment of spur gets delayed due to
non- availability of required civil engineering materials for
which Government of West Bengal is being actively pursued."

. 28. The channel leading to HDC is prone to heavy siltation which
results in clogging of the navigation channel. KoPT, therefore, has to carry
out dredging on continuous basis to maintain the navigability of the
shipping channel. Effective dredging depends on proper disposal of
dredged material. Mainly two practices of disposal of dredged material viz.
shore dumping and river disposal is followed. In the shore dumping
process, dredged material is discharged to shore through pipeline or by
barge. In the river dumping, dredged material is dumped in the designated
area of the river itself or through side casting considering the morphology
of the river. Disposal of dredged material of 10 to 20 MM3 per annum
approximately becomes a major constraint for KoPT. KoPT undertook

13 | Page


mainly river dumping of dredged material in the deep pockets of the river
and very small portion of the same by side casting method. Shore
disposal is preferred and most effective method which was not started by
KoPT till February 2020.

29. Asked to explain the frequency of dredging required in the channel
leading to HDC due to heavy siltation and the impact of this siltation on
the navigability of the shipping channel and the measures in place to
ensure continuous and effective dredging to maintain navigability, the
Ministry in its written reply stated as under:

"The shipping channel leading to HDC is dredged throughout
the year by engaging on an average three dredgers of hopper
volume approximately 15000 cubic meters in total, daily. The
annual quantity hovers around 8 million cubic meter."

30. On the two main practices for the disposal of dredged material:
shore dumping and river disposal and the advantages and disadvantages
of each method, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

"SMPK primarily undertakes river disposal at designated
dumping grounds in deep water identified through
mathematical studies. Shore disposal can be undertaken only
when suitable land is available in close proximity of the
dredging site, the probability of reuse of dredged material
dumped ashore along with the additional cost involved for
such operation.

For selection of shore dumping or river dumping, the
determining criteria is the cost involved in each of such
operation. In the dredging guideline of 2021, both disposal
methods have been recommended depending on suitability
and cost effectiveness."

31. The Audit report also raised concerns about the consequences of

14|Page


river dumping, including re-circulation of dredged material in the shipping
channel due to insufficient depth of dumping grounds. It highlighted
recommendations by experts to implement shore disposal for complete
removal of dredged material from the river system. Additionally, the report
discussed specific issues related to dredging at Lower Eden, the
narrowing of the navigable width at Haldia Anchorage, and the need for
effective management practices, including pursuing suitable land for shore
disposal. It criticized the Management's contentions, asserting that the
delay in implementing shore disposal lacked justification, leading to
avoidable additional expenditures.

32. In the past, there were two types of dredging activities carried out
by DCIL at Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT): conventional dredging and side
casting. In conventional dredging, the material was excavated and loaded
into the dredger's hopper for discharge at a designated dumping point in
the river. On the other hand, side casting involved excavating dredging
material and disposing of it by throwing it in slurry mode at a distant place
in the river. A specific issue highlighted in the report pertained to the non-
incorporation of the lower rate of side casting in the dredging contract.
Despite being aware since May 2015 that the rate of side casting dredging
was lower than that of conventional dredging, the Management did not
include a separate rate for side casting in the January 2017 contract. This
led to avoidable payments of 10.19 crore during the period from January
2017 to March 2019. Furthermore, KoPT missed the opportunity to save
212.74 crore during the remaining period of the contract, up to December
2021. |

33. The Management's contention, expressed in September 2019, that
they were unsure about the quantum of side casting necessary and
therefore did not ask for separate rates from DCIL, was deemed
unacceptable. The contract had clearly stipulated a maximum quantity of
one MMS per annum for side casting, necessitating the incorporation of a
separate rate in the dredging contract.

15|Page


No capabilities to measure actual quantity of material side casted

34. Another issue highlighted was the non-installation of a production
meter, a measuring device required by the contract, in DCIL's dredgers.
This absence of suitable measuring devices meant KoPT had no
instrument to measure the actual quantity of material side casted.
Consequently, payments were made based on a fixed formula at the rate
applicable for conventional dredging.

35. The Audit arrived at the conclusion that KoPT lacked a strategic
dredging plan approved by its Board of Trustees, resulting in deficiencies
in dredging contract execution, underutilization of dredgers, and additional
expenditures. The absence of shore disposal practices further contributed
to the deterioration of the navigation channel despite dredging activities,
making the port less attractive to users.

16|Page


PART-II

1. The Committee find that Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port,
Kolkata (SMPK), formerly known as Kolkata Port Trust, stands as
India's exclusive riverine port, boasting two essential docks: the
Kolkata Dock System (KDS) and the Haldia Dock Complex (HDC).
Operating under the administration of the Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT)
and falling under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Shipping (MoS),
this port plays a pivotal role in serving a vast hinterland that extends
across Eastern India, the North Eastern States, and landlocked
nations like Nepal and Bhutan and due to its prominent geograptiical
location, it assumes special significance.

2. The Committee note that KoPT navigation channel faces
significant siltation issues, requiring periodic maintenance dredging
to prevent clogging. Despite this, KoPT lacked a crucial long-term
strategic plan for dredging activities, including guidelines for
surveys, timelines for actions, shipping channel alignment, and
strategies for unexpected depth changes. The Committee note
deficiencies in KoPT's overall dredging strategy, emphasizing the
absence of a comprehensive, long-term strategic plan approved by
the Board of Trustees (BoT). They find that annual dredging plans
were not presented to the BoT for approval, hindering transparency.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Kolkata Port Trust
(KoPT) promptly develop and implement a comprehensive, long-term
strategic plan for its dredging activities. This plan should emphasise
on developing a computer aided mathematical model harnessing the
historical data available and including hydro-dynamic changes,
sedimentation transport and scientific studies conducted by
reputable institutes. The model should be all inclusive and to address
key aspects such as survey intervals, timelines for necessary actions
based on surveys, alignment adjustments for the shipping channel,
and strategies to handle unexpected depth issues. Additionally, the

17|Page


Committee would like to emphasise that KoPT may undertake to
collaborate with experts and consultants to establish a realistic target
depth, considering the unique challenges posed by the River ~
Hooghly. The integration of the result of the mathematical model into
the long-term strategic plan will enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of dredging activities, ensuring better navigability in the
face of siltation challenges. :

3. During their course of examination, the Committee note that
the payment terms for the dredging contracts with DCIL were not
linked to the quantity dredged until the new contract which came into
place from January 2017. This lack of linkage allowed dredgers to be
paid irrespective of their utilization, potentially leading to a situation
where performance was not directly incentivized. The incorporation
of new payment terms based on quantity in the later contract led to
an improvement in achieving the target depth, indicating the
significance of aligning payment terms with performance.

Taking note of the above developments, the Committee recommend
that future dredging contracts should include performance-based
payment terms to ensure that contractors are incentivized to meet the
specified targets. The Committee note that the payment terms for
dredging contracts with DCIL until December 2016 were not linked
with the quantity dredged, resulting in payment to dredgers
irrespective of utilization of their services. This may have contributed
to inefficiencies in dredging operations. The Committee therefore
recommend that KoPT should invariably continue the practice of
linking payment terms with the quantity dredged, as introduced in the
contract effective from January 2017. This approach aligns the
interests of the dredging contractor with the goal of achieving and
maintaining the required depth, ensuring that payments are

- contingent on performance and encouraging efficient dredging
operations.

18 |? ०8९


4, The Committee in no uncertain words would also like to
recommend that Shyama Prasad Mookherji Trust (Kolkata Port Trust,
KoPT) undertake immediate and comprehensive measures to
enhance its dredging operations and mitigate substantial losses in
cargo traffic. KoPT has lost 45.27 million metric tons of cargo valued
at %1,419.70 crore from 2013 to 2019 due to reduced carrying
capacities of cargo vessels, attributed to the non-achievement of
target depth by Dredging Corporation of India Limited (DCIL). To
address this, the Committee would suggest adopting a multifaceted
approach. Firstly, a thorough review and strengthening of contractual
provisions with DCIL is imperative. This includes the incorporation of
stringent clauses, such as performance-based payment terms and
penalties for non-achievement, fostering accountability and
incentivizing efficient dredging. Additionally, robust performance
monitoring mechanisms need implementation, utilizing advanced
technologies for real-time data analytics and establishing key
performance indicators to track and benchmark dredging efficiency.

5. The Committee find that exploring technological solutions is
crucial for optimizing dredging operations. They feel that KoPT
should investigate state-of-the-art dredging technologies, including
remote sensing and autonomous solutions, to improve accuracy and
efficiency. Accordingly, they would like to recommend that risk
mitigation strategies must be developed, anticipating challenges
related to tide, waves, upland discharge, and external factors
impacting the river regime. They would also like to observe that
collaboration with relevant authorities is key to addressing systemic
issues such as water-sharing treaties.

6. The Committee are of the opinion that continuous
improvement and adaptation should be ingrained in KoPT's
practices. Accordingly, they recommend stablishing a culture of
innovation, undertaking regular performance reviews, and periodic
updates to contractual agreements which will ensure that the
lessons learned while erring are incorporated, and operations remain

19|Page


aligned with evolving technologies and industry best practices.

7. The Committee, after a thorough examination of the audit
findings, note several critical issues in the dredging activities at
Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT). Firstly, the report highlights a discrepancy
related to the monitoring work of dredging, where a vast scope was
recognized as too extensive.for effective implementation, leading to
delayed revisions and additional expenditures. The Committee
observe that a comprehensive scope assessment before finalizing
contracts and a timely revision mechanism are imperative to prevent
such challenges. They recommend that KoPT develops protocols for
continuous evaluation of monitoring contracts based on gained
experience. The Committee find it surprising that the Board of
Trustees of the Port were not aware or informed of the dredging
performance. Contrary to the Management claims, the Committee
note that the Ministry of Shipping had not issued any policies
regarding dredging operations.

8. The Committee are also concerned to note irregularities
regarding dredged material disposal practices. They note that
inadequate depth of dumping grounds led 0 re-circulation,
emphasizing the need for shore disposal as recommended by
experts. The Committee find from the Audit report that 15% of
dredged material are re-circulated, incurring significant costs. In this
regard, the Committee recommend for active pursuit of shore
disposal implementation and with collaboration with relevant
authorities to identify suitable land for accommodating the dredged
out material. Moreover, the Committee also emphasise the need for
vigilantly monitoring dredging activities to prevent accretion and
narrowing of navigable widths, especially in critical areas like Haldia
Anchorage.

9. Regarding contractual issues with Dredging Corporation of
India Limited (DCIL), the Committee find that the non-incorporation of
lower rates for side casting in the dredging contract resulted in

20[Page


avoidable payments. They do not agree with the Management's
contention of uncertainty and recommend explicit incorporation of
rates for side casting dredging, aligned with specified annual
quantities. The Committee also observe the absence of suitable
measuring devices on DCIL's dredgers for accurate quantification of
side casting dredging material. Therefore, they recommend
mandating the installation of such devices and establishing a
standardized measurement system.

10. The Committee also find that annual dredging plans were not
presented to the BoT for approval, thereby hindering transparency.
They, therefore, recommend the development of a strategic plan and
regular presentation of annual plans to the BoT. The Committee also
urge that a proactive approach te be undertaken in the construction
and maintenance of spurs, allocating sufficient resources and setting
clear targets for timely completion. The Committee acknowledge the
importance of a comprehensive performance analysis in the Annual
Administrative Report (AAR) to evaluate the effectiveness of
dredging operations at Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT). The Committee
also take note of the response of the Ministry which indicate that the
current practice involves performance analysis by the consultant
engaged by SMPK, with subsequent corrective actions taken
accordingly. However, the Committee note that the Annual
Administrative Report lacks detailed insights into dredging
intricacies and recommend that such short comings to be properly
addressed in the subsequent Reports.

11. In light of this, the Committee specifically recommend a
structural improvement of the contents of the Annual Administrative
Report so as to include a dedicated section for performance analysis
against set targets and deviations. This inclusion will provide
stakeholders, including the Board of Trustees and relevant
authorities, with a clearer understanding of the dredging activities'
outcomes and challenges. The Committee would also like to suggest
that the Annual Administrative Report should not only present

21|Page


performance metrics but also offer a nuanced analysis, outlining the
reasons for any deviations and proposing remedial measures relating

thereto.
NEW DELHI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
५ ०५ February, 2024 Chairperson,
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

REKEKERER

22|Page