43

ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND
BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 1357 Report (16
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

FORTY THIRD

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

Ske
सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2251

FORTY THIRD

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

seeasrenata eae ५० AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND
BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

[Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 135" Report (16
Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS

e toad
सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 06 [A B02}

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 0. (A: Rog}

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2021/Kartika, 1943 (Saka)

(४)


CONTENTS

Page
No.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) (1 v)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER | Report के
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 9.1] Q
accepted by the Government
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the \4

Committee do not desire to Pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been AO~ ad
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 23-
which Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES
1. Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2021-22) on 21.10.2021 due3g*
1. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the - 4

Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 1357 Report (16" Lok Sabha)

ah)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury = ___ Chairperson Adhir Ranjan Chowdhur : Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

iS)

Shri T. R. Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry
Shri Sudheer Gupta

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

ee NDA A w

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh

vw)

r. Satya Pal Singh

Dn

ri Jayant Sinha
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi*

ही की ४ N= ©

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara**
RAJYA SABHA

6. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Shri C. M. Ramesh

9... Shri V.Vijayasai Reddy #
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
21... Dr. M Thambidurai

22... Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi ##

* Elected w.e.f 29.07.2021 vice Smt.Darshana Jardosh who ceased to be a member of the
Committee consequent to her appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

+ Elected w.e.f 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Teni Mishra who ceased to be a member of the
Committee consequent to his appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

H Elected w.e.f .09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav who ceased to be Member of the
Committee consequent to his appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

Hit Elected w.e.f 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar who ceased to be Member of the

Committee consequent to his appointment as Minister in the Union Cabinet on 07.07.2021

Ww


SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G Chandrasekhar
2. Shri S.R Mishra

3. Shri Paoliental Haokip
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo

(४)

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director

Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2021-22), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forth Third Report (Seventeenth
Lok Sabha) on Action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 135"
Report (16" Lok Sabha) on ‘Acquisition and Development of Land by Delhi
Development Authority’ relating to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.

2. The One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaj/laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2018. The Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 21*
October, 2021. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 135" Report (16 Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-I!

NEW DELHI; Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
November, 2021 Chairperson
Kartika, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Ww


REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on the
subject “Acquisition and Development of Land by the Delhi Development
Authority" based on Chapter V of the C&AG Report No. 17 of 2011-12 relating to
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.

2. The One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha), which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 211 December, 2018
contained 11 Observations and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in
respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received from

the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations: which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos.2-11
Total: 10
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para No. 1
Total: 1
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter ~ ४


3. A detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed holding of
only 14 meetings of the High Level Committee constituted for undertaking periodic
review, monitoring and management of Master Plan Delhi, 2021; failure to collect
data on the progress made by the stakeholders involved for development of city
infrastructure; nonchalant attitude of the Ministry in recovering the damage
charges with cases pending ever since 1974; shortfall in targeted demolition
programmes of Delhi Development Authority during the period 2005-06 to 2009-
10 and non-recovery of demolition charges from the unauthorized occupants;
poor planning, award of work without proper survey and not obtaining lay out plan
approval in advance resulting in infructuous expenditure; violation of Central
Public Works Department Manual etc. The Committee had accordingly given the
Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will
now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee made in the Original Report which either
need reiteration or merit comments.

(Recommendation Para No. 1)

5. The Report was based on scrutiny of Chapter V of C&AG's Report No.
17 of 2011-12 on "Acquisition and Development of land by Delhi Development
Authority” relating to acquisition as well as development of land by DDA for the
period 2005-10. The Committee also noted that a High Level Committee
constituted for undertaking periodic review, monitoring and management of the
Master Plan held only 14 meetings to discuss suggestions and recommended
modifications in (Master Plan Delhi) MPD-2021. The Ministry submitted that no
further meetings of the High Level Committee were required on completion of
the midterm review in December, 2014. The Committee were of the view that
there was requirement for regular/stringent monitoring of the developmental
projects since the Master Plan Delhi, 2021 was to be implemented in a phased
manner till 2021. The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry/DDA
to set short and long term milestones to achieve the ultimate targets set out in
the MPD - 2021 and also apprise the Committee of the achievements made so
far for the period 2006-07 to 2017-18. The Committee also desired that the
High Level Committee meet periodically on regular basis for reviewing,
monitoring and management so that the target of the MPD 2021 is achieved.
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated as under:

“Recently two important policies have been notified by Ministry of
Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) respectively ie. (i) Land Pooling (ii) Private Land Policy. The
short term & long term policy goals for the same are as follows:

Land Pooling Policy

A. Short Term Action Plans are as follows:
(i) The Sector Delineation Plans of Planning Zones K-1, L,N and P-Il,

-)-


(ii) Web enabled interface of DDA’s website for inviting Expression of

Willingness for participation of land owners falling in Planning Zones
K-1, L, N and P-Il. The portal provides a user friendly platform for
registration containing all the information with respect to zone wise
maps  (Zonal/revenue/sector), applicable charges, general
guidelines and instructions. The portal for registration of land parcels
is opened for a period of 6 months (ti 47 August, 2019). After this
due date, total area received for willingness to participate shall be
worked out and DDA will be able to ascertain how many sectors
maybe taken up for further necessary action as per the notified
policy.

(iii) As of 12.06.2019, a total of 759 numbers of applications for approx 640

hectares of land and a total payment of Rs. 22.36 lakh has been
received.

Zone No. of Applications Area in HA
Zone N 590 418

Zone L 94 128

Zone 7-॥ 72 हे 93

Zone K-| 03 0.5

B. The long term goals of the policy are as follows:

(i)

(ii)"

The policy aims to proactively increase housing supply in a time
bound manner, harness private potential in land assembly and
physical and social infrastructure development. The Land Policy
is proposed for 5 zones in proposed urbanizable areas of urban
extension of NCT Delhi i.e. Zone K-l, |, N, ?-॥ and J covering an
area 20,000-22,000 hectares approximately of land. This land
shall be developable based on the response received from land
owners/farmers as per the policy guidelines.

DDA will act as a facilitator and the entire process of pooling and
development will be taken up by Developer Entities/Consortiums,
i.e public shall be involved to participate in all aspects. Under
the policy, every 100 hectares of pooled land shall be able to
accommodate about 3,85,000 persons in approx. 85,000 DUs
(58,000 — General; 27,000-EWS) by the privately owned land
owners as per the current Master Plan of Delhi/Land Policy.
Since the developable land is privately owned, the outcomes are
expected to be world class ‘Smart’ and Sustainable
neighborhoods, sector and zones, planned and executed as per

-3-


the availability of water, power and infrastructure provided by the
service providing agencies.

Private land Policy

(i) As regards planned development for privately owned lands in
Delhi, it is submitted that the regulations for enabling the planned
development of privately owned lands in Delhi were notified on
था July, 2018. As per the Regulations the applicants who will be
fulfilling the prescribed applicability and conditions laid down in
the Regulations are to submit the applications for developing the
land to concerned local body/DDA where the area under
reference falls. As part of the Regulations the standard operating
Procedure was framed by DDA and forwarded to local body and
all concerned for appropriate action.

(ii) Concerned local body/DDA is to examine the applications
submitted by the applicants with reference to land use as per the
Master Plan/Zonal development plan and use premises of land
with reference to approved layout plan/schemes of respective
area. Regarding details of quantum of availability of private land,
Presently complete details are not available for NCT of Delhi.
Therefore, targets for processing cannot be defined. The
concerned local body/DDA will examine the applications of
private owned lands as and when received in accordance with
the Standard Operating Procedure and regulation notified.”

7, Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:

“The Ministry in its reply did not state anything regarding
apprising the committee of the achievements for the period 2006-07 to
2017-18. The Committee also desire that the High Level Committee
meet periodically on regular basis for reviewing, monitoring and
management so that the target of the MPD202tisachieved, However, in
this regard no action has been taken so far, the same may be furnished
to PAC.”

8. The Committee, in their Original Report on the subject had desired
that the High Level Committee of the Delhi Development Authority meet
at periodic intervals for reviewing, monitoring and managing the Master
Plan Delhi (MPD), 2021 so as to enable achieving the targets. This, the
Committee felt to be necessary despite the submission of the Ministry
that the mid-term review was completed in December, 2014 owing to
which it may not be necessary for the High Level Committee to hold
‘monitoring meetings’. The Committee feel concerned to note from the
Action Taken Note that the Ministry has failed to acknowledge and act
upon the above recommendation of the Committee, which would serve

“Ue


as an impetus for achieving the envisaged targets of MPD, 2021. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the High Level Committee consisting
of all the stakeholders hold their meetings for
reviewing/monitoring/managing the execution of MPD. The Committee
wish to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at the earliest. The
Committee further desire that current status of implementation of MPD-
2021 may be furnished in detail, outlining the achievements and failures
or delays along with explanatory notes.

(Recommendation Para No. 4)

9. The Committee noted that the amount of outstanding damage charges
on account of unauthorized occupation of land increased from Rs 17.97 crore
as on 31 March, 2006 to Rs 32.43 crore as on 31 March, 2010 ie, 80.46
percent. The Committee were astounded to note the nonchalant attitude of the
Department in recovering the Government money with cases even pending
since 1974 for recovery of money. The Ministry stated that there was a lot of
resistance from unauthorised occupants and as such door to door visit for
collection of damages was not advised. The Committee, therefore, desired the
DDA to devise and adopt an effective alternative method for speedy recovery
of the damage charges.

10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

(i) As a way forward, the occupants of Properties in the categories of
Damage payee or lease hold (including Ex-lessee) are being
encouraged to voluntarily provide the details of their occupation of
such property for updation of DDA’s records through a self-
assessment window by giving wide publicity in leading newspapers.
For this purpose, the portion of the actual area of Nazul Lands
where the properties are situated can also be publicized after
superimposing the same on Delhi's map.

(ii) Show-cause Notices u/s 7 (3) of the PP Act, 1971 are being issued to
the damage assessee whose records are presently available
vigorously. As a result, DDA has collected Rs. 2.18 crore in
Financial Year 2018-19 while DDA had collected Rs. 1.52 crore in
Financial Year 2017-18.

(iii) That the damage assesse can make the payment through DDA website
at www.dda.org.in in the module of payment which has been
functional w.e.f. February, 2019.

(iv)A scheme of waiver of penalty upto 50 percent (interest on delayed
payment of damage charges, within a certain window period is also
being considered. This would further encourage the occupants to
provide details with a view to get the damage amount calculated and
avail the Scheme of waiver of penalty by ensuring payment of
outstanding damage charges within the window period.

-S-


11... Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-

“More concrete steps needs to be taken as very less amount has
been recovered till now. Ministry may explore alternative measures for
recovery of the damaged charges and the same may be intimated to
PAC.”

12. | The Committee are appreciative of the efforts of the Ministry/Delhi
Development Authority in devising alternative methods for encouraging
the ‘damage payee’ or lease holder to voluntarily provide details of
unauthorized occupation of land. The Committee also note that the
Ministry/Dethi Development Authority is considering a scheme of waiver
of upto 50 percent of interest on delayed payment of damage charges for
unauthorized occupancy of land within a certain window period. The
Committee are of the view that the Delhi Development Authority needs to
implement such schemes in right earnest in consultation with the
Ministry. This would prompt the illegal occupants to voluntarily come
forward and thereby ensure speedy recovery of damage charges. The
Committee also desire to be kept apprised of the developments in this
regard.

(Recommendation Para No.7)

13. The Committee were perturbed to note the shortfall in the targeted
demolition programmes of DDA during the period 2005-06 to 2009-10 ranging
from 29.94 per cent to 51.31 per cent. Moreover, demolition charges were not
recovered by the DDA from the unauthorized occupants. The Ministry/DDA
failed to explain the reasons for the shortfall in targeted demolition and non-
recovery of demolition charges and submitted that Superintending Engineers
have been directed to reclaim land not protected by the law or stay orders
granted by courts within three months. The Committee, therefore, desired the
Ministry/DDA to explain the reasons for lagging behind the targeted demolition
programme and also the non-recovery of demolition charges from the
unauthorized occupants in contravention of section 30 of the Delhi
Development Authority Act, 1957. The Committee also recommended that
exemplary disciplinary actions be initiated against the officers who failed in
their duties to take timely action.
14. 116 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes stated as under:
“As per Section 30 of the Delhi Development Act 1957, it is stated that
where any development has been commenced or is being carried or
have been completed in contravention of Master Plan or Zonal
Development Plan or without the permission, without the sanction of
Building Plan, there are specific guidelines to take action of such
violations and in such cases the penalty of misused charges and
damage charges are imposed for the period property remained under
violations. If the violations are not removed, the allotment as well as
lease deed is also terminated and lease is restored only after such
violations are imposed are agreed to be paid by the lessee/allottee.

— Ke


However, the unauthorised encroachment of Government land that has
never been disposed off does not come in the purview of Section 30 of
the DD Act, 1957. Hence, it should not be considered as in
contravention of Section 30 of the Delhi Development Authority Act,
1957.
As far as matter of removal of encroachment from DDA land be carried
out by demolition programme and demolition charges to be recovered
from the encroachers. In this regard, it is stated that main objective of
the department is to retrieve the valuable government land. In such
cases the encroachers are removed from the sites and after that the
area is used to be fenced to avoid further encroachments and after that
whereabouts of the encroachers are not known to the department, so it
is not feasible to claim the demolition charges from them. However, the
main objective of the department to retrieve the government lands are
achieved in such demolition programme.
In view of the above, the action against the officers/officials does not
arise.”
15. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:-
“No comment on application of section 30 of Delhi Development
Act 1957 on unauthorized occupants. Further, Ministry in its reply did
not state the reasons of the shortfall in targeted demolition programmes
of DDA during the period 2005- 06 to 2009-10 and it is also not clear
from the reply that all the encroached DDA land has been demolished
and fencing work has been completed, therefore the same may be
intimated to PAC."
16. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that while
the primary objective of the targeted demolition programme of Delhi
Development Authority is to retrieve valuable Government land and take
measures towards avoiding further encroachment, no effort is made to
trace the whereabouts of the encroachers and recover the ‘legal
charges’. The Committee are of the view that this amounts to allowing
the violators to go scot-free, which is in contravention of Section 30 of
the Delhi Development Authority Act, 1957. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Ministry evolve a mechanism for streamlining the
measures for recovery of demolition charges in consonance with the
Delhi Development Authority Act, 1957 in future. The Committee desire
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the details and status of demolition and fencing
of all encroached DDA land.


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee find Master Plan Delhi, 2021 provides for the creation of
monitoring unit in DDA equipped with modern data processing facilities for
collection of data, its analysis and bringing any important change to the notice
of DDA comprehensively once in a year. The Committee are perturbed to note
that DDA failed to collect the data on the progress made by the stakeholders
involved for development of city infrastructure, and that in the absence of
centralized information system, DDA/Ministry was not in a position to oversee
the development made under the Master Plan or visualize proper future plan.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry/DDA to set up the
Monitoring Unit immediately with members from the Master Plan and Policy
Review Unit(MPPR),Master Plan Review Unit(MPRU)and the Master Plan
Section for concerted coordination which would be able to pinpoint the
deficiencies in implementing the Master Plan Delhi 2021 and take corrective
actions accordingly to achieve the targets effectively.

(Para No.2]
Action taken by the Ministry

(i) The Master Plan for Deihi-2021 (MPD-2021) was notified on
07.02.2007. The Master Plan and Policy Review Unit (MPPR) was associated
for preparation of MPD-2021. The MPPR unit continued to look after the work
related to the monitoring/follow-up actions after notification of MPD - 2021.
Later, the same work was under taken by Master Plan Section. (ii) As per
provisions in Introduction of MPD—2021 (Sr.No.19) and Para18.3 Master Plan
Review unit was created in 2011 to initiate process of First Mid-Term Review
at 5 years interval. This unit coordinated and monitored all the meetings,
proceedings and exercise during the period of review. (iii) On completion of
the major part of the review, the Master Plan Review unit has been merged
with the Master Plan section in 2014. This unit continued to provide
coordination with ail stake holders and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). (iv) The
modifications notified during the review have been compiled in the form of
updated Master Plan for Delhi- 2021, incorporating Modifications upto March
2016. (v) Efforts and strategies are being made to monitor review the
implementation of MPD-2021 through regular meetings and coordination with
GNCTD, local bodies, service providing agencies etc. (vi) Further, an Action
Committee for monitoring of preparation of MPD-2041 has been formulated
and the same committee shall function as Monitoring Unit of 2021, which shall
be reviewed by a Review Committee already formed under the chairmanship
of VC, DDA and other HOD's of various departments. In 2017, preparation of
New Master Plan 2041 has commenced. The basic review of 2021 has started
by analyzing the base lining data for Delhi with its stake holders. In this
process, various baseline meetings of experts of the respective fields are
being undertaken. However, the objectives of the Monitoring Unit as laid down

-$-


in MPD — 2021 with respect to pin point of the deficiencies in implementing the
MPD-2021 & take corrective actions, to achieve the targets effectively will be
addressed in the base lining phases of preparation of Master Plan for Dethi—
2041. The project of preparation of MPD - 2041 has a component of review of
MPD - 2021, under base lining phase to analyze the achievements & targets
set in MPD-2021. These exercises will help to overcome the deficiencies in
MPD-2021 to be taken care off in MPD - 2041 with directive & effective
actions to achieve targets effectively. (vii) The issue regarding setting up of the
monitoring unit was further discussed in the meeting held under the
chairmanship of VC, 008 on 02.08.2019.It was instructed that MPD - 2021
unit may be designated as the monitoring unit as envisaged in the Chapter 18
of MPD-— 2021. Accordingly, the Master Plan & Development Control Unit is
designated as Monitoring Unit of MPD-2021 at the moment, the unit
comprises of the following officers/ officials:

1. Add|.Commissioner(Plg)MP -1No.

2. Director (Pig) MP -1No.

3. Dy.Director (Pig) MP&DC - 1 No.

4. Assistant Director (Plg)MP&DC - 1 No.
5.Planning Assistant, MP -1 No.

(viii) The Monitoring Unit thus designated would be the main unit assisting the
Action Groups. In order to further improve the current status, the setting up of
the modern data processing facilities is also being setup under the aegis of
GIS unit. Thus GIS unit of Planning Deptt., DDA is working towards digitizing
the current land use plan on GIS platform as part of modern data processing.
This information would also be suitably given to the Action groups to make the
monitoring of the MPD — 2021 as a comprehensive unit. (ix) The above is
submitted to the Parliament & Coordination Deptt., DDA for further necessary
action please.

Vetting comment of Audit
No comments.

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note with concern that 1308.59 acres of balance land
valuing Rs.205.45 crore has still not been transferred by DDA to its user
Departments due to non-preparation of detailed layout plan by the planning
Department and due to encroachments. The Ministry in their written reply
clarified that only 690.61 acres (0.9%ofthe total land) are with the Land
Management Department which is also in the process of transfer to the user
Departments. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry/DDA to
urgently prepare the detailed layout plan so as to ensure quick transfer of land
by the Land Management Department to the user Departments for various
development purposes.

[Para No.3}
Action taken by the Ministry

—“G_


Land Management Deptt., DDA had handed over 531.33 acres of land,
out of 690.61 acres to Engineering Wing upto 31.12.2017. Remaining balance
land, measuring 159.28 acres could not be transferred for
Planning/Engineering Wing as this land is not free from encumbrances or is
under litigation. Most of the matters related to this land are lapse of acquisition
and the main matter is pending before the Constitutional Bench of Hon'ble
Supreme Court. Factually, as on date i.e. on 08.08.2019, there is no change in
the facts and circumstances given earlier and whenever there would be any
substantial change with the land, the same will be intimated.

Vetting comment of Audit

The matter is under Litigation and main matter is also pending before
the Constitutional Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court. Hence, no comments.
The outcome of the same maybe intimated to PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the amount of outstanding damage charges
on account of unauthorized occupation of land increased from Rs.17.97 crore
as on 31१ March, 2006 to Rs.32.43 crore as on 31st March, 2010 i.e .80.46
percent. The Committee are astounded to note the nonchalant attitude of the
Department in recovering the Government money with cases even pending
since 1974 for recovery of money. The Ministry stated that there was a lot of
resistance from unauthorized occupants and as such door to door visit for
collection of damages was not advised. The Committee, therefore, desire the
DDA to devise and adopt an effective alternative method for speedy recovery
of the damage charges and apprise the status there of within three months of
the presentation of this Report.

[Para No 4]
Action taken by the Ministry

As a way forward, the occupants of Properties in the categories of Damage
payee or lease holder (including Ex-lessee) are being encouraged to
voluntarily provide the details of their Occupation of such property for updation
of DDA’s records through a self-assessment window by giving wide publicity in
Leading Newspapers. For this purpose, the portion of the actual area of Nazul
Lands where the properties are situated can also be publicized after super
imposing the same on Delhi’s map. (ii) Show-cause Notices u/s7(3) of the PP
Act, 1971 are being issued to the damage assesse whose records are
presently available vigorously. As a result, DDA has collected Rs. 2.18 Crore
in F.Y.2018-19 while DDA had collected Rs.1.52crore in F.Y.2017-18. (iii) That
the damage assesse can make the payment through DDA website at
www.dda.org.in in the module of payment which has been functional w.e.f
February, 2019. (iv) A scheme of waiver of penalty up to 50% (interest on
delayed payment of damages charges) on damages charges, within a certain
window period, is also being considered. This would further encourage the
occupants to provide details with a view to get the damage amount calculated
and avail the Scheme of waiver of penalty by ensuring payment of outstanding
damage charges within the window period

नकल


Vetting comment of Audit

More concrete steps needs to be taken as very less amount has been
recovered till now. Ministry may explore alternative measures for recovery of
the damaged charges and the same may be intimated to PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that land measuring 6129 bigha,10 biswa in
Village Barwala, Delhi was notified and the physical possession was handed
over to DDA in October, 2005. Land measuring 22 bigha 10 biswas was under
encroachment of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.(RINL) at the time of taking
possession of land by DDA. They issued notice to RINL in April 2006 to vacate
the land and the same was vacated in December, 2006. Notice for payment of
damage charges of Rs. 6.25 crore for unauthorized occupancy of land was
served in December, 2007 i.e.after a period of more than 2 years. The
Committee are shocked to note the lackadaisical attitude of DDA even in
serving notice as well recovering damage charges from a Central Public
Sector undertaking like RINL. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by DDA in recovering the above damage charges from RINL.

[Para No. 5]
Action taken by the Ministry

(i) Rastriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. Filed a suit in Supreme Court of India on
17.04.2012 against an order of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi wherein it was held
that there is no merit in the appeal filed by the RINL, in as much as the RINL is
liable to pay the charges for using the land owned by DDA. (ii) DDA acquired
the land for Rohini Residential Scheme in 2003.The land measuring 22 Bigha
and 10 Biswa was under the occupation of the petitioner at the time of handing
over of the land to DDA. This land was transferred to the Engineering
Department on 25.12.2005.This premises remained under occupation from 6th
October, 2005 to 31१ December, 2006 and same was treated an unauthorized
possession by DDA and the Damage charges for an area of 22687
Sq. Yards.of Rs.6,25,71,881/-was levied on 23.11.2007 and notice was issued
on 17.12.2007. (iii) The case was admitted in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
on 15.01.2016 in CA no. 003009/2016 Registered on 14.03.2016 and
SLP(C)No. 017697/2012 registered on 14.03.2016. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court in its order dated 05.07.2012 stayed the matter of further proceeding
before the Estate Officer. (iv) The case is sub-judice and pending for hearing.

Vetting comment of Audit

The matter is subjudice and pending for hearing, therefore no comments.
Outcome of the Courts decisions may be intimated to PAC

\\ -


Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court set aside the
orders passed by the High Court and restricting the compensation to
andowner of Village PoothKalan from Rs.30,000 per bigha to Rs.18,500 per
bigha in November,2002 with directions to recover the excess amount of
Rs.25.69 crore i.e.excess payment of Rs.12.86 crore with interest @ 15
percent upto March, 2010 amounting payment to Rs.12.83 crore paid to the
jand owners. The Committee also note that the tesponsibility to recover the
excess compensation rest with the Land Acquisition Collector, GNCTD as per
he Land Acquisition Act 1894 and the issue had been taken up on several
occasions with GNCTD without any success. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry/DDA to urgently resolve the constraints in recovery of
the excess compensation from the landowners after negotiation with all the
stakeholders i.e.GNCTD and the land owners and apprised the Committee of
he same within three months of the presentation of this Report. Further, in
wake of computerization of all the records, Ministry may explore alternative
legal measures for recovery of excess amounts like not allowing construction
on the land owned by these owners in the pool.

[Para No. 6]
Action taken by the Ministry

A meeting was held on 27.02.2019 under the Chairmanship of Principal
Commissioner (LM), DDA with representatives of District Magistrate (North)
and Land & Building Department, GNCTD. In the meeting, it was decided that
the Revenue Authority concerned may explore possibility of recovering
amount of excess compensation under Delhi Land Reforms Act as land
revenue. Two reminders were also been sent to ADM/LAC (North West) on
12.06.2019 and 02.08.2019 to intimate the Progress made in recovering the
amount of excess compensation paid to the landowners of village Pooth Kalan
(copy enclosed as Annexure ‘A’ & Annexure ‘B’).

Vetting comment of Audit

No suitable action has been taken by DDA/Ministry regarding adopting
alternative legal measures for recovery of excess amount.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee are perturbed to note the shortfall in the targeted demolition
programmes of DDA during the period 2005-06 to 2009-10 ranging from 29.94
percent to 51.31 percent. Moreover, demolition charges were not recovered by
the DDA from the unauthorized occupants despite payment of Rs. 3.05 crore
to the contractor for demolition programmes. The Ministry/DDA failed to
explain the reasons for the shortfall in targeted demolition and non-recovery of
demolition charges and submitted that Superintending Engineers in charge of
monitoring demolition programmes in their respective zones haves been
directed to reclaim land not protected by the law or stay orders granted by
courts within three months and the same are being monitored by the Principal

-\2-


Commissioner, Land Management in the Headquarter. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry/DDA to explain the reasons for lagging behind
the targeted demolition programme and also the non recovery of demolition
charges from the unauthorized occupants in contravention of section 30 of the
Delhi Development Authority Act, 1957. The Committee recommended that
exemplary disciplinary actions be initiated against the officers who failed in
their duties to take timely action.

[Para 7]

Action taken by the Ministry

As per Section 30 of the Delhi Development Act 1957, it is stated that where
any development has been commenced or is being carried or have been
completed in contravention of Master Plan or Zonal Development Plan or
without the permission, without the sanction of Building Plan, there are specific
guidelines to take action of such violations and in such cases the penalty of
misused charges and damage charges are imposed for the period property
remained under violations. If the violations are not removed, the allotment as
well as lease deed is also used to be terminated and lease is restored only
such violations are imposed are agreed to be paid by the lessee/allottee.
However, the unauthorized encroachment on Govt. Land that has never been
disposed off does not come in the purview of Section 30 of the DD Act, 1957.
Hence, it should not be considered as in contravention of Section 30 of the
Delhi Development Authority Act, 1957. (ii) As far as matter of removal of
encroachment from DDA land be carried out by demolition programme and
demolition charges to be recovered from the encroachers. In this regard, it is
stated that main objective of the department is to retrieve the valuable
government land. In such cases the encroachers are removed from the sites
and after that the area is used to be fenced to avoid further encroachments
and after that where abouts of the encroachers are not known to the
department, so it is not feasible to claim the demolition charges from them.
However, the main objective of the department is to retrieve the government
lands are achieved in such demolition programme. (iii) In view of the above,
the action against the officers/officials does not arise.

Vetting comment of Audit

No comment on application of section 30 of Delhi Development Act 1957 on
unauthorized occupants. Further, Ministry in its reply did not state the reasons
of the shortfall in targeted demolition programmes of DDA during the period
2005- 06 to 2009-10 and it is also not clear from the reply that all the
encroached DDA land has been demolished and fencing work has been
completed, therefore the same may be intimated to PAC.

Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the work for construction of peripheral Storm Water
Drains and Culverts in Sector 27 & 28 in Rohini at a cost of Rs. 15.22 crore,

development of 400 hectares of land acquired at two places in Rohini for
construction of sewerline, water supply line, roads and toe walls were awarded

न >


at a tendered cost of Rs.3.06 crore and Rs.3.16 crore in March, 2004.
However, the road work could not be completed due to non-approval of layout
plan by MCD, absence of proper drainage system etc. The Committee note
with serious concern that poor planning, award of work without proper survey
and not obtaining of layout plan approval in advance from MCD etc. resulted in
infructuous expenditure of Rs.1.41 crore by the DDA. Similarly, DJB had
accorded its approval for releasing the treated effluent from the Sewer
Treatment Plant. Accordingly, DDA constructed four underground reservoirs
(UGRs) in 2006-07 for storing treated water and further supply for horticulture
purpose, and one inlet channel (in 2008) at a cost of Rs.4.88 crore. It was
noticed that the “Sump Well” for storing the treated sewerage from Sewer
Treatment Plant and releasing it to UGRs, was yet to be constructed. DDA
awarded that work at a tendered cost of Rs.94.05 lakh. Even though the work
was completed in April 2010,it has not become functional due to non
availability of treated effluent from DJB. The Committee are aghast to note that
poor planning, non synchronization of works related to supply of treated water
to horticulture areas from Sewer Treatment Plant resulted in idle expenditure
of Rs.5 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA should ensure
a system whereby coordinated mechanism is established with other local
agencies and utilities and hindrances removed before award of work. The
Committee also desire the Ministry/DDA to fix responsibility for the
lapses/delay in completion of the work and apprise them of the status of the
developmental works within three months of the presentation of this Report.

[Para 8]

Action taken by the Ministry

(i) (a) Regarding proper out fall structure to be provided for the drain in Sector-
27 & 28, Rohini, it is submitted that the out fall drain could not be constructed
on the originally planned route due to stay under Barwala village from
February 2013 to October 2016 on the land but the drains constructed were
useful in avoiding the flooding of Sector-27 & 28 as the rain water of these
drains was drained in vacant unplanned land of Sector-26, Rohini. There is no
report of any inundation in the area. Construction of Master Plan roads in
Sector-27 & 28 was essential and inevitable part of development of land to
provide access to the DDA Group Housing pockets and plotted pockets.
Construction of proposed main outfall drain was approved by the MCD in
October 2018. It was decided to get it constructed by funding through Urban
Development Fund (UDF), the estimate was submitted in December 2018 and
approval of UDF funding received in February 2019. Tenders for the same
have been called and after scrutiny and processing of the work is likely to be
taken up in August 2019. The amount incurred on the construction of
peripheral drains in Sector-27 & 28, Rohini was useful to avoid the flooding of
residential area in Sector-27 & 28, Rohini, thereby serving the purpose. (b)
The reference is made to providing and laying internal services like sewer line,
water supplyline, roads & toewalls in Sector-28,Pkt. 1&2 and 3,4 & 5. In this
regard, it is submitted that this work was executed in plotted pockets of DDA in
Sector-28, Rohini. The services like water supply and sewerage were laid in
the plotted pocket area after taking approval from concerned authorities i.e.
DJB and no approval is required for construction of roads from MCD. Layout is

“WM


approved by the DDA planning wing and the works are executed accordingly
by Engineering Wing. In plotted pockets the internal roads are constructed to
facilitate the movements of the vehicles to provide approach to the plots of the
allottees. For development of housing in the plotted areas, individuals who
have to construct their houses need access to their plots for carriage of
construction material etc. and services required to which they may connect.
The handing over of possession of plots was in progress, therefore it was
essential to provide roads in the pocket and therefore the work of toads was
taken up. The premix carpeting was not done to avoid damage to it during
construction/ development along the area and was to be done at a later stage.
In view of above, it is clear that the expenditure incurred on the road work was
unavoidable and not infructuous. The amount saved due to withdrawal from
execution of item of premix carpeting does not result in  infructuous
expenditure incurred as the premix is done on the same sub base & base
course at a later date. It is further stated that the premix carpeting has also
been done on these roads on the demand of allottees. (c) In view of the above
reply, regarding the poor planning, award of work without proper survey and
not obtaining of Layout Plan approval in advance from MCD, the expenditure
may not be considered as infructuous. (9) Therefore, the para may kindly be
dropped. (ii) (a)The preliminary estimate of the scheme for Dwarka area was
accorded by competent authority in year 1993. At the time of preparation of
preliminary estimate, use of sewer treated water for Horticulture work was not
anticipated hence it was not included in the preliminary estimate. Later on due
to increasing scarcity of ground water and as per direction of Central Water
Commission / Water Authorities issued to the civic agencies to use sewerage
effluent for the horticulture Purpose in order to avoid further extraction of
ground water for horticulture purposes, construction of Under Ground Reserve
(UGR) for distribution of sewerage water in different located parks has been
undertaken. (b) Sewer Treatment Plant (S.T.P) works for Dwarka has been
done in phased manner as per the growth of population. The work was taken
in regular course with the progress of different sector of Dwarka. CE (Dwarka)
is regularly monitoring the Progress of projects every fortnightly. Presently,
S.T.P water is being provided in 30 nos.of DDA parks and 7 nos.of S.D.M.C
parks. (c) Earlier in DDA there were separate Chief Engineer for Civil and
Electrical Works but now for better coordination, DDA reorganized their setup
for Civil and Electrical Works. Both are combined/merged under one entity ie.
CE of each zone for better coordination with other local agencies. (d) In view
of the above reply no individual officials can be held responsible as there is no
lapses/delay on the part of executing staff. (e) Hence the para may be
dropped.

Vetting comment of Audit
No comments.
Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find that the sewer works for storing sewerage effluent from
the existing Sewerage Treatment Plant of Jal Board, Dwarka costing Rs.6.13
crore was in violation of the CPWD Works Manual. Clarifying the above, the
Ministry submitted the (AA&ES) for development works of laying internal

-“\S 7


services and the detailed development plan were approved in the year 2002
and 2004 respectively though there was no specific mention about the works
for the development of 400 hectares land of Sectors 27 and 28, Rohini.
Moreover, the revised preliminary estimates based on the actual expenditure
incurred was approved by the competent authority for an amount of Rs.538.50
crore on 06.03.2015. Further, the construction of underground reservoirs
(UGRs) in Dwarka was part of the scheme and the expenditure for the same
have been booked under the same sub-head for which provision in AA&ES
was available. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take
steps to streamline the administrative approval and expenditure sanction
within the DDA with strict adherence to the CPWD Works Manual in future
before execution of any developmental works so as to ensure speedy
completion of the projects. The Committee also desire the Ministry/DDA to fix
responsibility for such lapses.

[Para 9]

Action taken by the Ministry

(i) (a) The preliminary estimate of the scheme was accorded by competent
authority in year 1993. At the time of preparation of preliminary estimate, use
of sewer treated water for Horticulture work was not anticipated hence it was
not included in the preliminary estimate. Later on due to scarcity of ground
water and as per direction of Central Water Commission/Water Authorities
issued to the civic agencies to use the sewerage effluent for the horticulture
purpose to avoid the further extraction of ground water in horticulture,
construction of UGR for distribution of sewerage water in different located
parks was undertaken. However, the expenditure incurred to a tune of % 6.13
crores for construction of these UGRs were duly approved by the Competent
Authority vide revised preliminary estimate as per provision in CPWD Manual.
(b) In view of above, as the work has been executed as per the available
provisions in CPWD Manual. It is submitted that there is no violation of CPWD
Manual for construction of these UGRs. (c) Therefore, the para may kindly be
dropped.

(ii) (a) The reference is made to providing and laying internal services like
sewer line, water supplyline, roads & toe walls in Sector-28,Pkt.1 &2 and 3,4
& 5,in this regard, it is submitted that this work was executed in plotted pockets
of DDA in Sector-28, Rohini. The. services like water supply and sewerage
were laid in the plotted pocket area after taking approval from concerned
authorities i.e. DJB and no approval is required for construction of roads from
MCD. Layout is approved by the DDA planning wing and the works are
executed accordingly by Engineering Wing. In plotted pockets the internal
roads are constructed to facilitate the movements of the vehicles to provide
approach to the plots of the allottees. For development of housing in the
plotted areas, individuals who have to construct their houses need access to
their plots for carriage of construction material etc. and services area require
to which they may connect. The handing. over of possession of plots was in
progress, therefore it was essential to provide roads in the pocket and
therefore the work of roads was taken up. The premix carpeting was not done
to avoid damage to its during construction/development along the area and

—-\b-


was to be done at a later stage. In view of above it is clear that the expenditure
incurred on the road work was unavoidable and not infructuous. The amount
saved due to withdrawal from execution of item of premix carpeting does not
result in infructuous expenditure incurred as the premix is done on the same
sub base & base course at a later date. It is further stated that the premix
carpeting has also been done on these roads on the demand of allottees. (b)
Therefore, the para may kindly be dropped. (iii) (a) The revised P.E (RPE)
among % 538.50 crore on the basis of actual expenditure incurred, i/c the
expenditure on providing of internal services in Sector-27 for the plots
earmarked for resettlement of squatters has already been approved by
competent authority vide EM.6(7)/2012/Est./Pt/912 dt.06.03.12 after
considering all the facts on ground. (b) The work has been executed as per
the available provisions in the CPWD Manual. It is submitted that there is no
violation of CPWD Manual. For construction of these UGRs. (c) In view of the
above reply no individual officials can be held responsible as there is no
lapses/delay on the part of executing staff. Hence the para may be dropped.

Vetting comment of Audit

Action taken to streamline the Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction
within the DDA may be furnished to PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that in their Action Taken Note on Performance
Audit on Development of Land by DDA incorporated in Report No.2 of 2006,
Ministry of Urban Development had stated that guidelines had been issued/
reiterated for taking up work in anticipation of Administrative Approval &
Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) on emergent basis. CPWD Works Manual
2007 stipulates that expenditure in excess of AA & ES should not be incurred
without approval of competent authority, and the expenditure if exceeds by 10
percent of original sanction, the revised expenditure sanction is necessary. In
utter disregard to the above, DDA spent Rs.4.33 crore upto March, 2010 for
development of resettlement of squatters. The expenditure was met by
diverting funds from the approved AA & ES for development of 400 hectares of
land in Rohini amounting to Rs. 129.94 crore. The Committee are shocked to
note that the work done by the DDA for resettlement of squatters had neither
pertained to the approved scheme nor formed part of preliminary estimate.
The Committee desire to be apprised of disciplinary action taken against
violators of CPWD manual for diversion of funds as well as Ministry of Urban

Development's commitment to the PAC.
[Para 10]

Action taken by the Ministry

(i) The Revised Preliminary Estimate (RPE) amounting to = 538.50 crores on
the basis of actual expenditure incurred, including the expenditure on
providing of internal services in Sector-27 for the plots earmarked for
resettlement of squatters has already been approved by competent authority
vide EM.6(7)/2012/Est./Pt./912 dated 06.03.2012 after considering all the

a\Va°


facts. (ji) Observation of PAC has been duly noted by this office. Due care is
being taken to fulfil all Codal formalities and in addition to this a General
Instructions/Circular has also been issued to avoid such short comings in
future.

Vetting comment of Audit

The recommendation of the PAC has been accepted by the Ministry/DDA for
future compliance, however No action has been taken for fixing the
responsibility, therefore the same may be intimated to the PAC.

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note with concern that the internal inspection manual of DDA
did not specify the frequency or periodicity of audit to be conducted by the
internal audit wing. Moreover, while the units covered by the internal audit
wing of DDA had steadily improved over the period 2007-08, 2008-09 and
2009- 10 the coverage was still just about 50 percent of the audit able units.
The Ministry submitted that DDA has been conducting internal audit of all the
units annually, biennially and triennially as per risk factor and expenditure
basis and has conducted audit in 347units during the period 2012-13 to 2016-
17.The Committee, therefore, recommend the DDA to streamline/strengthen
the internal audit mechanism within the organization so as to ensure 100
percent coverage of all audit able units annually irrespective of the risk factor
and quantum of expenditure under the overall supervision of the Vice
Chairman, DDA.

[Para 11]

Action taken by the Ministry

(i) At present, there are 214 auditable units comprising of 148 Field units and
66 Head quarter units which have been further categorized as Annual,
Biennial and Triennial auditable units on the basis of its work load/nature of
sensitivity involved. The units having workload of more than % 15 crore is
categorized for audit as Annual and unit having workload between हैं crore to
15 crore is categorized as biennial and unit having workload of less than हैं. 5
crore is categorized as triennial auditable units. As per the proviso contained
in DDA’s Internal Audit Manual, the internal audit inspection of these units is
planned through Annual Audit Plan each year depending upon the availability
of man power and the number of units to be inspected in a year. The targets to
audit the units are set on realistic basis which can be achieved near to 100%
considering the available manpower resources. Nevertheless, 100% audit
coverage is being achieved in relation to annual auditable units of DDA having
work load of more than & 15 crore.

Vetting comment of Audit
No Comments.

A\RO


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
हु THE GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

-\G—


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation

This report is based on scrutiny of Chapter V of C&AG's Report No. 17
of 2011-12 on “Acquisition and Development of land by 000", This
Performance Audit covered the activities relating to acquisition as well as
development of land by DDA for the period 2005-10. Six out of twenty
development schemes relating to this period were scrutinized. The Committee
note that the Master Plan Delhi, 2021 approved and notified by Central
Government on 7th February 2007 was to be implemented by the Delhi
Development Authority in a phased manner during 2006-11, 2011-16 and
2016-21 respectively. The Committee also note that a High Level Committee
Constituted for undertaking periodic review, monitoring and management of
he Master Plan held only 14 meetings to discuss suggestions and
recommended modifications in MPD-2021. The Ministry submitted that no
further meeting of the High Level Committee were required on completion of
the midterm review in December, 2014. The Committee are of the view that
here is requirement for regular/stringent monitoring of the developmental
projects since the Master Plan Delhi, 2021 is to be implemented in a phased
manner till 2021. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry/DDA to
set short and long term milestones to achieve the ultimate targets set out in
the MPD-2021 and also apprise the Committee of the achievements made so
ar for the period 2006-07 to 2017-18. The Committee also desire that the High
Level Committee meet periodically on regular basis for reviewing, monitoring
and management so that the target of the MPD 2021 is achieved.

[Para 1]
Action taken by the Ministry

Recently two important policies have been notified by Ministry of
Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) respectively i.e. (i) Land Pooling (ii) Private Land Policy. The
short term & long term policy goals for the same are as follows:

Land Pooling Policy
A. Short term Action Plans are as follows:
(i) The Sector Delineation Plans of Planning Zones K-1, 1, N and P-Il.

(ii) Web enabled interface of DDA’s website for inviting Expression of
Willingness for participation has been launched on 05.02.2019 for
inviting Expression of Willingness for participation of land owners
falling in Planning Zones K-1,L, Nand P-Il. The portal provides a

“Jar


user friendly platform for registration containing all the information
with respect to zone wise maps (zonal/revenue/sector), applicable
charges, general guidelines and instructions. The portal for
registration of land parcels is opened for a period of 6 months (till 4h
August, 2019). After this due date, total area received for willingness
to participate shall be worked out and DDA will be able to ascertain
how many sectors may be taken up for further necessary action as

per the notified policy.

(iii) As of 12.06.2019, a total of 759 numbers of applications for approx 640
hectares of land and a total payment of %.22.36 Lakh has been
received.

Zone No. of Area in
_| Applications HA
Zone N 590 418
Zone L 94 128
Zone P-II 72 93
Zone K-I 03 0.5

B. The long term goals of the policy are as follows:
i) The policy aims to proactively increase housing supply in a time

bound manner, harness private potential in land assembly and physical
and social infrastructure development. The Land Policy is proposed for
5 zones in proposed urbanizable areas of urban extension of NCT Delhi
ie. Zone K-I, L, N, P-ll and J covering an approximately area 20,000-
22,000 hectares approximately of land. This land shall be developable
based on the response received from land owners/ farmers as per the
policy guidelines.

ii) DDA will act as a facilitator and the entire process of pooling and
development will be taken up by Developer Entities/Consortiums, i.e.
public shall be involved to participate in all aspects. Under the policy,
every 100 hectares. of pooled land shall be able to accommodate about
3,85,000 persons in approx. 85,000 DUs (58,000-General; 27,000-
EWS) by the privately owned land owners as per the current Master
Plan of Delhi/Land Policy. Since the developable land is privately
owned, the outcomes are expected to be world class ‘Smart’ and
Sustainable neighborhoods, sector and zones, planned and executed
as per the availability of water, power and infrastructure provided by the
service providing agencies.

Private Land Policy

(i) As regards planned development for privately owned lands in Delhi, it is
submitted that the regulations for enabling the plan development of

—j)\-


(ii)

privately owned lands in Delhi were notified on 4'" July, 2018. As per
the Regulations the applicants who will be fulfilling the prescribed
applicability and conditions laid down in the Regulations are to submit
the applications for developing the land to concerned local body/DDA
where the area under reference falls. As part of the Regulations the
standard operating procedure was framed by DDA and forwarded to
local body and all concerned for appropriate action.

Concerned local body/DDA is to examine the applications submitted by
the applicants with reference to land use as per the Master Plan/Zonal
development plan and use premises of land with reference to approved
layout plan/schemes of respective area. Regarding details of quantum
of availability of private land, presently complete details are not
available for NCT of Delhi. Therefore, targets for processing cannot be
defined. The concerned local body/DDA will examine the applications of
private owned lands as and when received in accordance with the
Standard Operating Procedure guidelines and regulations notified.

Vetting comment of Audit
The Ministry in its reply did not state anything regarding apprising the

committee of the achievements for the period 2006-07 to 2017-18. The
Committee also desire that the High Level Committee meet periodically on
regular basis for reviewing, monitoring and management so that the target of
the MPD 2021 is achieved. However, in this regard no action has been taken
so far, the same may be furnished to PAC.

“33


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-

ADAIR

Pudlic Accounts Comm

“ABH


CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22) OF THE SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22
HELD ON 217 OCTOBER, 2021.

The Committee sat on 21 October, 2021 from 1100 hrs. to 1415 hrs. in Main

Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

oN ®@ A RF wD

10.
11.
12.

PRESENT

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Shri Vallabbhaneni Balashowry
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar
Shri Tirthankar Das

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

- Chairperson

- Joint Secretary
- Director

- Additional Director


REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR

GENERAL OF INDIA
SI. No. Name

1.
2.

जी. YW

Shri R. G. Vishwanathan
MS. Sangita Choure
Shri Deepak Anurag

Ms Ritika Bhatia

Shri D. K. Sekhar

Shri A. V. Singh

Designation

Dy. CAG
Dy, CAG
Dy. CAG
Director General
Director General

Principal Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATIONS (DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL,
EDUCATION AND LITERACY)

Si. Name
No.
1. Shri Santosh Kumar Sarangi

Designation
Additional Secretary
2. Shri Maneesh Garg Joint Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS/ONGC

Sl. Name
No.
1. Shri Navneet Kothari

Designation
Joint Secretary(Marketing)
2. Shri Subhash Kumar CMD, ONGC

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF COAL

SI. Name Designation

No.

1. Dr. Anil Kumar Jain Secretary (Coal)

2. Shri Vinod Kumar Tiwari Additional Secretary (Coal)
3. Mrs. Nirupama Kotru JS & FA

4. Shri Animesh Bharati Eco. Advisor

5. Shri Bhabani Prasad Pati Joint Secretary (Parliament)

-26-


REPRESENTATIVES OF COAL / LIGNITE COMPANIES

51.
No.
1.

RSGOPNMARWN

- oO

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the Sitting of the Committee, convened to have oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and Literacy) and Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas/ ONGC on the subject, “Construction of toilets in schools by
CPSEs" based on C&AG Report No. 21 of 2019 and also to consider and adopt draft Action
Taken Report (17th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the Observations /
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 135" Report (167 Lok Sabha) on the

Name

Shri Pramod Agrawal

Shri Vinay Ranjan

Shri S.K.Gomasta

Shri Sanjay Kumar

Shri Keshav Rao

Shri Goutam Chandra Dey

Shri P.V.K.R. Mallikarjuna Rao

Shri R.N. Dubey
Shri N. Balram

Shri R. Vikraman
Shri S.M. Choudhary

Designation

CMD,CIL

Director (P&IR), CIL
Director (T/CRD), CMPDIL
Director(Pers), WCL
Director(Pers), MCL
Director(Pers/Fin.), ECL
Director(Pers), CCL/ BCCL
Director(Pers/Fin.), NCL
Director (PAW), SCCL
Director (HR),NLCIL
Director(Fin/Pers), SECL

subject “Acquisition and Development of Land by DDA”.

3. 20006 2000९
4... 2000 XXXX
5. 20006 XXXX
6. XXxx XXXX
7. XXXX XXXX
8. XXxx XXXX
9... 20006 2000९
10. 20006 2000९

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

XXXX

>> -


11. xxxx XXXX XXXX

12. xxxx XXXX XXXX
13. 20006 XXXX XXXX
14. 20006 2000९ XXXX
15. Xxxx XXXX XXXX
16. xxxx XXXX XXXX
17. Xxxx XXXX XXXX

18. The Committee then took up the draft Action Taken Report (17th Lok Sabha) on action
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their 1357 Report (167 Lok Sabha) on the subject “Acquisition and
Development of Land by DDA” for consideration and adoption. The Committee, after some
deliberations, adopted the draft Report without any modification. The Committee also
authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid Report on the basis of factual
verification and present the same to the Hon’ble Speaker/ Parliament.

19. The Chairperson thanked the officials of the C&AG for assisting the Committee during

the deliberations.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

XXXX Does not pertain to the Report

-R}-


(APPENDIX - 11)
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
FUFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which
have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 2-11
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not

desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 1

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

11

Total: 10
Percentage - 90.91%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: 1
Percentage-— 9.09%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%