103

REVISION OF FINANCIAL LIMITS FOR
DETERMINING THE CASES RELATING TO
‘NEW SERVICE/NEW INSTRUMENT OF
SERVICE’

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDERED AND THIRD REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2333

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

REVISION OF FINANCIAL LIMITS FOR DETERMINING
THE CASES RELATING TO ‘NEW SERVICE/NEW
INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE’

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE

2235.

ies
सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 07.02.2024

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 07.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
a “NEW DELHI ~

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) 201
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
PART
Lt | New Service/ New Instrument of Service (NS/NIS)
Rationale for Revision
Present Proposal
PART नव
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
APPENDICES
|| Note/Proposal submitted by the Ministry of Finance seeking
approval of the Public Accounts Committee(2023-24)
PT | Note of concurrence from the Office of Comptroller & General of
India
| | Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2023-24) held on 17-01-2024.
Vv Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) held on 05.02.2024

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
Shri Brijendra Singh

11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh .
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni

SOE PNOKAGN

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien’
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director
“3.18. #तठाी ०.70 > 3 -+ - Assistant Committee Officer

* Elected w.c.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sckhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One-Hundred and Third Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Revision of Financial Limits for determining the
cases relating to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service".

2. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) had submitted proposal
seekinng approval of the Public Accounts Committee for revision of financial limits for
determining the cases relating to 'New Service(NS)/New Instrument of Service(NIS)'.

3. According to the Ministry, these proposals were finalized in consultation with the
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

4. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) at their sitting
held on 17.01.2024. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 05.02.2024. The Minute of the sittings are appended

to the Report.

5.. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-ll of the

Report

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the

proposal submitted.

7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the

Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 Chairperson,
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(vi)


REPORT

PART- I
1. New Service/ New Instrument of Service (NS/NIS): The Committee have been

given to understand that New Service ( NS ) refers to expenditure arising out of a new
policy decision, not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new activity or a
new form of investment. ‘New Instrument of Service’ (NIS) refers to relatively large
expenditure arising out of important expansion of an existing policy. The financial limits for
determining the cases relating to ‘New Service(NS)/New Instrument of Service’(NIS) are
applied whenever the expenditure provisions are augmented through re-appropriation of
funds from the savings available within the same section of the Grant/Appropriation.
Whenever these limits are attracted, approval-of/reporting-to Parliament is obtained/made

through Supplementary Demand for Grants during the course of financial year.

2. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) submitted a note soliciting
approval of the Public Accounts Committee for revision of financial limits for determining the
cases relating to ‘New Service (NS)/New Instrument of Service (NIS)’.. The note/proposal is
reproduced in Appendix - | of this Report. The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG)
concurred with the proposed amendments, subject to suitable incorporation of the proposed

changes in Annexure-| to Appendix-3 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), application of
the revisions to the Grants/Appropriations relating to Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Railways and Department of Posts, application of other conditions as stipulated in the GFR
2017 and Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 1978 in regard to NS/NIS mutates mutandis

and approval of the Committee before notification of the proposed changes. (Appendix-ll).

Rationale for Revision

3. Rationale and proposed benefits of the revision of financial limits as submitted by
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) are given as under:
“(i) The distinction in Government expenditure as Plan or Non-Plan has
since been done away from the Budget for the year 2017-2018. With this
removal, the focus has been shifted to holistic allocation on any

scheme/programme with bifurcation on revenue and capital expenditure.

1


(ii) The erstwhile alpha-numeric codes were replaced by standard numeric
codes vide DoE’s OM No. F.1 (47)-E.II(A)/94 dated 12.12.1994 and the same
were incorporated in the Detailed Demand for Grants w.e.f. Budget for 1995-96.
The transition from alpha-numeric codes to numeric codes in Detailed Demand for
Grants commenced from 1996-97 onwards. The existing norms governing
financial limits of NS/NIS need clarity on re-appropriations at Object Head level to
make it sync with the complete 15-digit classification adopted for incorporation in
the Detailed Demand for Grants. These alpha-numeric codes are not applicable
to estimates of Ministry of Defence (Defence Services) and Ministry of Railways.
However, object head wise expenditure of Defence Services and Ministry of
Railways have been mapped with that of standard object head followed for the
demands of civil ministries.

(iii) With the introduction of Public Financial Management System (PFMS),
the accounts have since been digitized and the payments by the Pay & Accounts
Offices have been linked with the Detailed Demand for Grants. While this ensures
proper exchequer control, efficient compilation of accounts and generation of
critically important fiscal reports at the end of the ministries, non-standardization
of re-appropriation proposals often leads to discrepancies and incongruities in the
processes.

(iv) Accounts of the non-civil Ministries/Departments [Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Railways, Department of Posts] have been aligned with the accounts of
the civil Ministries/Departments through linkages with PFMS through integration
protocols warranting broader perspective in decision making in re-appropriations.
(v) While the total expenditure of the Government, on net basis, has since
increased by more than 600% from % 5.83 lakh crore in 2006-07 to ₹ 45.03 lakh
crore in 2023-24, the total expenditure of the Government, on gross basis, has
increased by more than 700% from हैं 17.28 lakh crore to = 144.27 lakh crore
during the same period.

(vi) With the expected growth of GDP being in the range of 6-7% year over
year (YoY) basis during the next 10 years and with the Government of India
having adopted United Nation's Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 2030,


the budget size is expected to increase during the next ten years to
commensurate with:
a) the growing focus on equitable development and consequent
implementation of broad-based inclusive social policies.
b) increased thrust on Capital expenditure
०) enhanced support to the vulnerable class due to growing uncertainties
related to epidemics (like Covid etc.), changing geo-political landscape and
other unavoidable scenarios.
(vii) ॥ has been more than 16 years since the current norms governing the
financial limits of NIS/NIS were implemented vide Ministry of Finance’s O.M. No.
1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006 .
(शा) Existing NS/NIS limits consist of lots of stipulations and complex inter-
dependencies which lead to restrictive interpretations, open ended conclusions
and judgemental errors at the end of the Ministries/Departments.
(ix) The PAC and the C&AG have been pointing to the growing instances
of:
(i) unnecessary supplementary,
(ii) te-appropriations not adhering to the NS/NIS limits; and
(iii) re-appropriations without reporting to Parliament or without obtaining
prior approval of Ministry of Finance.
(x) Substantial growth in the budget size, over the years, has eviscerated
the Ministries/Departments of their delegated powers leading to voluminous
proposal(s) being forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, for reporting/approval of
the Parliament.
(xi) Huge volume of cases impairs scrutiny at the level of Parliament and
Ministry of Finance; and that the executive need to wait for ensuing Parliament
Session to get necessary approvals through Supplementary Demands for Grants
before incurring any expenditure on certain cases.
(xii) Effort is being made to restrict the number of Supplementary Demands
for Grants presented to Parliament during a financial year in order that the
Ministries give due seriousness to estimating their budgetary requirements.
“Increase in quantum of supplementary proposals from the Ministries/Depariments :


seeking prior approval from Parliament leads to delay ‘in execution of
projects/schemes/programmes despite availability of savings with the line

Ministries/Departments.

(xiii) Most of the critical issues arise due to complexities in the structure
based on which the current NS/NIS limits have been stipulated. Further, these
limits are defined at multiple levels/scenarios despite the standardization of object

heads.”

Present Proposal

4, All new services [except for the new ‘Works’ under Capital section] have been
proposed to be considered as ‘New Service’ as defined in Article 115 of the Constitution and

will accordingly need prior approval of Parliament.

5. For services falling under the category of new works under Capital, the proposal for
revision of financial limits for determining the cases relating to ‘New Service’ as received
from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) is as under:

Object Heads Prior Approval of the
Parliament

Reporting Limit

1. Machinery&

equipment;
2. ICT Equipment;

3. Building and
Structure;

Above % 50 crore but not
exceeding = 100 crore,
subject to savings within
same section of the Grant

Above 2 100 crore, subject
to savings within same
section of the Grant

4. Infrastructural
Assets ;

5. Arms and
Ammunitions; and

6. Land

6. ह Keeping in view the aspect of sensitivity on critical activities of the Government,
the Object Heads as per following details [in compliance with revised Rule 8 of the
DFPR] have been identified and categorised. for deciding on ‘reporting limits’ and for
obtaining ‘prior approval of the Parliament’ in the case of ‘New Instrument of Service’.


4, Machinery
equipment;

5. ICT Equipment;

6. Building and Structures;

upto हैं 100 crore
whichever is higher -

Object Heads Reporting Limit Prior Approval of the
Parliament
1. Investment;
2. Loans and advances; Upto 20% of the| Above 20% of the
3. Subsidies; original original appropriation
and | 4ppropriation* OR (15-digit line item)

OR
Above हैं 100 crore,

7. Infrastructure assets; [subject to savings | whichever is
8. Arms and ammunitions within same section | higher[subject to
9. Land; of the Grant} savings within same

10. GIA Capex; section of the Grant]

11. GIA General;
12. GIA Sala

All other Object Heads Each case to be decided on merit basis

7. The proposed limits will be applicable to all Ministries including Ministry of ~

Railways and Ministry of Defence and Posts.

8. Following exceptions to the financial limits of NS/NIS, as per existing norms, are
proposed to continue:
i. | Expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
ii. Normal administrative/establishment expenditure including:
° Re-organization of Ministries/Departments,
e Holding of conferences, seminars, exhibitions, surveys, feasibility studies,
etc. :
e Assistance to foreign Governments,
e Contributions to international bodies and fulfillment of Government
guarantee on its invocation.
ii. | Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments [under M.H. 3601 and 3602],

provided the Scheme is not new.



iv. Delegation of full powers to Chief Accounting Authorities to augment the

provisions through re-appropriation of savings under ‘Salaries’, ‘Pensions’,

‘Wages’, ‘Medical Expenses’ and ‘Rent Rates and Taxes’.

9. The Office of Comptroller and Auditor General of India on these new proposals have

informed the Committee vide their Brief Note as follows:

" The existing financial limits to determine new instruments of service / new
service are rule-based, requiring different limits for expenditure for different
categories of items. The proposal is for adoption of 3 principle-based
approach, which applies uniformly to all new services (except new Works,
exempted and exception categories) for seeking prior approval of
Parliament and determine the financial limits for considering reporting limit
and prior approval limit for services for new Works and new instrument of
service; exemption of certain services.

Taking into note of the requirements, previous revisions in the limit as per
requirements, growth in the budget and the expenditure in past about 17
years, including recent trends of gross budget increase from *106.74 lakh
crore in 2021-22 to ₹ 144.27 crore in 2023-24, about 35 percent in two
years and also keeping in view the future requirements for next a decade
or so, when the next revisit might be proposed, the proposal was examined
and concurrence of the Office of the CAG of India was conveyed.
Moreover, MoF has carried out an analysis which shows that 88 percent to
99 percent of the proposals for revision shall remain in the active scrutiny
of the PAC, implying thereby that the substantive re-appropriations can
only be done with the prior approval of Parliament.

Further, defining NS/NIS limits uniformly and consistently at standardised
Object Heads will enable effective monitoring, scrutiny and oversight by the
CAG and Parliament of the compliance of the limits by the executive as

well as for ensuring their accountability."


10. While explaining the need for the proposed revision, the representative of the Ministry

of Finance (Department of Expenditure) while tendering evidence made the following

submissions:
“...since the last revision in 2006, on a gross basis, the Union Budget has grown in
size by more than 1000 per cent.... several of the Ministries tend to take unnecessary
supplementary when none was required and requisite authorisation had been given
by the Parliament or the PAC to the Government.... As a result of low NIS limits, we
have been providing voluminous reports for its scrutiny. In the years 2019-20, 2020-
21, 2021-22, and 2022-23, we took 2,500 tokens to the notice of the Parliament for
reappropriating Rs. 5.45 lakh crore... if we apply those proposals to these years, the
number of tokens that we would have taken to Parliament for its consideration would
have dropped to 800 approximately with the amount that is being scrutinised by
Parliament only coming down marginally by Rs. 5.25 lakh crore.”
So, as a first step, we are not altering any existing guidelines of the PAC about
specified items and non-specified items that we have been running along all these
years. In fact, the areas which have been identified by PAC as critical or C@AG telling
us that these are critical for PAC, we would stick to it, going forward. Second, we are
simplifying the process in such a way that it becomes very easy to adopt by the
Ministries and it will be very easy for the PAC to find deviations. | must confess that
going forward, initially, you would find the volumes increasing but it will stabilise as
we go along because all the Ministries have to report as it is so simple.

Finally, it would speed up the process of decision making for the Government
and also perhaps improve the pace of scheme implementation.

One point that we have factored into our minds that it should be replicable and
it should be adopted in the existing IT infrastructure that we have within the
Government. So, the first point is with regard to the new services. All the new
‘services except in the case of new works where we have specific guidance of the
PAC, not contemplated in the budget, will require prior approval of Parliament. So, we
are committing to the PAC that any expenditure except for the new works where we
have the guidance of the PAC, we would come back to Parliament for approval”.


11. | When the Committee sought to know about the basis for proposing” principle-based
approach” for New Service and New Instruments of Service, the Ministry submitted as

follows:
“.. We are adopting broad principles as you would see, which affords flexibility to the

PAC to delve into greater details, and at the same time, it allows flexibility of the

Government to incur the expenditure based on needs.”

12. The proposed revision has been finalized by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) after obtaining the concurrence of the office of C&AG of India. The Committee
also heard the views of the officers of C&AG on the.subject, who have recommended the

implementation of proposed revision of the financial limits.

13. | The proposal of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) was considered
by the Committee at their sitting held on 17" January, 2024. The relevant Minutes of the

sitting are reproduced in Appendix II! of this report.


PART -Il
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

New Service (NS) refers to expenditure arising out of a new policy decision not
brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new activity or a new form of
investment. ‘New Instrument of Service’ (NIS) refers to relatively large expenditure
arising out of important expansion of an existing policy. The financial limits for
determining the cases relating to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’ are applied
whenever the expenditure provisions are augmented through re-appropriation of
funds from the savings available within the same section of the Grant/Appropriation.
Whenever these limits are attracted, approval-of/reporting-to Parliament is
obtained/made through Supplementary Demand for Grants during the course of the
financial year. The Committee note that Ministry of Finance has solicited approval of
the PAC for adoption of a principle-based approach, over the existing rule-based
approach, which applies uniformly to all new services (except new Works, exempted
and exception categories) for seeking prior approval of Parliament and determine the
financial limits for considering reporting limit and prior approval limit for services for
new Works and New Instruments of service and exemption of certain services. The
Committee further note that the proposal is for revision of the financial limits upward
on the basis of expansion of the budget after the last revision in 2006 and taking into
account the future expansion of the GDP/budget and other likely changes. This
proposal for amendment is fourth of its kind and is being made after a hiatus of about

17 years.

2. The Committee understand that the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) has currently proposed to amend various provisions of Delegation of
Financial Power Rules (DFPRs), 1978. As pait of this process, the Ministry have
sought approval of the PAC for revision of financial limits for determining the cases
relating to ‘New Service (NS)/New Instrument of Service (NIS)'. The proposed
amendments inter-alia include upward revision of financial limits for services
categorised as new works under the Capital section (classified as
Land/Building/Machine). The reporting limit is.proposed to be set above.%.50 crores.
but not exceeding €100 crores and prior approval of Parliament would be required for

9


amounts exceeding = 100 crores subject to saving within same section of the grant.
For certain object heads in the case of 'New Instrument of Service’, the reporting limit
would be up to 20% of the original appropriation or up to = 100 crores, whichever is
higher. Approval from Parliament would be mandatory for amounts exceeding 20% of
the original appropriation or above % 100 crores, whichever is higher, subject to

savings within same section of the grant.

3. The Committee further note from the submission of the Ministry that the
endeavor is to minimise the frequency of Supplementary Demands for Grants
presented to Parliament during a financial year. The proposed amendments intend to
encourage the Ministries to meticulously estimate their budgetary requirements. The
necessity for the upward revision arises due to a surge in supplementary proposals
from the Ministries/Departments seeking prior approval from Parliament, causing
delays in execution of projects/schemes/programmes despite availability of savings.
The Committee understand from the submission made by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure), the Government's expenditure, on net basis, has risen
by over 700 % from 2005-06 to 2023-24. The Ministry of Finance has explained that
with the expected growth of GDP in the range of 6-7% YoY basis, the size of the
Budget is anticipated to grow substantially in the next decade too. The Ministry of
Finance has further clarified that substantial growth in budget size has diminished
the delegated powers of the Ministries/Departments leading to voluminous
proposal(s) being forwarded, for reporting/approval of the Parliament. Therefore, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) felt that existing NS/NIS limits
consist of lots of stipulations and complex inter-dependencies which lead to
restrictive interpretations, open ended conclusions and judgmental errors for the
Ministries/Departments. The Committee note from the view provided by C&AG and
the Ministry that following the implementation of the current proposal, 88 to 99
percent of the cases for revision would remain in the active scrutiny of the PAC,
implying thereby that the substantive re-appropriations can only be done with the
prior approval of Parliament. The Committee observe from the observations of the
C&AG that defining NS/NIS limits uniformly and consistently at standardised Object
Heads. will .enable effective monitoring, scrutiny and oversight by the CAG and

10


Parliament of the compliance of the limits by the executive as also for ensuing their

accountability.

4, Considering that the proposal has been finalized after consultation with
various Ministries and obtaining the concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller &
Auditor General of India, and there is adequate rationale provided by the Ministry of
Finance for the need for revision of financial limits for determining the cases relating
to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’, the Committee concur with the proposed
amendments and recommend the same to be implemented in due course. The
Committee have every reason to believe that, as recommended by C&AG, adequate
measures for suitable incorporation of proposed changes in Annexure-1 to Appendix-
3 of the GFR, application of other conditions as stipulated in the GFR 2017 and
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 1978 in regard to NS/NIS mutatis mutandis have
been taken into consideration. The Committee while according their approval for
NS/NIS recommend the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) should
devise an effective monitoring mechanism for proper and continuous monitoring of
the revised limits in order to ensure strict adherence of the same by each and every
Ministry/Department. The Committee also expect the Financial Advisors of all the
Ministries/Departments to ensure that no violations occur in implementation of the
revised financial limits for 'New Service/New Instrument of Service’. It goes without

saying here that any slackness in complying with the same may be strictly dealt with.

In summation, the Committee acquiesce with the new proposal of ‘New
Service/New Instrument of Service’ (NS/NIS) and in sequel accord their
sanction for the same, as sought by the Ministry of Finance which have come
before the Committee after almost seventeen years with the expectation that

it would be implemented by the Ministry within the proposed timelines.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
06 February, 2024 || Chairperson
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

11


Appendix न

CHAPTER 1 ‘NEW SERVICE'/ ‘NEW INSTRUMENT OF
SERVICE’ (NS/NIS)

1.1. Introduction |

1.1.1 A Grant or Appropriation for charged expenditure is distributed by
standard Object Heads under which it shall be accounted for and cach such
standard Object Head, against which the provision for expenditure appears,
constitutes a primary unit of Appropriation.

1.1.2 Re-appropriation of funds entails re-allocation of funds from one primary
unit of appropriation to another primary unit of appropriation within the same
section of the Grant or Appropriation viz. Revenue-Voted, Revenue-Charged,
Capital-Voted and Capital-Charged. Re-appropriation of funds is necessary during
the course of the year for re-distribution of resources/savings in a fruitful
manner from one object of expenditure to another from the savings available
within the same section of the Grant. -

1.2 Constitutional/ Codal provisions

1.2.1 Constitutional provisions relating to financial matters, Delegation of
Financial Powers Rules (DFPRs) 1978, General Financial Rules, 2017 (GFRs) and
other standing instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, are the guiding
principles for governing rules related to determining the cases of New Service
and New Instrument of Service.

1.2.2 Article 115 (1)(a) of the Constitution of India provides that if the
amount authorized by any law made in accordance with the provisions of Article
114 to be expended for a particular purpose of that year or when a need has
arisen during the current financial year for the supplementary or additional
expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial
statement for that year, the President shall cause to be laid before both the
houses of the Parliament another statement showing the estimated amount of

that expenditure.

1.2.3 Rule 65 (1) of the General Financial Rules, 2017 related to Re-
appropriation of Funds states that ‘Subject to the provisions of Rule 10 of the

Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, and also subject to such other general of ~~

specific restrictions as may be imposed by the Finance Ministry in this behalf, re-
appropriation of funds from one primary unit of appropriation to another such unit
within a grant or appropriation, may be sanctioned by a competent authority at


Appendix -1

any time before the close of the financial year to which such grant or appropriation
relates. The Primary unit in this regard shall be the final unit of appropriation ie.
the Object head of account. .

1.2.4 Rule 66 of the General Financial Rules, 2017 provides that ‘If savings
are not available within the Grant to which the payment is required to be debited,
or if the expenditure is on “New Service” or “New Instrument of Service” not
provided in the budget, necessary Supplementary Grant or Appropriation in
accordance. with Article 115 (1) of the Constitution shall be obtained before
payment is authorized.’

1.3 Definitions of ‘New Service’ and ‘New Instrument of Service’

1.3.1 The term ‘new service’ has not been defined in the Constitution. After the
commencement of the Constitution, the scope and meaning of term ‘expenditure on
a new service’ was left to be decided by the evolution of a body of case law on the
basis of decisions taken and views expressed by the Public Accounts Committee and
audit from time to time. Broadly, expenditure from the Consolidated Fund arising
out of a new policy decision (not brought to the notice of the legislature earlier)
including a new activity or a new form of investment is regarded as an item of ‘new
service’ within the contemplation of article 115 (1) (a). Likewise, relatively large
expenditure arising out of an important expansion of an existing activity is treated
as ‘new instrument of service’ which, though slightly different from ‘New Service’ is,
in practice, subjected to the same restrictions as applicable to ‘new service’,
although the existing activity might have otherwise been contemplated and
provided for in the annual financial statement. [Source: 41st Report of PAC (1980-

81) (7 LS)]

1.3.2 Based on the consensus arrived at between the Public Accounts
Committee (PAC), the Ministry of Finance and the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (C&AG), ‘New Service’ and ‘New Instrument of Service’ have

been defined as under:
‘New Service’ (NS): As appearing in Article 115 (1)(a) of the Constitution
of India, this has been held as referring to expenditure arising out of anew
policy decision, not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a
new activity or a new form of investment.

‘New Instrument of Service’ (NIS): Refers to relatively large expenditure
arising out of important expansion'of an-existing-policy. ooo

1.4 Eligibility conditions for NS/NIS Limits



Appendix -1

1.4.1 The financial limits for determining the cases relating to 'New
Service/New Instrument of Service’ are applied whenever the expenditure
provisions are augmented through re-appropriation of funds from the savings
available within the same section of the Grant/Appropriation.

1.4.2 The nature and the volume of transactions determine:

a) whether prior approval of the Parliament needs to be obtained before
incurring the expenditure through re-appropriation; or

b) whether Ministry/Department may incur the expenditure using re-
appropriation but need reporting to the Parliament.

1.4.3 Whenever these limits are attracted, approval-of/reporting-to Parliament
is obtained/made through Supplementary Demand for Grants during the course
of the financial year.

1.4.4 If financial limits are not attracted, re-appropriation is carried out within
the delegated powers either by Chief Controlling Authority or with the approval
of the Ministry of Finance.

Following exceptions to the financial limits of NS/NIS are recognized:

a. Expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
b. Normal administrative/establishment expenditure including:

i. Re-organization of Ministries/Departments,

ii. Holding of conferences, seminars, exhibitions, surveys, feasibility studies,
etc.

iii. Assistance to foreign Governments,

iv. Contributions to international bodies and fulfillment of Government
guarantee on its invocation.

c. Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments [under M.H. 3601 and
3602], provided the Schemc is not new.

1.6 PAC’s recommendations and applicability of financial limits

1.6.1 In order to provide effective Parliamentary control over Government
expenditure certain monetary limits beyond which expenditure on new works
would constitute ‘New Instrument of Service’ requiring prior approval of
Parliament were prescribed-for the ‘first-time by the Central Public Accounts
Committee in 1963’.

1.6.2 First elaborate set of financial limits in respect of New Service/New
Instrument of Service were delineated vide Department of Economic Affairs’ OM



” Appendix -1

No. F.8(60)-B(69) dated 270 July 1970. [Annexure 3]. This was as per
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in its 500 report
(4% Lok Sabha).

1.6.3 The financial limits of New Service/New instrument of Service were
further revised as per the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in its 41st Report (7% Lok Sabha) and were issued vide Department of
Economic Affairs’ OM No. 7(15)-B(RA)/82 dated 13% April 1982 [Annexure
‘S’]as approved by the PAC in its 70% Report.

1.7 Current norms of the Financial Limits

1.7.1 The current norms of the financial limits applicable on the New
service/New Instrument of Service are governed by the Ministry of Finance’s
O.M. No. 1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006 [Annexure 47] which only
revised the financial limits defined vide MoF’s OM dated 13% April 1982 ibid. The
guidelines were revised in accordance with the commitment made in the Fiscal
Policy Strategy Statement (Budget 2005-06) under the mandate of FRBM
Legislation and in pursuance of approval of the Public Accounts Committee
(2005-06) with concurrence of the C&AG.]

1.7.2 Clarifications on the Financial Limits: Ministry of Finance’s 0.५. No.
dated 21.05.2012 provided further ‘Clarification on the Financial Limits to be
observed in determining cases relating to ‘New Service’/New Instrument of
Service’ with specific reference to ‘Grants-in-aid’, ‘Subsidies’ and ‘Major Works’.


Appendix न

NS/NIS limits

2.1.1 The distinction in Government expenditure as Plan or Non-Plan has since
been done away with from Budget 2017-2018. With this removal, the focus has
been shifted to holistic allocation on any scheme/programme with bifurcation on
revenue and capital expenditure.

2.1.2 The erstwhile alpha-numeric codes were replaced by standard numeric
codes vide DoE’s OM No. F.1 (47)-E.1I(A)/94 dated 12.12.1994 and the same
were incorporated in the Detailed Demand for Grants w.c.f. Budget for 1995-96.
The transition from alpha-numeric codes to numeric codes in Detailed Demand
for Grants commenced from 1996-97 onwards. The existing norms governing
financial limits of NS/NIS necd clarity on re-appropriations at Object Head level
to make it sync with the complete 15-digit classification adopted for
incorporation in the Detailed Demand for Grants. These alpha-numeric codes
are not applicable to estimates of Ministry of Defence (Defence Services) and
Ministry of Railways. However, object head wise expenditure of Defence Services
and Ministry of Railways have been mapped with that of standard object head
followed for the demands of civil ministries.

2.1.3 The Standardized Object Heads stand revised vide Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure’s Gazette Notification dated 16.12.2022 [Annexure
6]. The primary units of re-appropriations/Standard Object Heads as per Rule 8
of the Delegation of Financial Powers (DFPR) 1978 have since been rationalized
and warrant appropriate review of the delegated powers under Rule 10 of the
DFPR.

2.1.4 With the introduction of Public Financial Management System (PFMS), the
accounts have since been digitized and the payments by the Pay & Accounts
Offices have been linked with the Detailed Demand. for Grants. While this ensures
proper exchequer control, efficient compilation of accounts and generation of
critically important fiscal reports at the end of the’ ministries, non-
standardization of re-appropriation proposals often leads to discrepancies and
incongruities in the processes.

~2:1:5" Accounts: of ‘the non-civil Ministries/Departments “[Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Railways, Department of Posts] have been aligned with the accounts
of the civil Ministries/Departments through linkages with PFMS through


Appendix न

integration protocols warranting broader perspective in decision making in re-
appropriations.

2.1.6 The current norms/structure made applicable on NS/NIS limits vide
Ministry of Finance’s 0.५. No. 1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006 No. _1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated __25.5.200
{Annexure ‘1’] are continuum of the financial limits defined in this Ministry's

091५ (1४०. 7(15)-B(RA}/82) issued on 13th April 1982 [Annexure 5] with no

substantial change in the contents. These changes took into account the growing
need for greater parliamentary scrutiny and bringing in the flexibility in the
hands of the executive in an optimal manner.

2.1.7 While the total expenditure of the -Government, on net basis, has since
increased by more than 700 % from % 5.14 lakh crore in 2005-06 to % 45.03 lakh
crore in 2023-24, the total expenditure of the Government, on gross basis, has
increased by more than 1100 % from हैं 11.53 lakh crore to % 144.27 lakh crore
during the same period. [Refer Figure 1.1. ,1.2 & Table 1.1]

Total expenditure of the Government on

Net basis
(Xin lakh crore)

50 नाप:

2006-07 2023-24
[Figure 1.1 Total expenditure of the Government on Net basis]

Gross Budget 2005-06 2023-24
Charged 6.03 89.76
Voted 0.67 12.94

Capital



Appendix न

Growth in Budget since Last Revision
301.75

144.27

——+ Capital 102.70

le

Rs. tn lakh crore

11.53

—* capital 6.70
=~ Revenue 41.58

Revenue 4.83

के ced
Nominal GOP Gross Budget
2023-24

Nominal GDP Gross Budget

2005-06
[Figure 1.2 Growth in Budget since 2005-06]

2.1.8 With the expected growth of GDP being in the range of 6-7% YoY basis
during the next 10 years and with the Government of India having adopted
United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 2030, the budget size is
expected to increase during the next ten years to commensurate with:

a)the growing focus on equitable development and consequent
implementation of broad-based inclusive social policies.

b) increased thrust on Capital expenditure

c) enhanced support to the vulnerable class due to growing uncertainties
related to epidemic (Covid etc.), changing geo-political landscape and
other unavoidable scenarios.

2.2 Other issues which are required to be addressed post
implementation of current norms

2.2.1 It has been more than 16 years since the current norms governing the
financial limits of NIS/NIS were implemented vide Ministry of Finance’s 0.५.
No. _1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006 [Annexure 171] . These norms
attempted to merely revise the financial limits stipulated in the previous OM (No.
7(15)-B(RA)/82) issued on 13th April 1982 [Annexure 5] with no substantial
change in the contents.

2.2.2 Existing NS/NIS limits.consist of lots of stipulations and complex inter-
dependencies which lead to restrictive interpretations, open ended conclusions
and judgemental errors at the end of the Ministries/Departments.


Appendix -!

2.2.3 The PAC and the C&AG have been pointing to the growing instances of:

() un-necessary supplementary,

(ii) re-appropriations not adhering to the NS/NIS limits; and

(iii) re-appropriations without reporting to Parliament or without
obtaining prior approval of Ministry of Finance.

2.2.4 Substantial growth in the budget size, over the years, has eviscerated the
Ministries/Departments of their delegated powers leading to voluminous
proposal(s) being forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, for reporting/approval
of the Parliament.

2.2.5 The volume and the amount of the proposals received from various
Ministries/Departments during the last four financial years can be seen from the
Annexure 7. It is evident from this data that huge volume of cases impairs
scrutiny at the level of Parliament and Ministry of Finance; and that the executive
need to wait for ensuing Parliament session to get necessary approvals through
Supplementary Demands for Grants before incurring any expenditure on certain
cases.

2.2.6 In addition, effort is being made to restrict the number of Supplementary
Demands for Grants presented to Parliament during a financial year in order that
the Ministries give due seriousness to estimating their budgetary requirements.
Increase in quantum of supplementary proposals from _ the
Ministrics/Departments seeking prior approval from Parliament leads to delay in
execution of projects/schemes/programmes despite availability of savings with
the line Ministries/Departments.

2.2.7 Most of the critical issues arise due to complexities in the structure based

on which the current NS/NIS limits have been stipulated. Further, these limits
are defined at multiple levels/scenarios despite the standardisation of object

heads.


Appendix -1

CHAPTER3 PROPOSAL |

३.4 Principle-based approach |

3.1.1 It is proposed to revise the NS/NIS financial limits applicable for the
purpose of re-appropriation of savings within the delegated financial powers
with executives and seeking approval of Parliament through Supplementary
Demands for Grants beyond the delegated financial powers.

3.1.2 Principle-based approach has been considered over Rule-Based approach
in revising the financial limits for applicability of ‘New Service’ /’New Instrument
of Service’.

3.1.3 Following broad principles have been kept in mind while proposing the
new NS/NIS limits:

i the critical areas which have been under the existing oversight of
the Parliament are not overlooked;
ii. - systemic uniformity is maintained to enable consistency and
relevance in obtaining prior approvals & reporting;
iil. there remains a balance in the NS/NIS financial limits to ensure
proper parliamentary scrutiny;
iv. the scrutiny of the proposals is not impaired duc to growing mass
of data leading to voluminous reports;
v. administrative efficiency and financial discipline are ensured;
vi. there is no compromise on the accountability of the Government;
vil. there is swift decision making by the respective authorities;
viii. the financial limits are commensurate with the size of original
appropriation; and
ix. sufficient auditory controls are maintained in the processes
x. the revised model is replicable in the IT environment for ease of

making financial decisions.

3.1.4 The limits are proposed to be fixed keeping in perspective the growth in
GDP and the consequent budget size over next 10 years.

३.2. Financial Limits- Proposed under New Service [NS] |

3.2.1 All new services [except for the new ‘Works’ under Capital section] have
been proposed to be considered as ‘New Service’ as defined in Article 115 of the
Constitution and will accordingly need prior approval of the Parliament.

3.2.2 In case of services falling under the category of new works under Capital
section (currently classified as Land/Building/Machine), the financial limits for
the ‘New Service’ are proposed to be defined as under:


Appendix न

Object Heads

Reporting Limit

Prior Approval of the
Parliament

1. Machinery &
Equipment;
ICT Equipment;
3. Building and

N

Above हैं 50 crore but
not exceeding % 100
crore, subject to
savings within same

Above % 100 crore,
subject to savings
within same section of
the Grant

Structure; हि 6
4, Infrastructural section of the Grant
Assets;
5. Arms and
Ammunitions; and
6. Land
[Table 1.2 Proposed Financial Limit services falling under the category of new
works]
3.3 Financial limits under New Instrument of Service [NIS] |

3.3.1 Keeping in view the Parliamentary sensitivity on critical activities of the
Government, the Object Heads as per following details [in compliance with
revised Rule 8 of the DFPR] have been identified and categorised for making
decision on ‘reporting limits’ and for obtaining ‘prior approval of the Parliament’
in the case of ‘New Instrument of Service’.

1
1

1. GIA General;
2. GIA Salary

Object Heads Reporting Limit Prior Approval of
the Parliament

1. Investment;

2. Loans and advances; upto 20% of the| Above 20% of the.

3. Subsidies; original original

4. Machinery and equipment; appropriation* OR appropriation (15-

5. ICT Equipment; upto ₹ 100 crore digit line item)

6. Building and Structures; whichever is higher | OR

7. Infrastructure assets;

8. Arms and ammunitions [subject to savings | Above % 100 crore,

9, Land; within same section | whichever is higher

10. GIA Capex; of the Grant]

[subject to savings
within same section
of the Grant

All other Object Heads

Each case to be decided on merit basis

* refers to 15-digit numeric code in respect of civil Ministries or final unit of appropriation .
available in the Detailed Deriand for Grants in respect of non-Civil Ministriés”

[Table 1.3 Reporting Limits and for obtaining prior approval of the Parliament in
the case of ‘New Instrument of Service’]



Appendix -1

3.3.2 The proposed limits are proposed to be applicable to all Ministries including
Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Defence.

3.3.3 Following exceptions to the financial limits of NS/NIS, as per existing
norms, are proposed to continue:

a. Expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
b. Normal administrative/establishment expenditure including:

- Re-organization of Ministries/Departments,
- Holding of conferences, seminars, exhibitions, surveys, feasibility studies,

etc.

- Assistance to foreign Governments, हे
- Contributions to international bodies and fulfillment of Government
guarantee on its invocation.

c. Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments [under M.H. 3601 and
3602], provided the Scheme is not new.

व. Delegation of full powers to Chief Accounting Authorities to augment the
provisions: through re-appropriation of savings under ‘Salaries’, ‘Pensions’,
‘Wages’, ‘Medical Expenses’ and ‘Rent Rates and Taxes’.

3.3.4 The impact of keeping the financial limit(s) in respect of various heads at
above = 100 crore can be scen at Annexure 7.

3.4 Projected Benefits

3.4.1 The following benefits are expected to accrue in adopting the revised

regime:

h.

the Parliament will be kept informed of the re-appropriations being
done in the critical areas of the governance;

there will be systemic uniformity thus ensuring consistency and
relevance in obtaining prior approvals & reporting;

there would be a balance in NS/NIS financial limits and proper
parliamentary scrutiny will be ensured;

scrutiny of data is not impaired duc to growing mass of data leading
to voluminous reports;

there will be no compromise in the administrative efficiency and
financial discipline in the processes;

..this will retain. the accountability. of.the Government;

it is anticipated that decision making by the respective authorities

will be swift;
the financial limits will remain commensurate with the size of

original appropriation; and


Appendix -

i. there will be no compromise on the auditory controls in the revised ©

processes

j. the proposed regime would be in conformity with and replicable on
the IT system for ease of convenience

k. the revised limits would remain dynamic and in consonance with
the enhancements of the budgetary provisions in the future. and

]. the proposed revision in the financial limits applicable to NS/NIS
will establish a common and casy understanding across the line
Ministries/Departments.

3.4.2 Examining the cumulative data from Supplementary Demands for Grants
of FY 20, FY 21, FY 22 & FY 23 in terms of supplementary proposals of more than

2100 crore, it may be observed that, incase (|
NS/NIS limits is considered, substantial num
the active scrutiny of the Parliament:

he proposal for revision of financial
ber of the proposals will remain in

| Head | Count foun तन re Remarks
Loan & Investments 17 117965.8 36.17] 99.04 | Annexure 9
Major Works 27 36655.39 14.59 92.85 | Annexure 10
GIA GENERAL 131} 151364,32 14.19 92.47 | Annexure 11
GIA CAPEX | 69 | 67785.41 18.9 92.51 | Annexure 12
GIA SALARY 24 23626.67 8.79 88.23 | Annexure 13
Subsidies 29 29545.39 26.36 93.71 | Annexure 14

3.4.3 A matrix containing proposed object Heads-wise [Revised as per Gazette
Notification dated 16.12.2022] NIS/NIS financial limits is enclosed as Annexure

15.


Appenelix - TL

af tie Comptreiler and Auditor Generai of India

aie के Basa एवं sae aes का कार्यात्रय

16, Bakadur Shak, Zafar Marg. New Delhi - 19.092
10. बहादुर शाह ज़फर aie नई दिल्‍ली - 110 002

Government Accounts Wing (सरकारी लेखा 277)

Subject Revision of financial limits for determining the cases relating to ‘New

Service / New Instrument of Service’ - regarding.

Tae 04८8 of the CAG of India concurs with the rroposa! cf the 105:

2, MoF, Gol, subject to the following.

Tre proposed changes would affect the provisions in Annexure — I ६2

Appendix 3 of the GFR and would require suitable incorporation

ent upon the changes, rules / regulations related trereto may 8150
be examined for suitable adaptation.

(ii) The changes shall also apply to the Grants / Appropriations relating to
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways and Department of Posts.

Cy

Other conditions as stipulated in the GFR 2017 and Delegation of

(ity 1
Financial Powers Rules 1978 may apply in regard to NS ¢ NZS mnuates
mutandis

fiv) Ministry of Finance may like to bring the proposal before the Public

Accounts Committee (PAC) for their consideration before the cnai

are notified,

(S. K. हाई
Sr. AO (Govt. Accounts)

Shri C. P. Kushwaha, Under Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure, Govt. of India, New Delhi __
Ko, 1294 / 56 -205 / NS-NIS / 2023 Dated: 20 November 2023