111

ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSES IN ENTERTAINMENT
SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 517 Report (17 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT ~

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2341

ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2022-23)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSES IN
ENTERTAINMENT SECTOR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 517 Report (17" Lok Sabha)}

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER Ill

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the 50५शाशधाशाई......... ... ... .. ००० ०-०-०-०-«
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government...................
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.......
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no
18[065............ ... ... cece ee eee terete जज जज 55५«

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Public
Accounts Committee (2023-24) held on 05-02-2024.
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty-first
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal

6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

11. Shri Brijendra Singh

12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K Laxman

18. Shri Derek O’Brien

19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director

3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary

4. Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-23) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Eleventh Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Fifty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) "Assessment of Assesses in
Entertainment Sector" relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure).

2. The Fifty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 20" July 2022. Replies of the Government to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The
Committee considered and adopted the One hundred and eleventh Report at their
Sitting held on 5" February, 2024. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are given
at Appendix-!.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-/l.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__February, 2024 Chairperson,

Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty- first Report (17" Lok Sabha) on "Assessment of Assesses in
Entertainment Sector’.

2. The Fifty- first Report (177 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 20" July 2022, contained 18 Observations and
Recommendations. Action The Committee take strong exception to the delay in
furnishing the action taken notes by the Ministry and find that Action Taken Notes in
respect of only 17 Observations and Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry that have been broadly categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11, 13, 14, 15, 16

Total: 12
Chapter - Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. NIL

Total: 0
Chapter - Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No.4, 12
Total: 02
Chapter - IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para No. 2,3°,17,18
Total: 04
Chapter - ४

*Action taken Note on Recommendation at Para No.3 has not been furnished by the Ministry.


3. During the detailed examination of the subject "Assessment of Assesses in
Entertainment Sector’, the Committee had identified certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure which jinter-alia included updation of risk management system; a
number of segments of the entertainment sector, viz. sports, event management,
artist, animation, cable business etc. being clubbed under the same income tax
assessment code; sharing of inter-departmental and intra-departmental information
during the course of assessments; no monitoring mechanism to examine the details
of revenue earned from overflow and from various movie rights by the film producers
etc.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-first
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of
this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government
on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which

require reiteration/merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations
contained in Chapter | and V of the Report, positively within six months of the
presentation of the Report to the Parliament. The Committee further desire that
some kind of responsibility may be fixed against the officers responsible for
not furnishing the complete set of replies and also for the delay in furnishing
the same.

Paragraph 4 of PAC Report No. 51 (17"Lok Sabha)

6. The Committee note that for selection under scrutiny and monitoring purposes,
ITD has allocated codes to the assessees engaged in entertainment sector under six
categories. Of the six categories, five categories have been assigned to Film & television
sector while one category, which i ; code numbered 0906 has been allotted for ‘others' which
covers assessees associated with sports, film, event management, cable business, animation
etc. Audit scrutiny revealed that code wise data of assessees available in the website of ITD
showed that during FYs 2013-14, 87 per cent of assessees in entertainment sector were
falling in 'others' category of entertainment sector. Further, proportion of additions made
during scrutiny assessments under code 906 against total additions made in cases
relating to entertainment sector continuously increased from 66.71 per cent in FY 2013-14
to 80.62 per .cent in FY 2016-17. However, the number of cases selected for scrutiny
assessments under the business code 906 was not commensurate with the additions made
in scrutiny assessments of cases under this code during FYs 2013-14 to FYs 2016-17 1.6.


62.74 per cent in FY 2013-14 to 67.82 per cent in FY 2016-17. Due to this anomaly, Audit
observed that as a number of segments of the entertainment sector, viz. sports, event
management, artist, animation, cable business etc. are clubbed under this code, segment
specific refinement of assessees may not be possible for selection for scrutiny and
monitoring purposes. The Committee note from the related information furnished by the
Ministry that Centralised risk identification of cases of subcategories under a particular
business code such as 906 in the instant case under a risk Rule/parameter framework is
possible only when (a) Specific data fields identifying and attributable to these business
sub-sectors are available in ITRs; (b) Specific Third party or TDS data which is closely
related to and associated to transactions in these particular sub-sectors is readily
available; and (c) Such data from two different sources or fields is comparable either
directly or in terms of ratios so as to ascertain a sub-sector specific risk parameter.
Presently, these factors limit the segment specific refinement of the mentioned set of
assessees under a Computer Assisted Centralised risk parameter based scrutiny selection
process. Further, the Committee note that separate codes have been allotted in the Income-tax
return forms from AY2021-22 viz. new codes for film artists, event management, sports
management, etc. and that necessary modifications in the income-tax forms have been
carried out to further refine the categories of taxpayers belonging to entertainment sector
so as to obtain more refined results. The Committee desire the CBDT to take effective
steps to address the other limiting factors to ensure refinement of sub-sector specific risk
parameters by methodical collection, retrieving, sorting and sharing of relevant information
from various sources. To keep a constant watch over the rising number of high-risk
assessees' cases in new and emerging segments of the entertainment sector viz.
Augmented and Virtual Reality, social videos, cloud gaming, podcasting etc., the
Committee desire that the codes may be further reviewed and rationalized so as to ensure
improved vigilance and identification of high-risk assessees for detailed scrutiny.

7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:

“With regard to the refinement of sub-sector specific risk parameters, it is stated
that the review of risk parameters is carried out regularly.

With regard to the review and rationalization of business codes, it is stated that in
the return forms separate codes have been prescribed which include various
new and emerging segments in the entertainment industry. Under the column
pertaining to ‘Culture and Sport’, codes have been prescribed for motion picture
production, film distribution, film laboratories, television channel productions,
television channel broadcast, video production and distribution, sound
recording studios, radio recording and distribution, stage production and activities,
individual artists excluding authors, library activities, circuses and race tracks,
video parlours, activities of sports and game schools.


In the return forms, new codes include those of film artists, event management and
sports management. Thus, it may kindly be noted that the codes are already very
detailed and further classification would not serve any additional purpose.”

8. While noting that separate codes have been allotted in the Income-tax return
forms from AY2021-22 and that necessary modifications in the income-tax forms have
been carried out to further refine the categories of taxpayers belonging to
entertainment sector so as to obtain more refined results, the Committee had
desired the CBDT to take effective steps to address the other limiting factors to
ensure refinement of sub-sector specific risk parameters by methodical collection,
retrieving, sorting and sharing of relevant information from various sources. Further,
to keep a constant watch over the rising number of high-risk assessees' cases in new
and emerging segments of the entertainment sector viz. Augmented and Virtual
Reality, social videos, cloud gaming, podcasting etc., the Committee had desired that
the codes may be further reviewed and rationalized so as to ensure improved
vigilance and identification of high-risk assessees for detailed scrutiny. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that review of risk parameters is
carried out regularly and in the return forms separate codes have been prescribed
which include various new and emerging segments in the entertainment industry.
Under the column pertaining to 'Culture and Sport', codes have been prescribed for
motion picture production, film distribution, film laboratories, television channel
productions, television channel broadcast, video production and distribution,
sound recording studios, radio recording and distribution, stage production and
activities, individual artists excluding authors, library activities, circuses and race
tracks, video parlours, activities of sports and game schools and that the codes are
already very detailed and further classification would not serve any additional
purpose. The Committee are of the considered opinion that with the advent of social
media which is very much a part of the entertainment sector, it is imperative that the
codes are reviewed to include these categories. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation to include high-risk assessees' cases in new and
emerging segments of the entertainment sector viz. Augmented and Virtual Reality,
social videos, cloud gaming, podcasting etc., to ensure improved vigilance.


Co-ordination with other State/Central Government Departments

Paragraph 6 of PAC Report No. 51 (17“Lok Sabha)

9. ITD Manual of Office Procedure prescribed by CBDT entrusts ITD with the
responsibility to liaise with other Government departments and agencies to enable
income-tax authorities to get hold of vital information on assessees, both existing as
well as potential. Audit noticed instances where ITD did not utilize available resources
effectively for collection and analysis of data from other Central and State
Government departments especially in case of two Delhi based entities for
Assessment years 2011-12 to 2014-15 where non sharing of information reportedly
lead to tax effect of Rs.67.99 crore including interest. Moreover, Audit also pointed
out that lack of coordination with Registrar of Copyrights resulted in the royalty
income of Rs.38.28 crore and Rs. 39.67 crore in the AYs 2013-14 and 2014-15
respectively not being brought to tax. In this regard, DoR informed the Committee
that all the field formations of the Income Tax Department share relevant information
regarding violation of provisions of any statute noticed during the course of
enforcement actions like search & seizure and survey operations, with the relevant
Law Enforcement Agencies(LEA).Further, specific instructions have been issued to
field formations to share with Central Economic Intelligence Bureau(CEIB)the
information with respect of search & seizure and survey actions, related assessment
orders, appeal orders ,prosecutions ,etc. within the prescribed timelines. The
information is being shared so that appropriate information network/database of
offenders may be created and shared by CEIB with other LEAs. DoR also added that
CEIB shares details of relevant cases investigated by other LEAs with Income Tax
Department which has the effect of getting acquainted with the new and emerging
trends in regard to tax evasion. Further, CBDT is undertaking measures for
facilitating exchange of data regarding revenue collection of assesses among
various agencies such as integrating the important financial fields in Income-Tax
Returns and GST Returns. Moreover, to facilitate seamless exchange of data
between CBDT and Goods and Services Network (GSTN), an MoU was signed
between CBDT and GSTN incorporating the modalities of exchange and handling of
data, maintaining its confidentiality etc. The process of exchange of data will help in
cross verification of figures disclosed by the assessees in the ITR and GST returns.
The Committee, while expressing appreciation for the initiatives taken to strengthen
the coordination mechanism with Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, Law
Enforcement Agencies and Goods and Services Network, desire that endeavours
should also be made to liaise with District Administration, and other Government
agencies concerned with economic offences for enabling seamless exchange of data
with Income Tax Department. This will further improve the database of assesses /



offenders and will help in cross verification of figures disclosed by them during the
assessment process.

10.

The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:

“The Income-tax Department is conscious of the fact that collection of data
through various sources and its analysis is the key to address the challenge of
tax evasion, including through its usage in the assessment proceedings.

Organized data collection in the Department is done mainly through following
methods:

+ Electronic filing of IT Returns and Forms (e-filing).

+ Submission of TDS/TCS statements by deduct is in electronic form
(eTDS).

+ Collection of information by way of automatic exchange of
information under FATCA and CRS.

+ CollectionofinformationfromthirdpartiesunderApprovedprojectsofl&Cl.

+ Compulsory quoting of PAN for certain specified transactions.

+ Bulk Information exchanged through DCriT (Systems) by the
mechanism of MoUs with other Agencies/departments.

+ Mandatory furnishing of statement by various agencies for specified
financial Transactions.

In this context, ITD already comes in possession of information from District
Administration on the registration of immovable properties for sale/purchase
of properties for value >= 30 lakhs, Statement of Financial transactions
arc filed by Sub-Registrar office.

Moreover, during the course of investigation, the IT Authority concerned may
also access the data from various other state authorities/ websites of state
authorities like apnakhata epanjiyan vaaban,saarathi, bhunaksha,DoRIS etc.

Signing of MoUs for information exchange

Subject to the authorization of CBDT, Directorate of Systems, Income-tax
Department is exchanging information with various
agencies/departments/state governments. Directorate of Systems has entered
into MoU with following agencies for the exchange of information

1) GSTN

2) Ministry of Corporate Affairs

3) SEBI

4) NATGRID

5) Ministry of Micro ,Small and Medium Enterprises (MoMSME)
6) Online PSB Loans Limited(OPL)


Other than the above, Directorate of Systems is also
exchanginginformation with CBIC andFIU-IND, where MoU is signed between
CBDT and concerned agency/department. Directorate of Systems is also
providing Income-taxPayee Status information to Ministry of Agriculture &
Farmers Welfare for PM-Kisan (Pradhan Mantri KiSItscran Nidhi) scheme.

11. In this regard, Central Board of Direct Taxes in their Action Taken Reply
have stated as under:

“Data is also being shared with Government of Haryana, also Government
of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu etc. की this regard, kind
referenceisinvitedtothelatestsection138notification issued by the ITA
division, Notification under section 138 of Income Tax Act dated 16.02.2023
issued by CBDT (copy enclosed).

Over the last few years, the mechanism of sharing of information
with other agencies have both widened and deepened in scope and
execution as, inter-alia, bulk sharing of information is also being carried out
with various agencies in conformity with the MoUs entered with them. This
has led to effective bi-directionals luring of Information as far as ITD is
concerned.

However, with regard to sharing of information with the District
Administration, the Systems Directorate has opined that Signing MoUs with
various District Administrations may not be feasible. A better option may be
to sign the MoUs with State Governments, who can share the information
with District Authorities after obtaining consent of ITD.”

12. While appreciating the initiatives taken to strengthen the coordination
mechanism with Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, Law Enforcement
Agencies and Goods and Services Network, the Committee had recommended
that endeavour should also be made to liaise with District Administration, and
other Government agencies concerned with economic offences for enabling
seamless exchange of data with Income Tax Department so as to help in cross
verification of figures disclosed by them during the assessment process. In
this regard, the Ministry in their action taken reply have inter alia submitted
that over the last few years, the mechanism of sharing of information with
other agencies have both widened and deepened in scope and execution as,
interalia, bulk sharing of information is also being carried out with various
agencies in conformity with the MoUs entered with them resulting in effective
bi-directional sharing of Information as far as ITD is concerned. However, with
regard to sharing of information with the District Administration, the Systems
Directorate has opined that MoUs may be signed with State Governments, who


can share the information with District Authorities after obtaining consent of
ITD. The Committee, therefore, while recommending that Systems Directorate
may sign the MoUs with State Governments for sharing the information with
District Authorities desire that further appropriate action may be taken to
ensure seamless exchange of data with Income Tax Department and thereby
enabling effective and prompt assessment process.

Variation in treatment of write off of inventory of film rights and pre-operative

expenses
Paragraph 12 of PAC Report No. 51 (17"Lok Sabha)

13. Audit also noticed that there was lack of uniformity in allowing 'pre- operative
expenses’ by the AOs despite the facts and circumstances being similar in nature.
This is indicative of inconsistent approach adopted by the AOs in identical cases. As
per DoR, allowance of pre-operative expenses is decided by the AO on a case to
case basis, depending upon facts of each case while following judicial discipline.
DOR further added that under the Faceless Assessment Scheme all the assessment
proceedings, including the scrutiny assessments of cases related to film and
television industry, unless centralised, are conducted electronically, through team-
based assessment. Under this Scheme, the process of Review has been built to
facilitate an error- free assessment order. The Committee desire that clear
instructions for the allowance of pre operative expenses in various scenarios may be
issued and the Assessing officers encouraged to share information on a specified
platform, as already emphasized upon, in case new issues are involved. The
Committee also trust that with the launch of Faceless Assessment Scheme, a
uniform approach will be adopted for assessment of similar cases.

14. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:

“Section 35D of the Income-tax Act provides that the assessee may, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a
deduction of an amount equal to one-fifth of specified pre-operative expenses
in each of the five successive previous years beginning with the previous
year in which the business commences or, as the case may be, the year in
which the extension of an undertaking of the assessee is completed or a new
unit commences production or operation. These expenses are as under:

(a) expenditure in connection with-

(i) preparation of feasibility report;

(ii) preparation of project report;

(iii) conducting market survey or any other survey necessary for the
business of the assessee;

(iv) engineering services relating to the business of the assessee:


(b) legal charges for drafting any agreement between the assessee and any
other person for any purpose relating to the setting up or conduct of the
business of the assessee;

(c) where the assessee is a company, also expenditure-

(i) by way of legal charges for drafting the Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the company;
(ii) on printing of the Memorandum and Articles of Association;

(iii) by way of fees for registering the company under the provisions
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);

(9५) in connection with the issue, for public subscription, of shares in
or debentures of the company, being underwriting commission,
brokerage and charges for drafting, typing, printing and
advertisement of the prospectus;

(d) such other items of expenditure (not being expenditure eligible for any
allowance or deduction under any other provision of this Act) as may be
prescribed.

As can be seen above, pre-operative expenses involve various natures of
transactions and there may be various modes of payment between parties as
there are variety of scenarios for preoperative expenses incurred by
assessees. Therefore, prescribing uniform approach on the issue of pre-
operative expenses may adversely affect the assessees, which needs to be
decided on case to case basis by assessing officers.”

15. The Committee had, in their Report on the subject, expressed trust that
with the launch of Faceless Assessment Scheme, a uniform approach will be
adopted for assessment of similar cases. The Ministry in their Action Taken
Reply have inter alia stated that pre-operative expenses involve various types
of transactions and there may be various modes of payment between parties
as there are variety of scenarios for preoperative expenses incurred by
assessees. Therefore, prescribing uniform approach on the issue of pre-
operative expenses may adversely affect the assessees, which needs to be
decided on case to case basis by assessing officers. The Committee do not
find the reply of the Ministry justifiable as lack of uniformity in allowing 'pre-
operative expenses' by the AOs was pointed out due to the fact that the AOs
were found adopting inconsistent approach in identical cases despite the facts
and circumstances being similar in nature. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation that clear instructions for the allowance of pre
operative expenses in various scenarios may be issued and the Assessing
officers encouraged to share information on a specified platform desire that


10

proper internal controls should be applied to address such issues in the new
Faceless Assessment System.

Impact Assessment of ITBA
Paragraph 17 of PAC Report No. 51 (17Lok Sabha)

16. The Committee have been repeatedly apprised of the measures taken by the
Ministry particularly of the ITBA which is being termed as a_ revolutionary
development in the process of income tax assessment. The Committee would
emphasize in this regard that ITBA being a mere tool can be effective only to an
extent, as per design, and may thus be not treated as a panacea. The Committee,
while expressing hope that the new system addresses the systemic lacunae, would
also emphasize on the aspect that no software can parallel human cognitive abilities.
In light of the above, the Committee would like to stress on the need for undertaking
an Impact Assessment exercise to ascertain the utility of ITBA, the problem areas
and the loopholes that may arise in the application. The Committee believe that this
will help enhance the effectiveness of ITBA and also minimize instances of evasion
of tax.

17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:

“It is submitted that the C&AG is currently carrying out the IT-Audit of ITBA.
Among other things, the officers of the C&AG, during this IT-Audit of ITBA are
verifying that the functionalities of modules of ITBA application have been
developed and are working as envisaged and the intended benefits have been
achieved including ease of tax administration, and that ITBA application has
effective interfaces with other IT Applications used for assessment functions.

18. Vetting Comments of C&AG are as under:

“Presently, Audit is not in a position to offer comment on effectiveness of ITBA
and effectiveness of interfaces of ITBA with other systems/application viz.
CPC-ITR, CPC-TDS, e-filing etc., as, audit of ITBA is still under process due
to pending/delayed access to the UAT environment ITBA/CPC-ITR and
assisted data query facility by the CBDT for almost two years, despite
sufficient pursuance with the Department.”

19. The Ministry in their response to audit comments stated as under:

“As mentioned above, the Impact Assessment exercise, desired by the
Hon'ble PAC, is underway in the form of a full-fledged audit of ITBA. Under
this audit, access of UAT environment of ITBA has already been provided to
the officers of C&AG. Access to other applications, as requested by the
officers C&AG is also being provided.”


11

20. As regards the recommendation of the Committee for undertaking an
Impact Assessment exercise to ascertain the utility of ITBA, the Department of
Revenue in their Action Taken Reply have inter alia submitted that the Impact
Assessment exercise, desired by the Hon'ble PAC, is underway in the form of
a full-fledged audit of ITBA. Under this audit, access of UAT environment of
ITBA has already been provided to the officers of C&AG. Access to other
applications, as requested by the officers C&AG is also being provided. The
Committee, while emphasizing upon time bound completion of the Impact
Assessment exercise of the ITBA would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the initiative at the earliest.

अऋमऋअऊऊ

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__February, 2024 Chairperson,

Magha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee