 
 
52 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF DIMAPUR-KOHIMA NEW 
LINE PROJECT: NORTHEAST FRONTIER 
RAILWAY 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
PAC NO. -  2486 
 
F I F T Y - S E C O N D  R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
(EI G HTE ENTH LO K SA BHA ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  04.08.2026 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   04.08.2026 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August, 2026 / Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
 
CONSTRUCTION OF DIMAPUR-
KOHIMA NEW LINE PROJECT: 
NORTHEAST FRONTIER RAILWAY 

i 
 
 
1 Minutes not appended 
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2026-27) (ii) 
 COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS OF THE PUBLIC    
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2026-27) 
(iii) 
 COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) (iv) 
 COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE- III (RAILWAYS) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
(v) 
 INTRODUCTION (vi) 
REPORT  
  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VII 
Pre-Construction Surveys and Alignment Revision 
Land Acquisition Irregularities 
Tunnel Design and Overhead Equipment 
Geological Risk and Safety Audits 
Contract Management and Premature Procurement 
Physical and Financial Progress and Cost Escalation 
2 
5 
10 
13 
14 
16 
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  19-24 
 
APPENDICES1 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee III (Railways) of the 
Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 05.12.2025. 
 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee on Railways of the 
Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) held on 06.07.2026. 
 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) 
held on 30.07.2026. 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
1.  Smt. Mamta Kemwal                 - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Archna Pathania                - Director 
3.  Dr. Faiz Ahmad       - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand - Committee Officer 
    
 
# Suspended under Rule 374 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
22.07.2026 till Monsoon session (2026-27) 
 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP from Rajya Sabha with effect from 
08.06.2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee# 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Jai Parkash 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Dr. C M Ramesh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Vacant 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
22. Vacant 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2026-27) 
 
I. Dr. K. Laxman   - Convener 
II. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu - Alternate Convener 
III. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Member  
IV. Shri Ashokrao S. Chavan  - Member  
V. Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Member  
VI. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  - Member 
VII. Shri Jai Parkash   - Member  
 
  

iv 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
                              Shri K. C. Venugopal       -    Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu   
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey   
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal   
5. Shri Jai Parkash   
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad   
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh   
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy   
9. Prof. Sougata Ray   
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi   
11. Dr. Amar Singh   
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya   
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur   
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni   
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav    
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan    
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil   
18. Dr. K. Laxman   
19. Shri Praful Patel   
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray   
21. Vacant$   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi    
    
    
    
    
 
 
$ Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2nd April, 2026 

v 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE -III (RAILWAYS) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
I. Dr. K. Laxman   - Convener 
II. Shri Tiruchi Siva×   - Alternate Convener  
III. Prof. Sougata Ray   - Member  
IV. Shri Ashokrao S. Chavan  - Member  
V. Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Member  
VI. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  - Member 
VII. Shri Jai Parkash   - Member 
  
 
× Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2nd April, 2026 

vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27), having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifty-second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Construction of Dimapur-Kohima New Line Project: Northeast Frontier 
Railway” based on Para 2.1 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India Report No. 
35 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the 
Parliament on 27.03.2023. 
 
3. The Sub-Committee - III (Railways) was constituted by the Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) for detailed examination of the subjects related to Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board). The Sub-Committee worked under the convenorship of Dr. K 
Laxman, Member of Public Accounts Committee and Member of Parliament, Rajya 
Sabha. Public Accounts Committee (2025-2026) selected the aforesaid subject and 
allocated the same to Sub-Committee – III (Railways) for examination and Report.  
 
4.  The Sub-Committee- III (Railways) of the Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) 
took briefing by Audit and oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) on the aforementioned subject on 05.12. 2025. The Sub-Committee on 
Railways of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) considered and adopted the 
Draft Report at their Sitting held on 06.07.2026. Subsequently, the Report was 
considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2026-2027) during their 
sitting held on 30.07.2026. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
6.     The Committee thank Sub-Committee-III (Railways) of the predecessor Committee 
(2025-26) and Sub-Committee on Railways (2026-27) for taking oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject. 
 
7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing 
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
 
8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
         NEW DELHI:                                      K.C. VENUGOPAL 
     02 August, 2026                  Chairperson, 
Sravana 11, 1948 (Saka)                                 Public Accounts Committee 

1 
 
 
 
PART – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1. The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) selected the subject “Construction of 
Dimapur-Kohima New Line Project: Northeast Frontier Railway” based on Para 2.1 of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India Report No. 35 of 2022 relating to the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), in view of issues concerning repeated surveys, 
land acquisition irregularities, tunnelling design lapses, premature procurement of 
materials, and severe cost and time overruns in a strategically important railway project 
in Nagaland. 
 
2. Para 2.1 of the said C&AG Report highlights that the Dimapur-Kohima New Line 
Project, originally 90 km in length and sanctioned at a cost of Rs 850 crore in 2006-07, 
suffered a cost escalation to Rs 6,663.20 crore by May 2022 with less than 25 percent 
physical progress as of March 2022. Audit has revealed many lapses including 
inadequate and repeated pre-construction surveys; land acquisition irregularities; 
discriminatory establishment charges levied by the Government of Nagaland at 8 
percent against the codal provision of 4 percent; oversized tunnel cross-sections with 
walkways of maximum width on both sides in violation of applicable norms, generating 
avoidable liabilities assessed at Rs 879.05 crore; premature procurement of signalling 
materials worth Rs 11.44 crore; and wasteful expenditure of Rs 141.70 crore on land 
acquisition due to alignment revisions. These deficiencies have resulted in substantial 
time and cost overruns, undermining the project’s objective of providing all-weather rail 
connectivity to Nagaland. 
 
3. The Sub-Committee-III (Railways) of the Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) 
considered the subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on 05th December 2025. Based 
on the written replies, the comprehensive examination of the subject is discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
4. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the Dimapur–Kohima New Line 
Project (revised length 82.30 km) is a strategic infrastructure project for Nagaland, a 
predominantly hilly State having only 11.13 km of existing Broad Gauge (BG) rail 
network. The project aims to provide all‑weather rail connectivity, reduce dependence 
on road transport, and promote socio‑economic development. Partial commissioning 
has already yielded connectivity benefits, employment generation, and logistics support, 
consistent with the objectives envisaged in the 2004 Reconnaissance Engineering-cum-
Traffic Survey (RETS). 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
5. The Dimapur- Kohima New Line Project is a strategic infrastructure undertaking 
in Nagaland, a predominantly hilly State with only 11.13 km of existing broad-gauge rail 
network. The project, initially 90 km in length, was revised to 82.30 km post-2015 and 
further to 78.42 km. 
 
6. Audit has highlighted multiple grave lapses in the project’s planning and 
execution. The pre-construction survey by M/s RITES, costing Rs 7 crore, was 
effectively rendered unusable due to unaddressed constructability challenges in Neo-
Himalayan terrain, necessitating a fresh alignment review by M/s AYESA. Land 
acquisition over 57.5 hectares (Km 60-Km 88) was initiated in January 2016 on the 
basis of the RITES survey despite awareness, since September 2015, of the ongoing 
alignment revision by M/s AYESA. The Government of Nagaland has been levying 
establishment charges at 8 percent (including expenses as State revenue at the rate of 
4 percent) on compensation for railway land acquisition against the Indian Railway 
codal provision. The cross-sections of 20 tunnels (32.80 km) were designed with over-
width walkways on both sides, and flexible OHE was adopted in place of the more cost-
effective Rigid Overhead Conductor Rail System (ROCS), resulting in an avoidable 
liability assessed by Audit at Rs 879.05 crore. Signalling materials worth Rs 11.44 crore 
were procured prematurely when civil works were only 25 percent complete. 
Additionally, 42 Extensions of Time (EOTs) have been granted to contractors since 
2015, leading to price variation costs of Rs 42.38 crore. 
 
A. Pre-Construction Surveys and Alignment Revision 
 
7. Audit in its report has pointed that for conducting pre-construction survey, M/s 
RITES was engaged which completed the work in 2011 at a total cost of Rs. 7.0 crore. 
For conducting ‘Geo-technical & geological investigation, sub-soil investigation for 
major/minor bridges and tunnels’, the work was awarded to M/s Associates 
Construction Company in 2010, the work was completed at a total cost of Rs. 2.52 
crore.  In February, 2015 Railway Administration requested M/s RITES to suggest 
corrective measures for certain anomalies detected in it Pre-Construction Survey Report 
(from Km / 20 to Km 88.40)., M/s RITES suggested some corrective measures, which 
were not agreed to by Railway Administration. Railway Administration finally decided to 
abandon the Pre-Construction Survey Report of M/s RITES on the ground of difficulty in 
construction of alignment., and awarded Final Location Survey (FLS) of a major part of 
the Project (60 km.)  to M/s Ayesa in November 2015 for the work ‘Development of BG 
Single Railway line alignment from Chainage Km. 20 (Dhansiri near Dimapur) upto 

3 
 
 
 
Zubza near Kohima (approximate length 60.00 Km) at a cost of Rs. 1.52. The work was 
completed in November, 2019. Audit had observed due to laxity of Railway 
Administration, Final Location Survey (FLS) of a major part of the Project (60 km.) had 
to be re-conducted, resulting in infructuous expenditure of ₹ 5.44 crore on the original 
Pre-construction survey work which had to be abandoned.  
 
8. When asked to provide details on the project’s key components- total length, 
number of stations, major and minor bridges, and tunnels- with a status update as of 
December 2025, the Ministry furnished the following reply:  
 
S. No. Details of Projects Status of projects as on 31.12.2025 
1. Total Length – 78.42 KM 
(Revised Length) 
31.339 KM completed. 
2. Number of stations – 8 4 nos. completed. 
3. Total Nos. of Major bridges – 30 15 Nos. Completed. 
4. Total Nos. of Minor bridges – 150 138 Nos. Completed. 
5. Total number and length of 
tunnels – 20 and 32.80 KM 
7 Nos. Completed. Total Lining – 7.21 
KM Completed. Total underground 
excavation – 16.935 KM completed. 
 
9. On the rigorous vetting processes applied to feasibility and alignment studies 
before approval, and the accountability measures imposed on M/s RITES for the 
abandonment of the pre-construction survey at a cost of Rs 7 crore, the Ministry stated 
as under: 
 
“The Pre-Construction Survey entrusted to M/s RITES was executed strictly in 
accordance with the approved Terms of Reference and contractual scope 
prevailing at that time, and the agency delivered the survey outputs as stipulated. 
RITES submitted Final Survey Report on 21.11.2011, after due deliberation and 
discussion with Railway Administration during survey and after submission of draft 
survey report on 20.04.2011. The Final Survey Report was approved by Railways 
after following all prescribed vetting procedures. However, in a highly complex 
terrain in Neo-Himalayan geology, it is not possible to foresee all construction 
related technical challenges at the survey stage itself. Hence, mid-term review of 
technical decisions and intermediate course corrections are required in such 
complex projects to avoid complexities at construction and operation stage. 
Subsequent to sanction of the Detailed Estimate, during field-level construction 
planning, certain constructability challenges- particularly relating to long-span 
bridges on sharp curves in geologically fragile zones- came to notice. These 
issues arose not due to non-execution of the contracted scope by M/s RITES, but 
due to the inherent limitations of survey resolution and evolving understanding of 

4 
 
 
 
site-specific geological behaviour, which could only be fully appreciated at 
construction stage. 
In view of the above, an intermediate technical review of the alignment was 
undertaken as a risk-mitigation and course-correction measure, which is a 
recognized engineering practice in large infrastructure projects executed in difficult 
terrains. The review carried out by M/s AYESA using advanced tools such as 
Digital Terrain Modelling (DTM) and Digital Elevation Modelling (DEM)—which 
were not part of the original scope of M/s RITES—resulted in an improved 
alignment with enhanced safety and constructability. 
Since M/s RITES had completed the assigned work in conformity with the 
approved scope and contractual conditions, recovery of payments was neither 
contractually tenable nor technically justified. The expenditure thus incurred for 
intermediate review of the alignment, which was meagre in comparison to the 
project cost, was necessary to avoid complexities at construction and operation 
stage. Such reviews and course corrections are necessary for successful 
completion of such complex projects.” 
 
10. The Committee further asked whether the Ministry has ensured critical analysis 
of Pre-Construction Survey/Final Location Survey (FLS) Reports to detect probable 
technical/construction lacunae and their comprehensive resolution prior to final 
acceptance. The Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Yes. The Ministry ensures that Pre-Construction Survey (PCS)/Final Location 
Survey (FLS) reports are subjected to detailed and critical technical scrutiny prior 
to final acceptance. The survey proposals are examined at Zonal Railway level 
and during preparation and sanction of the Detailed Estimate by Railway Board. 
The scrutiny includes verification of alignment geometry, ruling gradients, bridge 
and tunnel locations, interaction of alignment with major structures, and 
compliance with applicable Codal provisions. For projects involving difficult terrain 
and complex geological conditions, the survey outputs are specifically examined 
from the perspective of constructability and operational safety. 
Pre-Construction Survey/Final Location Survey (FLS) has also been reviewed on 
the PM Gati Shakti portal, which is a GIS-based integrated platform aimed at 
ensuring coordinated planning and development of multimodal infrastructure 
across various Ministries/Departments. Further, the review has also been carried 
out in consultation with BISAG-N, an autonomous institute specializing in geo-
spatial technologies, satellite communication, and remote sensing, which provides 
technical support in terms of spatial analysis, map validation, and data integration. 
Wherever complex engineering issues are involved, expert technical inputs are 
obtained from specialized agencies such as RDSO. In addition, independent 
technical reviews are undertaken, using advanced terrain analysis tools like Digital 
Terrain Modelling (DTM)/Digital Elevation Modelling (DEM), to identify and address 

5 
 
 
 
probable technical or construction-related lacunae before freezing of alignment 
prior to commencement of actual construction work. These measures ensure 
comprehensive technical validation of PCS/FLS reports prior to acceptance.” 
 
 
B. Land Acquisition Irregularities 
 
11. Audit noticed several major irregularities in the land acquisition process which led 
to irregular/infructuous expenditure of ₹ 141.70 crore during the period from 2015 to 
2021. Audit has observed that 6161071.34 Sq. Ft land was acquired in March 2016 on 
the basis of RITES pre-construction survey report even though M/s AYESA (September 
2015) had already been engaged to revise that very alignment. This resulted in 
infructuous/ avoidable expenditure of ₹ 23.34 crore on account of compensation paid for 
acquisition/procurement of land which was of no use due to revision of the alignment. 
Land was also acquired over fourteen tunnels at a cost of Rs 79.70 crore, in clear 
disregard of Railway Board's instructions of September 2018, without any study on the 
possibility of cave-ins being placed on record, and the acquisition of land over Tunnel 
No. 1 was undertaken primarily at the request of the Chief Secretary of Nagaland, a 
consideration that cannot override codal provisions. Land in excess of the minimum 
prescribed width for the line between stations was also acquired in violation of Paras 
822(C) and 829 of the Railway Engineering Code, causing avoidable expenditure of           
Rs.12.97 crore. Further the initial joint survey was conducted without the participation of 
the Fishery Department and the Public Works Department, and the consequent            
re-survey and re-classification, unsupported by proper joint verification records, resulted 
in irregular additional compensation of Rs 6.97 crore. The Government of Nagaland 
levied establishment charges at 8 per cent of the total land compensation against the 
codal provision, with the excess 4 percent  being charged as State Revenue in violation 
of Paras 853 and 854 of the Indian Railway Engineering Code, causing irregular 
payment of Rs 18.72 crore, which the Ministry has stated is being pursued for recovery. 
 
12. On being asked how the Railway Administration justified acquiring land based on 
the RITES pre-construction survey in January 2016 when it was already aware of and 
engaging M/s AYESA for revision/refinement of the alignment since September 2015, 
the Ministry stated as under:  
 
“Engagement of M/s AYESA in September 2015 was for technical refinement and 
review of specific alignment features—mainly to address issues of bridges on 
sharp curves. 
AYESA reviewed the alignment from Km 20 to Km 88. No major shift was 
anticipated beyond Km 60 as there were only three bridges between Km 60 to Km 
88 which required realignment. Hence, land acquisition was processed beyond Km 
60 only. 

6 
 
 
 
Land acquisition is a statutory, time-consuming process involving multiple State 
authorities and has historically been a major cause of delay in this project. 
Therefore, proceeding with land acquisition in parallel with alignment refinement 
was a conscious project-management decision taken to mitigate further time 
overrun, and cannot be construed as undue haste. 
The alignment under review by M/s AYESA was not abandoned in toto; 
subsequent comparison of the RITES and AYESA alignments revealed only 
marginal deviations beyond Km 60. Audit observation is regarding 6161071.34 Sq. 
Ft. (57.5 Ha between Km 60 – Km 88). A substantial portion (33 Ha) of the land 
acquired continues to be required for construction of Railway track, and the 
balance land (24.5 Ha) is being utilized or planned for use in accordance with 
extant Codal provisions (Annexure-1). 
 
Accordingly, the land acquisition was neither based on a totally “abandoned” 
alignment nor carried out in haste, but was undertaken as a project execution 
strategy to balance technical review with project timelines.” 
 
13. When asked why the Railway Administration and the State Government failed to 
record the absence of Fishery Department or PWD officials in the initial Joint Survey 
Report, which led to re-survey and re-classification of land, the Ministry stated as under:  
 
“The initial joint survey was conducted by the District Administration with the 
participation of the Revenue authorities, Railway officials, and concerned Village 
Council representatives, as per the mandate for land acquisition and classification 
under the State Government’s revenue procedures. At that stage, the survey was 
undertaken primarily for verification of land particulars, ownership, and 
classification based on available revenue records. 
The Fishery Department or PWD officials were not identified as mandatory 
stakeholders for the initial joint survey under the prevailing procedure, and 
therefore their absence was neither recorded nor treated as a deficiency in the 
joint survey report. The necessity for involving these departments arose 
subsequently, when landowners raised objections and representations regarding 
land use and classification, necessitating further verification. 
Accordingly, the re-survey/re-classification was ordered by the District 
Administration to address the grievances received and to ensure correctness of 
land classification. The Railway Administration relied on the certification and 
assessment of the competent State authorities, who are statutorily responsible for 
land classification and compensation determination. Hence, the re-survey was 
conducted not due to any procedural lapse on the part of the Railway 
Administration, but as a corrective measure initiated by the State Government 
based on representations received after the initial survey.” 
 

7 
 
 
 
14. On being asked how the estimate was finalized in the absence of officials of the 
two departments in the first instance, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The initial estimate was finalized on the basis of the joint survey conducted by the 
District Administration with participation of the Revenue authorities, Railway 
officials and Village Council representatives, who are the competent authorities for 
land measurement, classification and assessment of compensation as per the 
prevailing procedure. At that stage, the involvement of officials from the Fishery 
Department or PWD was not prescribed, as the estimate was prepared based on 
existing revenue records and site verification. The Railway Administration 
accepted the estimate relying on the certification of the State Revenue authorities. 
Subsequently, upon receipt of representations from landowners regarding land use 
and classification, the District Administration involved additional departments and 
carried out re-survey/re-classification, leading to revision of the estimate as a 
corrective and grievance-redressal measure.” 
 
15. On being asked why the Railway Administration agreed to pay compensation on 
account of re-survey/re-classification in absence of any record of joint re-survey/re-
classification, and why no record was kept of the participation of Railway officials in that 
joint re-survey, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“It is not correct that there is no record of joint re-survey/re-classification. 
The Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur, vide Letter No. REV-05/2016-D/5055 dated 
04.08.2017, deputed the Revenue Officer along with other officials for spot 
verification jointly with Railway officials to address land-related complaints. 
As recorded in the noting of Dy. CE/CON/DMV-1 dated 07.11.2017 (Annexure-8), 
the joint verification was conducted on 10.08.2017 with the participation of 
Revenue Officer, Extra Additional Commissioner, Dimapur; Land Record and 
Survey Officer, Dimapur along with their surveyor; AXEN/CON/Dimapur; 
JE/Works/Dimapur and respective Village Council Members (Chairman, Gaon 
Budha, Secretary, etc.). 
Based on the findings of the joint survey, the Deputy Commissioner, Dimapur 
submitted the additional compensation estimate vide Letter No. REV-05/2016-
D/3770-75 dated 04.09.2017 (Annexure-9). 
Accordingly, the Railway Administration agreed to pay the compensation based on 
the jointly conducted survey and the assessment submitted by the District 
Administration, and therefore, it is not correct that the re-survey/re-classification 
was done without Railway participation.” 
 
16. The Committee enquired whether any action was taken against defaulting 
officials who allowed payment of compensation on account of re-survey/re-classification 
of land without verifying facts and records. The Ministry replied as under: 

8 
 
 
 
 
“The issue relating to payment of compensation on account of re-survey/re-
classification of land was examined administratively. The payments were made on 
the basis of assessments and estimates submitted by the competent District 
Authorities, who are statutorily empowered under the Nagaland Land (Requisition 
& Acquisition) Act, 1965 to classify land and determine compensation. The 
Railway Administration relied on the certifications and quasi-judicial decisions of 
the State authorities while processing the payments. 
It was observed that, in one instance, signatures of Railway field officials were 
inadvertently not recorded on the revised estimate at the initial stage; however, the 
same was subsequently rectified during finance scrutiny. As the compensation 
was released based on joint verification carried out by the District Administration 
with participation of Railway officials, and no irregularity on the part of Railway 
officials was established, no action against any official was considered warranted. 
At the same time, instructions have been issued to field units to ensure that, in 
future, tighter scrutiny of payments arising out of re-survey/re-classification is 
carried out.” 
 
17. The Committee further asked what steps have been initiated to ensure that 
payment of compensation in re-classification/re-survey cases is allowed only after 
proper joint verification of claims and provided they fell under the purview of the relevant 
provisions of the Nagaland Land (Requisition & Acquisition) Act, 1965. The Ministry 
stated as under: 
 
“The Railway Administration has taken up the matter with the State Government to 
ensure that, in all cases of re-classification/re-survey, compensation is released 
only after proper joint verification involving the Revenue authorities, concerned line 
departments, Railway officials and Village Council representatives, and after due 
documentation of such verification. It has been emphasized that revised estimates 
shall be accepted only when supported by formal joint survey proceedings, 
attendance records and certification by the competent authority, clearly 
establishing that the claims fall within the purview of the Nagaland Land 
(Requisition & Acquisition) Act, 1965 and the applicable State policy.” 
 
18. The Committee sought to know why two different parameters are adopted by the 
Government of Nagaland for charging establishment cost from two Central Government 
Ministries, levying 8 percent on compensation for Indian Railways while not levying any 
establishment cost for NHAI, and whether clarification has been sought from the State 
Government in this regard. The Ministry replied as under:  
 
“The payments of land compensation, including establishment charges, have been 
made in accordance with the State Government policy circulated vide Letter No. 

9 
 
 
 
LR/7-92/NHAI/A/2011/110 dated 14.04.2015, which is stated to be equally 
applicable to land acquisition for both National Highways and Railways (Annexure-
2). 
As per the stand of the Government of Nagaland, the Establishment Cost for land 
acquisition is leviable at 8%, and no separate or differential policy has been 
communicated by the State Government for National Highways and Railways. 
However, Railways have raised the issue that the levy of 8% establishment cost is 
in contravention of the Codal provision of 4%. Despite this, the Government of 
Nagaland has reiterated that the applicable establishment cost remains at 8%, as 
per their policy. 
Clarification has been sought from the Government of Nagaland on the issue of 
levy of establishment cost: Railways raised the issue of charging 8% 
establishment cost vide letter dated 26.05.2023 (Annexure-3), pointing out 
deviation from the Codal provision of 4%. 
In response, the Government of Nagaland, vide letter No. RAILWAY/2014 (Pt) 
dated 28.07.2023 (Annexure-4), reiterated that the establishment cost stands at 
8% as per the State Government policy. 
Subsequently, the matter has again been taken up with the Government of 
Nagaland requesting review of the levy of establishment charges at 8% for land 
acquisition for Railway Projects vide letter dated 17.12.2025 (Annexure-5), the 
reply of which is awaited.” 
 
19. Audit has highlighted that infructuous expenditure of Rs 141.70 crore was 
incurred in land acquisition (2015-2021), including compensation for surplus lands post-
alignment revision and indiscriminate acquisitions over tunnels based on the Chief 
Secretary of Nagaland’s request, in violation of codal provisions. When asked to furnish 
details of deviations, officials responsible therefor, and the status of recovery/utilization 
of the involved amount and any disciplinary actions initiated, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
 
“The contention that an amount of ₹141.70 crore was ‘wasted’ in land acquisition is 
not agreed to. Land acquisition for the Dimapur–Kohima New Line Project was 
carried out in a complex legal and socio-administrative environment governed by 
the Nagaland Land (Requisition & Acquisition) Act, 1965, Naga customary law and 
Article 371(A) of the Constitution, where land ownership, use and access are 
subject to special constitutional safeguards. 
Acquisition of land over tunnels and additional land at certain locations was 
undertaken based on practical and safety considerations in geologically unstable 
terrain. Such acquisitions were aimed at ensuring unhindered construction, safety 
against potential cave-ins, provision of access for construction, inspection and 
emergency response, and avoidance of stoppage of works due to local objections. 

10 
 
 
 
These decisions were taken in good faith and in consultation with State authorities, 
and in compliance of Codal provisions. 
As the land acquisition was processed on the basis of statutory decisions and 
certifications of the competent State authorities, and no violation on the part of 
Railway officials has been established, fixation of individual responsibility or 
recovery from officials is not tenable.” 
 
20. The Committee asked what mechanisms ensure transparent compensation and 
adherence to codal provisions, and how the Ministry has addressed external influences 
in acquisition decisions to prevent wasteful expenditures. The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Land acquisition for Railway projects is carried out strictly in accordance with the 
codal provisions of Indian Railways and the applicable Land Acquisition Act. 
Compensation is determined by the competent statutory authority/State 
Government through a legally issued award, leaving no discretionary role to the 
Railway Administration in fixation of rates. 
To prevent external influence and avoid wasteful expenditure, acquisition 
proposals are processed through a defined system involving Engineering, 
Accounts and Administrative authorities, with decisions taken collectively. 
Thus, the codal framework ensures transparency in compensation, adherence to 
statutory provisions and safeguards against extraneous influence.” 
 
21. The Committee asked whether any responsibility has been fixed for 
compensation on lands rendered unusable due to revisions, with verifiable zone-wise 
dashboards on utilization. The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“As the land acquisition was processed on the basis of statutory decisions and 
certifications of the competent State authorities, and no violation on the part of 
Railway officials has been established, fixation of individual responsibility or 
recovery from officials is not tenable. Hence, no responsibility can be fixed for 
compensation on lands rendered unusable due to revisions.” 
 
C. Tunnel Design and Overhead Equipment 
 
22. The Audit has highlighted deficiencies in tunnel cross-section design, resulting in an 
assessed avoidable liability of Rs 879.05 crore on the construction of fourteen tunnels. 
All tunnels from Tunnel - 6 to Tunnel - 19 were designed with flexible Over Head 
Equipment (OHE) instead of the more economical Rigid Overhead Conductor Rail 
System (ROCS), walkways of maximum width of 1.20 metres on both sides irrespective 
of tunnel length, and drainage dimensions exceeding hydrological requirements- 
parameters applied uniformly across all tunnels without regard to their individual length 
or traffic characteristics. This was done despite the Chief Commissioner of Railway 

11 
 
 
 
Safety having specifically advised in May 2020 in favour of ROCS, which offers savings 
of approximately 9 per cent in construction cost and 25 per cent in overall tunnel cost, 
and despite RDSO issuing supporting guidelines in September 2020; neither the safety 
authority's advice nor the RDSO guidelines were acted upon, and the user department 
was also not consulted. In a separate instance of planning inconsistency, the cross-
section of Tunnels Tunnel -1A, Tunnel -2, and Tunnel -3 was enlarged in March 2018 to 
accommodate ballasted track, only to be reverted to ballast less track in March 2020, 
without any intervening scientific study, making the enlargement wholly unnecessary 
and causing avoidable expenditure of Rs 6.14 crore. 
 
23. On being asked why the Railway Administration provided walkways of maximum 
width on both sides of the tunnel, in violation of international regulations in this regard, 
the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“It is stated that the dimensions of tunnel on Indian Railway are designed based on 
Maximum Moving Dimensions and clearances required from fixed structures as 
per Indian Railway Schedule of Dimensions (Figure attached as Annexure-6). 
Further, the shape and Height to Width ratio is decided based on the structural 
stability criteria for various rock classifications/conditions using Finite Element 
Method analysis and the construction methodology. 
Hence, the cross section of tunnel is dependent on Maximum Moving Dimension, 
type of rolling stock, geological conditions, construction methodology (modified 
horse shoe shape for NATM Vs circular for TBM) and maintenance & safety 
requirements. 
Width of walkway is not the deciding criteria for cross section of tunnel. 
Available width of tunnel decided as per above requirement is used for BLT, 
drainage of water, S&T and Electrical duct below pathway. 
The dimensions of other tunnels in different projects of Northeast Frontier Railway 
are also of the same range as all are designed based on the above criteria. 
(Annexure-7).” 
 
24. The Committee further asked whether any action has been planned to limit 
walkways as per international standards in the remaining tunnels. The Ministry replied 
as under: 
 
“As mentioned above, width of pathway is not the deciding criteria for fixing cross 
section of the tunnel. The available width is utilized as pathway above the 
Electrical and S&T cable ducts. The cross section of tunnel is decided based on 
Maximum Moving Dimension of Indian Railway, type of rolling stock, geological 
conditions, construction methodology (modified horse shoe shape for NATM Vs 
circular for TBM) and maintenance & safety requirements as per norms along with 
this the Pathway is required for Staff walking for track inspection. Hence, limiting 

12 
 
 
 
the pathway width will not have any effect on the size of the tunnel and the space 
already available will remain unutilized.” 
 
25. When asked about the avoidable liability of Rs 879.05 crore arising from the non-
adoption of the cost-effective Rigid Overhead Conductor Rail System (ROCS) over 
flexible OHE in 14 tunnels, despite the Chief Commissioner’s recommendations, and 
what retrofitting or recovery plans exist, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“The premise that an avoidable liability of ₹879.05 crore arose due to non-adoption 
of Rigid Overhead Conductor Rail System (ROCS) is not true. The cross-section of 
tunnels in the Dimapur–Kohima New Line Project was finalized primarily based on 
Indian Railway Schedule of Dimensions (IRSOD), rolling stock clearances, safety 
and evacuation requirements, drainage provisions, electrical and signalling needs, 
and, most importantly, structural stability considerations in highly fragile Neo-
Himalayan geology using appropriate analytical methods. 
In this project, the type of overhead equipment (flexible OHE or ROCS) was not 
the governing factor for determining tunnel cross-section. The adopted horseshoe-
shaped tunnel profile, finalized based on geological conditions and construction 
methodology (NATM), inherently accommodates both systems. Adoption of ROCS 
would not have resulted in any significant reduction in tunnel dimensions or 
construction cost. The cost comparisons cited by Audit were based on Metro 
tunnel data of different gauge, tunnel shape, geological and operating conditions, 
and are therefore not comparable. 
Provision of walkways, drainage and other facilities inside the tunnels was made 
based on safety, maintenance and emergency requirements and was an outcome 
of the finalized tunnel geometry, not the determinant of tunnel size. 
Provision of ROCS can be made in these tunnels and for that any 
retrofitting/recovery is not required. It is also pertinent that Audit has since 
consented with the Railway’s decision regarding provision of ROCS in tunnels of 
the Dimapur–Kohima New Line Project.” 
 
26. When asked whether any accountability has been fixed for the avoidable 
liabilities of ₹879.05 crore arising from design choices, delays, and lapses, with details 
on disciplinary actions/recoveries including interest on delays, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
 
“The contention of Audit about size of tunnel and calculation of the amount of 
avoidable liability of ₹879.05 crore (calculation sheet attached as Annexure-10) is 
not correct as it was calculated by comparing tunnel cross section of DMRC which 
has been designed for ‘Standard Gauge’ of 1435 mm with Dimapur-Kohima New 
Line Project which is being constructed as ‘Broad Gauge’ of 1676 mm. A 

13 
 
 
 
comparative statement of tunnels of Indian Railway and that of DMRC is attached 
as Annexure-11. 
The cross section of tunnel is decided based on Maximum Moving Dimension of 
Indian Railway, type of rolling stock, geological conditions, construction 
methodology (modified horse shoe shape for NATM Vs circular for TBM) and 
maintenance & safety requirements as per norms. No violation on the part of 
Railway officials has been established, fixation of individual responsibility or 
recovery from officials is not tenable.” 
 
 
D. Geological Risk and Safety Audits 
 
27. The Committee then asked about the geologically sensitive terrain around 
Tunnels 7 and 10, where ongoing land movement was noted in September 2025 
inspections, and why alignment decisions were sanctioned without comprehensive 
geotechnical investigation and detailed geological mapping. The Ministry replied as 
under: 
“The alignment decisions for the Dimapur–Kohima New Line Project were taken 
based on geotechnical and geological investigations. The project was initially 
guided by the Reconnaissance Engineering-cum-Traffic Survey (RETS), 2004, 
which identified the broad alignment, geological sensitivity of the region and the 
need for extensive tunnelling and slope protection measures in view of the Neo-
Himalayan terrain. 
Subsequently, detailed Pre-Construction Survey and Final Location Survey works 
included geological and geotechnical investigations such as surface geological 
mapping, borehole investigations, laboratory testing of soil and rock samples, and 
assessment of slope stability at critical locations. These inputs were used during 
preparation and sanction of the Detailed Estimate by Railway Board. 
For tunnel sections, including Tunnels 7 and 10, stage-wise geotechnical 
investigations were carried out in accordance with extant practices, and the design 
and construction methodology were finalized based on the available geological 
data. In geologically active and landslide-prone terrain, it is recognized that certain 
ground behaviours, such as localized land movement, may manifest during 
execution despite prior investigations. 
Accordingly, continuous geological mapping, additional probe drilling, 
instrumentation, and monitoring have been adopted during construction, and 
alignment and support systems are reviewed and strengthened as required based 
on actual ground conditions. The approach of progressive investigation and 
adaptive design is a standard engineering practice for tunnel construction in highly 
fragile and tectonically active regions, and risk mitigation measures are 
implemented on an ongoing basis.” 
 

14 
 
 
 
28. In the light of the commencement of construction on Tunnel No. 7 (the longest at 
6.1 km, located in Tsephama village, as reported in November 2025), the Committee 
asked what environmental/geological surveys preceded this, addressing steep terrain 
challenges from Zubza to Kohima. The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Detailed Pre-Construction Survey and Final Location Survey works included 
geological and geotechnical investigations such as surface geological mapping, 
borehole investigations, laboratory testing of soil and rock samples, and 
assessment of slope stability at critical locations, which have been done along the 
alignment for addressing the geological challenges.” 
 
29. The Committee asked whether any independent safety audit has been conducted 
on tunnel methodologies for high-risk zones, as recommended for geologically active 
regions like Tunnel No. 10. The Ministry replied as under: 
 
“An independent consultant has been engaged to carry out regular safety audit on 
tunnel methodology in the Project.” 
 
E. Contract Management and Premature Procurement 
 
30. The Audit has revealed that the entire requirement of signalling materials for the 
Project, valued at Rs 11.44 crore, was procured between 2017 and 2020 at a stage 
when the physical progress of civil engineering works was less than 25 per cent, in clear 
violation of Para 1438 of the Indian Railway Code for the Engineering Department, 
which expressly prohibits procurement of material for specific works in excess of or in 
undue advance of actual requirement. The procurement was initiated without any 
assessment of the progress of civil works, to which Signal and Telecommunication 
works are necessarily consequential, and materials such as Integrated Power Supply 
units and cables were found lying idle with 15 to 20 per cent of their codal life already 
elapsed without installation or utilisation, even as the revised target date for completion 
of the Project stood extended to March 2026.The Audit has further highlighted that the 
Ministry's contention that procurement was planned in anticipation of the original March 
2020 completion target was not found tenable, given that the physical progress on the 
ground at the time of procurement left no reasonable basis for such anticipation. 
 
31. On being asked about the premature procurement of signalling materials worth 
₹11.44 crore when civil works were only 25 percent complete, causing idle blockages, 
the Ministry was asked to furnish the procurement Rules/Provisions, instances of 
violation of such rules, the current deployment/utilisation status of the amount, and the 
steps taken to prevent recurrence. The Ministry stated as under:  
 

15 
 
 
 
“Procurement Rules as per Indian Railways Signal Engineering Manual (IRSEM) 
Para 6.8.1: 
Advance procurement of stores may be authorized by the PCSTE or Sr. DSTE or 
Dy. CSTE in-charge of the work for long lead vital materials such as relays, cables, 
point machines, block instruments, etc., which are required for the next three 
years, and which have to be specially arranged or have to be imported. In such 
cases, the indents may be placed as soon as a Work appears in the Final Works 
Programme. These indents shall be prepared on the basis of realistic estimate of 
quantities of materials and subject to prior scrutiny by Finance Branch in respect of 
reasonableness of the quantity of materials indented. The PCSTE or Sr. DSTE or 
Dy. CSTE in-charge of the work, shall certify the quantities of materials indented 
for each work. Indents shall specify the delivery schedule for the next three years 
and funds shall be arranged according to the delivery schedule. 
Step taken: All telecom and signalling projects are carried out through 
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) tenders, which do away long 
lead items procurement by railways.” 
 
32. On cost-efficient strategies to ensure adherence to timelines for procurement of 
specialized tunnelling equipment, the Ministry replied as under:  
 
“Since there were no Indian manufacturers of radio tunnelling communications at 
the time of tenders, the radio equipment was imported from the United States.” 
 
33. On the liberal contract extensions which led to ₹42.38 crore extra expenditure 
due to price variations, the Committee asked for the number of extensions since 2015, 
the justifications, the penalties imposed and/or reasons for waiver. The Ministry replied 
as under:  
 
“The extension for date of completion was given based on different reasons 
prevalent during execution of the work viz. Pandemic, land dispute, local agitation, 
bandhs, natural calamity like excessive rain, blockage of National 
Highway/approach road and change of scope etc. Price variation has been 
provided as per relevant GCC clause and merit of each case. 
Therefore, it can be appreciated that the extension in time and payment of PVC is 
granted due to reasons as encountered during contract execution after examining 
each case individually. 
 
Since 2015 till date 42 EOTs have been granted. A total of 41 Extensions of Time 
(EOTs) have been granted to different agencies under their respective Contract 
Agreements without imposition of penalty. The EOTs were considered without 
penalty due to reasons beyond the control of the contractors, such as land 
disputes, agitation by local people, road closures caused by landslides, disruptions 

16 
 
 
 
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and conduct of local elections during which 
vehicles/tippers were requisitioned by the Government for election duties, resulting 
in material shortages. In view of these unavoidable circumstances, EOTs were 
granted without imposition of penalty. One EOT was granted to an agency with 
imposition of penalty due to delay on contractor’s account.” 
 
F. Physical and Financial Progress and Cost Escalation 
 
34. The Committee asked how safety investments are quantified against audit-
flagged excessive provisions, and what is the progress on tunnels, bridges, and 
earthworks till December 2025. The Ministry stated as under:  
 
“Total 7 nos. tunnel completed. 
Total Lining – 7.21 KM Completed. 
Total underground excavation – 16.935 KM completed. 
Total 15 Nos. Major bridges out of 30 Completed. 
Total 138 Nos. Minor bridges out of 150 Completed. 
Total 222.32 Lakh Cum earthwork completed out of 266.47 Lakh Cum.” 
 
35. On the sevenfold cost escalation from Rs 850 crore (2006-07) to Rs 6,663.20 
crore (May 2022) against less than 25 percent progress as of March 2022, the 
Committee asked what specific administrative, technical, and financial failures 
contributed to such a state of losses and what steps have been 
considered/implemented to prevent the occurrence of such situations. The Ministry 
replied as under:  
 
“The substantial cost escalation and slow physical progress are largely attributable 
to unforeseen technical challenges arising from complex geology and difficult 
terrain, which could not be fully assessed at the time of initial survey. 
The project area is characterized by highly variable geological formations, 
including weak and fractured strata, shear zones, water-bearing layers and poor 
rock quality. During execution, several geological surprises were encountered, 
necessitating major changes in foundation designs, slope stabilization measures, 
tunnel support systems and bridge substructures. These interventions required 
additional quantities of high-cost materials such as steel, cement, shotcrete, rock 
bolts and specialized geotechnical treatments, leading to significant cost and time 
overruns. 
The alignment also passes through geographically difficult and inaccessible 
terrain, involving steep gradients, deep cuttings, high embankments, tunnels and 
major bridges. Restricted access, limited working seasons, dependence on 
temporary approach roads and vulnerability to landslides and heavy rainfall 

17 
 
 
 
severely constrained progress of works. Recurrent slope failures and damage to 
works during monsoons further impacted progress. 
The original estimates, prepared based on limited reconnaissance and preliminary 
investigations, could not fully capture these complexities. 
To prevent recurrence, Indian Railways has strengthened DPR preparation 
through detailed geological, geotechnical and hydrological investigations, use of 
advanced surveying techniques, provision of adequate contingencies for difficult 
terrain, and adoption of flexible design and construction methodologies.” 
 
36. The Committee asked for the present physical and financial progress for each of 
the three phases against sanction projections, including milestone dashboards for 
tunnels, bridges, stations, and the Dhansiri-Sukhovi section, and the target for 
completion and the number of extensions sought/granted. The Ministry furnished the 
following reply:  
 
“There are three phases: 
Phase 1: Dhansiri – Sukhovi (16.20 KM) Commissioned. 100% Physical and 
financial progress done. 
Phase 2: Sukhovi – Pherima (28.66 KM) – 15.419 KM (commissioned from 
Sukhovi to Molvom). TDC of Project: March-2027. Physical progress: 84%. 
Financial progress: 78%. 
Phase 3: Pherima – Zubza. TDC of Project: December-2029. Physical progress: 
31%. Financial progress: 28%.” 
 
S. No. Details of Projects Status as on 31.12.2025 
1. Number of stations – 8 4 nos. completed. 
2. Total Nos. of Major bridges – 30 15 Nos. Completed. 
3. Total Nos. of Minor bridges – 150 138 Nos. Completed. 
4. Total number and length of 
tunnels – 20 and 32.80 KM 
7 Nos. Completed. Total Lining – 7.21 
KM Completed. Total U/G – 16.935 KM 
completed. 
 
37. On the structural reforms introduced to ensure 100 percent codal compliance and 
mitigate fiscal risks in other North-East projects, the Ministry stated as under:  
 
“Detailed Project Reports are now supported by advanced surveys such as LiDAR, 
drone-based mapping, satellite imagery and GIS, along with detailed geological 
and geotechnical investigations, to accurately assess terrain, strata and risk 
zones. All works are being executed as per codal provisions and as per 
specification governing the work; if deviation is expected, approval of competent 
authority is taken. 
This is being followed in projects to ensure codal compliance.” 

18 
 
 
 
 
38. On contingency funding and risk mitigation strategies to support the 2028 
deadline in view of Nagaland’s land-locked status and project delays, the Ministry 
replied as under:  
 
“Considering Nagaland’s land-locked location, difficult terrain and past delays, to 
mitigate execution risks, critical works have been prioritized and construction 
methodologies optimized using mechanized and technology-enabled solutions 
suited to difficult terrain. Buffer timelines and resource plans have been 
incorporated to account for weather constraints and access limitations. 
Contractual risks are being managed through close monitoring of contractor 
progress. Any emerging risks are addressed through timely technical interventions 
and mid-course corrections, avoiding ad-hoc or unplanned expenditure. 
Enhanced monitoring at zonal and Railway Board levels, supported by progress 
tracking, ensures early identification of slippages and corrective action, thereby 
supporting achievement of the 2028 target.” 
 
 
  

19 
 
 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTORY 
Nagaland is a landlocked and hilly State with only 11.13 km of existing 
broad-gauge railway line. The State remains heavily dependent on road transport 
for majority of its connectivity needs. To address this critical infrastructure gap 
and promote all-weather rail connectivity, the Ministry of Railways had 
sanctioned the Dimapur-Kohima New Line Project in 2006-07 at an estimated cost 
of Rs 850 crore. However, the project has been plagued by repeated alignment 
revisions, persistent land acquisition challenges tunnelling design issues, 
premature procurement, and systemic failures in contract management. These 
lapses have caused the project cost to escalate sevenfold to Rs 6,663.20 crore by 
May 2022 while physical progress remained below 25 percent, significantly 
delaying the socio-economic benefits that the project was designed to deliver to 
the people of Nagaland. 
 
PRE-CONSTRUCTION SURVEYS AND ALIGNMENT PLANNING 
1. The Audit in its report has highlighted the infructuous expenditure of             
Rs. 5.44 crore on account of preparation of survey report by M/s RITES. The 
Committee, in this regard note that the pre-construction survey between Dimapur 
to Zubza was allocated to M/s RITES, which completed the work at a total cost of 
Rs. 7crore.The Committee observe that the said survey did not address 
constructability challenges in the Neo-Himalayan terrain. Thereafter, the Ministry 
has employed services of M/s AYESA for a fresh alignment review using 
advanced Digital Terrain Modelling (DTM) and Digital Elevation Modelling (DEM) 
tools. The Committee further note that the RITES Final Survey Report was 
approved by the Railway Administration in November 2011, and the Detailed 
Estimate was sanctioned accordingly, yet field-level challenges of the kind that 
necessitated M/s AYESA’s engagement could not be foreseen or resolved before 
acceptance of the report, pointing to inadequate due diligence at the survey 
stage. The Committee feel that  pre-construction surveys using advanced digital 

20 
 
 
 
tools is essential, particularly in hilly and difficult terrains, for the success of any 
construction project and therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways 
institutionalise a robust pre-project survey framework that mandates multi-stage, 
technology-assisted geotechnical and geological investigations, including LiDAR, 
drone-based mapping, satellite imagery, GIS-based analysis, and independent 
expert review, before any pre-construction survey report is accepted and acted 
upon for purposes of land acquisition or detailed estimate preparation. The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry review all ongoing and future hill-railway 
projects in the Northeast to identify similar survey-related risks and take pre-
emptive corrective action. 
 
LAND ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT 
2. The Committee observe that land acquisition for this project has been 
marked by many avoidable irregularities at every stage, resulting in infructuous 
expenditure as assessed by Audit at Rs 141.70 crore. The Committee note that 
the initial joint survey for land acquisition was conducted without the 
participation of the Fishery Department and PWD officials, leading to a re-survey, 
re-classification of land, and additional compensation payments of Rs 6.97 crore. 
Land was acquired over tunnel stretches at a cost of Rs 79.70 crore on the basis 
of a request by the Chief Secretary of Nagaland despite absence of a codal 
requirement to that effect. A further Rs 23.34 crore was spent acquiring 57.5 Ha of 
land on the basis of the RITES alignment even as its revision by M/s AYESA was 
already underway. The Committee also note that the Government of Nagaland has 
been levying establishment charges at 8 percent (including 4 percent of expenses 
as State revenue) on railway land acquisition compensation against the codal 
provision that allows reimbursement of only extra expenditure actually incurred 
over land acquisition staff and contingencies for the work of acquisition for the 
Central Government. This has resulted in irregular payments of Rs 18.72 crore, 
and that despite Railways raising this issue vide letters dated 26.05.2023 and 
17.12.2025, the State Government has persisted with its position, leaving the 
matter unresolved.  

21 
 
 
 
The Committee are concerned that across all these instances, the Ministry 
has not fixed responsibility on any official, citing reliance on State authority 
certifications and the special constitutional framework under Article 371(A) of the 
Constitution. The Committee are of the view that Railway officers bear an 
independent responsibility to scrutinise and, where necessary, question the 
directions that are contrary to codal provisions.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Railways take up the matter of the excess 
establishment charge of 8 percent with the Government of Nagaland at the 
highest level and, if the State Government persists, seek the intervention of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that land acquisition for Central Government 
projects in Nagaland is conducted at rates consistent with the codal provision. 
The Committee further recommend that standing instructions be issued that land 
acquisition for any project stretch shall not be initiated until the alignment for that 
stretch has been formally frozen and approved by the competent authority, and 
that no acquisition proposal shall be processed on the basis of a survey that is 
simultaneously under review or revision.  
The Committee also recommend that in all future joint survey proceedings 
for land acquisition in Nagaland or similar difficult geographical terrain states, the 
list of mandatory participating departments- including the Revenue Department, 
Fishery Department, PWD, and other line departments relevant to the land use 
classification- shall be specified in advance, and that compensation estimates 
shall not be forwarded to Railway Headquarters without signed attendance 
records of all such departments. The Committee desire that the Ministry furnish a 
factual justification for each acquisition of land over tunnel stretches, together 
with confirmation of current use, and also a zone-wise dashboard showing the 
utilisation status of the land acquired for the project indicating which portions are 
in productive use and on what basis, and whether the balance is proposed to be 
surrendered or retained with justification. 
 
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AND EXTENSIONS OF TIME 
3. The Committee are concerned by the fact that till December, 2025, a total of 
42 Extensions of Time (EOTs) were given to contractors since 2015 in this 

22 
 
 
 
project, resulting in additional price variation costs of Rs 42.38 crore. While the 
Committee appreciate that many of the reasons cited, such as the COVID-19 
pandemic, landslides, local agitation, road blockages, and election requisitions, 
were beyond the contractors’ control, they note that such a large number of EOTs 
reflects a systemic failure in project scheduling and risk assessment at the 
tendering stage. The Committee also note that signalling materials worth Rs.11.44 
crore were procured prematurely when civil works were only 25 percent 
complete, resulting in idle blockage of funds, and that tunnel radio 
communication equipment was imported from the United States due to the 
absence of Indian manufacturers, raising concerns about procurement planning.  
The Committee further observe with concern that materials procured in advance 
of requirement remained idle for extended periods, consuming a significant 
portion of their codal/shelf life even before installation, which not only ties up 
capital unproductively but also risks deterioration in quality and consequent 
compromise of safety and performance once such materials are eventually put to 
use. 
The Committee hence, recommend that the Ministry review its framework 
for granting EOTs in hill-railway and complex-terrain projects to ensure that each 
extension is individually justified by documentary evidence and subjected to 
financial scrutiny at a senior level before approval. The Ministry should further 
ensure that all signalling and telecom procurement is carried out exclusively 
through Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) tenders in future, as 
has been now adopted, thereby eliminating premature procurement by Railways. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry put in place a mechanism to monitor the 
residual codal/shelf life of materials procured for ongoing projects, and ensure 
that procurement is synchronized with the actual progress of civil engineering 
works, so that materials are utilised well within their codal life and idle blockage 
of capital is avoided. The Committee further desire the Ministry to develop an 
indigenous supply chain or Make-in-India alternative for specialized tunnelling 
and communication equipment to reduce import dependence and procurement 
risks. 
 

23 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT AND PROJECT GOVERNANCE 
4. The Committee note that the project cost has escalated over sevenfold, 
from Rs 850 crore at sanction in 2006-07 to Rs 6,663.20 crore by May 2022, while 
physical progress remained below 25 percent as of March 2022. The Committee 
observe that this level of cost escalation, coupled with such poor physical 
progress, represents a failure of financial oversight and project governance. The 
Committee also note that the original estimates were based on limited 
reconnaissance and preliminary investigations that could not capture the full 
complexity of Neo-Himalayan geology, and that there has been no effective 
mechanism for identifying and addressing cost drivers on a real-time basis.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry institute a comprehensive 
project financial management framework for this and all comparable projects, 
including quarterly reviews of expenditure against physical progress milestones, 
periodic audits, and escalation of discrepancies, if any, to Railway Board for 
corrective action. The Committee further recommend that detailed project reports 
for all future hill-railway projects incorporate adequate contingency provisions, 
realistic cost estimates based on advanced surveys, and built-in risks for 
geological, socio-legal, and climatic factors. 
 
GEOLOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND SAFETY AUDITS 
5. The Committee note with concern that Tunnels 7 and 10 of this project, 
among the most challenging in the Indian railway network, are located in 
geologically active zones where ongoing land movement was noted during 
inspections as recently as September 2025. Tunnel 7, which is the longest of the 
section at 6.1 km, was under construction commencing as late as November 
2025. The Committee observe that initial alignment decisions were sanctioned 
without the level of comprehensive geotechnical investigation and geological 
mapping that the terrain demanded, and that the progressive investigation 
approach, while recognized as standard practice in complex terrains, has 
contributed to the project’s cost and time overruns. While appreciating that an 
independent consultant has been engaged for regular safety audits on tunnel 
methodology, the Committee recommend that the Ministry ensure continuous 

24 
 
 
 
geological monitoring with real-time instrumentation in Tunnels 7 and 10, and 
establish a protocol for adaptive design response to geological surprises, with 
documentary trail of decisions taken and their rationale. Given the State’s land-
locked and seismically sensitive geography, the Committee desire that robust 
contingency plans be formulated and adequate funding reserved for emergency 
geological interventions throughout the construction period. 
 
STRUCTURAL REFORMS AND CODAL COMPLIANCE 
6. The Committee, taking an overall view, observe that the Dimapur-Kohima 
New Line Project exemplifies a pattern of many shortcomings that occur in large 
railway infrastructure projects in geographically complex regions including 
inadequate initial surveys, rushed land acquisition, design decisions not backed 
by cost-benefit analysis, poor contract oversight, and insufficient accountability. 
The Committee note with appreciation that the Ministry has initiated some 
structural reforms, including the adoption of LiDAR, drone mapping, GIS, PM Gati 
Shakti platform review, and BISAG-N consultation for new projects, and the shift 
to EPC tenders for signalling works. However, the Committee are of the view that 
these reforms need to be systematically implemented and their compliance 
monitored across all projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry prepare and implement a comprehensive Codal Compliance Framework 
for all hill-railway projects across the country, with mandatory checkpoints at 
each stage, survey, detailed estimate, land acquisition, design approval, contract 
award, and construction, and that deviations from codal provisions be 
documented and approved by Railway Board with reasons on record. The 
Committee also recommend that accountability for specific lapses identified in 
this project, including the surplus land acquisition, premature procurement, and 
non-adoption of cost-effective design solutions, be fixed at the appropriate level. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                     K.C. VENUGOPAL 
        2 August, 2026                      Chairperson, 
  Sravana 11, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
******* 