44 
DERAILMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their 132nd Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


1 
 
 
 
 
 
PAC NO. -  2450  
F O R T Y  F O U R T H  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCO UNTS  CO MMITTE E 
(2025-26 ) 
(EIG HTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their 132nd Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
                             
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  01.04,2026 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   01.04.2026 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
March, 2026 /Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
DERAILMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 

Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………`…. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) held on     
27.03.2026. 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their One Hundred Thirty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha). 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025-26) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal   -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagd ambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C.  M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anu rag  Singh Th akur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania         -                  Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad                   -                  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred Thirty Second 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Derailment in Indian Railways" relating to the Ministry 
of Railways (Railway Board). 
 
2. The One Hundred Thirty Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24.07.2024. The Committee considered the draft Action 
Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 
27.03.2026. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred Thirty Second 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                        K. C. VENUGOPAL 
27 March, 2026                Chairperson, 
6 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their One hundred thirty second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Derailment 
in Indian Railways” 
2. The One hundred thirty second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 24.07.2024.  It contained seventeen 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Railways, 
and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos.  Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 and 17
           
      Total:      17       
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total: 0 
         Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL      
           
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter - V 

2 
 
 
3.  The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Railways, which inter-alia included 
Shortfalls from 30 to 100 per cent in inspections by Track Recording Cars to assess the 
condition of railway tracks; Idling of track machines; non submission of inquiry reports of 
train accidents to the authority; Non-availability of fire extinguishers in 27,763 coaches in 
violations of extant norms and non-elimination of manned level crossings as per target; 
Non-maintenance of tracks as major factors responsible for derailment; Deviation of track 
parameters beyond permissible limits, bad driving/over speeding etc. The Committee had 
accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their One hundred thirty second 
Report. 
 
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways, on each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One hundred thirty 
second Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken Notes 
in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Monitoring by Track Recording Cars 
6.  The Committee in their Original Report No. 132 (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
as under:- 
“Track Recording Cars (TRCs) are specialized vehicles that inspect the geometrical 
and structural conditions of Railway tracks, identifying defects that could lead to 
derailment and other accidents. The Committee note from the Audit observation 
that there were shortfalls in inspections by Track Recording Cars which ranged 
between 30 per cent and 100 per cent in TRC inspections which has had an 
adverse impact on the quality of railways assets and also implications on safe 

3 
 
operation of trains on various routes. The Committee also note from one of the 
‘accident inquiry reports’ that the derailment of Seemanchal Express occurred in 
February 2019 in ECR wherein it was stated that the TRC run over the section was 
overdue by four months. Had the TRC run been carried out, it could have given vital 
inputs on possible defects in track. The main reason assigned for the shortfall in the 
inspections, as informed to the Committee include, non-receipt of the programme 
for the running of TRCs to be prepared and finalized by Research Designs & 
Standards Organization (RDSO), Lucknow. From the submissions made by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that there has been shortfall in frequency of track 
recording vis-à-vis, the stipulations due to limited number of Cars as also faulty 
planning. Consequently, the target of inspections by TRCs could not be achieved. 
Besides, the problem was aggravated due to break downs, scheduled maintenance 
of Track Recording system, non-availability of path on congested traffic sections 
etc. The Ministry in their submission to the Committee have stated that in case of 
non-availability of TRC, alternative means i.e. Oscillation Monitoring Systems were 
deployed and attention to track maintenance issues is given based on the result. 
The Committee however, cannot endorse the argument that additional runs of 
Oscillation Monitoring System (OMS) have been carried out for monitoring the 
health of the track, as an alternative to, or in lieu of track recording by TRCs as 
these systems serve separate purposes. While OMS assesses the ride quality of 
the track, the actual track geometry is recorded by the TRC. The Committee further 
note from the submission of the Ministry that to address the shortfall, steps like 
commissioning and procurement of 2 new TRCs each and sanction of 7 more TRCs 
have been done (including 04 additional TRCs and replacement of 03 old TRCs). 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry take steps to make sure that TRCs 
are put to full utilization and a time-bound utilization certificate reflecting stipulated 
periodicity, length of track recording, time taken to complete the given stretch and 
consequential action for those falling short of the target be made mandatory. The 
Committee are of the view that instead of procuring TRCs in batches, the required 
number of TRCs should be estimated well in advance and procured straightaway in 
a time bound manner as this would not only put an end to the recurrent 
shortage/maintenance issues but would also, at the same time, prevent 

4 
 
accidents/derailments caused on account of shortfall in frequency of track recording 
due to limited number/shortage of TRCs. The Committee desire that the Ministry set 
a target for 100 percent track recording by the year 2025. The Committee also 
desire that a compliance report in the matter regarding procurement of Track 
Inspection and Monitoring Systems and Zero Speed Integrated Track Monitoring 
Systems be submitted to the Committee.” 
7. Action Taken by Ministry 
 
 “The procurement of 7 nos. TRCs include procurement of 3 nos. TRCs against the 
old 3 nos. TRCs, so that the availability of 11 nos. TRCs will be ensured at a given 
time. Utilization of available 7 nos. TRCs is improved with track recording 
achievement of 99.74% in the year 2023-24 by recording 2,82,754 km as against set 
target of 2,83,494 km. Target for 100% track recording is almost achieved in the year 
2023-24. 
 
8. Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
“1. What steps has MoR taken to implement Hon’ble PAC’s recommendation on 
issuing time bound utilization certificate for each TRC?  
 
2. What steps have been taken by MoR to comply with Hon’ble PAC’s 
recommendations on procurement policy for TRCs?  
 
3. Has the compliance report regarding procurement of Track Inspection and 
Monitoring Systems and Zero Speed Integrated Track Monitoring Systems been 
submitted to the Hon’ble PAC?  
 
4. How is MoR planning to achieve 100 percent track recording by 2025? All relevant 
details like year wise target set etc. for the same may be furnished.  
 
5. The Track Recording data was verified by Zonal Railway Audit Offices and it was 
observed that in five Zonal Railways, the percentage of actual run cumulative of 
TRCs as verified by Zonal Railway Audit offices was less than the data provided by 
MoR as shown in the following table:” 
 
 

5 
 
ZR ANNUAL TARGET 
PLANNED 
RECORDING 
PLANNED 
CUMULATIVE 
2023- 24 
ACTUAL TRACK 
RECORDING 
RUN 2023-24 
CUMULATIVE 
% ACTUAL 
RUN 
CUMULATIVE 
(PERCENTAGE 
OF TARGET 
ACHIEVED ) 
Difference in 
% achieved 
 MOR (1) ZR AUDIT 
(2) 
MOR 
(3) 
ZR 
AUDIT 
(4) 
MOR 
(5) 
ZR 
AUDIT 
(6) 
MOR 
(7) 
ZR 
AUDIT 
(8) 
%MoR- %ZR 
AUDIT 
Col.(7)-
Col.(8) 
CR 21005 20335 19973  20335 19991 20335 95.2 100 -4.8 
ECOR 13298 15820 12330  11744 12372 11103 93 70.18 22.82 
ER 13032 13159 11263 …. 11112 11191 85.30 85.04 0.26 
NCR 16608 16608 16531 …. 17602 14629 106 88.08 17.92 
SECR 12113 11037 12339 PERTAINS 
TO RDSO 12161 10230 100.4 92.68 7.72 
SWR 10427 14190 15030 14190 14977 11751 143.6 82.81 60.79 
 
9. Final Reply of Ministry 
 
7 nos. TRCs are under supply. The work is moving as per schedule. Further 7 nos. 
of TRC were sanctioned in RSP 2024-25 (02 nos.) & RSP 2025-26 (05 nos.) and 
procurement process for them has been started. Utilization of available 7 nos. TRCs 
has improved in the year 2024-25 and 2,62,018 track km have been recorded 
against the target of 2,53,589 track km (Annexure-A).  
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee had in their original Report recommended that Track 
Recording Cars (TRCs) are put to full utilization and  time-bound utilization certificate 
reflecting stipulated periodicity, length of track recording, time taken to complete the 
given stretch and consequential action for those falling short of the target be made 
mandatory.  The Committee had also desired that compliance report in the matter 
regarding Zero Speed Integrated Track Monitoring Systems and procurement of 
Track Inspection and Monitoring Systems be submitted to the Committee.  The 
Ministry in their ATN have stated that 7 nos. TRCs are under supply. Further 7 nos. of 
TRC were sanctioned in RSP 2024-25 (02 nos.) & RSP 2025-26 (05 nos.) and 
procurement process for them has been started. Utilization of available 7 nos. TRCs 
has improved in the year 2024-25 and 2,62,018 track km have been recorded against 
the target of 2,53,589 track km.   However, the reply of the Ministry is silent on issues 
like issuing time-bound utilization certificate for each TRC and time taken to 
complete the given stretch.  The Committee, therefore, desire to be communicated 
about the time-bound utilization certificate reflecting stipulated periodicity, length of 
track recording, time taken to complete the given stretch and consequential action 
for those falling short of the target alongwith the mechanism developed to meet the 

6 
 
target of procurement of Track Inspection and Monitoring Systems and compliance 
report regarding Zero Speed Integrated Track Monitoring Systems. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Mechanization of track maintenance activities 
 
 11. The Committee in their Original Report No. 132 (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
as under:- 
 
“The Committee note from the audit observation that idling of track machines due to 
‘block not given by the Operating Department’ and ‘Stabled due to operational 
problems’ was found in all the twelve Zonal Railways; in eleven Zonal Railways, the 
track machine was kept idle for 13 to 1881 days due to ‘non-availability of track 
machine staff’. Also, ‘idling of track machines’ due to ‘block not planned by divisions’ 
and ‘programme not planned by Track Machine Office’ was noticed in ten Zonal 
Railways. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that track 
machines are being used for track renewal work as well and mechanization work too 
is being carried out as part of the track renewal activity. Besides, the quality of the 
work is ensured by laying the tracks with the help of track machines and a good 
number of machines have been inducted for the maintenance work which is being 
carried out with the help of automatic machines which ensures the quality of 
maintenance. The Committee also note from the submissions of the Ministry that 
Satellite Track Machine Maintenance Depots (STMMD) are being set up in each 
Division to ensure timely maintenance of machines and improved quality. The 
Committee feel that there have been cases of idling of track machines due to various 
reasons which has hampered the process of mechanization of track maintenance 
activities and are of the view that the Ministry need to develop an inbuilt mechanism 
to make sure that track machines are not kept idle and are put to maximum use. The 
Committee recommend introduction of the ground penetrating Radar (GPR) for 
Ballast Bed condition evaluation as soon as possible. The Committee also 
recommend that human intervention in the activities of track maintenance services 
be minimized and mechanized maintenance work be maximized which would not 
only speed up the maintenance Process and eliminate the angle of human error in 
the process of track maintenance and thereby infuse more confidence on safety 
issues.” 
 
12. Action Taken by Ministry 
(i) “For proper planning of blocks for maintenance and renewal of assets on Indian 
Railways (IR), concept of Rolling Block Plan (RBP) with advance planning for 26 
weeks & weekly review has been implemented on IR since June, 2023.  
(ii) Track Management System (TMS) is already functional to monitor the idling of 
track machines due to various reasons on Zonal Railways.  
(iii) LOA (Letter of Acceptance) for procurement of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) 
system has been placed by South Central Railway on trial basis being a new 

7 
 
technology for IR. The preparatory works are being done and actual recording will 
start soon.  
(iv) Automated track machines for quality maintenance have been deployed. Further, 
high output track machines having integrated function of 2/3 machines in one 
machine are also being procured. This will improve utilization of blocks and 
ensure progress with maximum mechanized track maintenance with less human 
intervention.” 
 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
“1. It may be clarified whether Zone wise implementation of Rolling Block Plan (RBP) 
has been completed across all Zonal Railways? All details regarding stages of 
implementation, present status etc. may be furnished.  
2. It may be clarified in detail how Track Management system is being utilized to 
monitor and prevent idling of track machines as well as ensure optimum utilization of 
Track machines across all ZR in IR.  
3. Details of Timeline, action plan etc. devised by MoR to implement Ground 
Penetrating Radar (GPR) system across ZRs may be furnished.  
4. Zonal Railways wise details regarding deployment of Automatic Track Machines 
may be furnished.” 
 
14. Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
(i) Rolling Block plans have been implemented in all Zonal Railways and presently 
all Zonal Railways are preparing 26 weeks Rolling Block Plan. The rolling block 
was initially started for 1 week and subsequently increased to 2, 4, 8, 12 and 26 
weeks’ duration.  
(ii) Track Management System (TMS) provides information on traffic block demanded 
& granted and progress achieved. So TMS becomes very effective tool to decide 
on further action to be taken for preventing idling and ensuring optimum utilization 
of the machines. Utilization of machines, idling of machines, etc. is also regularly 
monitored by Track Machine Directorate, Railway Board. Zonal Railways having 
deficient performance are advised to ensure proper utilization of machines, and 
machines are also shifted as per requirement to avoid idling and optimize 
utilization.    
(iii) Trials of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) are in progress for commissioning of 
the system. 
(iv) Zonal Railways wise details regarding deployment of Track Machines is enclosed 
as Annexure – B. 
 
 

8 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
15. The Committee had recommended introduction of the ground penetrating 
Radar (GPR) for Ballast Bed condition evaluation as soon as possible. The 
Committee note from the ATN that LOA (Letter of Acceptance) for procurement of 
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) system has been placed by South Central Railway 
on trial basis being a new technology for IR. The preparatory works are being done 
and actual recording will start soon. Besides, the ATN states that total scope of GPR 
survey is 48450 km for entire Indian Railways and work on drawing finalization and 
other preliminary activities are in progress and actual work will start by October, 
2024 and complete in 24 months time. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
latest status in this regard including the details of Timeline, action plan etc. devised 
by MoR to implement Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) system across ZRs. The 
Committee had also recommended that human intervention in the activities of track 
maintenance services be minimized and mechanized maintenance work be 
maximized to eliminate the angle of human error in the process of track maintenance. 
The Committee note from the ATN of the Ministry that for proper planning of blocks 
for maintenance and renewal of assets on Indian Railways (IR), concept of Rolling 
Block Plan (RBP) with advance planning for 26 weeks & weekly review has been 
implemented on IR since June, 2023. However, the details regarding stages of 
implementation, present status etc have not been furnished in the ATN. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the same be furnished to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 9 
Inspections by Higher Authorities 
 
16. The Committee in their Original Report No. 132 (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
as under:- 
“The Committee note from audit observation the discrepancies in the ratio of route 
kilometer with average number of inspections in various zonal railways. Notably, in 
South East Central Railway, higher officials did not carry out any inspection, though 
the zone has 2348 route km which constitutes around 4 per cent of total of Indian 
Railways’ Broad Gauge line. No standard criterion was set for number of inspections 
to be conducted by higher authorities and hence, there is no accountability for the 
meagre number of inspections undertaken. The Committee note from the submission 
of the Ministry that detailed schedule of inspection of field officials (JE/SSE/ADEN) 
has been stipulated in IRPWM and in addition, the guidelines for inspection by 
Divisional officers have been issued by Railway Board. Yet, no specific inspection 
schedule is prescribed for higher ranking officers at the Headquarters. However, as 
stated by the Ministry, Headquarter level officers carry out the technical inspections 
suo motu and also during the safety drives launched from time to time, which are 

9 
 
scrutinized on completion of such safety drives. The Committee opine thata target 
based inspection module needs to be worked out not only for the junior and middle 
level officers but also for high level authorities who would not only play a monitoring 
role for inspections but also conduct real time inspection at given time intervals which 
should be on a monthly basis in place of annual inspection. The Committee also 
observe that inspection notes were not uploaded in the Track Management System 
(TMS) portal and compliance to the notes was not available in many cases during 
field visits to the Senior Section Engineer office. Thus, the in-built monitoring 
mechanism including the TMS portal was not found to be properly operational. The 
Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Ministry need to fine-tune the system 
to the targeted standards so as to make the inspection system meaningful and 
beneficial. The Committee note that in accordance with the functions laid down in the 
Railway Act, 1989, a thorough inspection is carried out by the Commission of 
Railway Safety only when commissioning is done for a new asset which maybe a 
new line, or doubling a line, or a gauge conversion project, before opening any new 
asset. The Committee also opine that the office of Commission of Railway Safety 
which operates under the control of the Ministry of Civil Aviation may be directly 
involved in the inspection process as an independent and dispassionate agency and 
the Commissioner of Railway Safety should carry out safety audit in five Railway 
divisions every year and submit a structured safety audit report on which the Indian 
Railways (Railway Board) may record their inputs and action taken. The Committee 
desire that the proposal be examined and related details furnished at the earliest.” 
 
17. Action Taken by Ministry 
“Regular field inspection of higher officers is carried out especially in extreme 
weather conditions also. Safety department at divisional/Zonal and Board level 
monitors the inspections. To carry out compliances of observations during 
inspections of higher officials, railway has launched a dedicated online module where 
inspecting officer can record his/her observations of inspection, mark them to 
concerned officials and take compliances of observations. Close monitoring of 
inspection of higher officers is being done by this portal.” 
 
18. Vetting Comments of Audit 
“1. It may be clarified how the regular inspection by Higher Officials at periodic 
intervals is ensured so that No stretch is left uninspected for longer periods of time?  
2. It may be clarified whether the issues of ‘compliance to the inspection notes not 
being uploaded’ and ‘closure of inspection notes was not found filled’ in the Track 
Management System (TMS) have been resolved? If not, what are the steps being 
taken/envisaged towards resolution of the same?” 
 
 

10 
 
19. Final Reply by the Ministry 
“In every department, scheduled inspection of higher officials has been laid down, 
which are done by concerned officers religiously. For example, every SrDEN has to 
inspect his/her complete section once in 3 months by foot plate or brake-van fast 
train. Issue of compliance of inspection notes has been resolved. Consolidated 
position is being monitored through Track Management System (TMS).” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
20. The Committee had expressed the view that the Ministry needed to fine-tune 
the system to the targeted standards so as to make the inspection system 
meaningful and beneficial.  The Ministry in their ATN have stated that Regular field 
inspection of higher officers is carried out especially in extreme weather conditions 
also and Safety department at divisional/Zonal and Board level monitors the 
inspections. It further states that Issue of compliance of inspection notes has been 
resolved and the Consolidated position is being monitored through Track 
Management System (TMS). The Committee, while noting that the Ministry’s reply is 
routine, desire that the latest details regarding the steps to ensure that no stretch is 
left uninspected for longer periods of time.  
 
The Committee had also opined that the office of Commission of Railway 
Safety which operates under the control of the Ministry of Civil Aviation may be 
directly involved in the inspection process as an independent and dispassionate 
agency and the Commissioner of Railway Safety should carry out safety audit in five 
Railway divisions every year and submit a structured safety audit report on which the 
Indian Railways (Railway Board) may record their inputs and action taken. The 
Committee had desired that the proposal be examined and related details furnished 
at the earliest. The ATN does not provide details on this aspect. The Committee 
desire that the details regarding this be also furnished to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Analysis of Accidents/Derailments in Indian Railways and introduction of safety 
measures 
 
21. The Committee in their Original Report No. 132 (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
as under:- 
 
The Committee note from the audit observation that the factors causing maximum 
derailments (395) were in ‘Engineering Department’ followed by ‘Operating 
Department’ (173). Out of several factors attributed, the major factor responsible for 
derailment related to ‘maintenance of track’ (167 cases), followed by ‘deviation of 

11 
 
track parameters beyond permissible limits’ (149 cases) and ‘bad driving/over 
speeding’ (144 cases). From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that 
measures to reduce derailments have been taken like track renewal and 
maintenance; track upgradation consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength 
(UTS) rails; Pre-stressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC); Welded Rails on most of BG 
tracks wherein short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails have been converted 
into long welded rails; reduction in population of Alumino-Thermit ( AT ) welds 
gradually by using longer rail panels with one/two/three Flash Butt weld (FB) from rail 
manufacturing plant; Track Recording wherein Supercheck of track parameters is 
done through regular runs of Track Recording Cars (TRC) and regular bridge 
inspection. Besides, Measures have been taken to avoid collisions through 
introduction of Advanced Signaling System, Panel Interlocking/Route Relay 
Interlocking/Electronic Interlocking (PI/RRI/EI) along with Multiple Aspect Colour 
Light Signals, Block Proving Axle Counter (BPAC) to ensure complete arrival of train 
without manual intervention before granting line clear to the next train; Development 
of India’s own state-of-the-art electronic system Automatic Train Protection (ATP) 
System named KAVACH (Train Collision Avoidance System) by RDSO, which 
activates the train braking system automatically if the Loco Pilot fails to control the 
train as per the speed restrictions. However, the system to be an effective safety 
measure, all need to have the KAVACH system. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a time bound programme for installation of KAVACH system in all 
divisions/Routes should be taken up by the Ministry. The Committee note from the 
report of the CCRS on the accident that not adhering to the standard practices 
stipulated in the Manuals and Work Instructions were not followed during the process 
of signal modification work, owing to which the accident occurred. The Committee 
are also of the view that training programmes of all levels of officers/staff should be 
made more vigorous and result oriented. The Committee while taking note of the 
measures taken to prevent derailments/accidents/collisions nevertheless also feel 
concerned to observe that despite these measures, the system is still not capable of 
putting a full stop to such mishaps and loss of lives and property due to accidents 
continue to happen. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport I/3106083/2024 Issues like 
track maintenance, track upgradation and Retro-reflective sigma (∑) boards and 
electronic interlocking system should be accorded greater priority and should cover 
all routes/sectors at the earliest and a target should be fixed to achieve a complete 
makeover towards a zero error and a flawless and accident free operation. The 
Committee recommend that the Indian Railways need to remodel the operational 
training programmes keeping in view the five barriers/layers of defense (Swiss 
Cheese Slices’ or ‘defense barriers) against accidents/derailments and use this 
Model as a reference for strengthening the above barriers to avoid occurrence of 
similar incidents. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the implementation 
status of this Model and the benefits accruing from it. 

12 
 
 
22. Action Taken by Ministry 
A. Training  
Indian Railways has an extensive training mechanism to cater training needs of 
various categories of railway employees. All safety category railway employees 
are given structured training at various stages of their career, which includes 
initial, promotional, refresher and specialized training. 
MoR deputes railway personnel for undergoing courses at reputed Universities 
as well as permits them to avail various online courses offered by international 
bodies. Indian Railways also have collaborations with various reputed domestic & 
international academies to develop/deliver specialized knowledge contents for 
physical trainings as well as online trainings as per functional needs of IR.   
Trainings are imparted to skill/up-skill domain, functional and behavioral 
competencies of employees through physical trainings at various railway training 
centres across the country as well as hybrid and online training interventions.   
All newly recruited maintainers of Indian Railways undergo a detailed training 
programme of one to one and half years duration. This initial training programme 
consists on-job training (field training) component as well as classroom training in 
the Zonal training schools.   
Indian Railways is making concerted efforts to provide technological support & 
training to the Loco-pilots. The Loco-Pilots are provided with Vigilance Control 
Device (VCD) to improve alertness and Fog Safe Device to assist them to locate 
Signals during the fog when visibility is poor. 
 
Simulator- based training is being imparted for improving the driving skills and 
reaction time of Loco Pilots.   
There is regular counseling of running staff and interaction with their families.   
Training module has been formulated for frontline staff on Fire Fighting & use of 
fire extinguishers.   
Yoga and Meditation lessons have been introduced in training centers with an 
aim to help railway men in coping with the stress involved with their jobs.   
It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources. 
During the year 2023-24, around 5,19,566 Railway employees were given 
different types of training viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.   
All the training activities are monitored at various levels through regular 
meetings, periodical reports and online data monitoring system. 
 
B. Track Improvement Works 
Track renewal and maintenance works, being directly related to safe train 
operation, are given the top most priority at each level. Retro-reflective sigma 
boards are provided on the mast which is located two OHE masts prior to the 

13 
 
signals in electrified territories to warn the crew about the signal ahead when 
visibility is low due to foggy weather. 
Following progress has been achieved in financial year 2023-24 for important 
track related works: 
1. Rail renewal – 6051 Track Kilometers  
2. Deep screening- 10363 Tkm  
3. 60 kg rail- More than 70% (cumulatively)  
4. Insertion of thick web switches- 5982 Nos.  
5. Introduction of new track machines to enhance mechanized track 
maintenance- 154 Nos 
Other than these, following policy measures have been taken to strengthen and 
speed up the system of track renewal and maintenance in Indian Railways: 
1. General Managers have been delegated powers to sanction works up to Rs. 
50 Cr. for track renewal works which was earlier Rs. 2.5 Cr. only. Zonal Railways 
now can sanction most of the identified works related to track safety themselves.  
2. To reduce fish plated joints, a provision has been made in Indian Railways 
Permanent Way Manual in March 2024 to provide Long Welded Rail on curve up 
to 6.5° in temperature zone- I & II and up to 6° in temperature zone- III & IV. 
3. To ensure planned work, concept of Rolling Block Program has been 
introduced in Indian Railways. Increased predictability of traffic blocks has 
resulted in better quality of track works and quantum of works has also gone up. 
C. Signalling Improvement Works 
KAVACH system has so far been deployed on 1465 Route Kms of SCR. 
Subsequent to deployment in South Central Railway, High density routes have 
been taken up for deployment of KAVACH and presently work is in progress on 
two HDN routes Delhi Mumbai and Delhi Howrah on approx. 3,000 route Km, out 
of which over 1300 Route Kms, the track side work is near completion. All 
possible efforts are being taken for the rapid deployment of the KAVACH system 
on the IR network. 
Indian Railway has been continuously upgrading its signaling system with 
changeover from Mechanical to Electromechanical and to Electronic Interlocking 
signaling system with centralized operation of points and Signals to enhance 
safety in train operations. High priority is accorded to install and commission new 
Electronic Interlocking systems for better reliability and safety. During last 2 years 
itself, about 1000 Electronic Interlocking systems have been installed on IR 
network. 
In the aftermath of Balasore incidence, several measures have been taken to 
strengthen the existing maintenance practices and safety protocols. Drives have 
been launched to ensure availability of completion documents at all installations 
and checking & verification of writing work details of signaling gears at site. Policy 
for commissioning of new works and alteration to existing signaling installations 

14 
 
has been issued. In case of minor day-to-day works of maintenance, repair & 
replacement activities, instructions have been issued for thorough testing of gears 
before resuming train operations. 
Besides, the instructions have been issued to Zones/IRISET that more emphasis 
needs to be given on rigorous practical training in concerned modules of 
curriculum, for carrying out signalling modifications/ alterations. Special modules 
on this subject have also been included in training curriculum. In last four months, 
04 such courses have been conducted and so far 243 trainees have been trained 
through these courses, which also include following sessions: 
(i) Practical sessions are introduced for modification of wiring for hands on 
experience for trainees.  
(ii) The protocol of disconnection and reconnection memos is practised in 
each laboratory session. 
(iii) The guidelines of Railway Board and the safety practices in installation, 
testing and maintenance of Signalling assets is emphasized in the 
instruction (theory) component of training. Further, such courses are being 
conducted every month at Central Training Institute at Secunderabad. 
It would be pertinent to mention that as a result of the various safety measures 
taken over the years, the number of consequential train accidents have come 
down from 473 in year 2000-01 to 40 in year 2023-24. Likewise, the number of 
accidents per million train kms (AMTKs), an index of safety performance of 
railway system, has reduced from 0.65 to 0.03 respectively during the same 
period.” 
 
23. Vetting Comments of Audit 
“1. Action plan implemented/envisaged by MOR to install KAVACH across all 
division/ZR with timelines may be furnished.  
2. It may be clarified whether the Swiss Cheese model has been incorporated in 
operational training programmes.. If yes, details may be furnished.” 
 
24. Final Reply of the Ministry 
Safety is accorded highest priority on Indian Railways. Over the years, various 
measures have been taken by Indian Railways which include track improvement 
works, signalling improvement works, training of railway staff, etc. in order to 
enhance safety in train operations. 
 
A. Track Improvement Works 
Track renewal and maintenance works, being directly related to safe train operation, 
are given the top most priority at each level. 
Following progress has been achieved in financial year 2024-25 for important track 
related works: 

15 
 
1. Complete Track Renewal – 6851 Tkm 
2. Deep screening – 15433 Tkm 
3. 60 kg rail – More than 75% (cumulatively) 
4. Insertion of Thick Web Switches – 7161 Nos. 
5. Introduction of new track machines to enhance mechanized track maintenance – 
55 Nos. 
Other than these, following policy measures have been taken to strengthen and 
speed up the system of track renewal and maintenance in Indian Railways. 
i. General Managers have been delegated powers to sanction works up to Rs. 
50 Cr. for track renewal work which was earlier Rs. 2.5 Cr. only. Zonal 
Railways now can sanction most of the identified works related to track safety 
themselves. 
ii. To reduce fish plated joints, a provision has been made in Indian Railways 
Permanent Way Manual in March 2024 to provide Long Welded Rail on curve 
up to 6.5° in temperature zone-I & II and up to 6º in temperature zone-III & IV. 
iii. To ensure planned work, concept of Rolling Block Program has been 
introduced in Indian Railways. Increased predictability of traffic blocks has 
resulted in better quality of track works and quantum of works has also gone 
up. 
iv. Maintenance track parameters for Passenger Loop Line & Goods Loop Lines 
have been upgraded. 
v. 60 kg new rail has been adopted for new laying of Passenger Running Loop 
Line and renewal of Passenger Running Loop Line. 
vi. During 2024-25, total 1704 WCMS crossing have been laid to continue LWR 
through yards, which are reducing number of joints. 
vii. Indian Railways have adopted world class R260 grade rails and Advanced 
USFD Testing of Rail/Welds by Phased array technology. Indian Railways 
have also adopted global technologies as Weldable CMS Crossing, Thick 
Web Switch & Thick Web Switch Expansion Joints for improving safety and 
efficiency. 
 
B. Signalling Improvement Works 
(1)  Automatic Train Protection System: Kavach 
 
A) Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) 
system. Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires 
safety certification of highest order (SIL-4). 
Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of train within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps 
the trains to run safely during inclement weather. It consists of the following 
systems/sub systems: 

16 
 
(a) Station Kavach: An electronic equipment which receives the 
information from Loco Kavach& existing signaling system and guides 
the Loco Kavach. 
(b) RFID tags: They are installed on the tracks every Kilometer and at 
every signal. These are read by Loco Kavach to determine the location 
and direction of the train. 
(c) Communication Backbone: Communication towers are erected every 
few kilometers along the track and are connected through optical fiber 
cables to exchange information continuously between Loco & Station 
Kavach equipment. 
(d) Loco Kavach: An equipment to read RFID tags on the track for getting 
the location and determining the speed of the loco. It is integrated with 
the braking system, communicates with the station Kavach equipment 
and applies automatic braking in case the driver fails to do so. 
Taking input from all these systems/subsystems, Kavach guides the loco pilot 
to stay within the permissible speed limits. 
 
B) The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. 
Based on the experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the 
system by Independent Safety Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 
2018-19, for supply of KavachVer 3.2. 
C) Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
 
D) Deployment of Kavach involves installation of Station Kavach at each and 
every station/block section; installation of RFID tags throughout the track 
length; installation of towers throughout the section and laying of Optical Fiber 
Cable along the entire track length and provision of installation of Loco 
Kavach on each and every locomotive running on Indian Railways. 
E) Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm and 162 
locomotives on South Central Railway, lots of experience was gained. Using 
that, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification version 
4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. This is a significant milestone in 
safety for Indian Railways. 
F) Kavach version 4.0 covers major features required for the diverse railway 
network, major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location 
Accuracy, Improved Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yard, Station to 
Station Kavach interface on OFC and Direct Interface to existing Electronic 
Interlocking System. With these improvements, Kavach Ver. 4.0 is planned 
for large scale deployment over Indian Railways. 
G) Subsequent to deployment in South Central Railway, High density routes 
have been taken up for deployment of Kavach and presently work is in 

17 
 
progress on two HDN routes, Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah (approx. 3,000 
RKm). Progress of key items comprising Kavach system on Indian Railways 
upto May 2025 is as under:- 
i. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable: 5806 RKm  
ii. Installation of Telecom Towers: 540 Nos.  
iii. Provision of Kavach at Stations: 688 Nos.  
iv. Provision of equipment in Loco: 856 Locos  
v. Installation of Track side equipments: 3882 RKm  
 
H)  Further, Kavach implementation is planned as under: 
a. Project for equipping 10,000 Locomotives has been finalized. 69 nos. of 
loco sheds have been prepared for equipping with Kavach. 
b. Bids for track side Works of Kavach for approximately 15000 RKm have 
been invited out of which 14454 RKm have been finalized. It covers all 
GQ, GD, HDN and Identified sections of Indian Railways. 
c. Currently, 3 OEMs are approved for supply of Kavach System. To 
increase capacity and scale of implementation, trials and approval of 
more OEMs are at different stages.  
 
Indian Railways is deploying Kavach on its network progressively. As brought out 
above, the deployment is complex and time consuming. All efforts are being taken 
for rapid deployment.  
 
2) Training Programme:  
Equipment courses, refresher courses and other training programme are carried out 
for Railway staff on a regular basis. Besides, instructions have been issued to 
Zones/IRISET that more emphasis needs to be given on rigorous practical training in 
concerned modules of curriculum, for carrying out signaling modifications/alterations. 
Special modules on this subject have also been included in training curriculum. In 
year 2024-2025, 21 such courses have been conducted and 1256 trainees have 
been trained through these courses, which also include following sessions:- 
 
(i) Practical sessions are introduced for modification of wiring for hands on 
experience for trainees.  
(ii) The protocol of disconnection and reconnection memos is practiced in each 
laboratory session.  
(iii) The guidelines of Railway Board and the safety practices in installation, 
testing and maintenance of Signalling assets is emphasized in the instruction 
(theory) component of training. Further, such courses are being conducted every 
month at Central Training Institute at Secunderabad. 
 

18 
 
3) Electronic Interlocking Systems  
It is mentioned that Indian Railway has continuously upgraded its signalling system 
with changeover from Mechanical to Electromechanical and to Electronic Interlocking 
signalling system with centralized operation of points and signals to enhance safety 
in train operations. High priority is accorded to install and commission new Electronic 
Interlocking systems for better reliability and safety. During last 3 years (2022-2025) 
itself, about 1355 nos. of Electronic Interlocking systems have been installed on 
Indian Railway network. 
 
C. Training 
Indian Railways has a robust, efficient and cost-effective training infrastructure to 
meet the diverse training needs of its railway staff. Training is imparted across 
various domains to skill/upskill technical, functional, and behavioral competencies of 
employees through physical training at various railway training centers, as well as 
hybrid and online platforms. Structured training programs are conducted for all safety 
category employees at different career stages, including initial, promotional, 
refresher, and specialized training before deputing the staff/officer on the working 
post. 
 MoR deputes railway personnel for undergoing courses at reputed Universities 
as well as permits them to avail various online courses offered by international 
bodies. Indian Railways also have collaborations with various reputed 
domestic & international academies to develop/deliver specialized knowledge 
contents for physical trainings as well as online trainings as per functional 
needs of Indian Railways. 
 All newly recruited maintainers of Indian Railways undergo a detailed training 
programme of one to one and half year duration. Before posting in the working 
post this initial training programme consists on-job training (field training) 
component as well as classroom training in the Zonal training schools. 
 The training modules for different categories of staff are being regularly 
updated to ensure continuous development and upgradation of skills as well 
as addressing the evolving needs of the railway system. 
 As safe train operation is the top most priority of Indian Railways, Kavach 
system is being proactively installed on the busy routes and special emphasis 
is being given to the training of safety category employees. Recently, a 
training module with course content for imparting training on 'KAVACH to 
running staff, Chief Loco Inspectors, Loco Pilots, Assistant Loco Pilots and 
Traffic Department have also been issued. 
 Indian Railways is making concerted efforts to provide technological support & 
training to the Loco-pilots. The Loco-Pilots are provided with Vigilance Control 
Device (VCD) to improve alertness and Fog Safe Device to assist them to 
locate Signals during the fog, when visibility is poor. 

19 
 
 Simulator-based training is being imparted for improving the driving skills and 
reaction time of Loco Pilots. There is regular counseling of running staff and 
interaction with their families. 
 Training module has been formulated for frontline staff on Fire Fighting & use 
of fire extinguishers. 
 Yoga and Meditation lessons have been introduced in training centers with an 
aim to help railway men in coping with the stress involved with their jobs. 
 It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources. 
During the year 2024-25, around 5,72,819 railway employees were given 
different types of training viz., initial, promotional, refresher & specialized. 
 All the training activities are monitored at various levels through regular 
meetings, periodical reports and online data monitoring system. 
 Multi layered checking of signaling designs and multilayered testing of 
signaling installation have been embedded in the codal provisions for Railway 
Signaling installation and the same are followed before any new signaling 
installed is brought to use. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee had recommended that a time bound programme for 
installation of KAVACH system in all divisions/Routes should be taken up by the 
Ministry. The Committee had recommended that the Indian Railways needed to 
remodel the operational training programmes keeping in view the five barriers/layers 
of defense (Swiss Cheese Slices’ or ‘defense barriers) against accidents/derailments 
and use this Model as a reference for strengthening the above barriers to avoid 
occurrence of similar incidents. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the 
implementation status of this Model and the benefits accruing from it. The Committee 
note from the submission of the Ministry in their ATN that they have not reflected 
upon the timeframe for 100 percent implementation of the programme for installation 
of KAVACH system nor have they furnished the details of  implementation status of 
Swiss Cheese Slices’ or ‘defense barriers model and the benefits accruing from it  
across all division/ZR. The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest details in 
these regards. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Fire accidents in coaches 
26. The Committee in their Original Report No. 132 (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
as under:- 
The Committee note from audit observation that out of the identified 44,407 
coaches on 12 ZRs, fire extinguishers have not been provided in 27,763 (62 per 
cent) coaches. The reasons attributed for non-provision of fire extinguishers include 

20 
 
delays in tendering processes, failure of firm to supply the fire extinguishers, supply 
awaited/under progress etc. The Committee note from reply of the Ministry that 
measures like usage of fire retardant furnishing materials in coaches, provision of 
fire detection and suppression system in Power Cars and Pantry Cars and Fire and 
Smoke detection system in AC coaches, provision of fire extinguishers in all AC 
coaches and all newly manufactured Non-AC coaches and Display of statutory “Fire 
Notices” for widespread passenger information in all coaches have been taken and 
fire extinguishers have been installed in 39000 coaches. Besides, till now, Indian 
Railways has provided fire detection cum suppression system in nearly 1775 Power 
Cars and 800 Pantry Car Coaches. Fire detection cum alarm system has been 
provided in nearly 11,000 AC Coaches and fire extinguishers have been provided in 
nearly 34700 Non AC coaches and that it is planned to cover all coaches with fire 
safety system by March 2024. The Committee while acknowledging the steps taken 
by the Ministry observe that there is still much left to be desired as regards 
installation of fire extinguishers. The Committee are of the view that the 
tendering/procurement process needs to be reworked to make sure that supply of 
fire extinguishers and their installation is not hindered in any way and the target of 
covering all coaches with fire safety system by March 2024 is met without fail. The 
Committee desire that a strict protocol for inspection, service and maintenance of 
fire extinguishers should be put in place. The Committee are of the considered view 
that a comprehensive Fire Risk Assessment of trains and stations should be 
conducted by an independent agency/Authority to enable the Ministry to formulate a 
comprehensive Fire Safety protocol for Indian Railways. The Committee also feel 
that Fire Safety Audits should be conducted at regular intervals for assessing the 
preparedness in Indian Railways against fire hazards. 
 
27. Action Taken by Ministry 
Provision of Fire extinguishers in 100% coaches has been achieved by March 2024. 
The system of periodic checking and maintenance is in place. The instructions have 
again been reiterated to all Zonal Railways.  
 
Following systems are already in place for fire safety in passenger coaches: 
 
1. Provision of Fire and Smoke Detection Systems (FSDS) in air-conditioned 
(AC) coaches: - To improve fire safety in the running trains, Automatic fire and 
smoke detection system has been provided in all the AC coaches. Instructions are in 
place for all the production units to manufacture the AC coaches with the provision of 
FSDS in all AC coaches. 
 
 
 

21 
 
2. Provision of Fire Extinguishers in all coaches:  
Dry chemical powder type/water mist type fire extinguishers are provided in all 
operational coaches viz. Air-conditioned coaches, Second class- cum-guard and 
luggage van and Pantry cars and Non-AC coaches. 
 
3. Provision of Fire Detection and Suppression Systems (FDSS) in Pantry Cars 
and Power Cars: - 
Pantry and Power Cars have been provided with Automatic Fire detection and 
Suppression systems. Instructions are in place for all the production units to 
manufacture the pantry and power cars with these provisions only. 
 
4. Provision of flameless cooking system in Pantry Cars: - 
Indian Railways have envisaged for flameless cooking in the operational pantries. 
The provision for completely flameless cooking, water-heating arrangements are 
available in all the LHB pantry cars. 
 
5. Aerosol-based fire suppression: - 
The Aerosol based fire suppression system has been provided in electrical cubicle of 
all Vande Bharat 
Train-set Rakes. Also, the newly manufactured coaches are turned out from PUs 
with the fitment of Aerosol Based fire suppression system. 
 
6. Emergency talk-back system in Vande Bharat Train-sets: -  
There is a provision of 4-Emergency Talk Back Units in every coach of Train-set. 
This facility can be used by passengers to communicate with Train Manager and 
Loco Pilot in case of exigencies /emergencies like fire incidence etc. 
 
7. Emergency Alarm System: -  
Passenger Emergency Alarm Buttons have been provided in the Vande Bharat 
Train-sets. Every coach is provided with 4 such push buttons for emergency usage, 
this will provide an indication to the Loco Pilot for taking suitable action. Similarly, 
alarm chains have been provided in all the coaches for usage to stop the train during 
emergencies like fire incidence etc. Regular inspections are done during 
maintenance schedules at Depots/Sheds etc. for ensuring the proper upkeep of 
various systems. Inter Zonal audits, Safety Drives, Inspections at different levels etc 
are also done to check for the functionality of these systems in regular manner. 
Further, RCF has been advised to take necessary action for getting fire risk 
assessment done for trains and Northern Railway to do similar action for the stations. 
 
 
 

22 
 
28. Vetting Comments of Audit 
1. It may be clarified whether a strict protocol for inspection, service and 
maintenance of fire extinguishers has been put in place across all Zonal Railways. If 
not, action taken/proposed to be taken for the same may be furnished.  
 
2. How is MOR reworking the tendering/procurement process to ensure that the 
supply of fire extinguishers and their installation is not hindered in any way? 
  
3. It may be clarified whether MoR has conducted a comprehensive fire risk 
assessment of trains and stations through an independent agency. If yes, then how 
has MoR incorporated the findings of this assessment to formulate more efficient fire 
safety protocols for IR.  
 
4. It may be clarified whether Fire safety audits are conducted at regular intervals 
across all Zonal Railways in IR. 
 
29. Final Reply of the Ministry 
Indian Railways is having a well laid down procedure for conducting Inquiries. A very 
stiff deadline of 30 days for completion of Departmental Inquiries has been fixed by 
Railway Board. The accidents inquiries in all unusual cases is conducted in a 
professional manner with lots of technical inputs, viz. Metallurgical/Chemical test 
reports from laboratories, Forensic reports from State agencies and due 
deliberations with RDSO to reach at proper conclusion. This obviously increases the 
inquiry duration.   
 
In spite of above limitations, as per data of last three years, i.e., 2022-23, 2023-24 
and 2024-25, Departmental inquiries have been completed in 100% cases, i.e., 105 
cases and out of these inquiries, 71 cases (approx. 70% cases) had been completed 
by Railways within the time frame. 
 
30. The Committee had expressed the view that a comprehensive Fire Risk 
Assessment of trains and stations should be conducted by an independent 
agency/Authority to enable the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive Fire Safety 
protocol for Indian Railways. The Committee also felt that Fire Safety Audits should 
be conducted at regular intervals for assessing the preparedness in Indian Railways 
against fire hazards. The Ministry in their ATN have inter alia submitted that Indian 
Railways is having a well laid down procedure for conducting Inquiries. A very stiff 
deadline of 30 days for completion of Departmental Inquiries has been fixed by 
Railway Board. The accidents inquiries in all unusual cases is conducted in a 
professional manner with lots of technical inputs and in spite of limitations, as per 
data of last three years, i.e., 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25, Departmental inquiries 
have been completed in 100% cases. It also states that Rail Coach Factory (RCF) has 

23 
 
been advised to take necessary action for getting fire risk assessment done for trains 
and Northern Railway to do similar action for the stations. However, it does not 
elaborate upon the details regarding the conduct of comprehensive Fire Risk 
Assessment of trains and stations by an independent agency/Authority. The 
Committee desire that the details of latest measures taken/proposed to help 
formulate a foolproof fire safety protocol along with details of fire safety audit be 
furnished to the Committee. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Indian Railway (IR) is one of the world's largest railways. It functions as a vertically 
integrated organization providing Passenger and Freight services. It is a single system 
which consists of 67,956 route km of track that traverses the country. More than 21648 
number of trains ply on IR carrying about 22.15 million passengers and hauling nearly 3.32 
million tonnes of freight every day. Accidents in Indian Railway tarnish the image and raises 
questions on safe and sound working procedures. Accidents occur on account of acts of 
omission or commission, evasion of rules, unsafe practices, etc. Out of various categories 
of accidents, most serious consequences are witnessed in collisions, derailments, fire in 
running trains and accidents at level crossings accidents etc. There exist statutory rules 
known as Indian Railways (Open Lines) General Rules (GR), 1976 to regulate safe 
operation of trains. These Rules have been notified as per the powers delegated by the 
Railways Act, 1989. These Rules are further supplemented by Zonal Railways, by way of 
issuing Subsidiary Rules (SR), to ensure safety, punctuality and mobility. All new Railway 
lines for the public carriage of passengers and major modifications of existing systems 
require inspection and clearance by the Commission of Railway Safety (CRS), which is an 
independent organization under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation. A 
dedicated Safety department operates as an internal auditor in the Railways at three tiers, 
viz. Railway Board Level, Zonal Level and Divisional Level. A number of initiatives and 
safeguards have been taken continuously in the past to improve the safety performance, as 
a result of which the safety of Railways has been claimed to have improved over the years. 
Some of the issues contained in the Audit Report have been examined by the Committee 
and commented upon suitably in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
Introductory. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport dated: 30.05.2024 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
Track Recording Cars (TRCs) are specialized vehicles that inspect the geometrical and 
structural conditions of Railway tracks, identifying defects that could lead to derailment and 
other accidents. The Committee note from the Audit observation that there were shortfalls in 
inspections by Track Recording Cars which ranged between 30 per cent and 100 per cent 
in TRC inspections which has had an adverse impact on the quality of railways assets and 
also implications on safe operation of trains on various routes. The Committee also note 
from one of the ‘accident inquiry reports’ that the derailment of Seemanchal Express 
occurred in February 2019 in ECR wherein it was stated that the TRC run over the section 
was overdue by four months. Had the TRC run been carried out, it could have given vital 
inputs on possible defects in track. The main reason assigned for the shortfall in the 
inspections, as informed to the Committee include, non-receipt of the programme for the 
running of TRCs to be prepared and finalized by Research Designs & Standards 
Organization (RDSO), Lucknow. From the submissions made by the Ministry, the 
Committee note that there has been shortfall in frequency of track recording vis-à-vis, the 
stipulations due to limited number of Cars as also faulty planning. Consequently, the target 
of inspections by TRCs could not be achieved. Besides, the problem was aggravated due to 
break downs, scheduled maintenance of Track Recording system, non-availability of path 
on congested traffic sections etc. The Ministry in their submission to the Committee have 
stated that in case of non-availability of TRC, alternative means i.e. Oscillation Monitoring 
Systems were deployed and attention to track maintenance issues is givenbased on the 
result. The Committee however, cannot endorse the argument that additional runs of 
Oscillation Monitoring System (OMS) have been carried out for monitoring the health of the 
track, as an alternative to, or in lieu of track recording by TRCs as these systems serve 
separate purposes. While OMS assesses the ride quality of the track, the actual track 
geometry is recorded by the TRC. The Committee further note from the submission of the 
Ministry that to address the shortfall, steps like commissioning and procurement of 2 new 
TRCs each and sanction of 7 more TRCs have been done (including 04 additional TRCs 
and replacement of 03 old TRCs). The Committee recommend that the Ministry take steps 
to make sure that TRCs are put to full utilization and a time-bound utilization certificate 
reflecting stipulated periodicity, length of track recording, time taken to complete the given 
stretch and consequential action for those falling short of the target be made mandatory. 
The Committee are of the view that instead of procuring TRCs in batches, the required 
number of TRCs should be estimated well in advance and procured straightaway in a time 
bound manner as this would not only put an end to the recurrent shortage/maintenance 
issues but would also, at the same time, prevent accidents/derailments caused on account 
of shortfall in frequency of track recording due to limited number/shortage of TRCs. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry set a target for 100 percent track recording by the year 
2025. The Committee also desire that a compliance report in the matter regarding 

26 
 
procurement of Track Inspection and Monitoring Systems and Zero Speed Integrated Track 
Monitoring Systems be submitted to the Committee. 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in their Action Taken Notes have stated as 
under: 
 “The procurement of 7 nos. TRCs include procurement of 3 nos. TRCs against the 
old 3 nos. TRCs, so that the availability of 11 nos. TRCs will be ensured at a given 
time. Utilization of available 7 nos. TRCs is improved with track recording 
achievement of 99.74% in the year 2023-24 by recording 2,82,754 km as against set 
target of 2,83,494 km. (Annexure-1). Target for 100% track recording is almost 
achieved in the year 2023-24. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
“1. What steps has MoR taken to implement Hon’ble PAC’s recommendation on 
issuing time bound utilization certificate for each TRC?  
 
2. What steps have been taken by MoR to comply with Hon’ble PAC’s 
recommendations on procurement policy for TRCs?  
 
3. Has the compliance report regarding procurement of Track Inspection and 
Monitoring Systems and Zero Speed Integrated Track Monitoring Systems been 
submitted to the Hon’ble PAC?  
 
4. How is MoR planning to achieve 100 percent track recording by 2025? All relevant 
details like year wise target set etc. for the same may be furnished.  
 
5. The Track Recording data was verified by Zonal Railway Audit Offices and it was 
observed that in five Zonal Railways, the percentage of actual run cumulative of 
TRCs as verified by Zonal Railway Audit offices was less than the data provided by 
MoR as shown in the following table:” 
 
ZR ANNUAL TARGET 
PLANNED 
RECORDING 
PLANNED 
CUMULATIVE 
2023- 24 
ACTUAL TRACK 
RECORDING 
RUN 2023-24 
CUMULATIVE 
% ACTUAL 
RUN 
CUMULATIVE 
(PERCENTAGE 
OF TARGET 
ACHIEVED ) 
Difference in 
% achieved 
 MOR (1) ZR AUDIT MOR ZR MOR ZR MOR ZR %MoR- %ZR 

27 
 
(2) (3) AUDIT 
(4) 
(5) AUDIT 
(6) 
(7) AUDIT 
(8) 
AUDIT 
Col.(7)-
Col.(8) 
CR 21005 20335 19973  20335 19991 20335 95.2 100 -4.8 
ECOR 13298 15820 12330  11744 12372 11103 93 70.18 22.82 
ER 13032 13159 11263 …. 11112 11191 85.30 85.04 0.26 
NCR 16608 16608 16531 …. 17602 14629 106 88.08 17.92 
SECR 12113 11037 12339 PERTAINS 
TO RDSO 12161 10230 100.4 92.68 7.72 
SWR 10427 14190 15030 14190 14977 11751 143.6 82.81 60.79 
 
 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
7 nos. TRCs are under supply. The work is moving as per schedule. Further 7 nos. of TRC 
were sanctioned in RSP 2024-25 (02 nos.) & RSP 2025-26 (05 nos.) and procurement 
process for them has been started. Utilization of available 7 nos. TRCs has improved in the 
year 2024-25 and 2,62,018 track km have been recorded against the target of 2,53,589 
track km. (Annexure A) 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
[Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 10 of Chapter I] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
From the audit observation, the Committee find that the status of outsourcing was found to 
be inadequate as against the required number of work force of the Civil Engineering 
Department. Though the percentage of vacancies in Indian Railways for Civil Engineering 
Department ranged between 9-36 per cent, no outsourcing was done in East Central 
Railway for addressing the problem of shortage of work force in divisions selected for 
review. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that accident Inquiry 
reports of the zone revealed that in 23 per cent of the total derailments (40 out of 172) in 
East Central Railways, one of the factors responsible for the derailment was improper track 
maintenance. Despite the fact that the three Zonal Railways viz. North Central Railways, 
North Frontier Railway, and West Central Railway had more than seven percent vacancies, 
no serious efforts seem to have been made for filling up the vacant posts nor outsourcing 
was done in any of these Zonal Railways. The Committee further note from the submission 
of the Ministry that the total Non-gazetted Group ‘C’ (including level – 1) vacancies in Civil 
Engineering department of Indian Railways as on 01.07.2023 was 68619. During 2018- 
2019 to 2022-2023, 11784 (Provisional) candidates had been empanelled in Civil 
Engineering Department (for Group ‘C’ posts excluding Level 1) by 21 Railway Recruitment 
Boards (RRBs). The Committee are of the view that adequate monitoring mechanism 

28 
 
should be worked out to maintain a ‘Database’ containing the details of track maintenance 
by the permanent staff and the extent of shortage of staff that needs to be met by 
outsourcing. The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry need to work out a 
mechanism preferably in the form of an ‘Outsourcing Coordination Cell’ to ensure that a 
viable ‘Stop-Gap’ arrangement to address the issue of shortage of ‘permanent or regular 
staff’ is taken care of by way of engaging qualified contractual staff. The Committee are of 
the view that the quantum of work based on the field requirement needs to be worked out 
by the respective units of the division well in advance to make good the shortage of 
permanent staff and in furtherance of this objective, the ‘Outsourcing Coordination Cell’ 
should be entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining the ‘Database’ with a view to 
eliminating the possibility of staff requirement-gap; and also to monitor, assess and grade 
the outsourced staff. The Committee recommend that recruitment of sufficient permanent 
staff should be carried out at the earliest to ensure regular and reliable supply of workforce 
and also to make sure that punitive actions are initiated against those found responsible for 
any negligence or breaking the established rules which cause accidents/derailments. 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
 “The staff position of Civil Engineering Department of Indian Railways (Group 
C including Level-1 Posts), as on 01.06.2024, as obtained from MPP Portal is 
as under:- 
Staff Strength position of Civil Engineering Department of Indian Railways (ZRs+PUs) as on 
01.06.2024 
Sanctioned Strength On Roll Vacancy 
355531 299011 299011 
Occurrence and filling up of vacancies are continuous process on Indian 
Railways considering its size, spatial distribution and criticality of operation. 
The vacancies are filled up primarily by placement of indents by Railways with 
Recruitment agencies as per operational requirements. During the process, 
vacancies may arise and these are filled subsequently. Further, 94703 
(Provisional) candidates have been empanelled in Civil Engineering 
Department (for Group ‘C’ posts including Level 1) by 21 Railway Recruitment 
Boards (RRBs) & Zonal Railways during 2018-2019 to 2022-2023. The details 
are as under: 
 
S. No. 
 
Year Candidates Empanelled in Civil Engineering Department (for 
Group ‘C’ posts) * 
Level 2 to 7 Level 1 
1. 2018-2019 13  
2. 2019-2020 8467  
36,313 3. 2020-2021 596 
4. 2021-2022 467 
5. 2022-2023 2241 46,572 
6. 2023-2024* 34 
 Total 11818* 82,885* 

29 
 
Provisional*  
Centralized Employment Notification (CEN) no. 02/2024, for 9144 vacancies 
of Technicians (including 1430 Engineering vacancies) have been published 
on 08.03.2024. Guidelines are already in place wherein it is mentioned that 20 
activities can be executed through contract system (Annexure-I). As per 
requirement and assessment by zonal railways, contracts are awarded for 
period in the range of one or two years covering scope of these activities. 
Each and every derailment is inquired by a joint committee of prescribed level 
and responsibilities are fixed based on the finding of committee. Employees 
found responsible are taken up under D&A Rules. This complete position is 
maintained and monitored by Safety department on regular basis.” 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
“1. It may be clarified whether there are any unnecessary delays in the recruitment 
process pertaining to civil engineering department in IR? If yes, how is IR eliminating 
these delays?  
2. It may be clarified whether the vacancies in Civil Department is adequately filled 
by both outsourcing and recruitment process? If not, then steps taken/envisaged by 
IR may be furnished.” 
Final Reply of Ministry 
Occurrence and filling up of vacancies are continuous process on Indian Railways 
considering its size, spatial distribution and criticality of operation. The vacancies are 
filled up primarily by placement of indents by Railways with Recruitment agencies as 
per operational requirements. During the process, vacancies may arise and these 
are filled subsequently. 
2.1 Further, 11909 (Provisional) candidates have been empanelled in Civil 
Engineering Department (for Group ‘C’ posts excluding Level 1) by 21 Railway 
Recruitment Boards (RRBs) during 2018-2019 to 2024-2025. The details are as 
under: 
S. No. Year 
Candidates Empanelled in Civil 
Engineering Department (for 
Group ‘C’ posts excluding Level 
1)* 
1 2018-2019 13  
2 2019-2020 8467  
3 2020-2021 596  
4 2021-2022 467  
5 2022-2023 2241  
6 2023-2024 60  

30 
 
7 2024-2025 65*  
Total 11909*  
*Provisional. 
3. Further, as a system improvement, the Ministry of Railways has introduced a 
system of publishing annual calendar from 2024 onwards for recruitment to various 
categories of Group ‘C’ posts.  
 
3.1 Accordingly, as per annual calendar 2024 & 2025, following Centralized 
Employment Notifications (CENs) having Civil Department vacancies have been 
issued- 
S.N. Year CEN. No. Name of post 
I.   
 
2024 
02/2024 Technicians(14298 
vacancies) 
II.   
03/2024 
Junior Engineers (JEs) 
/Depot Material 
Superintendent (DMS) 
/Chemical & Metallurgical 
Assistant (CMA)(7951 
vacancies) 
III.  2025 02/2025 Technicians (6238 
vacancies) 
 
3.2 Under these three notifications, a total 3145 vacancies have been notified 
for civil engineering department. 
The total number of vacancies of Non-gazetted (Group 'C' including Level-1) in Civil 
Engineering Department as on 01.07.2025 is 64623. 
 
Outsourcing of Track Maintenance activities: The candidates empanelled in posts 
of Asst. Track Machine and Track Maintainer Grade IV in Level-1 under CEN RRC-
01/2019 in the year 2023-24 and 2024-25 is as follows:  
 Post 2023-24 2024-

31 
 
25  
Asst. Track Machine 1434 177 
Track Maintainer Grade 
IV 15826 2192 
Further, the following vacancies in the above categories have been notified to be 
filled up through CEN No. 08/2024    
   
 
 
2.  To reduce 
difficulties being 
experience by Zonal Railways due to Vacant posts a ‘Stop Gap’ arrangement is 
being made by Railway Board through Re-engagement of retired Railway staff (Non-
Gazetted) in Level-1 to Level-9 by calling volunteers who retired from posts in same 
cadre/category up to three level higher than the post against which re-engagement is 
being considered on contractual basis and also Engagement of Ex-Servicemen as 
Gatemen (both Civil & Traffic Deptt.) on contract basis is being made for smooth 
functioning of Railway operations 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132nd Report 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note from the audit observation that idling of track machines due to ‘block 
not given by the Operating Department’ and ‘Stabled due to operational problems’ was 
found in all the twelve Zonal Railways; in eleven Zonal Railways, the track machine was 
kept idle for 13 to 1881 days due to ‘non-availability of track machine staff’. Also, ‘idling of 
track machines’ due to ‘block not planned by divisions’ and ‘programme not planned by 
Track Machine Office’ was noticed in ten Zonal Railways. From the submissions of the 
Ministry, the Committee note that track machines are being used for track renewal work as 
well and mechanization work too is being carried out as part of the track renewal activity. 
Besides, the quality of the work is ensured by laying the tracks with the help of track 
machines and a good number of machines have been inducted for the maintenance work 
which is being carried out with the help of automatic machines which ensures the quality of 
maintenance. The Committee also note from the submissions of the Ministry that Satellite 
Track Machine Maintenance Depots (STMMD) are being set up in each Division to ensure 
timely maintenance of machines and improved quality. The Committee feel that there have 
Post Notified Vacancies 
Asst. Track Machine 799 
Track Maintainer Grade 
IV 13187 

32 
 
been cases of idling of track machines due to various reasons which has hampered the 
process of mechanization of track maintenance activities and are of the view that the 
Ministry need to develop an inbuilt mechanism to make sure that track machines are not 
kept idle and are put to maximum use. The Committee recommend introduction of the 
ground penetrating Radar (GPR) for Ballast Bed condition evaluation as soon as possible. 
The Committee also recommend that human intervention in the activities of track 
maintenance services be minimized and mechanized maintenance work be maximized 
which would not only speed up the maintenance Process and eliminate the angle of human 
error in the process of track maintenance and thereby infuse more confidence on safety 
issues. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
(i) “For proper planning of blocks for maintenance and renewal of assets on Indian 
Railways (IR), concept of Rolling Block Plan (RBP) with advance planning for 26 
weeks & weekly review has been implemented on IR since June, 2023.  
(ii) Track Management System (TMS) is already functional to monitor the idling of 
track machines due to various reasons on Zonal Railways.  
(iii) LOA (Letter of Acceptance) for procurement of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) 
system has been placed by South Central Railway on trial basis being a new 
technology for IR. The preparatory works are being done and actual recording will 
start soon.  
(iv) (iv) Automated track machines for quality maintenance have been deployed. 
Further, high output track machines having integrated function of 2/3 machines in 
one machine are also being procured. This will improve utilization of blocks and 
ensure progress with maximum mechanized track maintenance with less human 
intervention.” 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 “1. It may be clarified whether Zone wise implementation of Rolling Block Plan 
(RBP) has been completed across all Zonal Railways? All details regarding stages of 
implementation, present status etc. may be furnished.  
2. It may be clarified in detail how Track Management system is being utilized to 
monitor and prevent idling of track machines as well as ensure optimum utilization of 
Track machines across all ZR in IR.  
3. Details of Timeline, action plan etc. devised by MoR to implement Ground 
Penetrating Radar (GPR) system across ZRs may be furnished.  
4. Zonal Railways wise details regarding deployment of Automatic Track Machines 
may be furnished.” 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
1. Rolling Block plans have been implemented in all Zonal Railways and presently all 
Zonal Railways are preparing 26 weeks Rolling Block Plan. The rolling block was 

33 
 
initially started for 1 week and subsequently increased to 2, 4, 8, 12 and 26 weeks’ 
duration.  
2. Track Management System (TMS) provides information on traffic block demanded 
& granted and progress achieved. So TMS becomes very effective tool to decide on 
further action to be taken for preventing idling and ensuring optimum utilization of the 
machines. Utilization of machines, idling of machines, etc. is also regularly monitored 
by Track Machine Directorate, Railway Board. Zonal Railways having deficient 
performance are advised to ensure proper utilization of machines, and machines are 
also shifted as per requirement to avoid idling and optimize utilization.  
3. Trials of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) are in progress for commissioning of 
the system.  
4. Zonal Railways wise details regarding deployment of Track Machines is enclosed 
as Annexure – B. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport) 
 
[comments of the Committee, see Para No. 15 of Chapter I] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee note from the audit observation that Research Design and Standard 
Organization (RDSO) had developed a new wider and heavier pre-stressed concrete 
sleeper (RT-8527) for Indian Railways to keep pace with the increased freight traffic by 
allowing higher axle load on existing track. The Committee find that despite Railway Board 
directive issued vide letter dt. 17.10.2018 communicating its approval on usage of wider 
and heavier sleepers (RT8527) from financial year 2019-20 onwards, the sleepers were not 
used by some zonal railways at the time of track renewal due to non-availability of the rate 
reference in Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM) and web based 
application for RT-8527 sleepers at the stage of preparing detailed estimates. The 
Committee further note from the submissions of the Ministry that the tender for procurement 
of wider sleepers (RT-8527) was finalized by the Board in May, 2019 with provision of 
mobilization period of 4 months for shifting to production of wider sleepers. Accordingly, 
Zonal Railways started production of wider sleepers from September 2019 onwards and 
started using wider sleeper (RT-8527) based on availability of wider sleepers & its matching 
fittings. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that Zonal Railways also 
continued using normal sleepers (RT2496) till the stocks and matching fittings were 
available, with a view to avoiding wastage of resources. In this regard, the Committee 
concur with the audit observation that there is a need to upgrade and standardize the 
existing track structure for 25 tonne axle load on IR, as the existing sleepers are slender 
and lightweight and are less fit for higher impact load caused by flat wheels which may lead 
to premature failure of sleepers and consequently rail disasters in the form of 

34 
 
derailment/accidents. The Committee are not convinced with the explanation furnished by 
the Ministry and are of the view that sleepers that are lightweight and are less fit for higher 
impact load should be replaced on war footing with PSC sleepers and a target oriented 
working/monitoring group should be put in place to make sure that the recommendations of 
the Railway Board for use of PSCS is implemented both in letter and spirit without further 
delay. The Committee are of the view that the idea of ‘avoiding wastage of resources till old 
stocks last’ should not in any way override issues of safety. The Committee also desire that 
the Ministry furnish a compliance report on use of PSCS as per the advisory of the Railway 
Board. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Normal sleepers (RT-2496) are fit for 25 Ton action load trains up to 60 kmph as per 
Board’s circular no. 2018/CE-II/TS/25T dated 14.03.2018 (Annexure-2). Further 25 
tons action load trains are permitted to run on identified routes at 45 kmph only on 60 
kg rail as per Railway Board letter no.2019/CE-II/TS/25t dated 01.09.2020 
(Annexure-3). Accordingly, 25 ton trains are running at 45 kmph only, although 
normal sleeper (RT 2496) is fit up to 60 kmph. Therefore, there is no safety hazard 
for running 25 ton axle load on existing sleepers and there is no need to replace the 
normal sleepers with wider sleepers on an urgent basis. Further the normal sleeper 
are being replaced with wider sleeper whenever due for renewal. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
1. It may be clarified whether all instructions, subject to which the permission to 
operate 25T axle load trains on Normal sleepers (RT-2496) on selected routes of IR 
have been granted, are being followed to the letter.  
2. How is MoR ensuring compliance to all the instructions issued vide Railway Board 
letter no.2019/CE-II/TS/25t dated 01.09.2020? 
Final Reply of Ministry 
1. All instructions for operation of 25 T axle load tracks on normal sleepers are being 
followed.  
2. Railway Board’s guidelines pertain to multi-disciplinary authorities under overall 
domain of General Managers of Zonal Railways who have been entrusted for the 
same, vide referred letter. Any subsequent queries/clarifications as required by 
General Managers are taken care of through Railway Board’s directives issued from 
time to time and also during inspection by Railway Board authorities. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee note from the audit observation that while the targets in respect of the less 
preferred AT welding (manual process) were achieved, there was shortfall in achievement 
of targets for the more preferred FB welding and that the Railway administration failed in 
implementing the directives issued on rail welds in the ‘Corporate Safety Plan of IR’ (2003-

35 
 
13). From the audit observation, the Committee also note that the Railway Board reiterated 
(August 2019) that the elimination of AT welding except in emergency shall be the way 
forward. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that the concerned 
zonal Railways have listed reasons like, unavoidability of use of AT welds for regular 
maintenance, use of AT welding where FB welding is not economical, non-fixation of targets 
for removal of AT welds and isolated welding as the reasons for opting for the less preferred 
AT welding. In response to the recommendation of the Standing Committee on Railways, 
the Ministry had stated that technology upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is 
being carried out continuously including switching over to mobile FB welding technology in 
place of AT welding to carry out weld renewals. The Committee note that AT welding was 
given more weightage over FB Welding which is indicative of a lackadaisical approach 
practiced towards implementation of Railway Board directives and also towards the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Railways which clearly that expressed the 
view elimination of AT welding except in cases of emergency should be ‘the way forward’. 
The Committee opine that advocacy of use of AT welding, where FB welding is not 
economical, does not hold much ground, as safety of human life should be given 
precedence over economics of scale. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry need 
to work out a timeline for completion of replacement of AT welds with FB welds and a 
monitoring mechanism should be put in place to oversee the process on a regular basis till 
the objective is achieved. The Committee desire to be apprised of the timeline fixed in this 
matter. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Road Map for reduction of AT Welding on Indian Railways (IR) had been prepared 
in 2019 and is being followed by IR. Accordingly, older AT welds are being replaced 
with more preferred FB welds by through weld renewal using Mobile Flash Butt 
Plants. Technology upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is being carried 
out continuously, switching over to FB welding in place of AT welding to carry out 
the maintenance/renewals. IR has also adopted to use long rail panels to reduce 
population of welds. IR has achieved supply of 90% of total rails in the form of long 
rails in FY 23-24 and is targeting for 92% in FY 24-25. IR is planning to increase 
long rails to 95% of its total requirement by FY 26-27. So, use of AT weld will be 
reduced considerably by FY 26-27. 100% replacement of AT welds with FB welds is 
not practically possible as AT welding has to be done for certain isolated locations 
such as for attention to rail/weld failures, removal of USFD defects, Scabbed rails, 
isolated SEJ renewals, point and crossing approaches, glued joints etc. However, 
all efforts are being made to reduce AT welds & to provide FB welds. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. It may be clarified whether any specific targets of replacing Alumino Thermit 
welds with FB welds were set in terms of percentage etc. If yes, details of the same 
may be furnished.  

36 
 
2. Zone wise present status of replacing Alumino Thermit welds with FB welds till 
date along with shortfalls in achieving the target set, if any, may be furnished.  
3. Steps taken by MoR to mitigate the shortfalls in said replacement w.r.t. the target 
set for 24-25 may also be furnished. 
 
Final Reply of Ministry  
 
Road Map for reduction of AT Welding on Indian Railways (IR) had been prepared 
in 2019 and is being followed by IR. Accordingly, older AT welds are being replaced 
with more preferred FB welds using Mobile Flash Butt Plants.  Technology 
upgradation in laying and maintenance of track is being carried out continuously, 
switching over to FB welding in place of AT welding in infrastructure works is being 
maximized.  
IR has also adopted to use long rail panels to reduce population of welds. IR has 
achieved supply of 94% of total rails in the form of long rails in FY 2024-25 and is 
targeting for 95% in FY 25-26.  IR planning to increase long rails to 97% of its total 
requirement by FY 26-27. So, use of AT weld will be reduced considerably by FY 
26-27.  
Though IR is committed to maximize FB welding, but 100% replacement of AT 
welds with FB welds is not practically possible as AT welding has to be done for 
certain isolated locations such as for attention to rail/weld failures, removal of USFD 
defects, Scabbed rails, isolated SEJ renewals, point and crossing approaches, 
glued joints etc. However, all efforts are being made to reduce AT welds & to 
provide FB welds. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
From the audit observation, the Committee note that there were shortfalls in USFD testing 
in rails and welds during 2017-2021. The ultrasonic flaw detection system is used in Indian 
Railways for detection of flaws in railways to enable timely removal of defects. The 
Committee note with dismay that whereas this shortfall was 50 percent in the Northern 
Railways in respect of USFD testing in rails, it reached as high as 100 percent in the East 
Coast Railway in respect of USFD testing on welds. The Committee note from the reply of 
the Ministry that Indian Railway has already adopted a web enabled Track Management 
System (TMS) to ensure monitoring of the track inspection and maintenance activities at 
various levels of Railway working and that Alarm/Reminder is provided by TMS for any 
location of rails & welds due for USFD testing, based on which planning and deployment of 
USFD testing team is done. The Committee note that there have been instances in the past 
when derailments have taken place because of rail breakage. The Ministry has informed 
that the USFD testing is being done in the range of 305 thousand track kilometer per year 
and USFD testing is being done for weld and the number has increased to 2533 thousand 

37 
 
welds per year and that to meet the shortfall over and above the departmental resources, 
outsourcing agencies are made available over and above the departmental workforce. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry need to work out a mechanism advisably in the 
form of a ‘USFD testing Monitoring Cell’ to make sure that there is no shortfall in USFD 
testing in all Zonal Railways and also to ensure that there is no demand gap in terms of 
departmental workforce to carry out this task. The Committee are of the view that the 
conventional method of using trolleys for USFD of rails is becoming increasingly difficult as 
repair window shrinks due to train speed reaching above 130 kmph. The Committee 
recommend that self-propelled Ultrasonic Rail Testing (SPURT) Cars should be inducted at 
the earliest. The Committee also note that efforts made to introduce SPURT Cars in the 
past have not been successful and recommend that the Ministry should make earnest 
efforts to procure SPURT Cars as soon as possible and furnish a compliance report about 
the procurement of SPURT Cars. The Committee are of the view that more technologically 
advanced tools on the pattern of web enabled Track Management System should be 
explored and implemented in order to ensure shielding from human error in USFD testing 
procedure. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Indian Railways has a set system of testing of rails and welds by Ultrasonic Flaw 
Detection Testing (USFD) machines at prescribed frequencies. These testing are 
being monitored at field, division and Zonal Railways regularly. Timely testing by 
USFD is helping in early detection of vulnerable points and initiating necessary 
remedial measures to reduce the probability of accidents. Indian Railways has 
already adopted a web enabled Track Management System (TMS) to ensure 
monitoring of the track inspection and maintenance activities at various levels of 
Railway working. Alarm/Reminder is provided by TMS for any locations of rails & 
welds due for USFD testing, based on which planning and deployment of USFD 
testing team is done efficiently. Track Management System is a tool for 
management and storage of data in standard format for subsequent data analysis. 
However, AI based Self Propelled Ultrasonic Rail Testing Car (SPURT) and Rail 
Cum Road Vehicle (RCRV) based USFD testing system for testing of Rails/welds is 
in the process of adoption on IR. USFD testing of rail/welds by SPURT/RCRV 
based system has minimum human interface. Through this system, suspect list of 
defects is generated through software tool of the vehicular USFD system after 
testing of a stretch. The suspect list containing km/chainage and GPS locations of 
suspected defect is verified at site with Trolley mounted USFD machines. IR is in 
process of procurement of 18 no. SPURT car and expected to be supplied in next 
2-4 years. Also, Rail Cum Road Vehicle (RCRV) is under trial and decision of 
adoption on IR will be taken subsequently. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. Present status of the procurement of SPURT cars and outcome of RCRV trials 
may be furnished.  

38 
 
2. What are the various measures taken by MOR to mitigate the shortfall in USFD 
Testing? 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
During the year 2024-25, USFD testing of 471 thousands Tkm of rail and 2580 
thousands of welds was done over IR. There is no shortfall of USFD testing on IR.    
Indian Railway has a set system of testing of rails and welds by Ultrasonic Flaw 
Detection Testing (USFD) machines at prescribed frequencies. These testing are 
being monitored at field, division and Zonal Railways regularly. Timely testing by 
USFD is helping in early detection of vulnerable points and initiating necessary 
remedial measures to reduce the probability of accidents. Indian Railway has 
already adopted a web enabled Track Management System (TMS) to ensure 
monitoring of the track inspection and maintenance activities at various levels of 
Railway working. Alarm/Reminder is provided by TMS for any locations of rails & 
welds due for USFD testing based on which planning and deployment of USFD 
tests team is done efficiently.  
Track Management System is a tool for management and storage of data in 
standard format for subsequent data analysis. However, AI based Self Propelled 
Ultrasonic Rail Testing Car (SPURT) and Rail Cum Road Vehicle (RCRV) based 
USFD testing system for testing of Rails/welds is in the process of adoption on IR. 
USFD testing of rail/welds by SPURT/RCRV based system has minimum human 
interface. Through this system, suspect list of defects is generated through software 
tool of the vehicular USFD system after testing of a stretch. The suspect list 
containing km/chainage and GPS locations of suspected defect is verified at site 
with Trolley mounted USFD machines. IR is in process of procurement of 18 no. 
SPURT car are expected to be supplied in next 2-4 years. Also, Rail Cum Road 
Vehicle (RCRV) is under trial and decision of adoption on IR will be taken 
subsequently. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note from the observation of the audit that against the demand of 7339:28 
hours for Yard line maintenance, only 4667:56 maintenance block hours were granted by 
the Zonal Railways during 2017-2021. The Committee note from the submissions of the 
Ministry that the reasons for the shortfalls were due to the agencies not turning up to 
execute the work in time, less number of blocks granted against those demanded and non-
availability of materials, etc. The Committee also note from the submissions of the Ministry 
that there is a concept of corridor block which is inbuilt in the working time table issued by 
Zonal Railways. Further, Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs) from the Engg. & Traffic Dte. have 
been issued to Railways for advance planning of traffic blocks for maintenance of assets. 
Recently, system of Rolling Block Plan (RBP) has been introduced at Divisional level for 

39 
 
advance two week block planning for maintenance of assets by different departments 
working in same block to avail maximum benefits of traffic blocks, which is reviewed on 
weekly basis by the Divisions and Zonal Railways. Besides, works are executed by the 
outsourcing agency based on detailed planning for supply of men and machinery etc 
required for the work. Regular monitoring of progress is being done by Railway officials 
linked with the execution of works. Action in terms of conditions of contract is taken in case 
of delay attributable to the contractor. The Committee feel that there is a yawning difference 
in the demand hours and supply hours for maintenance and there is a need to bridge the 
gap. The Committee are of the view that there is a need to increase absolute block hours 
granted. The Committee are also of the view that stricter control needs to be exercised over 
the outsourced agencies involved in this work and the conditions of contract should be 
reworked to ensure complete compliance. The Committee desire that the Ministry furnish a 
compliance report to them in the matter. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Maintenance of Yard Lines is one of area where due attention and resource 
allocation is increasing. To increase the block availability, Rolling Block Programme 
is now being prepared for 26-weeks in advance in place of 2 weeks. To incorporate 
‘Rolling Block Programme’ in system of working permanently, new clause 15.02(c) 
has been added in Indian Railways (Open Lines) General Rules, 1976 vide Gazette 
Notification dated 29.11.2023 (Annexure-II). 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Steps taken by MoR to exercise stricter control over outsourced agencies in 
execution of the maintenance contract including action taken in case of any lapses 
on their part may be furnished. 
Final Reply of Ministry 
In addition to the previously submitted Action Taken Note above, the updated 
comments are as under: 
 
To improve and regular monitoring of track in all yard lines, regular measurement of 
track parameter has been introduced vide ACS-3 of IRPWM-2024, the same is 
reproduced below: 
 
Sl. No. Type of Inspection Schedule of Inspection 
2 Measurement of 
track parameters of 
loop lines and yard 
lines 
Track parameters (gauge, cross level, twist & versine) 
of all loop lines and yard lines excl.main lines (which 
are measured by ITMS/TRC), shall be measured by 
JE/SSE/P.Way (Sectional) by manual or mechanized 
means: 
(a) Passenger running loop lines including cross 
overs: Once in 3 months 
(b) All other running and non-running lines including 
cross overs: Once in 6 months 
 

40 
 
Note: Records of measurement will be kept in the form 
of registers, which will be countersigned by 
SSE/P.Way (In-charge) and ADEN during their 
Foot/Push Trolley inspections. 
 
 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132nd Report 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note from audit observation the discrepancies in the ratio of route kilometer 
with average number of inspections in various zonal railways. Notably, in South East 
Central Railway, higher officials did not carry out any inspection, though the zone has 2348 
route km which constitutes around 4 per cent of total of Indian Railways’ Broad Gauge line. 
No standard criterion was set for number of inspections to be conducted by higher 
authorities and hence, there is no accountability for the meagre number of inspections 
undertaken. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that detailed schedule 
of inspection of field officials (JE/SSE/ADEN) has been stipulated in IRPWM and in 
addition, the guidelines for inspection by Divisional officers have been issued by Railway 
Board. Yet, no specific inspection schedule is prescribed for higher ranking officers at the 
Headquarters. However, as stated by the Ministry, Headquarter level officers carry out the 
technical inspections suo motu and also during the safety drives launched from time to time, 
which are scrutinized on completion of such safety drives. The Committee opine thata 
target based inspection module needs to be worked out not only for the junior and middle 
level officers but also for high level authorities who would not only play a monitoring role for 
inspections but also conduct real time inspection at given time intervals which should be on 
a monthly basis in place of annual inspection. The Committee also observe that inspection 
notes were not uploaded in the Track Management System(TMS) portal and compliance to 
the notes was not available in many cases during field visits to the Senior Section Engineer 
office. Thus, the in-built monitoring mechanism including the TMS portal was not found to 
be properly operational. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Ministry need to 
fine-tune the system to the targeted standards so as to make the inspection system 
meaningful and beneficial. The Committee note that in accordance with the functions laid 
down in the Railway Act, 1989, a thorough inspection is carried out by the Commission of 
Railway Safety only when commissioning is done for a new asset which maybe a new line, 
or doubling a line, or a gauge conversion project, before opening any new asset. The 
Committee also opine that the office of Commission of Railway Safety which operates 
under the control of the Ministry of Civil Aviation may be directly involved in the inspection 
process as an independent and dispassionate agency and the Commissioner of Railway 
Safety should carry out safety audit in five Railway divisions every year and submit a 
structured safety audit report on which the Indian Railways (Railway Board) may record 
their inputs and action taken. The Committee desire that the proposal be examined and 
related details furnished at the earliest. 

41 
 
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Regular field inspection of higher officers is carried out especially in extreme 
weather conditions also. Safety department at divisional/Zonal and Board level 
monitors the inspections. To carry out compliances of observations during 
inspections of higher officials, railway has launched a dedicated online module 
where inspecting officer can record his/her observations of inspection, mark them to 
concerned officials and take compliances of observations. Close monitoring of 
inspection of higher officers is being done by this portal. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. It may be clarified how the regular inspection by Higher Officials at periodic 
intervals is ensured so that No stretch is left uninspected for longer periods of time?  
2. It may be clarified whether the issues of ‘compliance to the inspection notes not 
being uploaded’ and ‘closure of inspection notes was not found filled’ in the Track 
Management System (TMS) have been resolved? If not, what are the steps being 
taken/envisaged towards resolution of the same? 
Final Reply of Ministry 
In every department, scheduled inspection of higher officials has been laid down, 
which are done by concerned officers religiously. For example, every SrDEN has to 
inspect his/her complete section once in 3 months by foot plate or brake-van fast 
train. Issue of compliance of inspection notes has been resolved. Consolidated 
position is being monitored through Track Management System (TMS). 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
[For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I] 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee note from the audit observation that 794 officials dealing with track 
maintenance activities were not given training at various levels be it the induction level or 
refresher course level and there were also shortfalls in conducting training at supervisory 
level such as SSE/JE/P. Way in many Zonal Railways. The reasons for the shortfall in 
imparting training at various levels were mainly attributed to Covid-19 situation, staff not 
being spared due to special work and other assignments, non-receipt of training schedule in 
the units and nonupdating of information of employees in Track Management System 
(TMS) etc. From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that all safety category 
railway employees are to be imparted structured training at various stages of their career 
which includes, Simulatorbased training imparted for improving the driving skills and 
reaction time of Loco Pilots; Training module formulated for running staff on Fire Fighting 
and use of fire extinguishers; Regular counseling of running staff etc. and that It has been 
the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources. From the information 

42 
 
furnished, the Committee note that during 2022-23, all employees have not been given 
different types of training viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized. The Committee 
take a grim view of the position and feel that there have been gaps in providing training at 
different levels of officers/staff and are of the view that the Ministry needs to develop a 
mechanism to ensure that there are no shortfalls in the training programmes at any point of 
time and the limitations attributed as reasons for the shortfall are addressed systematically. 
The Committee are of the view that officials need to be encouraged to undergo 
internationally recognized certification courses to develop proficiency. The Ministry should 
also consider examining the feasibility of collaborating with IITs and IIMs to develop 
specialized courses aimed at offering advanced technical and management training to 
officers. The Committee also recommend that an independent supervisory body be 
constituted to formulate and monitor training schedules and prepare a monthly report 
containing details of implementation of training programmes and also to ensure that no 
untrained hand is deployed for duty for any reason.  
Action taken by Ministry 
With reference to recommendation no. 2.13 & 2.14 (Rec. No. 2) of C&AG’s Report 
No. 22 of 2022, reply has already been provided (copy enclosed). Also, Board’s 
letter dt. 19.06.23 was issued to All Indian Railways to strictly ensure that training is 
imparted to Railway employees on time. These instructions have further been 
reiterated, vide Board’s letter dated 28.05.2024 and railways have been advised to 
strictly ensure on-time training of Railway Personnel of all the departments of IR. 
Indian Railways has an extensive training mechanism to cater to training needs of 
various categories of railway employees. Trainings are imparted to skill/up-skill 
domain, functional and behavioral competencies of employees through physical 
trainings at various railway training centres across the country as well as hybrid and 
online training interventions. Railway personnel undergo Initial, Refresher, 
Promotional as well as Specialized training courses at appropriate stages of their 
career 
During the year 2023-24, around 5,19,566 railway employees were imparted Initial, 
Refresher, Promotional and Specialized training. MoR also deputes railway 
personnel for undergoing courses at foreign Universities. Indian Railways also have 
collaborations with various reputed domestic & international academies to 
develop/deliver specialized knowledge contents for physical trainings as well as 
online trainings as per functional needs of IR. All the training activities are 
monitored at various levels through regular meetings, MCDOs and online data 
softwares. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. What are the specific outcomes of the monitoring through meetings and 
MCDOs?  
2. What specific steps are being taken /envisaged to systematically reduce shortfall 
in trainings?  

43 
 
3. What are the specific value additions achieved through the collaborations with 
the reputed Domestic and International academies for meeting Training needs of 
MOR? 
Final Reply of Ministry 
1. Indian Railways (IR), with a workforce of around 1.25 million dedicated 
employees, is committed towards providing safe and efficient rail services 
nationwide. To maintain a skilled workforce, IR has developed a robust and 
structured training framework that addresses the diverse needs of employees 
across all departments. Personnel receive Initial, Refresher, Promotional, and 
Specialized training at relevant stages of their careers. 
2. IR operates an extensive network of training centers, where more than 500,000 
personnel participate in various programs annually, as reflected in the annual 
training statistics below: 
Year 2024-2025 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-19* 2019-18 
No. of railway 
staff imparted 
training 
5,72,819 5,19,566 5,00,833 4,74,236 3,79,668 4,23,990 
*covid period 
3. Zonal Railways and training institutes have been instructed to deliver training 
strictly as per the prescribed schedules and are regularly monitored using review 
meetings, MCDOs, and digital platforms. The Safety Department also conducts 
periodic reviews to ensure compliance. Besides, Zonal Railways are also 
periodically pursued through reminder letters, emphasizing timely and effective 
delivery of training. Training programs are aligned with operational needs  
3.1 Any training gaps identified during these review meetings are promptly 
addressed in coordination with the concerned Railway units through appropriate 
remedial measures. Due to consistent monitoring via meetings and MCDOs, a 
notable improvement was achieved in 2024–25, with a 10% increase in the 
number of personnel trained compared to 2023–24. 
4. The Ministry of Railways (MoR) continues to implement various initiatives aimed 
at strengthening employee competencies through both domestic and 
international partnerships. To further enhance training quality, IR has partnered 
with reputed institutions—both in India and abroad—to develop and deliver 
specialized modules through classroom-based and online formats. Additionally, 

44 
 
MoR facilitates the deputation of select personnel to pursue advanced training 
courses at leading foreign universities. 
4.1 International Training Collaboration – Japan: 
In terms of Memorandum of Co-operation signed with Japan, a Study 
Programme in Japan in the field of High-Speed Rail Technology and related 
subjects is offered by the Japanese universities to Indian Railway officers with 
MEXT scholarship and provides 20 slots per academic year for Indian Railway 
officers. Details of officers deputed for the same are as follows; 
Year 
No. of 
Officers 
opted 
No. of 
Officers 
selected 
No. of 
Officers 
deputed 
Remarks 
2016 30 9 8 
1 officer returned after 2 
weeks course on 
personal ground 
2017 15 6 5 1 officer could not 
proceed for the course 
2018 30 12 12 X 
2019 42 12 12 X 
2020 32 18 18 X 
2021 21 13 11 
 Nomination of 1 
officer withdrawn 
by Univ. 
 1 officer withdrew 
on personal 
ground 
2022 39 20 16 4 officers withdrew on 
personal ground 
2023 33 20 17 3 officers withdrew on 
personal ground 
2024 45 19 
 7 officers selected for April session 
deputed. 
 12 officers are to be deputed in 
October 2024. 
2025 Nomination process is going on. 
4.2 Management Development Programme (MDP): 

45 
 
The Management Development Programs (MDP), which is a mandatory course for 
Senior Scale railways officers contains one-week module by IIM-A, out of total 4 
weeks course duration. 
4.3 Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya (GSV): 
GSV, established under the aegis of the Ministry of Railways, is in its second 
academic year (2024–25). The university is offering 02 M.Tech courses, 03 MBA 
courses & 01 Ph.D courses for Executives/Working professionals including from 
MoR besides other B.Tech/M.Tech/MBA courses for regular students. 
5. In response to recommendations 2.13 and 2.14 (Rec. No. 2) of the C&AG’s 
Report No. 22 of 2022, IR has undertaken various initiatives to enhance training 
practices. A detailed training module for non-gazetted staff of the civil 
engineering department—covering JE/SSE (P. Way), track maintainers, and 
welders—was issued via Board’s letter no. (MPP)/2019/3/46 dated 28.10.2019 
(RBE No. 183/2019), approved by the concerned Board Members. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note from the audit observation that the factors causing maximum 
derailments (395) were in ‘Engineering Department’ followed by ‘Operating Department’ 
(173). Out of several factors attributed, the major factor responsible for derailment related to 
‘maintenance of track’ (167 cases), followed by ‘deviation of track parameters beyond 
permissible limits’ (149 cases) and ‘bad driving/over speeding’ (144 cases). From the 
submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that measures to reduce derailments have 
been taken like track renewal and maintenance; track upgradation consisting of 60kg, 90 
Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails; Pre-stressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC); Welded Rails 
on most of BG tracks wherein short-welded rails of 39m length and single rails have been 
converted into long welded rails; reduction in population of Alumino-Thermit ( AT ) welds 
gradually by using longer rail panels with one/two/three Flash Butt weld (FB) from rail 
manufacturing plant; Track Recording wherein Supercheck of track parameters is done 
through regular runs of Track Recording Cars (TRC) and regular bridge inspection. 
Besides, Measures have been taken to avoid collisions through introduction of Advanced 
Signaling System, Panel Interlocking/Route Relay Interlocking/Electronic Interlocking 
(PI/RRI/EI) along with Multiple Aspect Colour Light Signals, Block Proving Axle Counter 
(BPAC) to ensure complete arrival of train without manual intervention before granting line 
clear to the next train; Development of India’s own state-of-the-art electronic system 
Automatic Train Protection (ATP) System named KAVACH (Train Collision Avoidance 
System) by RDSO, which activates the train braking system automatically if the Loco Pilot 
fails to control the train as per the speed restrictions. However, the system to be an 
effective safety measure, all need to have the KAVACH system. The Committee, therefore, 

46 
 
recommend that a time bound programme for installation of KAVACH system in all 
divisions/Routes should be taken up by the Ministry. The Committee note from the report of 
the CCRS on the accident that not adhering to the standard practices stipulated in the 
Manuals and Work Instructions were not followed during the process of signal modification 
work, owing to which the accident occurred. The Committee are also of the view that 
training programmes of all levels of officers/staff should be made more vigorous and result 
oriented. The Committee while taking note of the measures taken to prevent 
derailments/accidents/collisions nevertheless also feel concerned to observe that despite 
these measures, the system is still not capable of putting a full stop to such mishaps and 
loss of lives and property due to accidents continue to happen. 2024-BC-PAC-
XVII/132ndReport I/3106083/2024 Issues like track maintenance, track upgradation and 
Retro-reflective sigma (∑) boards and electronic interlocking system should be accorded 
greater priority and should cover all routes/sectors at the earliest and a target should be 
fixed to achieve a complete makeover towards a zero error and a flawless and accident free 
operation. The Committee recommend that the Indian Railways need to remodel the 
operational training programmes keeping in view the five barriers/layers of defense (Swiss 
Cheese Slices’ or ‘defense barriers) against accidents/derailments and use this Model as a 
reference for strengthening the above barriers to avoid occurrence of similar incidents. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the implementation status of this Model and the 
benefits accruing from it.  
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
A. Training  
 
Indian Railways has an extensive training mechanism to cater training needs of 
various categories of railway employees. All safety category railway employees are 
given structured training at various stages of their career, which includes initial, 
promotional, refresher and specialized training. 
 
MoR deputes railway personnel for undergoing courses at reputed Universities 
as well as permits them to avail various online courses offered by international 
bodies. Indian Railways also have collaborations with various reputed domestic & 
international academies to develop/deliver specialized knowledge contents for 
physical trainings as well as online trainings as per functional needs of IR.   
 
Trainings are imparted to skill/up-skill domain, functional and behavioral 
competencies of employees through physical trainings at various railway training 
centres across the country as well as hybrid and online training interventions.  
  

47 
 
All newly recruited maintainers of Indian Railways undergo a detailed training 
programme of one to one and half years duration. This initial training programme 
consists on-job training (field training) component as well as classroom training in 
the Zonal training schools.   
 
Indian Railways is making concerted efforts to provide technological support & 
training to the Loco-pilots. The Loco-Pilots are provided with Vigilance Control 
Device (VCD) to improve alertness and Fog Safe Device to assist them to locate 
Signals during the fog when visibility is poor. 
 
Simulator- based training is being imparted for improving the driving skills and 
reaction time of Loco Pilots.   
 
There is regular counseling of running staff and interaction with their families.   
 
Training module has been formulated for frontline staff on Fire Fighting & use of 
fire extinguishers.   
 
Yoga and Meditation lessons have been introduced in training centers with an 
aim to help railway men in coping with the stress involved with their jobs.   
 
It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources. 
During the year 2023-24, around 5,19,566 Railway employees were given 
different types of training viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.   
 
All the training activities are monitored at various levels through regular 
meetings, periodical reports and online data monitoring system. 
 
B. Track Improvement Works 
 
Track renewal and maintenance works, being directly related to safe train operation, 
are given the top most priority at each level. Retro-reflective sigma boards are 
provided on the mast which is located two OHE masts prior to the signals in 
electrified territories to warn the crew about the signal ahead when visibility is low 
due to foggy weather. 
 
Following progress has been achieved in financial year 2023-24 for important track 
related works: 
 
1. Rail renewal – 6051 Track Kilometers  
2. Deep screening- 10363 Tkm  

48 
 
3. 60 kg rail- More than 70% (cumulatively)  
4. Insertion of thick web switches- 5982 Nos.  
5. Introduction of new track machines to enhance mechanized track 
maintenance- 154 Nos 
 
Other than these, following policy measures have been taken to strengthen and 
speed up the system of track renewal and maintenance in Indian Railways: 
 
1. General Managers have been delegated powers to sanction works up to Rs. 
50 Cr. for track renewal works which was earlier Rs. 2.5 Cr. only. Zonal Railways 
now can sanction most of the identified works related to track safety themselves. 
  
2. To reduce fish plated joints, a provision has been made in Indian Railways 
Permanent Way Manual in March 2024 to provide Long Welded Rail on curve up 
to 6.5° in temperature zone- I & II and up to 6° in temperature zone- III & IV. 
 
3. To ensure planned work, concept of Rolling Block Program has been 
introduced in Indian Railways. Increased predictability of traffic blocks has 
resulted in better quality of track works and quantum of works has also gone up. 
 
C. Signalling Improvement Works 
KAVACH system has so far been deployed on 1465 Route Kms of SCR. Subsequent 
to deployment in South Central Railway, High density routes have been taken up for 
deployment of KAVACH and presently work is in progress on two HDN routes Delhi 
Mumbai and Delhi Howrah on approx. 3,000 route Km, out of which over 1300 Route 
Kms, the track side work is near completion. All possible efforts are being taken for 
the rapid deployment of the KAVACH system on the IR network. 
 
Indian Railway has been continuously upgrading its signaling system with 
changeover from Mechanical to Electromechanical and to Electronic Interlocking 
signaling system with centralized operation of points and Signals to enhance safety 
in train operations. High priority is accorded to install and commission new Electronic 
Interlocking systems for better reliability and safety. During last 2 years itself, about 
1000 Electronic Interlocking systems have been installed on IR network. 
 
In the aftermath of Balasore incidence, several measures have been taken to 
strengthen the existing maintenance practices and safety protocols. Drives have 
been launched to ensure availability of completion documents at all installations and 
checking & verification of writing work details of signaling gears at site. Policy for 
commissioning of new works and alteration to existing signaling installations has 
been issued. In case of minor day-to-day works of maintenance, repair & 

49 
 
replacement activities, instructions have been issued for thorough testing of gears 
before resuming train operations. 
 
Besides, the instructions have been issued to Zones/IRISET that more emphasis 
needs to be given on rigorous practical training in concerned modules of curriculum, 
for carrying out signalling modifications/ alterations. Special modules on this subject 
have also been included in training curriculum. In last four months, 04 such courses 
have been conducted and so far 243 trainees have been trained through these 
courses, which also include following sessions: 
 
(i) Practical sessions are introduced for modification of wiring for hands on 
experience for trainees.  
(ii) The protocol of disconnection and reconnection memos is practised in each 
laboratory session. 
(iii) The guidelines of Railway Board and the safety practices in installation, testing 
and maintenance of Signalling assets is emphasized in the instruction (theory) 
component of training. Further, such courses are being conducted every 
month at Central Training Institute at Secunderabad. 
It would be pertinent to mention that as a result of the various safety measures taken 
over the years, the number of consequential train accidents have come down from 
473 in year 2000-01 to 40 in year 2023-24. Likewise, the number of accidents per 
million train kms (AMTKs), an index of safety performance of railway system, has 
reduced from 0.65 to 0.03 respectively during the same period. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. Action plan implemented/envisaged by MOR to install KAVACH across all 
division/ZR with timelines may be furnished.  
2. It may be clarified whether the Swiss Cheese model has been incorporated in 
operational training programmes.. If yes, details may be furnished.  
Final Reply of Ministry 
Safety is accorded highest priority on Indian Railways. Over the years, various 
measures have been taken by Indian Railways which include track improvement 
works, signalling improvement works, training of railway staff, etc. in order to 
enhance safety in train operations.  
A. Track Improvement Works  
 
Track renewal and maintenance works, being directly related to safe train operation, 
are given the top most priority at each level.  
Following progress has been achieved in financial year 2024-25 for important track 
related works:  
 
1. Complete Track Renewal – 6851 Tkm  

50 
 
2. Deep screening – 15433 Tkm  
3. 60 kg rail – More than 75% (cumulatively)  
4. Insertion of Thick Web Switches – 7161 Nos.  
5. Introduction of new track machines to enhance mechanized track maintenance – 
55 Nos.  
 
Other than these, following policy measures have been taken to strengthen and 
speed up the system of track renewal and maintenance in Indian Railways.  
 
i. General Managers have been delegated powers to sanction works up to Rs. 
50 Cr. for track renewal work which was earlier Rs. 2.5 Cr. only. Zonal 
Railways now can sanction most of the identified works related to track safety 
themselves.  
ii. To reduce fish plated joints, a provision has been made in Indian Railways 
Permanent Way Manual in March 2024 to provide Long Welded Rail on curve 
up to 6.5° in temperature zone -I & II and up to 6º in temperature zone-III & IV.  
iii. To ensure planned work, concept of Rolling Block Program has been 
introduced in Indian Railways. Increased predictability of traffic blocks has 
resulted in better quality of track works and quantum of works has also gone 
up.  
iv. Maintenance track parameters for Passenger Loop Line & Goods Loop Lines 
have been upgraded.  
v. 60 kg new rail has been adopted for new laying of Passenger Running Loop 
Line and renewal of Passenger Running Loop Line. 
vi. During 2024-25, total 1704 WCMS crossing have been laid to continue LWR 
through yards, which are reducing number of joints.  
vii. Indian Railways have adopted world class R260 grade rails and Advanced 
USFD Testing of Rail/Welds by Phased array technology. Indian Railways 
have also adopted global technologies as Weldable CMS Crossing, Thick 
Web Switch & Thick Web Switch Expansion Joints for improving safety and 
efficiency.  
 
B. Signalling Improvement Works  
 
(1) Automatic Train Protection System: Kavach  
 
A) Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) 
system. Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety 
certification of highest order (SIL-4).  
 

51 
 
Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of train within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps 
the trains to run safely during inclement weather. It consists of the following 
systems/sub systems:  
 
(a) Station Kavach: An electronic equipment which receives the information 
from Loco Kavach & existing signaling system and guides the Loco 
Kavach.  
(b) RFID tags: They are installed on the tracks every Kilometer and at every 
signal. These are read by Loco Kavach to determine the location and 
direction of the train.  
(c) Communication Backbone: Communication towers are erected every few 
kilometers along the track and are connected through optical fiber cables 
to exchange information continuously between Loco & Station Kavach 
equipment.  
(d) Loco Kavach: An equipment to read RFID tags on the track for getting the 
location and determining the speed of the loco. It is integrated with the 
braking system, communicates with the station Kavach equipment and 
applies automatic braking in case the driver fails to do so. Taking input 
from all these systems/subsystems, Kavach guides the loco pilot to stay 
within the permissible speed limits.  
 
B) The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. 
Based on the experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the 
system by Independent Safety Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 
2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver 3.2.  
C) Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020.  
D) Deployment of Kavach involves installation of Station Kavach at each and 
every station/block section; installation of RFID tags throughout the track 
length; installation of towers throughout the section and laying of Optical Fiber 
Cable along the entire track length and provision of installation of Loco 
Kavach on each and every locomotive running on Indian Railways.  
E) Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm and 162 
locomotives on South Central Railway, lots of experience was gained. Using 
that, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification version 
4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. This is a significant milestone in 
safety for Indian Railways.  
F) Kavach version 4.0 covers major features required for the diverse railway 
network, major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location 
Accuracy, Improved Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yard, Station to 
Station Kavach interface on OFC and Direct Interface to existing Electronic 

52 
 
Interlocking System. With these improvements, Kavach Ver. 4.0 is planned for 
large scale deployment over Indian Railways.  
G) Subsequent to deployment in South Central Railway, High density routes 
have been taken up for deployment of Kavach and presently work is in 
progress on two HDN routes, Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah (approx. 3,000 
RKm). Progress of key items comprising Kavach system on Indian Railways 
upto May 2025 is as under:-  
 
i. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable: 5806 RKm  
ii. Installation of Telecom Towers: 540 Nos.  
iii. Provision of Kavach at Stations: 688 Nos. 
iv. Provision of equipment in Loco: 856 Locos  
v. Installation of Track side equipments: 3882 RKm  
 
H) Further, Kavach implementation is planned as under:  
 
a. Project for equipping 10,000 Locomotives has been finalized. 69 nos. of 
loco sheds have been prepared for equipping with Kavach.  
b. Bids for track side Works of Kavach for approximately 15000 RKm have 
been invited out of which 14454 RKm have been finalized. It covers all 
GQ, GD, HDN and Identified sections of Indian Railways.  
c. Currently, 3 OEMs are approved for supply of Kavach System. To 
increase capacity and scale of implementation, trials and approval of 
more OEMs are at different stages.  
 
Indian Railways is deploying Kavach on its network progressively. As brought out 
above, the deployment is complex and time consuming. All efforts are being taken 
for rapid deployment.  
 
2) Training Programme:  
 
Equipment courses, refresher courses and other training programme are carried 
out for Railway staff on a regular basis. Besides, instructions have been issued to 
Zones/IRISET that more emphasis needs to be given on rigorous practical training 
in concerned modules of curriculum, for carrying out signaling 
modifications/alterations. Special modules on this subject have also been included 
in training curriculum. In year 2024-2025, 21 such courses have been conducted 
and 1256 trainees have been trained through these (i) courses, which also include 
following sessions:-  
 

53 
 
(i) Practical sessions are introduced for modification of wiring for hands on 
experience for trainees.  
(ii) The protocol of disconnection and reconnection memos is practiced in each 
laboratory session.  
(iii) The guidelines of Railway Board and the safety practices in installation, testing 
and maintenance of Signalling assets is emphasized in the instruction (theory) 
component of training. Further, such courses are being conducted every month at 
Central Training Institute at Secunderabad.  
 
3) Electronic Interlocking Systems  
 
It is mentioned that Indian Railway has continuously upgraded its signalling system 
with changeover from Mechanical to Electromechanical and to Electronic 
Interlocking signalling system with centralized operation of points and signals to 
enhance safety in train operations. High priority is accorded to install and 
commission new Electronic Interlocking systems for better reliability and safety. 
During last 3 years (2022-2025) itself, about 1355 nos. of Electronic Interlocking 
systems have been installed on Indian Railway network.  
 
C. Training  
 
Indian Railways has a robust, efficient and cost-effective training infrastructure to 
meet the diverse training needs of its railway staff. Training is imparted across 
various domains to skill/upskill technical, functional, and behavioral competencies 
of employees through physical training at various railway training centers, as well 
as hybrid and online platforms. Structured training programs are conducted for all 
safety category employees at different career stages, including initial, promotional, 
refresher, and specialized training before deputing the staff/officer on the working 
post. 
 
 MoR deputes railway personnel for undergoing courses at reputed Universities as 
well as permits them to avail various online courses offered by international 
bodies. Indian Railways also have collaborations with various reputed domestic & 
international academies to develop/deliver specialized knowledge contents for 
physical trainings as well as online trainings as per functional needs of Indian 
Railways.  
 All newly recruited maintainers of Indian Railways undergo a detailed training 
programme of one to one and half year duration. Before posting in the working 
post this initial training programme consists on-job training (field training) 
component as well as classroom training in the Zonal training schools.  

54 
 
 The training modules for different categories of staff are being regularly updated 
to ensure continuous development and upgradation of skills as well as 
addressing the evolving needs of the railway system.  
 As safe train operation is the top most priority of Indian Railways, Kavach system 
is being proactively installed on the busy routes and special emphasis is being 
given to the training of safety category employees. Recently, a training module 
with course content for imparting training on 'KAVACH to running staff, Chief 
Loco Inspectors, Loco Pilots, Assistant Loco Pilots and Traffic Department have 
also been issued.  
 Indian Railways is making concerted efforts to provide technological support & 
training to the Loco-pilots. The Loco-Pilots are provided with Vigilance Control 
Device (VCD) to improve alertness and Fog Safe Device to assist them to locate 
Signals during the fog, when visibility is poor.  
 Simulator-based training is being imparted for improving the driving skills and 
reaction time of Loco Pilots. There is regular counseling of running staff and 
interaction with their families.  
 Training module has been formulated for frontline staff on Fire Fighting & use of 
fire extinguishers.  
 Yoga and Meditation lessons have been introduced in training centers with an 
aim to help railway men in coping with the stress involved with their jobs.  
 It has been the constant endeavor of Railways to develop Human Resources. 
During the year 2024-25, around 5,72,819 railway employees were given different 
types of training viz., initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.  
 All the training activities are monitored at various levels through regular meetings, 
periodical reports and online data monitoring system.  
 Multi layered checking of signaling designs and multilayered testing of signaling 
installation have been embedded in the codal provisions for Railway Signaling 
installation and the same are followed before any new signaling installed is 
brought to use. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
[For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I] 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 12 
From the observation of the audit the Committee note that there were delays in different 
stages of accident inquiries and that the inquiry reports were not submitted to the accepting 
authority within the time schedule prescribed by Railway Board in 63 per cent cases and 
also that delays in submission of the inquiry report had a cascading effect on acceptance of 
the reports by the accepting authority. The Committee also note from audit observation that 
in 49 percent cases, there was delay in acceptance of the reports by the authorities 
concerned. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that as per complexity 

55 
 
of an accident case, multiple witnesses are required to be examined, detailed investigation 
reports e.g. Metallurgical, Chemical test reports from Laboratories, RDSO, Forensic 
Examination report from state agencies and other external agencies are required by the 
Inquiry Committee to arrive at the ‘root cause’ of the accident for taking corrective and 
preventive actions. The Committee also took note of the fact that in February 2006, Railway 
Board had prescribed the timeline of D+10 days for Departmental Inquiry in Consequential 
Accidents which was revised to D+30 days in view of the complexities in December 2019 
and further that the progress of departmental inquiries for their early finalization is 
monitored at the highest level at Zonal Railway Headquarters as well as at Railway Board. 
The Committee observe that delays in stages of accident inquiries and non submission of 
inquiry reports to the accepting authority within the time schedule prescribed by Railway 
Board have been playing havoc with the lives and property and were of the view that 
unwavering commitment to the timeline for inquiries and submission of report to the 
accepting authority must be ensured. The Committee also recommend that effective steps 
should be taken to prevent any delay in acceptance of the reports by the authority 
concerned within a reasonable timeframe and punitive mechanism should be put in place to 
discourage avoidable delays in any respect. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
All the consequential train accidents (including derailments) are inquired into by a 
committee of Railway officers. The committee is required to submit its Inquiry Report 
within D+30 days. Continuous efforts are being made to ensure that accident 
inquiries are being completed within the stipulated time frame. Towards this direction, 
Zonal Railways are counseled for timely completion and submission of train 
accidents inquiry reports. All the accident related data are entered in SIMS module 
by the concerned Railway, which is monitored on regular basis by Safety Directorate 
of Railway Board. In case, delay is noticed in the finalization/acceptance of an 
inquiry, necessary intervention is immediately made with the concerned Railway. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
1. What are the steps being taken to discourage avoidable delays in any/all aspects?  
2. Please elaborate on the point- ‘In case, delay is noticed in the 
finalization/acceptance of an inquiry, necessary intervention is immediately made 
with the concerned Railway’.” 
Final Reply of Ministry 
Indian Railways is having a well laid down procedure for conducting Inquiries. A very 
stiff deadline of 30 days for completion of Departmental Inquiries has been fixed by 
Railway Board. The accidents inquiries in all unusual cases is conducted in a 
professional manner with lots of technical inputs, viz. Metallurgical/Chemical test 
reports from laboratories, Forensic reports from State agencies and due deliberations 
with RDSO to reach at proper conclusion. This obviously increases the inquiry 
duration.  

56 
 
In spite of above limitations, as per data of last three years, i.e., 2022-23, 2023-24 
and 2024 25, Departmental inquiries have been completed in 100% cases, i.e., 105 
cases and out of these inquiries, 71 cases (approx. 70% cases) had been completed 
by Railways within the time frame. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132nd Report 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee note from audit observation that there has been an assured annual funding 
of Rs.15000 crore out of the ‘Gross Budgetary Support. However, an annual amount of 
Rs.5000 crore (25 per cent) amounting to total contribution of Rs 20,000 from 2017-18 to 
2020-21 per year to this fund designed to be met from Railways internal resources had 
been falling short of target to the tune of Rs. 15775 crore constituting 78.88 % during the 
years 2017-18 to 2020-21. The Committee also note from audit observation that the 
physical as well as financial targets in respect of track renewals need to be enhanced as 
per the annual requirement for track renewals for safety. From the submission of the 
Ministry the Committee note that during this period, Railways’ internal resource generation 
was adversely affected following Covid Pandemic which led to passenger trains completely 
halting and freight trains running with only essential commodities. Further, despite the 
pandemic and other recessionary conditions, IR provided funds for incurring gross 
expenditure of Rs.1.08 lakh crore on RRSK works from 2017-18 till 2021-22. Besides, with 
the improvement in the net revenue position on account of higher incremental loading and 
passenger revenues along with astute expenditure management, MoR is able to 
supplement RRSK from 2022-23. The Committee also note from Ministry’s submission that 
in 2022-23, the Government has extended the currency of RRSK for another period of five 
years w.e.f. 2022-23 with total Gross Budgetary Support of Rs.45000 crore. Against 
Revised Estimate 2022-23 provision of Rs.1000 crore to RRSK from internal resources, IR 
has contributed Rs.1797 crore considering requirement of funds. In addition, in 2023-24, 
Rs.1000 crore from internal generation of resources have been budgeted. Regarding 
fulfillment of target for renewal of tracks, the Committee note from submission of the 
Ministry that due to assured funding under RRSK, the Budget allocation and expenditure 
over Indian Railway network for track renewal works has almost doubled from 2017-18 to 
2023-24 and there has been no deficit of funds for RRSK works, which have progressed as 
per their targets. The Committee feel that generation of internal resources has seen an 
aberrant trend and has been falling short of the target and the resultant short deployment of 
funds by Railways from internal resources to the tune of Rs. 15,775 crore (78.88 per cent) 
out of the total share of Rs. 20,000 crore had defeated the primary objective of creation of 
RRSK to support absolute safety in Railways. The Committee are of the view that funding to 
and expenditure from RRSK for safety purposes should be ensured at highest level in order 
to accord paramount importance to safety. The Committee are also of the view that the 
Ministry need to set up a ‘Financial Task Force’ to trace the reasons causing decline in the 
generation of internal resources and find ways to develop the resources to ensure funding 

57 
 
to the RRSK and its use for critical safety works. The Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the latest status of the same.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
During Covid period, Railways’ ‘Net Revenue’ was negative due to the reasons the 
Hon’ble Committee has already mentioned in the recommendations. In the post 
Covid period, Railways have shown an impressive recovery and generated an 
internal resource of Rs. 3,217.38 cr. in 2022-23 to supplement Capex. Out of which, 
Rs.1517.38 cr. were appropriated to RRSK against “nil” provision made in RE 2022-
23. In 2023-24 also, Railways generated an internal resource of Rs.4059.56 cr. and 
from this, an amount, Rs.1759.56 cr. (provisional) has been appropriated to RRSK 
vis-à-vis the estimate of Rs.1000 cr. in RE 2023-24.  
Safety has been accorded highest priority in Indian Railways. Financing of safety 
works from source RRSK will help Railways in achievement of the "Mission Zero 
Accidents". From 2017-18 to 2021-22 expenditure towards RRSK works including 
EBR(S) was Rs 1,08,742.57 cr. It is pertinent to mention that apart from RRSK, 
expenditure on safety related works is also being funded from DRF, RSF and GBS 
(Capital) under various Plan heads i.e Bridge works, Signal and Telecom works, 
Track Renewals etc. With continuous and assured funding from GBS, safety works 
have been prioritized and adequate funding to works has ensured that safety works 
are carried out as per priority.  
Railways are making continuous efforts to improve and generate enough Net 
Revenue to supplement Capex. Towards this end, Railways are taking various steps 
like induction of more AC travel coaches, introduction of state of art Vande Bharat 
Trains, Tejas trains etc. as per popular demand of passengers. Railway stations are 
being developed to generate revenue from non-fare revenue sources. In the medium 
and long run, various policy initiatives have been/are being undertaken to diversify 
freight basket, to achieve a loading of 3000 MT by the year 2030 and substantially 
regain Railways’ market share in freight. For this, Indian Railway has undertaken a 
major drive to augment the capacity of the system to carry more cargo and to 
modernize passenger services by way of spending Capex. By virtue of these efforts, 
Railways achieved a total revenue of Rs. 2,40,176.96 cr. in 2022-23 against Rs. 
1,91,367.01 cr. achieved in 2021-22 i.e. Rs. 48,809.95 cr. higher over 2021-22. In 
2023-24 also, Railways’ total receipts grew by 6.6% to Rs. 2,56,093.42 cr. 
(provisional). 
Additionally, expenditure control measures are also being taken such as 
electrification of the entire Railway network so as to save on fuel, institution of strict 
economy and austerity measures, improved man-power planning, better asset 
utilization, inventory management, 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport I/3106084/2024 
optimizing fuel consumption etc. to reduce operating costs. As a result of the efforts 
to increase the revenue and control the expenditure, Railways’ Net Revenue 
increased to Rs. 2,517.38 cr. in 2022-23 against negative of Rs. 15,024.58 cr. in 

58 
 
2021-22. In 2023-24, Railways’ Net Revenue grew by 29.5% to Rs. 3,259.56 cr. 
(provisional) which was appropriated to Railways funds like RRSK and DF to 
supplement critical projects with safety related implications also.  
The Committee observed that the Ministry need to set up a ‘Financial Task Force’ to 
trace the reasons of causing decline in the generation of internal resources and find 
ways to develop the resources to ensure funding to the RRSK and its use for critical 
work. Here, it is pertinent to mention that Railways has generated surplus revenue 
during last two years as explained in above paras. The increase in generation of 
internal resources is due to the several proactive measures taken by Railways. IR is 
ensuring proper funding to the RRSK. It is reiterated again that safety is being 
accorded the highest priority in Indian Railways. All the funding made to RRSK is 
being deployed for critical safety works. Hence, concerns raised by Committee have 
already been addressed by IR as the earnings and surplus both have increased as 
compared to pre-Covid times.  
Vetting comments of Audit  
Has MoR envisaged ways to enhance the apportionment to RRSK from its internal 
resources to the extent of the committed amount?  
Final Reply of Ministry 
During Covid period, Railways’ ‘Net Revenue’ was negative due to the reasons the 
Hon’ble Committee has already mentioned in the recommendations. In the post 
Covid period, Railways have shown an impressive recovery and generated an 
internal resource of Rs. 4,059.68 cr. in 2023-24 out of which Rs. 1,760 cr. was 
appropriated to RRSK. In 2024-25(Prov.), Railway appropriated Rs. 2,118 cr. to 
RRSK against Rs. 1,341 cr. provisioned at RE 2024-25 stage. Railways have 
appropriated Rs. 1,517.38 cr. in 2022-23, Rs. 1,759.68 cr. in 2023-24 and Rs. 
2,117.84 cr. in 2024-25(Prov.) to RRSK which was nil in 2021-22. Therefore, in the 
post Covid period, appropriation to RRSK increased year-on-year.  
Safety has been accorded highest priority in Indian Railways. Financing of safety 
works from source RRSK will help Railways swift achievement of “Mission Zero 
Accidents”. From 2017 18 to 2021-22 expenditure towards RRSK works including 
EBR(S) was Rs 1,08,742.57 cr. Safety related works are also being funded from 
DRF and RSF, in addition to RRSK. It is pertinent to mention that expenditure on 
safety related works is also made through Capital (GBS) such as Bridge Works, 
Signal & Tele Works etc. With continuous and assured funding from GBS, safety 
works have been prioritized and adequate funding to works has ensured that safety 
works are carried out as per priority.  
Railways are making continuous efforts to improve and generate enough Net 
Revenue to supplement Capex. Towards this end, Railways are taking various steps 
like induction of more AC travel coaches, introduction of state of art Vande Bharat 
Trains, Tejas trains etc. as per popular demand of passengers. Railway stations are 
being developed to generate revenue from non-fare revenue sources. In the medium 

59 
 
and long term, various policy initiatives have been/are being undertaken to diversify 
freight basket, to achieve a loading of 3000 MT by the year 2030 and substantially 
regain Railways’ market share in freight. For this, Indian Railways has undertaken a 
major drive to augment the capacity of the system to carry more cargo and to 
modernize passenger services by way of spending Capex. By virtue of these efforts, 
Railways achieved a total revenue of Rs. 2,65,677.03 cr. in 2024-25 (Provisional) 
against Rs. 2,56,093.42 cr. achieved in 2023-24.  
Additionally, expenditure control measures are also being taken such as 
electrification of the entire Railway network so as to save on fuel, institution of strict 
economy and austerity measures, improved man-power planning, better asset 
utilization, inventory management, optimizing fuel consumption etc. to reduce 
operating costs. As a result of the efforts to increase the revenue and control the 
expenditure, Railways generated a Net Revenue of Rs. 2,659.23 cr. in 2024-
25(Provisional) despite interest payment of Rs. 1,358.69 cr. towards loan provided by 
Ministry of Finance due to Covid related resource gap in 2020-21. Net Revenue was 
appropriated to Railways funds like RRSK and DF to supplement critical projects with 
safety related implications also. 
The Committee observed that the Ministry need to set up a ‘Financial Task Force’ to 
trace the reasons of causing decline in the generation of internal resources and find 
ways to develop the resources to ensure funding to the RRSK and its use for critical 
work. Here, it is pertinent to mention that Railways has generated surplus revenue 
during last three years which as explained in above paras. The increase in 
generation of internal resources is due to the several proactive measures taken by 
Railways. IR is ensuring proper funding to the RRSK. It is reiterated again that safety 
is being accorded the highest priority in Indian Railways. All the funding made to 
RRSK is being used only for critical safety works. Hence, concerns raised by 
Committee has already been addressed by IR as the earnings and surplus both have 
increased as compared to pre-Covid times.  
Updated comments on Audit’s vetting remarks:  
Appropriation to RRSK was Rs. 1,517.38 cr. in 2022-23, Rs. 1,759.68 cr. in 2023-24 
and Rs. 2,117.84 cr. in 2024-25(Prov.). In 2021-22, no provision was made to RRSK 
due to negative Net Revenue. It is therefore clear that Railway are increasing 
appropriation to RRSK from internal resources year on year.  
Appropriation to RRSK from internal resources is dependent on Net Revenue 
generated by Railways. As also stated in the original reply, Railways are making 
continuous efforts to improve and generate enough Net Revenue to supplement 
Capex. The endeavor comprises of a combination of initiatives aimed at maximizing 
revenue receipts and minimizing controllable revenue expenses. Revenue enhancing 
measures, inter alia, include targeting progressively higher traffic throughput, 
expansion of commodity basket, effective and innovative marketing strategies to 
capture more and more traffic, creation of additional capacity and optimum utilization 

60 
 
of the existing rail infrastructure including rolling stock, enhancement in productivity 
and efficiency, improvement of passenger interface, periodic rationalization of fare 
and freight rates and focus on increasing the share of non-fare revenue sources in 
Railways’ total revenue. Expenditure control measures include strict economy and 
austerity measures, improved man-power planning, better asset utilization, inventory 
management, optimizing fuel consumption etc.  
Railways have set an ambitious loading target of 3000 MT by the year 2030 and 
substantially regain Railways’ market share in freight. For this, Indian Railways has 
undertaken a major drive to augment the capacity of the system to carry more cargo 
and to modernize passenger services by way of spending Capex. In the coming 
years, benefits from investment in capacity augmentation works will start accruing 
and the Net Revenue position will improve further to supplement Capex. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 14 
The Committee note from audit observation that out of the identified 44,407 coaches on 12 
ZRs, fire extinguishers have not been provided in 27,763 (62 per cent) coaches. The 
reasons attributed for non-provision of fire extinguishers include delays in tendering 
processes, failure of firm to supply the fire extinguishers, supply awaited/under progress 
etc. The Committee note from reply of the Ministry that measures like usage of fire retardant 
furnishing materials in coaches, provision of fire detection and suppression system in Power 
Cars and Pantry Cars and Fire and Smoke detection system in AC coaches, provision of 
fire extinguishers in all AC coaches and all newly manufactured Non-AC coaches and 
Display of statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread passenger information in all coaches have 
been taken and fire extinguishers have been installed in 39000 coaches. Besides, till now, 
Indian Railways has provided fire detection cum suppression system in nearly 1775 Power 
Cars and 800 Pantry Car Coaches. Fire detection cum alarm system has been provided in 
nearly 11,000 AC Coaches and fire extinguishers have been provided in nearly 34700 Non 
AC coaches and that it is planned to cover all coaches with fire safety system by March 
2024. The Committee while acknowledging the steps taken by the Ministry observe that 
there is still much left to be desired as regards installation of fire extinguishers. The 
Committee are of the view that the tendering/procurement process needs to be reworked to 
make sure that supply of fire extinguishers and their installation is not hindered in any way 
and the target of covering all coaches with fire safety system by March 2024 is met without 
fail. The Committee desire that a strict protocol for inspection, service and maintenance of 
fire extinguishers should be put in place. The Committee are of the considered view that a 
comprehensive Fire Risk Assessment of trains and stations should be conducted by an 
independent agency/Authority to enable the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive Fire 
Safety protocol for Indian Railways. The Committee also feel that Fire Safety Audits should 
be conducted at regular intervals for assessing the preparedness in Indian Railways against 
fire hazards.  

61 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Provision of Fire extinguishers in 100% coaches has been achieved by March 2024. 
The system of periodic checking and maintenance is in place. The instructions have 
again been reiterated to all Zonal Railways.  
Following systems are already in place for fire safety in passenger coaches: 
1. Provision of Fire and Smoke Detection Systems (FSDS) in air-conditioned 
(AC) coaches: -  
To improve fire safety in the running trains, Automatic fire and smoke detection 
system has been provided in all the AC coaches. Instructions are in place for all the 
production units to manufacture the AC coaches with the provision of FSDS in all AC 
coaches. 
2. Provision of Fire Extinguishers in all coaches:  
Dry chemical powder type/water mist type fire extinguishers are provided in all 
operational coaches viz. Air-conditioned coaches, Second class- cum-guard and 
luggage van and Pantry cars and Non-AC coaches. 
3. Provision of Fire Detection and Suppression Systems (FDSS) in Pantry Cars 
and Power Cars: - 
Pantry and Power Cars have been provided with Automatic Fire detection and 
Suppression systems. Instructions are in place for all the production units to 
manufacture the pantry and power cars with these provisions only. 
4. Provision of flameless cooking system in Pantry Cars: - 
Indian Railways have envisaged for flameless cooking in the operational pantries. 
The provision for completely flameless cooking, water-heating arrangements are 
available in all the LHB pantry cars. 
5. Aerosol-based fire suppression: - 
The Aerosol based fire suppression system has been provided in electrical cubicle of 
all Vande Bharat 
Train-set Rakes. Also, the newly manufactured coaches are turned out from PUs 
with the fitment of Aerosol Based fire suppression system. 
6. Emergency talk-back system in Vande Bharat Train-sets: -  
There is a provision of 4-Emergency Talk Back Units in every coach of Train-set. 
This facility can be used by passengers to communicate with Train Manager and 
Loco Pilot incase of exigencies /emergencies like fire incidence etc. 
7. Emergency Alarm System: -  
Passenger Emergency Alarm Buttons have been provided in the Vande Bharat 
Train-sets. Every coach is provided with 4 such push buttons for emergency usage, 
this will provide an indication to the Loco Pilot for taking suitable action. Similarly, 
alarm chains have been provided in all the coaches for usage to stop the train during 
emergencies like fire incidence etc. Regular inspections are done during 
maintenance schedules at Depots/Sheds etc. for ensuring the proper upkeep of 
various systems. Inter Zonal audits, Safety Drives, Inspections at different levels etc 

62 
 
are also done to check for the functionality of these systems in regular manner. 
Further, RCF has been advised to take necessary action for getting fire risk 
assessment done for trains and Northern Railway to do similar action for the stations. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
1. It may be clarified whether a strict protocol for inspection, service and 
maintenance of fire extinguishers has been put in place across all Zonal Railways. If 
not, action taken/proposed to be taken for the same may be furnished.  
2. How is MOR reworking the tendering/procurement process to ensure that the 
supply of fire extinguishers and their installation is not hindered in any way?  
3. It may be clarified whether MoR has conducted a comprehensive fire risk 
assessment of trains and stations through an independent agency. If yes, then how 
has MoR incorporated the findings of this assessment to formulate more efficient fire 
safety protocols for IR.  
4. It may be clarified whether Fire safety audits are conducted at regular intervals 
across all Zonal Railways in IR. 
Final Reply of Ministry 
Fire safety audit of electrical systems in coaches have been carried out at RCF. 
The compliance of the same is under process. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport 
 
[For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 30 of Chapter I] 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 15 
The Committee note from audit observation that except for North West Railway, the shortfall 
in elimination of manned level crossings in 15 ZRs ranged from 6 per cent (WR) to 61 per 
cent (ECR) and the main reasons cited for delay in completion of the work was delay in 
finalization of drawing, delay in preparation and sanction of detailed estimates, issues 
related to land acquisition and non-finalization of cost sharing issues etc. From the 
submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that all Unmanned Level Crossings 
(UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) routes on Indian Railways have been eliminated by 
31.01.2019. Elimination of Manned Level Crossing gates is under process, by provisioning 
for Road Under Bridges (RUB) and Road Over Bridges (ROB) at these locations, and the 
priority of elimination of level crossing (LC) is based on its impact on safety in train 
operations, mobility of trains, impact for road users and feasibility etc. The Committee 
further note from the reply of the Ministry that one of the major constraints faced in 
elimination of level crossings has been allocation of limited funds by state Governments for 
sanction and construction of ROBs/RUBs on cost sharing basis. The Committee note that a 
Comprehensive review of policy has been done by the Railways and the revised policy 
dated 02.03.2023 has been issued to remove bottlenecks in sanctioning and for faster 
execution of these works. As per revised policy, 100% cost of work of ROB/RUB at LCs 
shall be borne by Railways except LCs located on National Highways (NH) and where State 

63 
 
Govt /Road Owning Authority/ Local Authority want to take up the works at their own cost. 
Besides, the level crossings on MG & NG sections will be eliminated along with gauge 
conversion work of the section to BG. While appreciating the fact that all Unmanned Level 
Crossings (UMLCs) on BG routes on Indian Railways have been eliminated and the 
revision of earlier policy has been effected with a view to fastening of the process of 
elimination of remaining Manned Level Crossings, the Committee observe that there is still 
much space left for expediting and completing the left over Level Crossings in the 
categories of Broad Gauge, Metre-Gauge and Narrow Gauge. The Committee are of the 
view that a special cell may be created to see to it that all bottlenecks in completely 
eliminating level crossings are removed and all level crossings are done away with by the 
year 2025. The Committee also recommend that chances should not be taken with Metre-
Gauge and Narrow Gauge level crossings either and elimination of level crossings 
irrespective of category should be the priority over anything else particularly in view of the 
fact that availability of finances has not been a hindrance. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the latest developments and decisions taken by the Ministry in the matter.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
“As on 01.04.2024, there are 17,773 nos. of Level Crossings (LCs) on Indian 
Railways. As per the progress made during the last 03 years, average progress for 
LC elimination per year comes out to be 844. With the introduction of new policy for 
sanctioning of ROB/ RUB works, the sanctioning of works has increased. 1247 no. of 
works have been sanctioned in 2023-24. The ministry has taken following measures, 
so far, to remove the bottlenecks and expedite the progress of elimination of LC 
Gates:- 
 
(i) Standardization of designs  
(ii)  Land acquisition permitted as per special Railway projects  
(iii) Permit innovative design for faster execution  
(iv)  Execution to be done on Single Entity Basis  
(v)  LC Gates on MG/ NG found critical are also considered for elimination 
 
Further, posting of CAO/Construction/Road Safety Projects (CAO/C/RSP) has been 
planned for execution of Road Safety Works exclusively for holistic planning of Road 
Safety Works including feasibility studies & DPR preparation, sanction of work, 
detailed structural design, detailed estimate for execution and supervision as per 
requirement. This will be an additional executing unit for Road Crossings works along 
with other existing units. It is also proposed to engage General Consultants/ Detailed 
Design Consultants who will provide all technical & supervisory assistance for faster 
execution of ROB/ RUB works.  
 
Elimination of level crossings (LCs) is an ongoing process and these works are taken 
up on a programmed basis. Priority of LC elimination shall be based on its impact on 
safety in train operations, mobility of trains and impact for road users & feasibility etc. 

64 
 
All efforts are being made to pace up the execution of ROB/ RUB works for early 
elimination of LC Gates.” 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Gauge–wise break up of 1247 Nos. of works sanctioned in 2023-24, along with the present 
status of the same may be furnished. 
Final Reply of Ministry 
As on 01.04.2025, there are 16,349 nos. of Level Crossings (LCs) on Board Gauge network 
of Indian Railways. As per the progress made during the last 03 years, average progress for 
LC elimination per year comes out to be 824. With the introduction of new policy for 
sanctioning of ROB/ RUB works, the sanctioning of works has increased. 830 no. of works 
have been sanctioned in 2024-25. The ministry has taken following measures so far to 
remove the bottlenecks and expedite the progress of elimination of LC Gates: 
i. Standardization of designs.  
ii. Land acquisition permitted as per special Railway projects.  
iii. Permit innovative design for faster execution.  
iv. Execution to be done on Single Entity Basis.  
v. LC Gates on MG/ NG found critical are also considered for elimination.  
 
Further, posting of CAO/Construction/Road Safety Projects (CAO/C/RSP) has been 
planned for execution of Road Safety Works exclusively for holistic planning of Road Safety 
Works including feasibility studies & DPR preparation, sanction of work, detailed structural 
design, detailed estimate for execution and supervision as per requirement. This will be an 
additional executing unit for Road Crossings works along with other existing units. It has 
also been planned to engage Project Consultants who will provide all technical & 
supervisory assistance from feasibility to commissioning stage for faster execution of ROB/ 
RUB works.  
Elimination of level crossings (LCs) is an ongoing process and these works are taken 
up on a programmed basis. Priority of LC elimination shall be based on its impact on safety 
in train operations, mobility of trains and impact for road users & feasibility etc. All efforts 
are being made to pace up the execution of ROB/ RUB works for early elimination of LC 
Gates.  
Completion & commissioning of ROB/RUB works depends on various factors like 
cooperation of State Governments in giving consent for closure of LC, fixing of approach 
alignment, approval of General Arrangement Drawing (GAD), land acquisition, removal of 
encroachment, shifting of infringing utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities, 
law and order situation in the area of project / work sites, duration of working season in a 
year for the particular project / area due to climatic conditions etc. All these factors affect 
the completion time of the projects / works. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132ndReport  
 

65 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 16 
The Committee note from the audit observation that important precautionary measures 
related to provision of signage boards, construction of underpasses, provision of fencing 
and deputation of forest staff in divisional offices has not been implemented in many 
sections, even after a lapse of more than 10 years following the issue of Joint General 
Advisories by Ministry of Environment & Forests, and Ministry of Railways. The Committee 
note from the submission of the Ministry that to reduce the safety hazards for animals, 
during construction of new line/multitracking/gauge conversion projects in forest area, the 
Railway is taking required wildlife mitigation measures in consultation with forest authorities 
like imposition of speed restrictions in identified locations, Provision of signage board for 
pre-warning the train crew about animal crossing zones, need based clearance of 
vegetation on the sides of the track within railway land, construction of underpasses and 
ramps for the movement of wildlife at identified locations, provision of fencing at isolated 
locations, deployment of forest Department staff in Railway control offices to liaison with 
Railway and elephant trackers engaged by Forest Department for timely action by alerting 
station master and loco pilots and installation of honey bee sound systems at locations 
which are prone to crossing of elephants. Besides, regular inspections at different levels are 
conducted to check the above measures taken in different sections and shortcomings 
noticed are made good at the earliest and necessary instructions to defaulting officials are 
issued for immediate compliance. The Committee are of the view that Road Crossing 
works, in lieu of Level Crossings should exclusively be carried out by the Railways without 
leaving this job to State Govt. /Road Owning Authority/Local Authority. The Committee also 
recommend that a database be prepared against those held accountable for not 
implementing important precautionary measures as issued by Joint General Advisories by 
Ministry of Environment & Forests and Ministry of Railways and action be taken promptly 
and without fail.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
All the efforts have been made to prevent Animal accidents on track. This is a 
continuous process. A number of preventive measures have already been taken by 
Zonal Railways in coordination with Ministry of Environment and Forest. Despite 
above measures, certain cases of train hits occur, for which new technological 
initiatives like Intrusion Detection system, Honey bee sounding system etc are being 
tried over Zonal Railways to further mitigate the cases of elephant mortality. As 
implementation of Joint General Advisories is a multi-departmental and long-drawn 
process, it is difficult to fix individual responsibility. Ministry of Railways is earnestly 
pursuing all the works required for prevention of elephant deaths on track.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
Final Reply of Ministry 

66 
 
In order to prevent accidents involving elephants on Railway tracks, works for 
installation of Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) based Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS), 
also known as Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for detecting presence of elephants 
on tracks at vulnerable locations, has been sanctioned.  
Presently, it is working over 141 RKms on critical & vulnerable locations in Northeast 
Frontier Railway. 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132nd Report 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 17 
 
Proper maintenance of the railway tracks is a pre-requisite for operating the trains without 
the occurrence of accidents. Mechanized maintenance should be prioritized as far as 
possible and human intervention should be kept to the minimum. For this purpose, there is 
a need for new machines and advanced technologies like B Scan USFD machine, Phased 
Array Ultrasonic Testing etc. Tracks which are of concrete sleepers should normally be 
maintained by heavy on-track machines. Provisions of integrated maintenance blocks/traffic 
blocks/corridor blocks for timely maintenance of assets on all routes including yard lines 
need to be given greater emphasis to prevent accidents. In October 2018, the Railway 
Board had directed for usage of wider and heavier PSC sleepers (RT-8527) on all tracks 
from 2019-20 onwards which is a welcome step in the direction of safety. Similarly, action 
plan for gradual replacement of flash butt (FB) welds in place of Alumino Thermit (AT) 
welds had been envisaged in Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) 2003-13. Despite the efforts 
made in this direction hitherto, there is much room left for achievement of the final goal and 
the process requires to be fast tracked. Training and certification as per International 
Standards and as prescribed in manuals, to the officials dealing with track maintenance, 
training and certification of welders in particular, and also conducting regular medical 
examination at prescribed intervals are some of the key areas to be given attention to, 
which would go a long way in developing a fatality free performance of the Railways.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
Ministry of Railways continuously exert on safe running of trains which covers the 
track safety also. Regular maintenance and inspection of track is done as per 
standards in Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM), which is revised from 
time to time. Various technological inputs are being introduced in inspection and 
maintenance both to minimize the human intervention and increase the reliability of 
assets. 
Training module prepared by IRICEN and Guidelines of the same issued by E(MPP) 
dte. are already in place for imparting training of the officials related to track 
maintenance works which are of international standards (Annexure-III).  
Policy regarding periodical medical examination of officials of Permanent Way has 
already been implemented over Indian Railways. Zonal Railways frequently conduct 

67 
 
periodical medical examination of their staff in the scheduled time as per laid down 
procedure. 
Following steps have been taken to adopt the preferred FB welding and minimize AT 
welding: -  
1. For all New Line/Gauge conversion/Doubling Projects, initial track laying is being 
done by using Second hand service rails. These service rails are been replaced by 
Long rail panels of 260m with one/two/three Flash Butt weld (FB) supplied from rail 
manufacturing plant. As maximum proportion in the form of long rails is being 
supplied to the field, therefore, number of AT welds requirement is reducing.  
2. In all New Line/Gauge conversion/Doubling Projects, FB Welding by Mobile FB 
plant is being used to convert 260m rail panels into continuous welded rails. 
3. Rails of different lengths are being used by cutting long rail panels, for use in 
Points and Crossings (P&C) area, so as to reduce AT Welding.  
4. For loop lines and sidings, FB welding by Mobile Plants is being used for welding.  
5. Older AT welds are being replaced with FB welds by through weld renewal works 
with Mobile Flash Butt Plant.  
It is submitted that all the observations and recommendations made by committee 
are being taken in true spirit by Ministry of Railways which will make all genuine 
efforts to implement those to increase safety in train operation.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
1. MoR may elaborate the various technological inputs introduced in Inspection and 
maintenance to increase the reliability in assets w.r.t mechanized maintenance of 
tracks.  
2. MoR may elaborate on the steps being taken/envisaged to reduce the reasons for 
possible shortfall in provisions of various integrated maintenance blocks/traffic 
blocks/corridor blocks for timely maintenance of assets on all routes, yard lines etc.  
3. It may be clarified whether there is any shortfall in conducting the prescribed 
medical examination of P-way officials in various Zonal Railways. If yes, Action plan 
implemented/envisaged by MOR to reduce this shortfall may be furnished. 
4. Action plan, along with present status to replace AluminoThermit welds with Flash 
But welds may be furnished.  
5. Action plan to mitigate the shortfall in providing Training and certification as per 
International Standards and as prescribed in manuals, to the officials dealing with 
track maintenance, with special emphasis on training the personnel posted as 
'welders' may be furnished. 
 
Final Reply of Ministry 
Ministry of Railways continuously exert on safe running of trains which covers the 
track safety also. Regular maintenance and inspection of track is done as per 
standards in Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM), which is revised from 
time to time. Various technological inputs are being introduced in inspection and 

68 
 
maintenance both to minimize the human intervention and increase the reliability of 
assets.  
Training module prepared by IRICEN and Guidelines of the same issued by E(MPP) 
dte. are already in place for imparting training of the officials related to track 
maintenance works which are of international standards (Annexure-C).  
Policy regarding periodical medical examination of officials of Permanent Way has 
already been implemented over Indian Railways. Zonal Railways frequently conduct 
periodical medical examination of their staff in the scheduled time as per laid down 
procedure.  
Following steps have been taken to adoption preferred Flash Butt (FB) welding and 
minimize Alumino Thermit (AT) Welding:  
1. All New Line/Gauge conversion/Doubling Projects, initial track laying is being done 
using second hand service rails. These service rails are being replaced by long rail 
panels of 260m supplied for rail manufacturing plant. As maximum proportion in the 
form of long rail is being supplied to the field, therefore, number of AT welds 
requirement is reducing.  
2. In all New Line/Gauge Conversion/Doubling projects project, FB welding by Mobile 
FB plant is being used to convert 260m rail panels into continuous welded rails.  
3. Rails of different lengths are being used by cutting long rail panels for use in Points 
and Crossing (P&C) area, so as to reduce AT welding.  
4. For Loop lines and sidings, FB welding by Mobile plants is used for welding.  
5. Older AT welds are being replaced with FB welds by through welds renewal works 
with Mobile Flash Butt Plants.  
 
It is submitted that all the observations and recommendations made by committee 
are being taken in true spirit by Ministry of Railways, which will make all genuine 
efforts to implement those to increase safety in train operation. 
 
Ministry of Railways’ case no. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/132nd Report 
 
*************** 

69 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
  

70 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
NIL 
  
 
  

71 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                            K.C. Venugopal 
  27 March 2026             Chairperson, 
  6 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)      Public Accounts Committee
  
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 17 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 
and 17 
Total: 17 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. – NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
  

73 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-
26) HELD ON 27th MARCH, 2026. 
 
 The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) sat on Friday, the 27th March, 2026 from 1500 
hrs to 1610 hrs in Samanvay-3, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT  
 Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
3. Shri Jai Parkash  
4. Dr. C M Ramesh  
5. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi  
6. Dr. Amar Singh  
7. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
 RAJYA SABHA  
8. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
9.     Dr. K Laxman  
10.    Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray  
11.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Deputy Secretary 
6. Dr. Faiz Ahmad - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri Anand M. Bajaj -  Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Pravir Pandey -  Addl. Dy. C&AG 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur -  Addl. Dy. C&AG 

74 
 
4. Shri Biren Parmar -  Director General 
5. Ms. Reena Saha, -  Director General 
6. Shri Mukul Jamloki -  Dy. Director 
 
PART A 
XXXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX  XXXXX 
XXXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX  XXXXX 
XXXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX  XXXXX 
 
PART B 
1. Thereafter, for the second agenda of the Sitting – consideration and adoption of Draft 
Reports, the Hon'ble Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the following Draft 
Reports:-  
(i) *********************************** 
(ii) *********************************** 
(iii) ************************************ 
(iv) ************************************ 
(v) ************************************ 
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 132nd Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Derailment in Indian Railways'. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports ******* and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of factual verification done by the 
Audit.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
 
 
 