 
55  
 
 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO FAILURE TO REVISE 
CASUAL OCCUPATION AND SERVICE CHARGES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the    
Committee  contained  in  their  119th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
FIFTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
   PAC NO. 2489 
 
 
F I F T Y  F I F T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the  Public  
Accounts  Committee  contained  in  their  119th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 
                                         
                                                 
                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  12/08/2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   12/08/2026 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
     August, 2026 / Shraavana, 1948 (Saka)  
 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO FAILURE TO 
REVISE CASUAL OCCUPATION AND SERVICE 
CHARGES 

 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                      
COMMITTEE (2026-27) 
 
INTRODUCTION  ...................................................................................        
 
CHAPTER I  Report.......................................................................            
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the     
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the    
  replies received from the Government.................... 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
  replies of the Government have not been accepted   
 by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
  the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  the  Public  Accounts  
   Committee (2026-27) held on 06.08.2026 
 
 II   Analysis  of  the  Acton T aken  by  the  Government  
   on the  Observations/Recommendations  of  the  
   Public Accounts Committee contained in their 
   One Hundred and Nineteenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-2027) 
 
 
 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee1 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Jai Parkash 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Dr. K. Laxman 
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi    
21. Vacant2 
22. Vacant   
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal             -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania           -    Director 
3. Smt. Malvika Mehta              -    Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Nahar Singh                  -    Assistant Committee Officer 
___________________________________________________________ 
1 Suspended under Rule 374 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22.07.2026 till Monsoon session (2026-27) 
2 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP from Rajya Sabha with effect from 08.06.2026 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this Fifty-fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their 119th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on "Loss of Revenue due to 
Failure to Revise Casual Occupation and Service Charges” relating to the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways.  
 
2. The One Hundred and Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 6th 
August, 2026. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India.  
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Nineteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       K. C. Venugopal 
10th August, 2026                                           Chairperson, 
19 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                  Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One Hundred and Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Loss of Revenue due to 
Failure to Revise Casual Occupation and Service Charges".  
 
2. The One Hundred and Nineteenth report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the 
Table of the Rajya Sabha on 08 th February, 2024.  It contained four 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on four 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
and Waterways and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4        
    
      Total:       4        
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL     
            
            
       Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V

 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that due to 
inability of the Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) to revise three recurring charges-parking 
charges, casual occupation charges and service charges since their establishment in 
1990-1992 resulted in a financial setback, with an estimated loss of approximately 
Rs.15.10 crore from April 2012 to March 2017.  The Committee also noted that significant 
loss was incurred by the port due to non-revision, particularly in the Railway division, 
amounting to Rs.8.19 crore for casual occupation charges alone. Service charges 
contributed to an additional loss of Rs.6.91 crore and total loss incurred by the port was 
Rs.15.10 core. According to Audit, the ongoing loss would persist until the outdated By-
Laws were replaced with fresh regulations.  
4.  The Committee had inter-alia given the following recommendations in their One 
hundred and Nineteenth Report :- 
 the Mumbai Port Authority should calculate the total losses incurred due to the 
delay in making policy changes by the Board. The MbPA to take immediate action 
to implement the revised casual occupation charges. The revised rates should be 
communicated promptly to all stakeholder and that regular monitoring mechanisms 
be put in place to ensure expeditious compliance.  
 establishing a systematic process for periodic indexation benefits for both storage 
and service charges.  
 review and assessment of revenue generated and benefits reaped by the Mumbai 
Port Authority through the changes in policy, ensuring a thorough evaluation of the 
financial impact and efficacy of the proposed revisions.  
 strategic measures to strengthen regulatory framework and oversight mechanisms 
of the Mumbai Port Authority, aligning the existing regulations with the Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021. Streamline Mumbai Port Authority’s approval process with the 
Ministry, establishing clear timelines and effective communication channels and 
periodic internal audits to identify bottlenecks in the regulatory process.  
5.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One hundred and Nineteenth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters 
of this Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
6.  The Committee desire Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways to furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of the Report positively within three months of the presentation of the 
Report to the Parliament. 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation No. 4 
7. The Committee in their original report had recommended the following: 
“The Committee recommend the Ministry to take up strategic measures to 
strengthen the regulatory framework and oversight mechanisms of the Mumbai Port 
Authority. They observe the necessity for aligning existing regulations with the 
Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, as communicated by the Ministry. The Committee 
emphasize the need for the Mumbai Port Authority to streamline its approval 
process with the Ministry, establishing clear timelines and effective communication 
channels to prevent delays in implementing crucial changes. Further, the 
Committee recommend Internal audits to be conducted periodically to identify 
bottlenecks in the regulatory process, ensuring effective enforcement of regulations 
and timely resolution of any issues hindering the process”.  
8. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as 
under:- 
“Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, empowered Major Ports to formulate their 
regulations independently. MbPA has also been engaging the services of Internal 
Auditor for regulatory process, ensuring effective enforcement of regulations and 
timely resolution of any issues hindering the process”.   
9.  In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit in their vetting comments have stated as 
under :- 
“The Guidelines from the Ministry with regard to recommendation of PAC is awaited 
by the Port.” 
10. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“No further Tariff Policy issued by the Ministry after Tariff Policy for Major Port 
Authorities 2021 notified by the MoPSW dated 03.11.2021”. 
           (R. Lakshmanan) 
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
         Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways OM No. PD-21016/1/2018-PD-II dated 
24.04.2025 
 
11. The Committee in their original report had observed the necessity for aligning 
existing regulations with the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and had 
recommended that the Ministry may take up strategic measures to strengthen the 
regulatory framework and oversight mechanisms of the Mumbai Port Authority. The 
Committee had emphasized the need for the Mumbai Port Authority to streamline its 
approval process with the Ministry, establishing clear timelines and effective 

 
communication channels to prevent delays in implementing crucial changes. The 
Committee had also recommended internal audits to be conducted periodically to 
identify bottlenecks in the regulatory process. The Committee note from the reply of 
the Ministry that services of internal auditors have been availed by Mumbai Port 
Authority for regulatory process, ensuring effective enforcement of regulations and 
timely resolution of any issues hindering the process.   
The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that Major Port Authorities 
Act, 2021 empowered Major Ports to formulate their regulations independently. In 
order to obviate chances of delays in implementation of crucial changes, clear 
timelines and effective communication channels are imperative and hence effective 
regulations are necessary. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of 
details of regulations formulated by the Mumbai Port Authority that have been 
aligned with the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021.  
  

 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note the inordinate and substantial delay in introducing the revised rates 
for casual occupation of sheds and service charges, now re-termed as storage charges. 
They also find the reply of the Ministry, wherein the delay has been attributed to the 
cumbersome process involving deliberations with the Heads of Departments, stakeholders 
etc., as unacceptable. The Committee also consider the Ministry's contention stating 
frequent changes at the level of Heads of Departments/ Chairman/ Deputy Chairman, as 
untenable. This delay has culminated in continuous and huge revenue losses to the Port 
Trust. The Committee note the substantial revenue loss highlighted loss highlighted in the 
draft report, amounting to approximately Rs. 15.10 Crores for the Mumbai Port Authority 
during April 2012 to March 2017. In this regard, they would like to recommended that the 
Mumbai Port Authority should calculate the total losses incurred due to the delay in 
making policy changes by the Board. Further, they would also like the MbPA to take 
immediate action to implement the revised casual occupation charges, now termed as 
storage charges, and service charges. The Committee observe that the revised rates, 
effective from 3rd October 2022 for storage charges and 1st June 2023 for service 
charges, should be communicated promptly to all stakeholders. They would also like to 
suggest regular monitoring mechanisms to be put in place to ensure expeditious 
compliance.  
[Recommendation no. 1 of 
Report No. 119 of the  
Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
  
The revision of Scale of Rates underwent several iterations based on suggestions from 
various stakeholders within and outside MbPA as it represented a significant shift to a 
contemporary system. It may be acknowledged that under an ideal situation, Mumbai Port 
Authority could have been able to conduct multiple rounds of consultations and secure in 
principle approval from all stakeholders including the Board of MbPA in a more expedited 
manner, however it may also be acknowledged that potential revenue loss reflected in the 
report may not reflect the actual values, as the estimation of committee is a based on ideal 
conditions and not in line with existing guidelines followed at Major Port. Therefore, Port 
has not suffered any actual loss.   
  
Casual Occupancy Charges have been renamed as "Storage Charges" and is included as 
a new section effective from October 3, 2022. Storage charges and service charges which 
were governed by bye-laws have now been included in the Port Scale of Rates and the 
Estate Scale of Rates, respectively. These charges specify rates for non-custom notified 
bunder/outlying/Railway Areas. Furthermore, Casual Occupancy Charges in the Estate 

 
Department are now treated as Temporary Use Charges in the revised SoR effective from 
June 1, 2023.This move ensures greater consistency and clarity in the application of 
charges at appropriate rates across different areas, in alignment with the Ministry's 
Guidelines. 
  
As regards implementation of monitoring mechanism, this is to state that after adopting 
due procedure now this has become a part of the Scale of Rates where the rate is being 
automatically updated from time to time.   
 
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
Vetting remarks of Audit 
 
Ministry is silent about the calculation of total losses as sought by the PAC. Further, MbPA 
also has not initiated any such exercise to calculate the losses. 
 
PAC recommended to implement the revised storage and service charges and 
communicate it promptly to all stakeholders. The same has already been implemented 
through the Port Scale of Rates and the Estate Scale of Rates effective from 03.10.2022 
for Storage Charges. from 01.06.2023 for Service Charges.  
 
Hence. suggestion given by the PAC has been complied by the Ministry via notification in 
the official Gazette on dates mentioned above. 
 
PAC recommended implementation of regular monitoring mechanisms to ensure 
expeditious compliance. Port stated that the “Tariff Policy for, Major Port Authorities 2021" 
notified by the MoPSW dated 03.11.2021. monitoring mechanism is in place for revision of 
SoR. 
 
 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
 
The revision of Scale of Rates underwent several iterations based on suggestions from 
various stakeholders within and outside MbPA as it represented a significant shift to a 
contemporary system. While it has been acknowledged that under ideal conditions, MbPA 
might have been able to conduct multiple rounds of consultations and secure in principle 
approval from all stakeholders including the Board of MbPA in a more expedited manner, 
any potential revenue could have been earned earlier remains purely hypothetical.   As 
regards calculation of losses is concerned it is submitted that the competitive landscape in 
the port sector has become quite volatile and it is in a state of constant flux offering a 
myriad of opportunities and challenges. The port therefore had already explored various 
other options and had not restricted itself to the Casual Occupancy Charges 
only.  Therefore, it would not be expedient to ascertain the potential losses in this rapidly 
changing market dynamics.  
 
Apart from what has been stated above, the port tariff ceilings are governed by the Tariff 
Guidelines for major ports. The guidelines also stipulate a ceiling Return on Capital 
Employed at 16%. These guidelines prescribe that charges for all services should be 
levied in such a manner that the Annual Revenue Requirement of the port is met within 
the ceiling Return on Capital Employed. Therefore, the issue of revenue maximisation 

 
cannot be pursued as a maxim without due regard for the extant tariff regulatory 
guidelines which are binding and non-negotiable for the major ports. 
 
Mumbai Port Authority has not suffered any loss, as it has revised the rates on other 
charges/commodities and recovered required applicable charges. Therefore, in our 
considered opinion, MbPA has adhered to the framework and has recovered maximum 
possible revenue within that framework.  Hence, there is no question arise of any notional 
loss during the specified period. 
 
As regards implementation of monitoring mechanism, this is to state that after adopting 
due procedure now this has become a part of the Scale of Rates where the rate is being 
automatically updated from time to time. Apart from the above, MbPA has taken various 
initiatives like implementation of CCTV Camera, GPS mapping/ tracking mechanism, 
enhancing Security Force, employment of Maharashtra State Security Force, etc. All these 
measures are expected to ensure that there is proper monitoring.  
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
(Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways O.M. PD-21016/1/2018-PD-II dated 24.4.2025) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee note that the storage charges are subject to upward revision through 
indexation benefits and hence the Committee recommend establishing a systematic 
process for this periodic indexation benefits for both storage and service charges. This 
proactive measure will prevent future revenue losses by ensuring that the charges remain 
aligned with market conditions over time. They would like to see methodical and 
transparent communication channels forming a basis for the rationale behind the 
revisions, fostering understanding and garnering support from port users.  
[Recommendation no. 2 of 
Report No. 119 of the  
Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action Taken 
  
The process of revising the storage charges has become robust and systematic with 
enhanced transparency and with the active participation of the stakeholders. The updated 
tariffs are being published in the Official Gazette to bring about awareness among the 
stakeholders and to address their concerns and suggestions. 
Since the enactment of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, the Major Ports have been 
empowered to formulate their regulations independently. The relevant charges have been 
incorporated in Docks and Estate SoR so as to align the existing regulations with MPA 

 
Act, 2021. The said charges will be reviewed and revised from time to time with respective 
SoRs.     
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
Vetting remarks of Audit 
 
Regarding PAC recommendation for establishing a systematic process for periodic 
indexation benefits for both storage and service charges The “Tariff Policy for Major Port 
Authorities 2021 “notified by the MoPSW dated 03.11.2021. the rates are automatically 
indexed annually to inflation.  
 
Hence, recommendations of PAC in this regard are being complied. 
 
 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
 
Casual occupancy charges and service charges, which were governed by bye-laws have 
now been included in the Port Scale of Rates and the Estate Scale of Rates, respectively. 
This move ensures greater consistency and clarity in the application of charges at 
appropriate rates across different areas, in alignment with the Ministry's Guidelines. 
Casual Occupancy Charges have been renamed as "Storage Charges” and have been 
included as a new section effective from October 3, 2022. These charges specify rates for 
non-custom notified bunder/outlying/Railway Areas. Furthermore, Casual Occupancy 
Charges in the Estate Department are now treated as Temporary Use Charges in the 
revised SOR effective from June 1, 2023. The rate of service charges, included in bye 
laws earlier and now included in Estate Scale of Rates, has been revised to Rs. 2 per 
square meter per month from 50 paise per square meter per month, with effect from June 
1, 2023. Parking charges have been revised starting from May 15, 2023.   
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
(Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways O.M. PD-21016/1/2018-PD-II dated 24.4.2025) 
 
Observations/Recommendation 
  
      The Committee also emphasize the importance of a regular review and revision 
process, incorporating stakeholder consultations and adjustments based on market 
dynamics, to maintain fair and competitive charges that are reflective of operational costs. 
Further, the Committee suggest that the Ministry reviews and assesses the revenue 
generated and benefits reaped by the Mumbai Port Authority through the changes in 
policy, ensuring a thorough evaluation of the financial impact and efficacy of the proposed 
revisions.  
[Recommendation no. 3 of 
Report No. 119 of the  
Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
  

 
Action Taken 
  
Since the enactment of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, the Major Ports have been 
empowered to formulate their regulations independently. The relevant charges have been 
incorporated in Docks and Estate SoR so as to align the existing regulations with MPA 
Act,2021. The said charges will be reviewed and revised by the Mumbai Port Authority 
from time to time for respective SoRs. Further suggestions of PAC in the matter will be 
complied. 
 
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
Vetting remarks of Audit 
 
Recommendations suggested by the PAC have been incorporated in the “Tariff Policy for 
Major Port Authorities 2021 “notified by the MoPSW dated 03.11.2021. 
Furthermore, a review of the revenue generated and the benefits gained from the revision 
of SoRs may be conducted by the Management prior to initiating the revision process, 
which is carried out every three years as per the Tariff Policy 2021. 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
The comprehensive Tariff review is due on 3.10.2025, hence noted for future compliance. 
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
(Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways O.M. PD-21016/1/2018-PD-II dated 24.4.2025) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendation 
 
      The Committee recommend the Ministry to take up strategic measures to strengthen 
the regulatory framework and oversight mechanisms of the Mumbai Port Authority. They 
observe the necessity for aligning existing regulations with the Major Port Authorities Act, 
2021, as communicated by the Ministry. The Committee emphasize the need for the 
Mumbai Port Authority to streamline its approval process with the Ministry, establishing 
clear timelines and effective communication channels to prevent delays in implementing 
crucial changes. Further, the Committee recommend Internal audits to be conducted 
periodically to identify bottlenecks in the regulatory process, ensuring effective 
enforcement of regulations and timely resolution of any issues hindering the process.  
[Recommendation no. 4 of 
Report No. 119 of the  
Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 

 
Action Taken 
  
Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, empowered Major Ports to formulate their regulations 
independently. MbPA has also been engaging the services of Internal Auditor for 
regulatory process, ensuring effective enforcement of regulations and timely resolution of 
any issues hindering the process.   
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
Vetting remarks of Audit 
 
The Guidelines from the Ministry with regard to recommendation of PAC is awaited by the 
Port. 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further Tariff Policy issued by the Ministry after Tariff Policy for Major Port Authorities 
2021 notified by the MoPSW dated 03.11.2021.  
R. Lakshmanan  
Joint Secretary (Ports) 
 
(Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways O.M. PD-21016/1/2018-PD-II dated 24.4.2025)   
 
 
[Please see comments of the Committee at para 11 in Chapter-I ] 
  

 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       K. C. Venugopal 
10th August, 2026                                           Chairperson, 
19  Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                  Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 04 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
 
***************** 