 
 
 
 
 
07 
 
INJUDICIOUS PROCUREMENT OF AN 
ADDITIONAL CNC HORIZONTAL BORING 
AND MILLING MACHINE: PATIALA 
LOCOMOTIVE WORKS  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 96th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2390   
 
 
S E V E N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 96th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.12.2024 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   17.12.2024 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
 
 
 
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
  
INJUDICIOUS PROCUREMENT OF AN 
ADDITIONAL CNC HORIZONTAL BORING AND 
MILLING MACHINE: PATIALA LOCOMOTIVE 
WORKS 
 

 
 
i 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
  
 
APPENDIX 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2024- 25) held on 12.12.2024 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety Sixth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  2.  Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma                 -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P                 -   Director 
3. Shri Vijay Mishra                       -   Committee Officer 
4. Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand    -   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety Sixth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on "Injudicious procurement of an additional CNC Horizontal Boring 
And Milling Machine: Patiala Locomotive Works" relating to the Ministry of 
Railways. 
 
2. The Ninety Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken 
Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12.12.2024. 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 96th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 December, 2024               Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                        Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Ninety Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Injudicious procurement 
of an additional CNC horizontal boring and milling machine: Patiala Locomotive 
Works".  
 
2. The Ninety sixth report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on -
07.02.2024.  It contained six Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.       
     
      Total:       6        
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL      
           
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V

 
 
2 
 
 
3.  The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
several deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Railways, Railway Board 
concerning the procurement of a CNC machine for Patiala Locomotive Works (PLW). 
Despite the Railway Board’s 2014 directive to cease production of mainline ALCO 
locomotives, PLW continued with the machine’s procurement without reassessing its 
necessity. Delays in installation and commissioning of the machine, along with a 
declining demand for diesel locomotives, led to significant time and cost overruns. 
The machine faced various issues post-commissioning and a Prove-Out Test 
certificate remained pending as of April 2022. This resulted in an infructuous 
expenditure of Rs 22.87 crore. The Ministry’s mismanagement to review 
procurement after policy changes minimized the project’s intended benefits. The 
Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Ninety 
sixth Report. 
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways, Railway Board 
on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Ninety sixth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways, Railway Board to furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of the Report, positively within three months of the presentation of the 
Report to the Parliament. 
 
Recommendation Paragraph No. 1 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
6. The Indian Railways has a very crucial role in connecting people and 
facilitating the transportation of goods across the Nation and is moving ahead in the 
right trajectory and achieving its objectives. Post-independence, Indian Railways 
entered into technical agreement with American Locomotive Company (ALCo) and a 
diesel locomotive manufacturing unit was established at Varanasi. The Diesel Loco 
Modernization Works was established in the year 1981 in Patiala (now PLW) with a 
view to undertaking the upgradation and mid-life rehabilitation of ALCo engines. 

 
 
3 
 
During 1999-2000, Indian Railways entered into understanding with General Motors 
of USA for manufacturing state-of-the-art two stroke Electro-Motive Diesel (GM-
EMD) locomotives at Diesel Locomotives Works (DLW), Varanasi. These high 
powered EMD engines received wider acceptance due to low fuel consumption, 
better haulage capacity, increased maintenance periodicity and higher reliability. 
 
7. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
 stated as under:- 
  “These are facts on record.”. 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“No Comments.” 
 
Recommendation Paragraph No. 2 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha)  
 
8. The Committee noted that in the year 2011-12, DMW (now renamed as PLW) 
was engaged in mid-life rebuilding of old diesel locomotives as its primary activity. 
The process required rebuilding of the engine blocks, which are actually the heart of 
the diesel engines. During the rebuilding process of old engine blocks, all the 
distorted and worn-out surfaces were rebuilt by depositing metal through welding 
process, following which the welded areas were machined on sophisticated CNC 
machines to create accurate mating surfaces. For this machining activity the PLW 
had one machine at that point of time, which was a replacement of an old machine. 
Nevertheless, due to excessive workload, Patiala Locomotives obtained permission 
from the Railway Board to continue using the old machine till December 2011 with 
limited capacity and both these machines were able to machine about 160 engine 
blocks in a year, by following a 3-Shift working. With the phasing out of the old 
machine from service, the capacity of the one new machine would have come down 
to 10 blocks per month only (i.e. 120 blocks per year). In 2010-11, as per the 
information furnished, out of the total production of about 160 blocks, 109 blocks 
were being used internally for rebuilding of old diesel locos and the balance quantity 
of engine blocks were being sent to Zonal Railways to meet their maintenance 
requirements. Therefore, these machines were not only meeting the internal 
requirement of PLW but also the Zonal Railways’ maintenance requirements. 
Further, in the year 2010, the Railway Board advised PLW to create capacity for 
manufacturing about 100 new ALCo diesel locomotives per annum.  

 
 
4 
 
 The capacity of the existing machine being grossly inadequate to meet the 
enhanced requirement, the proposal for procuring the new machine was made under 
M&P Program of Railway Board. With the addition of the new machine, the 
combined targeted capacity was anticipated to be 22 engine blocks per month (10 
old + 12 proposed machine), which would translate to 264 engine blocks per year. 
The Committee were surprised to note that in 2010, Railway Board advised PLW to 
create capacity for manufacturing 100 new ALCo diesel loco engines per annum 
when more efficient GM-EMD engines were already being manufactured in India.  
The Committee therefore wanted to have been apprised of the reasons for the 
Railway Boards directive to increase the capacity to build new ALCo engines instead 
of the more efficient EMD engines.  
 
9. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
 “Vision-2020: Action Plan for increasing production of Diesel locomotives of 
Indian Railways envisaged production of 5334 Diesel locomotives during the 
period 2010-11 to 2019-20. The production plan of DLW (now BLW) for 2010-
11 provided for manufacturing of only 250 locomotives. In order to reach close 
to the goals of Vision-2020, production/acquisition of Diesel locomotive by 
Indian Railways needed to be scaled up substantially. In this regard, following 
decisions were taken to increase the Diesel loco production: 
1.  ALCO loco production to be fully phased out from DLW. 
2. The capacity of DLW to be augmented to manufacture 300 EMD type 
locomotives. 
3.  ALCO loco production to be initiated at DMW (now PLW) and along with 
the capacity of ALCO loco assembly generated at Parel. DMW (now PLW) 
should be able to deliver 100 ALCO locomotives. As there will be a consistent 
requirement of about 100 ALCO locomotives to meet the combined demands 
of (a) Non-Railway Customers/export (b) Shunting operations (c) Inferior 
passenger services.” 
 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“No comments.” 
 

 
 
5 
 
10. In view of the availability of the more efficient GM-EMD engines, the 
Committee had desired to know the reasons for the Railway Boards directive 
to increase the capacity to build new American Locomotive Company (ALCo 
engines). The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that despite the 
existence of more efficient EMD locomotives, there remains a consistent 
domestic and export market for ALCo locomotives. Therefore, it was 
necessary for the Ministry to continue ALCo production, especially for 
exports, shunting and inferior services or lower-performance applications. 
While the Ministry has provided a detailed rationale for continuing ALCo 
production, the Committee however desires to be apprised of more detailed 
cost-benefit analysis comparing ALCo and EMD locomotives, specifically 
regarding their lifecycle costs (fuel efficiency, maintenance, and operational 
costs) so as to have clarity on whether it is still cost effective to invest in ALCo 
production and validate the long term economic rationale for continuing ALCo 
production. The Ministry should regularly monitor and report on the actual 
demand for ALCo locomotives in the non-railway and export markets to ensure 
that production capacity remains aligned with real market needs, avoiding 
overproduction. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to explore and 
evaluate how long requirements for these ALCo engines will persist, 
considering global trends in hybrid or more environmentally friendly 
locomotive technology.  
 
Recommendation Paragraph No. 3 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
11. As for the reasons for PLW not reviewing its procurement plan in 2014 
following the Railway Board's directive to stop production of mainline ALCO 
Locomotives; and not reconsidering the decision to procure the CNC machine, the 
Committee noted from the information furnished that although the Railway Board had 
advised discontinuing manufacturing of new locomotives in 2014, the proposal for 
procuring the new machine was not dropped, because of the huge requirement of 
new engine blocks for replacing old engine blocks in the Zonal Railways. The fresh 
demand for new engine blocks was so high that even following the decision to stop 
manufacturing new Diesel locomotives, the new machine would have been fully 
utilised for manufacturing of the new engine blocks, required by Zonal Railways. The 
Railway Board had sanctioned a total of 1077 new engine blocks between 2012-13 

 
 
6 
 
and 2017-18 under various annual rolling stock programs and PLW was entrusted 
with the responsibility of supplying of the new engine blocks to Zonal Railways. PLW 
had to procure a total of 1318 new engine blocks from private firms between 2013-14 
and 2020-21 by following an arduous process of developing new sources. The 
Committee found that this had become imperative because the machining capacity 
available with PLW was inadequate and the commissioning of the new machine was 
getting delayed due to technical deficiencies. As for the manner in which PLW 
adapted to the policy change communicated by the Railway Board in June 2014, 
which called for stopping production of mainline ALCo Locomotives and whether the 
issue of going ahead with the procurement of the new CNC machine was assessed, 
the Committee noted that the matter was well considered by PLW. While 
acknowledging the context in which the initial decision of procuring the CNC machine 
was taken, it was also evident that with the changing policy landscape, as 
communicated by the Railway Board in 2014, a thorough review of the procurement 
plan was a necessity. The Committee therefore, did not find the  reasons afforded by 
the Ministry for going ahead with the proposal for procuring the machine despite the 
changed policy dimension to the convincing; and recommended that the Ministry 
should own responsibility for the failure to review the proposal for purchasing the 
CNC machine in light of the change in policy. The Committee also recommended 
that the Ministry should establish a mechanism for periodic review of procurement 
policies in line with evolving directives to prevent recurrence of such infructuous 
expenditure in future.  
  
 The Committee in this regard also recommended in no uncertain words the 
Ministry to strengthen their due diligence at all stages of the decision-making 
process, from placing the initial request for procurement to commissioning and to 
implement measures to ensure efficient utilization of resources in alignment with the 
changing requirements. This may, inter-alia, involve periodic reassessment of 
production targets and reallocation of resources to areas of higher priority and need. 
It would be pertinent to also bring out here that the Ministry should invariably assess 
the necessity and relevance of machinery prepared for being procured in light of 
evolving policies. Further, the Committee expressed concern over the lack of 
documented internal discussions within PLW regarding the changing requirements 
following the Railway Board's directive in 2014. Hence, the Committee 
recommended the Ministry to improve its internal communication channels which 

 
 
7 
 
should encompass thorough documentation and decision-making processes. This 
will aid in transparency, accountability, and better understanding of the rationale 
behind critical decisions. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the cost 
benefit analysis that may have been done by the Ministry to adjudge whether it 
would have been economical to procure a CNC machine or directly procure 
additional new engine blocks from private firms. 
 
12. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
“Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
Further, the Ministry of Railways has a very robust mechanism for 
sanctioning of machines under M&P programme. The proposal for 
sanctioning of a machine is received in Railway Board only after its 
departmental approval and financial vetting at Division and Zonal 
Railways/PUs level. The proposals compiled by Zonal Railways & PUs, 
thereafter, are sent to Railway Board for sanction. Keeping in view the 
limited resources, efforts are made to restrict sanction to essential items only 
after critical review of justification furnished for the procurement of the 
machine. 
Sanctioned M&Ps are reviewed regularly in line with changing requirement 
of Zonal Railways/PUs and, if required, dropped also as per changing 
scenario. 
PLW has also initiated a formal system of critical reviewing the procurement 
cases of CNC machines, including the requirement of machines in light of 
any change in policy directives received from Railway Board. This review is 
being conducted on a quarterly basis. The changes in the Production plan or 
any policy changes due to Railway Board instruction are regularly taken in 
account during review. The minutes of these reviews are issued which will 
strengthen the documentation of internal discussions at PLW. 
Further, at that point in time, i.e. FY 2010-11, BLW and PLW were the only 
units in Indian Railways that were capable of manufacturing/rebuilding ALCO 
engine blocks. No known private firm was existing in the country having 
proven capability of manufacturing new ALCO engine blocks at that time. 

 
 
8 
 
Therefore, cost benefit analysis regarding in-house manufacturing versus 
procurement from private firms was not feasible at that time.” 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“As far as compliance to the recommendation of the PAC at PLW is 
concerned, no further comments” 
13. In view of the fact that the PLW went ahead with the procurement of new 
CNC machine despite changes in the policy landscape, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to establish a mechanism for periodic review of 
procurement policies in line with evolving directives to prevent recurrence of 
infructuous expenditure in future and strengthen their due diligence at all 
stages of the decision making process with regards to procurement, 
commissioning and efficient utilization of resources. The Committee note from 
the reply of the Ministry that proposals for machine procurement under the 
Machinery & Plant program go through departmental approvals and financial 
vetting at divisional, zonal and production unit levels before being sent to the 
Railway Board and only essential items are sanctioned after a critical review 
which suggests an attempt to optimize the procurement process. The 
Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that PLW has introduced a 
formal system for quarterly reviews of procurement, particularly for CNC 
machines, considering any policy changes from the Railway Board. The 
Committee further note from the reply that during the financial year 2010-11, 
no private firms had the proven capability to manufacture new ALCo engine 
blocks. Therefore, a cost-benefit analysis comparing in-house production with 
procurement from private firms was not feasible which is why a decision was 
made to procure the CNC machine, given the lack of alternative suppliers. 
While the Ministry outlines a formalized review process at PLW, the Committee 
reiterates their recommendation to strengthen due diligence throughout the 
decision making process so as to ensure that the said process is robust 
enough to detect and act on evolving policies in real time. The Committee 
further note from the reply of the Ministry that no private firms were available 
to produce ALCo engine blocks in 2010-11, making in-house production the 
only feasible option. However, in view of the fact that 1318 engine blocks were 
eventually procured from private firms between 2013-14 and 2020-21, the 

 
 
9 
 
Committee opine that it would be prudent for the Ministry to undertake a 
retrospective cost-benefit analysis comparing in-house production costs with 
external procurement costs so as to assess whether continuing investments in 
in-house CNC machines remain justified or  relying on external suppliers could 
be more economical.  The Committee may be apprised of this analysis at the 
time of furnishing the Action Taken Statements.  
Recommendation Paragraph No. 4 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha) 
14. The Committee did note that the significant delay of over two and half years in 
the installation, commissioning and prove-out test of the CNC machine had been 
attributed entirely to the supplier and initially one of the trucks carrying machine parts 
in a container, met with a road accident in November 2016 in which some critical 
parts were damaged and had to be replaced; following the commencement of 
machining trials, it was found that the tooling used for machining of Serrations was 
not as per actual requirement; and subsequent to the commissioning, it was found 
that the machine was not able to achieve specified process capability requirements 
(Cpk parameter, which is basically repeated accuracy of machining over multiple 
operations). Later, PLW sought to transfer the CNC machine to some other Railway 
Unit and within six months of the commissioning i.e., in November, 2020 rejected the 
machine with the remarks 'no replacement required'. As far the reasons that 
prompted these steps, the Committee noted from the information furnished that till 
2019-20 PLW was continuing to manufacture old engine blocks at full capacity. The 
requirement however came down abruptly, in view of decision taken by Ministry of 
Railways for 100% electrification. Consequently, PLW had to realign its working as 
per changed scenario and the attempt to offer the machine to some other workshop 
production unit through COFMOW, where it could be put to alternate use was made. 
Further, as the supplier could not meet the technical requirements of the contract 
even after repeated attempts, following the commissioning of the machine, the 
decision to reject the machine had to be taken in November 2020. As seen from the 
information furnished, there was no interest shown by any Indian Railway unit in 
accepting the machine. What the Committee found to be surprising was the fact that 
PLW sought to transfer the machine to some other workshop when it was already 
proven that it was incapable of obtaining the process capability requirements as 
prescribed in the contract and the same defect of process capability was popping up 
again and again, which could not be resolved. The Committee in this regard, wanted 

 
 
10 
 
to have been apprised of the objectives that could have or were intended to be 
achieved by PLW by transferring a defective machine to some other workshop. 
 
15. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
 “The main reason for rejection of machine was non compliance to 
achieve the specified process capability requirements which was a 
contractual requirement and therefore its non compliance forced PLW 
to reject the machine. This parameter indicates the machining accuracy 
within a narrower tolerance band than the specified accuracy band 
when machine is new so that during its useful codal life operations the 
machining accuracy does not go beyond the specified requirement due 
to normal wear and tear in the machine. It means that the machine was 
functional and capable of performing its intended operations with 
slightly lesser accuracy requirements as mandated in engine block 
machining. Since Indian Railways has already made 80% payment to 
the firm and the machine had become the Indian Railways property, it 
was therefore necessary to explore alternate use of this machine, so 
that it could be fruitfully utilised elsewhere. The firm in any case was 
not showing any interest to rectify the machine as per contractual 
requirement. In this situation Railways would have withheld firm’s 
balance 20% payment along with forfeiture of Performance Guarantee 
and would have utilized the machine in sub-optimal conditions for some 
other applications on Indian Railways. As the effort of offering the 
machine to other Railways didn’t materialize, so PLW finally took a 
decision to reject the machine.” 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
 “PLW (earlier DMW) in their Rejection Memo dated 05/11/2020 has 
mentioned that “None of 42 Engine Blocks machined so far has been 
without deviation in any of the key parameters”. In view of the same, 
Ministry of Railway’s justification that “Machine was functional and 
capable of performing its intended operation with slightly lesser 
accuracy” is not acceptable. MoR is requested to forward the ATR 
along with above Audit comments to the PAC for their consideration.” 

 
 
11 
 
The Ministry has responded to the Audit Comments as below: 
“None of 42 Engine Blocks machined so far have been without 
deviation in any of the key parameters”. The said statement was 
mentioned in the rejection advice issued by PLW. This was informed in 
reply to PAC question pertaining to intended objective to be achieved 
by PLW transferring a defective machine to some other workshop. The 
above statement concludes that the machine was unable to meet the 
process capability requirements as per AT clause 3.2.8.1 in respect to 
bore size, Cpk value and serration pitch which are most critical 
parameters in engine block machining during its rebuilding. As per 
PLW, the machine was capable of performing the machining 
operations like boring, counter-boring, milling, serration milling, drilling, 
tapping and spot facing etc. with lesser accuracy requirements vis-à-vis 
that mandated for engine block machining. It was construed by PLW 
that the machine could have been used for machining operations (as 
mentioned above) on items/jobs other than engine blocks which didn’t 
require such higher level of accuracy.” 
16. The Committee had found it surprising that Patiala Locomotive Works 
(PLW) sought to transfer the machine to some other workshop when it was 
already proven that it was incapable of obtaining the process capability 
requirements as prescribed in the contract. Therefore, the Committee had 
inquired about the objectives that were intended to be achieved by PLW by 
transferring a defective machine to some other workshop. The Committee note 
from the reply of Ministry that the CNC machine was rejected by PLW due to 
its failure to meet the specified process capability requirements, a contractual 
obligation. This failure pertained to critical parameters like bore size, Cpk 
value (accuracy over multiple operations), and serration pitch, which are vital 
for engine block machining. The Committee further note that PLW rightly 
decided to reject the machine when it became clear that these parameters 
could not be consistently met. The Ministry has further clarified that while the 
machine was not suitable for engine block machining due to accuracy issues, 
it was still functional and capable of performing other machining tasks like 
boring, counter-boring, milling, drilling, and tapping, with less stringent 
accuracy requirements. The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry 

 
 
12 
 
that Railways had already made 80% payment to the supplier and the machine 
had become the property of Indian Railways, so it was imperative to explore 
alternate uses for the machine rather than writing it off immediately. The 
attempt to transfer the machine to another railway unit was based on the 
rationale of making some use of it, given that withholding the remaining 
payment and forfeiting the Performance Guarantee were the only other 
options. Despite PLW's efforts to find an alternate use for the machine, no 
other Railway units showed interest in accepting the same and finally PLW 
had to reject the machine. While the Ministry has provided the rationale for 
this decision, the Committee still find it necessary to recommend that the 
Ministry develop clearer and formal guidelines for handling defective and 
underperforming machinery. These guidelines should include a clear process 
for evaluating whether such equipment can be transferred to another unit, with 
emphasis on ensuring that the receiving unit’s requirements are fully met. The 
Committee further recommend that defective machines should not be 
transferred to other workshops unless a formal and detailed cost-benefit 
evaluation confirms that the machine can meet the operational requirements 
of the intended recipient unit as otherwise the Ministry risks spreading 
inefficiency across its workshops. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the actions taken against the supplier, including any financial 
penalties and steps to prevent the recurrence of such issues in future 
contracts. 
 
  
Recommendation Paragraph No. 5 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
17. The delays and deficiencies in the commissioning of the CNC machine being 
attributable to the supplier, the Committee desired that the Ministry establish a 
robust 'supplier oversight mechanism' so as to ensure timely delivery, adherence to 
technical specifications, and prompt resolution of any issues that may arise during 
the commissioning process of the machinery/equipment may be procured. This will 
help in mitigating the risk of project delays and financial losses. The Committee also 
expressed the need for developing and implementing comprehensive contingency 
plans to address potential disruptions in project timelines, including mechanisms to 
expedite the replacement of critical components in case of accidents or unforeseen 

 
 
13 
 
circumstances. Further, considering the experience of the delay in the 
commissioning of the machine, the Committee recommended that the Ministry 
improve the modalities of documentation of deficiencies identified during 
commissioning, including specific details on how these deficiencies impact the 
functionality of the machine. Clear and comprehensive documentation will aid in the 
resolution of issues and facilitate a better understanding of the challenges faced 
during the commissioning process.  
 
18. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
  
“Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
Further, COFMOW (the central procurement agency of IR) and ultimate 
consignee normally coordinate with each other on a regular basis 
during the commissioning process of the machine, so that all timelines 
are met as per contractual requirements. There are contractual 
provisions, wherein Liquidated Damages (normally @ ½% per week) 
are imposed for delays at any milestones stages, defined in the 
contract. Despite all these checks, in this particular case, there were 
delays in supply and commissioning due to highly complex nature of 
the machine and also due to un-anticipated accident during transport. 
Notwithstanding the above, as advised by Hon’ble PAC, PLW would 
work to make its systems more robust so that timely review of the 
purchase process and stage wise monitoring is done effectively and 
well documented to avoid any kind of delays in the project execution 
process. PLW will also improve the documentation during the 
commissioning process to identify any deficiencies that may impact the 
functionality of machine.” 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
““As far as compliance to the recommendation of the PAC at PLW is 
concerned, no further comments.”” 
19. The Committee while noting that the delays and deficiencies in the 
commissioning of the CNC machine being attributable to the supplier, had 
desired that the Ministry establish a robust 'supplier oversight mechanism' so 

 
 
14 
 
as to ensure timely delivery, adherence to technical specifications, and prompt 
resolution of any issues that may arise during the commissioning process of 
the machinery/equipment. The Committee had also recommended for 
developing and implementing comprehensive contingency plans to address 
potential disruptions in project timelines, including mechanisms to expedite 
the replacement of critical components in case of accidents or unforeseen 
circumstances. The Ministry in their reply have acknowledged the Committee's 
recommendation for establishing a robust supplier oversight mechanism. 
They have highlighted that coordination between COFMOW (Central 
Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops) and the ultimate consignee 
(PLW) takes place regularly during the commissioning process to ensure 
adherence to timelines and the contract provisions include penalties like 
Liquidated Damages for delays at milestone stages. The Ministry have also 
pointed out that the delays in this particular case were partly due to the 
complex nature of the CNC machine and the unforeseen transport accident 
that damaged critical parts. Further, the Ministry have assured that PLW will 
enhance its review process, stage-wise monitoring and documentation 
process during machine commissioning to identify deficiencies and their 
impact on functionality thus preventing future delays. While the Ministry has 
cited its coordination efforts and the imposition of Liquidated Damages, it may 
be necessary to go beyond these existing measures. Hence, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to establish a specific team or task force within 
COFMOW dedicated to overseeing complex and high-value procurements, 
particularly for technically advanced machinery by more frequent progress 
updates from suppliers and early warning mechanisms for potential delays. 
The Committee also recommend the Ministry to implement more rigorous 
supplier monitoring mechanisms, including progress updates at regular 
intervals, escalation procedures for delays, and clearer guidelines for 
imposing Liquidated Damages or other penalties. Although the Ministry has 
mentioned that the delays were partly due to an unexpected accident, the 
Committee's recommendation to develop contingency plans for unforeseen 
circumstances has not been fully addressed. Hence, the Committee re-iterate 
their recommendation regarding creation of comprehensive contingency plans 
by the Ministry. The Committee further desire that the Ministry must put in  

 
 
15 
 
place systems for faster procurement of replacement parts, maintain a list of 
backup suppliers, and be ready with  mitigation strategies for potential 
disruptions such as transport accidents or delays in component delivery in 
project timelines. These contingency plans should be periodically reviewed to 
ensure that they are effective when needed. 
 
Recommendation Paragraph No. 6 of PAC Report No. 96   (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
20. From the information available, the Committee noted that 80% of the payment 
towards procuring the CNC machine was made to the supplier before the actual 
shipment. The Committee wished to be apprised of the reasoning behind agreeing to 
this payment schedule, and safeguards, if any, that may have been put in place to 
protect the Ministry's interests in the event of non-compliance by the supplier. As 
regards action initiated and taken to mitigate the loss caused, the Committee noted 
that COFMOW had encashed performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) for Rs. 
2,55,55,519/- submitted by the firm on 22.09.2023 and gave an advisory for 
recovering the cost of the machine. Considering the information furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee were appalled to observe that instead of taking measures 
for returning the defective machine directly and claiming the entire refund from the 
supplier, COFMOW sought to transfer the defective machine to some other Railway 
unit and issued an advice for recovering the costs. The Committee were of the view 
that atleast now the COFMOW should take recourse to legal measures for 
reclaiming the whole amount paid to the supplier, directly. The Committee also 
recommended that, especially in case of transactions involving suppliers outside 
India, the Ministry ought to review the 'agreement clauses' with a view to ensuring 
the financial interests are adequately protected in case of delay or deficiencies 
attributable to the supplier. The Committee also recommended that, in future 
procurements, the Ministry considers all viable options and selects the most suitable 
solution to meet its manufacturing or maintenance needs, and minimizing the risk of 
encountering deficiencies or delays. The Committee further felt that it would be 
appropriate for the Ministry to establish a comprehensive supplier developing and 
handholding programme for identifying, developing and providing technological 
support for Indian suppliers so that they could be an integral part of the 'Make in 
India' supply chain system. 

 
 
16 
 
 
 
21. The Ministry of Railways, Railway Board in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
 “Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
Further, it is submitted that 80% of the payment towards procuring the 
CNC machine was not made to the supplier before the actual shipment 
but after shipment and submission of documents by the supplier to the 
bank in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. In the 
subject case, tender was a global tender and contract was on Free on 
Board (FOB) basis. FOB means that the seller delivers the goods 
loaded onto a vessel nominated by the buyer at the named port of 
shipment and gets the goods cleared for export. In the subject case, 
the payment to the supplier was made after pre-inspection of machine 
and its dispatch and submission of documents by the supplier to the 
bank fulfilling the conditions of letter of credit as per the contract. 
Encashment of Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) was done in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. All Railway 
Units were advised for recovering the balance payment of the machine 
from the defaulting supplier. 
As per the contract, the place of consignee was Patiala Locomotive 
Works (PLW) and PLW currently has the physical possession of the 
defective machine. The machine cannot be returned back to the 
supplier until either the supplier pays back entire amount or railway 
recovers the entire paid amount from the supplier from its other 
pending bills. As desired by the Hon’ble Committee, COFMOW will take 
recourse to legal measures for reclaiming the balance payment from 
the firm.” 
Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“MoR has not furnished any ‘action taken reply’ with respect to 
following recommendations of the Committee:  
1. The Committee recommends that, especially in case of transactions 
involving suppliers outside India, the Ministry ought to review the 

 
 
17 
 
‘agreement clause’ with a view to ensuring the financial interest are 
adequately protected in case of delay or deficiencies attributable to the 
supplier.  
2. The Committee also recommends that, in future procurements, the 
Ministry considers all viable options and selects the most suitable 
solution to meet its manufacturing or maintenance needs and 
minimizes the risk of encountering deficiencies or delays.  
3. The Committee also feel that it would be appropriate for the Ministry 
to establish a comprehensive supplier developing and handholding 
programme for identifying, developing and providing technological 
support for Indian suppliers so that they could be an integral part of the 
‘Make in India’ supply chain system.  
MoR is requested to forward the ATR along with above Audit 
comments to the PAC for their consideration.” 
The Ministry has responded to the Audit Comments as below: 
“1. The committee has raised concerns on two specific issues:  
  i. Recourse of Legal action.  
  ii. Payment of 80% through Letter of Credit  
With regards to issue no. 1, it is submitted that recourse to take legal 
action is always open and as desired by the Committee, COFMOW has 
also confirmed that it will take recourse to Legal measures for 
reclaiming the balance payment from the firm.  
For issue 2, it is submitted that Payment through irrevocable Letter of 
Credit are part of standard agreement clauses.  
Para 6.4 of Manual for Procurement of Goods issued by Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure, states about terms of payment of 
imported Goods. Para 6.4.1 (ii) specifically states that in Cases where 
installation, erection and commissioning are the responsibility of the 
supplier – 80-90 (eighty to ninety) percent net FOB/FAS/CFR/CIP price 
will be paid against the invoice, inspection certificate (where 
applicable), shipping documents, and so on, and balance within 21-30 

 
 
18 
 
(twenty-one to thirty) days of successful installation and commissioning 
at the consignee’s premises and acceptance by the consignee. 
Para 6.4.2 of the Manual specifically states that: “For imported goods, 
payment usually happens through the LC opened by the State Bank on 
India or any other scheduled/authorized bank as decided by the 
procuring entity. The amount of LC should be equal to the total payable 
amount, and be released as per the clauses mentioned above. 
Provisions of Uniform Customs and Practices for Documentary Credits 
should be adhered to while opening the LC for import into India”.  
Thus, the existing clauses for payment through Letter of Credit are in 
line with the policy followed by Government of India.  
2. Noted for compliance. All Indian Railway tenders are done through 
Indian Railways E-Procurement System (IREPS) which ensures an 
open and transparent tendering process. The IREPS allows vendors 
from all over India to participate in the bidding process, fostering 
healthy competition and promoting regional development.  
3. In order to promote local suppliers and manufacturers a set of 
instructions for implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to 
Make in India) have been issued by Ministry of Railways over a period 
of time as per the Policy initiatives issued in this regard by GoI. These 
initiatives have been undertaken with a view to enable widespread 
participation of Indian Suppliers/Manufactures in the tenders/contracts 
of Railways for supply of Goods/Services/Works. Instructions have 
specifically been issued for guidance and compliance by Railway Units 
that terms and conditions of the tenders are not restrictive and 
discriminatory against the Indian suppliers which result in unreasonable 
exclusion of local suppliers.” 
22. While noting that 80% of the payment towards procuring the CNC 
machine was made to the supplier before the actual shipment, the Committee 
desired to be apprised of the reasoning behind agreeing to this payment 
schedule, and safeguards, if any, that were put in place to protect the 
Ministry's interests in the event of non-compliance by the supplier. The 

 
 
19 
 
Ministry in their action taken notes have clarified that the 80% payment for the 
CNC machine was not made before shipment but after shipment, following 
pre-inspection, and upon submission of the required documents to the bank, 
in line with the terms of the Letter of Credit (LC) and Free on Board (FOB) 
basis which also complies with established practices for international 
procurement, as per the Manual for Procurement of Goods issued by the 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee in this regard recommend that future 
contracts for high-value machinery include more stringent clauses for supplier 
performance, such as performance-linked payment schedules and actual 
payments only against successful milestone achievements, performance 
guarantees tied to product functionality, or third-party verification before 
releasing last installment. The Committee,  while observing that instead of 
taking measures for returning the defective machine directly and claiming the 
entire refund from the supplier, COFMOW sought to transfer the defective 
machine to some other Railway unit and issued an advice for recovering the 
costs, recommended that COFMOW should take recourse to legal measures 
for reclaiming the whole amount paid to the supplier, directly. The Ministry 
have confirmed through their action taken notes that COFMOW has taken 
steps to encash the Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) and will now initiate 
legal recourse to recover the remaining balance from the supplier which aligns 
with the Committee’s recommendation for holding the supplier accountable. 
Though COFMOW is taking legal recourse, the Committee is of the view that 
there should be development of a more proactive legal framework, including 
faster dispute resolution mechanisms and pre-defined penalties for supplier’s 
non-compliance thus minimizing delays and ensuring faster recovery of funds. 
The Ministry’s response to the Committee's recommendation for fostering 
local suppliers is encouraging. However, the Committee are of the opinion that 
Ministry has not provided detailed information on whether any handholding or 
technical support programs for Indian suppliers are currently being 
developed. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to help local 
suppliers meet technical and global supply chain standards by implementing a 
support program, providing technological training, and establishing a supplier 
accreditation process.  
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Indian Railways has been playing a crucial role in connecting people and 
facilitating the transportation of goods across the Nation and is moving ahead in the 
right trajectory and achieving its objectives. Post-independence, Indian Railways 
entered into technical agreement with American Locomotive Company (ALCo) and a 
diesel locomotive manufacturing unit was established at Varanasi. The Diesel Loco 
Modernization Works was established in the year 1981 in Patiala (now PLW) with a 
view to undertaking the upgradation and mid-life rehabilitation of ALCo engines. 
During 1999-2000, Indian Railways entered into understanding with General Motors 
of USA for manufacturing state-of-the-art two stroke Electro-Motive Diesel (GM-
EMD) locomotives at Diesel Locomotives Works (DLW), Varanasi. These high 
powered EMD engines received wider acceptance due to low fuel consumption, 
better haulage capacity, increased maintenance periodicity and higher reliability. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 1 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
These are facts on record. 
 (Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN 
No Comments. 
 
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that in the year 2011-12, DMW (now renamed as PLW) was 
engaged in mid-life rebuilding of old diesel locomotives as its primary activity. The 
process required rebuilding of the engine blocks, which are actually the heart of the 
diesel engines. During the rebuilding process of old engine blocks, all the distorted 
and worn-out surfaces are rebuilt by depositing metal through welding process, 
following which the welded areas are machined on sophisticated CNC machines to 
create accurate mating surfaces. For this machining activity the PLW had one 
machine at that point of time, which was a replacement of an old machine. 
Nevertheless, due to excessive workload, Patiala Locomotives obtained permission 

 
 
21 
 
from the Railway Board to continue using the old machine till December 2011 with 
limited capacity and both these machines were able to machine about 160 engine 
blocks in a year, by following a 3-Shift working. With the phasing out of the old 
machine from service, the capacity of the one new machine would have come down 
to 10 blocks per month only (i.e. 120 blocks per year). In 2010-11, as per the 
information furnished, out of the total production of about 160 blocks, 109 blocks 
were being used internally for rebuilding of old diesel locos and the balance quantity 
of engine blocks were being sent to Zonal Railways to meet their maintenance 
requirements. Therefore, these machines were not only meeting the internal 
requirement of PLW but also the Zonal Railways' maintenance requirements. 
Further, in the year 2010, the Railway Board advised PLW to create capacity for 
manufacturing about 100 new ALCo diesel locomotives per annum.  
 
The capacity of the existing machine being grossly inadequate to meet the enhanced 
requirement, the proposal for procuring the new machine was made under M&P 
Program of Railway Board. With the addition of the new machine, the combined 
targeted capacity was anticipated to be 22 engine blocks per month (10 old + 12 
proposed machine), which would translate to 264 engine blocks per year. The 
Committee are surprised to note that in 2010, Railway Board advised PLW to create 
capacity for manufacturing 100 new ALCo diesel loco engines per annum when 
more efficient GM-EMD engines were already being manufactured in India. The 
Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the reasons for the Railway Boards 
directive to increase the capacity to build new ALCo engines instead of the more 
efficient EMD engines..   
  
[Observations/Recommendation No. 2 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 Action Taken  
Vision-2020: Action Plan for increasing production of Diesel locomotives of 
Indian Railways envisaged production of 5334 Diesel locomotives during the period 
2010-11 to 2019-20. The production plan of DLW (now BLW) for 2010-11 provided 
for manufacturing of only 250 locomotives. In order to reach close to the goals of 
Vision-2020, production/acquisition of Diesel locomotive by Indian Railways needed 
to be scaled up substantially. In this regard, following decisions were taken to 
increase the Diesel loco production: 
1.  ALCO loco production to be fully phased out from DLW. 
2. The capacity of DLW to be augmented to manufacture 300 EMD type    
locomotives. 
3.  ALCO loco production to be initiated at DMW (now PLW) and along with 
the capacity of ALCO loco assembly generated at Parel. DMW (now PLW) should be 
able to deliver 100 ALCO locomotives. As there will be a consistent requirement of 
about 100 ALCO locomotives to meet the combined demands of (a) Non-Railway 
Customers/export (b) Shunting operations (c) Inferior passenger services. 

 
 
22 
 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
No comments. 
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 As for the reasons for PLW not reviewing its procurement plan in 2014 
following the Railway Board's directive to stop production of mainline ALCO 
Locomotives; and not reconsidering the decision to procure the CNC machine, the 
Committee note from the information furnished that although the Railway Board had 
advised discontinuing manufacturing of new locomotives in 2014, the proposal for 
procuring the new machine was not dropped, because of the huge requirement of 
new engine blocks for replacing old engine blocks in the Zonal Railways. The fresh 
demand for new engine blocks was so high that even following the decision to stop 
manufacturing new Diesel locomotives, the new machine would have been fully 
utilised for manufacturing of the new engine blocks, required by Zonal Railways. The 
Railway Board had sanctioned a total of 1077 new engine blocks between 2012-13 
and 2017-18 under various annual rolling stock programs and PLW was entrusted 
with the responsibility of supplying of the new engine blocks to Zonal Railways. PLW 
had to procure a total of 1318 new engine blocks from private firms between 2013-14 
and 2020- 21 by following an arduous process of developing new sources. The 
Committee find that this had become imperative because the machining capacity 
available with PLW was inadequate and the commissioning of the new machine was 
getting delayed due to technical deficiencies. As for the manner in which PLW 
adapted to the policy change communicated by the Railway Board in June 2014, 
which called for stopping production of mainline ALCo Locomotives and whether the 
issue of going ahead with the procurement of the new CNC machine was assessed, 
the Committee note that the matter was well considered by PLW. While 
acknowledging the context in which the initial decision of procuring the CNC machine 
was taken, it is also evident that with the changing policy landscape, as 
communicated by the Railway Board in 2014, a thorough review of the procurement 
plan was a necessity. The Committee, therefore, do not find the reasons afforded by 
the Ministry for going ahead with the proposal for procuring the machine despite the 
changed policy dimension to the convincing; and recommend that the Ministry 
should own responsibility for the failure to review the proposal for purchasing the 
CNC machine in light of the change in policy. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry should establish a mechanism for periodic review of procurement 
policies in line with evolving directives to prevent recurrence of such infructuous 
expenditure in future.  
 

 
 
23 
 
The Committee in this regard also recommend in no uncertain words the Ministry to 
strengthen their due diligence at all stages of the decision-making process, from 
placing the initial request for procurement to commissioning and to implement 
measures to ensure efficient utilization of resources in alignment with the changing 
requirements. This may, inter-alia, involve periodic reassessment of production 
targets and reallocation of resources to areas of higher priority and need. It would be 
pertinent to 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96thReport I/3093996/2024 also bring out here that 
the Ministry should invariably assess the necessity and relevance of machinery 
prepared for being procured in light-of-evolving-policies. Further, the Committee 
express concern over the lack of documented internal discussions within PLW 
regarding the changing requirements following the Railway Board’s directive in 2014. 
Hence, the Committee recommend the Ministry to improve its internal 
communication channels which should encompass thorough documentation and 
decision-making processes. This will aid in transparency, accountability, and better 
understanding of the rationale behind critical decisions. The Committee also desires 
to be apprised of the cost benefit analysis that may have been done by the Ministry 
to adjudge whether it would have been economical to procure a CNC machine or 
directly procure additional new engine blocks from private firms. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
 Further, the Ministry of Railways has a very robust mechanism for sanctioning of 
machines under M&P programme. The proposal for sanctioning of a machine is received in 
Railway Board only after its departmental approval and financial vetting at Division and 
Zonal Railways/PUs level. The proposals compiled by Zonal Railways & PUs, thereafter, are 
sent to Railway Board for sanction. Keeping in view the limited resources, efforts are made 
to restrict sanction to essential items only after critical review of justification furnished for the 
procurement of the machine. 
 
 Sanctioned M&Ps are reviewed regularly in line with changing requirement of Zonal 
Railways/PUs and, if required, dropped also as per changing scenario. 
PLW has also initiated a formal system of critical reviewing the procurement cases of CNC 
machines, including the requirement of machines in light of any change in policy directives 
received from Railway Board. This review is being conducted on a quarterly basis. The 
changes in the Production plan or any policy changes due to Railway Board instruction are 
regularly taken in account during review. The minutes of these reviews are issued which will 
strengthen the documentation of internal discussions at PLW. 
 
 Further, at that point in time, i.e. FY 2010-11, BLW and PLW were the only units in 
Indian Railways that were capable of manufacturing/rebuilding ALCO engine blocks. No 
known private firm was existing in the country having proven capability of manufacturing new 

 
 
24 
 
ALCO engine blocks at that time. Therefore, cost benefit analysis regarding in-house 
manufacturing versus procurement from private firms was not feasible at that time. 
 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 
As far as compliance to the recommendation of the PAC at PLW is concerned, no further 
comments.  
 
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that the significant delay of over two and half years in the 
installation, commissioning and prove-out test of the CNC machine has been 
attributed entirely to the supplier and initially one of the trucks carrying machine parts 
in a container, met with a road accident in November 2016 in which some critical 
parts were damaged and had to be replaced; following the commencement of 
machining trials, it was found that the tooling used for machining of Serrations was 
not as per actual requirement; and subsequent to the commissioning, it was found 
that the machine was not able to achieve specified process capability requirements 
(Cpk parameter, which is basically repeated accuracy of machining over multiple 
operations). Later, PLW sought to transfer the CNC machine to some other Railway 
Unit and within six months of the commissioning i.e., in November, 2020 rejected the 
machine with the remarks 'no replacement required'. As far the reasons that 
prompted these steps, the Committee note from the information furnished that till 
2019-20 PLW was continuing to manufacture old engine blocks at full capacity. The 
requirement however came down abruptly, in view of decision taken by Ministry of 
Railways for 100% electrification. Consequently, PLW had to realign its working as 
per changed scenario and the attempt to offer the machine to some other workshop 
production unit through COFMOW, where it could be put to alternate use was made. 
Further, as the supplier could not meet the technical requirements of the contract 
even after repeated attempts, following the commissioning of the machine, the 
decision to reject the machine had to be taken in November 2020. As seen from the 
information furnished, there was no interest shown by any Indian Railway unit in 
accepting the machine. What the Committee find to be surprising is the fact that 
PLW sought to transfer the machine to some other workshop when it was already 
proven that it was incapable of obtaining the process capability requirements as 
prescribed in the contract and the same defect of process capability was popping up 
again and again, which could not be resolved. The Committee in this regard, would 
like to be apprised of the objectives that could have or were intended to be achieved 
by PLW by transferring a defective machine to some other workshop. 

 
 
25 
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 4 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
  
Action Taken 
 
The main reason for rejection of machine was non compliance to achieve the 
specified process capability requirements which was a contractual requirement and 
therefore its non compliance forced PLW to reject the machine. This parameter 
indicates the machining accuracy within a narrower tolerance band than the 
specified accuracy band when machine is new so that during its useful codal life 
operations the machining accuracy does not go beyond the specified requirement 
due to normal wear and tear in the machine. It means that the machine was 
functional and capable of performing its intended operations with slightly lesser 
accuracy requirements as mandated in engine block machining. Since Indian 
Railways has already made 80% payment to the firm and the machine had become 
the Indian Railways property, it was therefore necessary to explore alternate use of 
this machine, so that it could be fruitfully utilised elsewhere. The firm in any case 
was not showing any interest to rectify the machine as per contractual requirement. 
In this situation Railways would have withheld firm’s balance 20% payment along 
with forfeiture of Performance Guarantee and would have utilized the machine in 
sub-optimal conditions for some other applications on Indian Railways. As the effort 
of offering the machine to other Railways didn’t materialize, so PLW finally took a 
decision to reject the machine. 
 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
PLW (earlier DMW) in their Rejection Memo dated 05/11/2020 has mentioned that 
“None of 42 Engine Blocks machined so far has been without deviation in any of the 
key parameters”. In view of the same, Ministry of Railway’s justification that “Machine 
was functional and capable of performing its intended operation with slightly lesser 
accuracy” is not acceptable. MoR is requested to forward the ATR along with above 
Audit comments to the PAC for their consideration. 
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
The Ministry’s Comment to Audit Vetting Remarks 
 None of 42 Engine Blocks machined so far have been without deviation in any 
of the key parameters”. The said statement was mentioned in the rejection advice 
issued by PLW. This was informed in reply to PAC question pertaining to intended 
objective to be achieved by PLW transferring a defective machine to some other 
workshop.   

 
 
26 
 
 The above statement concludes that the machine was unable to meet the 
process capability requirements as per AT clause 3.2.8.1 in respect to bore size, 
Cpk value and serration pitch which are most critical parameters in engine block 
machining during its rebuilding. As per PLW, the machine was capable of performing 
the machining operations like boring, counter-boring, milling, serration milling, 
drilling, tapping and spot facing etc. with lesser accuracy requirements vis-à-vis that 
mandated for engine block machining. It was construed by PLW that the machine 
could have been used for machining operations (as mentioned above) on items/jobs 
other than engine blocks which didn’t require such higher level of accuracy. 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The delays and deficiencies in the commissioning of the CNC machine being 
attributable to the supplier, the Committee desire that the Ministry establish a robust 
'supplier oversight mechanism' so as to ensure timely delivery, adherence to 
technical specifications, and prompt resolution of any issues that may arise during 
the commissioning process of the machinery/equipment may be procured. This will 
help in mitigating the risk of project delays and financial losses. The Committee also 
express the need for developing and implementing comprehensive contingency 
plans to address potential disruptions in project timelines, including mechanisms to 
expedite the replacement of critical components in case of accidents or unforeseen 
circumstances. Further, considering the experience of the delay in the 
commissioning of the machine, the Committee recommend that the Ministry improve 
the modalities of documentation of deficiencies identified during commissioning, 
including specific details on how these deficiencies impact the functionality of the 
machine. Clear and comprehensive documentation wilt aid in the resolution of issues 
and facilitate a better understanding of the challenges faced during the 
commissioning process. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 5 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.  
Further, COFMOW (the central procurement agency of IR) and ultimate consignee 
normally coordinate with each other on a regular basis during the commissioning 
process of the machine, so that all timelines are met as per contractual 
requirements. There are contractual provisions, wherein Liquidated Damages 
(normally @ ½% per week) are imposed for delays at any milestones stages, 
defined in the contract. Despite all these checks, in this particular case, there were 
delays in supply and commissioning due to highly complex nature of the machine 
and also due to un-anticipated accident during transport. Notwithstanding the above, 

 
 
27 
 
as advised by Hon’ble PAC, PLW would work to make its systems more robust so 
that timely review of the purchase process and stage wise monitoring is done 
effectively and well documented to avoid any kind of delays in the project execution 
process.  
PLW will also improve the documentation during the commissioning process to 
identify any deficiencies that may impact the functionality of machine. 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
 
 
 Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
As far as compliance to the recommendation of the PAC at PLW is concerned, no 
further comments. 
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
From the information available, the Committee note that 80% of the payment 
towards procuring the CNC machine was made to the supplier before the actual 
shipment. The Committee wish to be apprised of the reasoning behind agreeing to 
this payment schedule, and safeguards, if any, that may have been put in place to 
protect the Ministry's interests in the event of non-compliance by the supplier. As 
regards action initiated and taken to mitigate the loss caused, the Committee note 
that COFMOW had encashed performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) for Rs. 
2,55,55,519/- submitted by the firm on 22.09.2023 and gave an advisory for 
recovering the cost of the machine. Considering the information furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee are appalled to observe that instead of taking measures for 
returning the defective machine directly and claiming the entire refund from the 
supplier, COFMOW sought to transfer the defective machine to some other Railway 
unit and issued an advice for recovering the costs. The Committee are of the view 
that atleast now the COFMOW should take recourse to legal measures for 
reclaiming the whole amount paid to the supplier, directly. The Committee also 
recommend that, especially in case of transactions involving suppliers outside India, 
the Ministry ought to review the 'agreement clauses' with a view to ensuring the 
financial interests are adequately protected in case of delay or deficiencies 
attributable to the supplier. The Committee also recommend that, in future 
procurements, the Ministry considers all viable options and selects the most suitable 
solution to meet its manufacturing or maintenance needs, and minimizing the risk of 
encountering deficiencies or delays. The Committee also feel that it would be 
appropriate for the Ministry to establish a comprehensive supplier developing and 
handholding programme for identifying, developing and providing technological 

 
 
28 
 
support for Indian suppliers so that they could be an integral part of the 'Make in 
India' supply chain system.  
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 6 of 96th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. Further, it is 
submitted that 80% of the payment towards procuring the CNC machine was not made to 
the supplier before the actual shipment but after shipment and submission of documents by 
the supplier to the bank in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. In the 
subject case, tender was a global tender and contract was on Free on Board (FOB) basis. 
FOB means that the seller delivers the goods loaded onto a vessel nominated by the buyer 
at the named port of shipment and gets the goods cleared for export. In the subject case, the 
payment to the supplier was made after pre-inspection of machine and its dispatch and 
submission of documents by the supplier to the bank fulfilling the conditions of letter of credit 
as per the contract. Encashment of Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) was done in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. All Railway Units were advised for 
recovering the balance payment of the machine from the defaulting supplier. 
As per the contract, the place of consignee was Patiala Locomotive Works (PLW) and PLW 
currently has the physical possession of the defective machine. The machine cannot be 
returned back to the supplier until either the supplier pays back entire amount or railway 
recovers the entire paid amount from the supplier from its other pending bills. As desired by 
the Hon’ble Committee, COFMOW will take recourse to legal measures for reclaiming the 
balance payment from the firm. 
 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
MoR has not furnished any ‘action taken reply’ with respect to following 
recommendations of the Committee:  
1. The Committee recommends that, especially in case of transactions involving 
suppliers outside India, the Ministry ought to review the ‘agreement clause’ with a 
view to ensuring the financial interest are adequately protected in case of delay or 
deficiencies attributable to the supplier.  
2. The Committee also recommends that, in future procurements, the Ministry 
considers all viable options and selects the most suitable solution to meet its 
manufacturing or maintenance needs and minimizes the risk of encountering 
deficiencies or delays.  
3. The Committee also feel that it would be appropriate for the Ministry to establish a 
comprehensive supplier developing and handholding programme for identifying, 

 
 
29 
 
developing and providing technological support for Indian suppliers so that they 
could be an integral part of the ‘Make in India’ supply chain system.  
MoR is requested to forward the ATR along with above Audit comments to the PAC 
for their consideration.  
(Audit vide their UO No. 277/Rly/NR/12-52/2020 dated. 23.04.2024) 
 
The Ministry’s Comment to Audit Vetting Remarks 
1. The committee has raised concerns on two specific issues:  
  i. Recourse of Legal action.  
  ii. Payment of 80% through Letter of Credit  
 
With regards to issue no. 1, it is submitted that recourse to take legal action is 
always open and as desired by the Committee, COFMOW has also confirmed that it 
will take recourse to Legal measures for reclaiming the balance payment from the 
firm.  
For issue 2, it is submitted that Payment through irrevocable Letter of Credit are part 
of standard agreement clauses.  
Para 6.4 of Manual for Procurement of Goods issued by Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure, states about terms of payment of imported Goods. Para 
6.4.1 (ii) specifically states that in Cases where installation, erection and 
commissioning are the responsibility of the supplier – 80-90 (eighty to ninety) percent 
net FOB/FAS/CFR/CIP price will be paid against the invoice, inspection certificate 
(where applicable), shipping documents, and so on, and balance within 21-30 
(twenty-one to thirty) days of successful installation and commissioning at the 
consignee’s premises and acceptance by the consignee. 
Para 6.4.2 of the Manual specifically states that: “For imported goods, payment 
usually happens through the LC opened by the State Bank on India or any other 
scheduled/authorized bank as decided by the procuring entity. The amount of LC 
should be equal to the total payable amount, and be released as per the clauses 
mentioned above. Provisions of Uniform Customs and Practices for Documentary 
Credits should be adhered to while opening the LC for import into India”.  
Thus, the existing clauses for payment through Letter of Credit are in line with the 
policy followed by Government of India.  
2. Noted for compliance.  
All Indian Railway tenders are done through Indian Railways E-Procurement System 
(IREPS) which ensures an open and transparent tendering process. The IREPS 
allows vendors from all over India to participate in the bidding process, fostering 
healthy competition and promoting regional development.  

 
 
30 
 
3. In order to promote local suppliers and manufacturers a set of instructions for 
implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) have been 
issued by Ministry of Railways over a period of time as per the Policy initiatives 
issued in this regard by GoI. These initiatives have been undertaken with a view to 
enable widespread participation of Indian Suppliers/Manufactures in the 
tenders/contracts of Railways for supply of Goods/Services/Works. Instructions have 
specifically been issued for guidance and compliance by Railway Units that terms 
and conditions of the tenders are not restrictive and discriminatory against the Indian 
suppliers which result in unreasonable exclusion of local suppliers. 
(Ministry of Railways/ Railway Board; OM No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/96th Report; Dated 
03.05.2024) 
  

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                            K.C. Venugopal 
12  December, 2024            Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana 1946 (Saka)    Public Accounts Committee  

 
 
34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 9th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 12th DECEMBER 2024 FROM 1530 HRS. ONWARDS 
The Committee met on Thursday from 1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 12th December, 
2024 in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6. Prof. Sougata Ray 
7. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
10. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
11. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12.   Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
13.   Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
14.   Dr. K. Laxman 
15.   Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
16.   Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Mehta  - Deputy Secretary 
7. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
4. Shri Gurveen Sindhu - Director General 
 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following three draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 96th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Injudicious Procurement of an additional CNC Horizontal Boring and Milling 
Machine: Patiala Locomotive Works”; 
b) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; and 
c) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX. 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in 
the light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting 
has been kept on record. 
 
 
******** 
  

 
 
36 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY SIXTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 06 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 
 
Total: 06 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  
  
 
 
***************** 