15 
AUDIT OF PAY & ALLOWANCES IN 
POLICE DEPARTMENT, UT, CHANDIGARH  
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 122nd Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)]  
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
PAC NO. 2409 
 
 
F I F T E E N T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 122nd Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
                             
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
  Presented to Lok Sabha on:  21-03-2025 
                            Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  20-03-2025 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
March 2025/ Phalguna 1946 (Saka)  
AUDIT OF PAY & ALLOWANCES IN 
POLICE DEPARTMENT, UT, 
CHANDIGARH  

i 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25)              (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                        (iii) 
CHAPTER I  Report                                                                           
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                replies of the Government have not been accepted   
                 by the Committee and which require reiteration 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                the Government have furnished interim replies 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Public Accounts (2024- 25) held on                  
12.02.2025 
II   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee on Public Accounts 
contained in their One Hundred Twenty Second Report  (17th  Lok Sabha) 
  

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
 
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Vijay Mishra                -                  Committee Officer 
  
 
  

iii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty second Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on “Audit of Pay & Allowances in Police Department, UT, Chandigarh” relating to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  
  
2.       The One Hundred and Twenty second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024. The Committee considered the 
draft Action Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 
12th February, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the 
Report. 
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
  
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
  
5.        An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 122nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accounts deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One Hundred and Twenty Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Audit of Pay & 
Allowances in Police Department, UT, Chandigarh” based on Para 3.2 of C&AG 
Report No. 24 of 2022  pertaining to Ministry of Home Affairs. 
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024. The Report contained seven 
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry Home Affairs 
and are categorized as under: 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 & 7 
                 Total:       7        
                 Chapter –II  
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para Nos. NIL 
                 Total:       0 
                Chapter – III 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
                                
                   Para Nos.  NIL     
                                                     
Total:        0 
                     Chapter – IV 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
           Para Nos.    NIL    
            Total:        0   
                                        Chapter–  V                                     
 
 
3. The Committee’s examination of the subject ‘Audit of Pay & Allowances in Police 
Department, UT, Chandigarh’    revealed significant irregularities primarily stemming 

2 
 
from deficiencies in internal controls and IT systems, compounded by negligence 
among Drawing & Disbursing Officers under the Director General of Police, UT 
Chandigarh. Audit scrutiny found that inappropriate payments totaling Rs. 1.60 Crore, 
including pay, allowances, LTC, and other benefits, were disbursed to police personnel 
during 2017-2020. While Rs. 1.10 Crore had been recovered following audit scrutiny, 
bills and vouchers for various payments remain untraceable, hampering assurance on 
payment accuracy. Multiple issues such as excess conveyance allowance, salary 
overpayments, non-recovery of inadmissible payments, irregularities in compensatory 
pay, house rent allowance, leave encashment, and questionable pay arrears were also 
revealed by Audit. The Committee had accordingly given their 
Observations/Recommendations in their One Hundred and Twenty Second Report. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and 
Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with 
the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations 
which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter- I 
within three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.  
 
6.  The Committee in their original Report No, 122 (17thL.S)had recommended as 
under:-   
“While examining the subject, the Committee take note of the Ministry's efforts to 
update the software and prevent irregularities. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend continuous efforts be undertaken in enhancing internal control 
measures. This includes regular reviews and updates to the existing system to 
prevent loopholes that may lead to financial irregularities. Ongoing vigilance is 
crucial to maintaining the effectiveness of internal controls. The Committee would 
also like to suggest periodic assessments to identify emerging risks and address 
them promptly. By fostering a proactive approach, the Ministry can ensure the 
sustained integrity of financial processes.”  
[Recommendation Para No.1] 
 
7. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, with the help of NIC, UT, Chandigarh 
has capped the allowances to the maximum limits and updated the software according 

3 
 
to admissibility of allowances in 7th Central Pay Commission as per recommendations 
of C&AG. Further, regular audit is being conducted by the AG, UT, Chandigarh. Test 
checks has also been applied to plug the loopholes. “  
8. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: - 
 
“Efforts made to establish strong internal controls needs to be apprised.” 
 
9. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
 
“To implement a robust system of Internal Audit and in order to implement the 
check and balances in the financial matters, Chandigarh Administration has initiated the 
process for creation of Accounts and Internal Audit Cell consisting of 05 posts of 
Accounts Functionaries, which is under process. 
 
10.  The Committee had acknowledged the Ministry's efforts to update software 
and enhance internal controls to prevent financial irregularities. In light of the 
recent developments reported by the Chandigarh Administration, including the 
capping of allowances and regular audit being conducted by AG, UT, Chandigarh, 
the Committee recommend that these initiatives be further strengthened through 
continuous evaluation and updation of requisite software. This should also 
involve regular monitoring and reviews of the existing systems to close any 
potential loopholes. The Committee emphasize the need for ongoing vigilance and 
periodic assessments to identify emerging risks, ensuring that any issues are 
promptly addressed. The Committee have been informed about initiation of steps 
towards creation of Accounts and Internal Audit Cell by Chandigarh 
Administration. In this regard, the Committee desire that they be apprised of the 
updated action taken towards creation of the Cell. The Committee further 
recommend a proactive approach by the Ministry towards maintaining internal 
controls so as to preserve the integrity of financial processes while effectively 
mitigating risks associated with fund disbursement. 
 
  
11.  The Committee in their original Report No, 122 (17thL.S) had recommended as 
under:-  
“The Committee observe substantial discrepancies, particularly in 
the disbursement of funds within the Department. They note from the 
Audit findings that inadmissible payments totaling to Rs.1.60 crore were 
made to Police personnel due to internal and IT control deficiencies. In 
light of this, the Committee recommend for swift initiation of recovery 
procedures to reclaim the entire amount. Furthermore, the Committee 
stress the importance of assigning responsibility for the lapses in 

4 
 
disbursement, urging a clear delineation of accountability for Drawing and 
Disbursing Officers.” 
   [Recommendation Para No.4] 
 
 
12. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 
“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, due recoveries have been made 
from the beneficiaries/police personnel and an amount of Rs.21.53 lakh is outstanding 
as on 02/2024. Rs. 3.07 lakh is pending against absentee/retired/deceased police 
personnel out of which Rs. 2,06,651 is under recovery from one police personnel who 
was going absent earlier but has joined duty now, therefore, the recovery is expected to 
be made by January 2025 and for balance of Rs. 1,01,232, the Chandigarh Police 
Department is making efforts to recover the amount from the families of deceased 
police personnel. Recovery of the remaining amount of Rs.18.46 lakh is under process, 
out of which (i) an amount of Rs. 8,83,422 is expected to be recovered by January 
2025, (ii) bill of Rs. 56,329 has been traced out by the crime branch and payment has 
been verified and found genuine, hence, not to be recovered, (iii) case to recover Rs. 
5,07,171 from DCRG has been referred to AG, UT, Chandigarh, (iv) for an amount of 
Rs 2,71,270, bank account has been freezed and recovery is to be made after obtaining 
orders from appropriate court of law (District and Sessions Court, Chandigarh) and (v) 
for an amount of Rs. 1,27,270, it is submitted that concerned official was under 
suspension and his subsistence allowance was also stopped as he had not been 
reporting, hence, recovery will be re-initiated once he joins duty.  
A case FIR No.25 has already been registered at PS-3, Chandigarh which is 
under investigation by crime branch and the dealing hands responsible for preparing 
such bills of inadmissible payments have been suspended and 13 officials have been 
arrested so far by the Crime Branch during the investigation of case and departmental 
action has also been initiated against them. Further, regular departmental enquires 
have also been initiated against other delinquent officials to ascertain their roles in 
embezzlement so that penal action also be taken against the defaulters. 
 The accountability of DDOs can only be ascertained upon the outcome of 
investigation and will be reported after outcome of investigation.” 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: - 
 
“Final action still awaited.” 
 
14. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
 
“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, an amount of Rs.20,93,641/- is 
outstanding as on 06/2024, out of which Rs.5,17,808/- is under recovery and is 
expected to be fully recovered by Jan, 2025.  Rs.1,01,232/- is outstanding against 
deceased/absentee and department is trying to making correspondence with families of 
such officials to recover the amount with the help of SIT.  Rs.12,91,002/- is outstanding 
against a retired official namely Sh. Jasvir Singh, 1062/CP and the Police department, 
Chandigarh has submitted an application in the District Court, UT of Chandigarh to 

5 
 
recover the amount from him out of the seized amount of Rs.32.00 lakhs. Rs.56,329/- 
has been verified and not to be recovered.   An amount of Rs.1,27,270/- is also 
outstanding against one official who is under suspension.The amount will be recovered 
as soon as he reports to the Police Department, Chandigarh. “  
 
 
 
15. The Committee had observed significant discrepancies in the 
disbursement of funds within the Department, particularly regarding inadmissible 
payments totaling Rs. 1.60 crore made to Police personnel due to deficiencies in 
internal and IT controls. In light of the ongoing recovery efforts, which have 
resulted in an outstanding amount of Rs.20,93,641/- as on 06/2024, the Committee 
recommend that the Chandigarh Administration prioritize the swift recovery of 
this amount. The Committee also stress the importance of establishing clear 
accountability for all Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) involved in these 
disbursements, with accountability measures based on the outcomes of ongoing 
investigations. The Committee further urge the implementation of internal control 
measures including enhanced IT controls and comprehensive training programs 
for officials involved in financial management, to prevent future discrepancies. 
The Committee also desire periodic reports on recovery progress and 
investigation outcomes until all issues are resolved. 
 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation:- 
 
While examining the subject, the Committee take note of the Ministry's efforts to 
update the software and prevent irregularities. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend continuous efforts be undertaken in enhancing internal control measures. 
This includes regular reviews and updates to the existing system to prevent loopholes 
that may lead to financial irregularities. Ongoing vigilance is crucial to maintaining the 
effectiveness of internal controls. The Committee would also like to suggest periodic 
assessments to identify emerging risks and address them promptly. By fostering a 
proactive approach, the Ministry can ensure the sustained integrity of financial 
processes. 
 
[ Para 1 of the 122nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, with the help of NIC, UT, Chandigarh 
has capped the allowances to the maximum limits and updated the software according 
to admissibility of allowances in 7th Central Pay Commission as per recommendations 
of C&AG. Further, regular audit is being conducted by the AG, UT, Chandigarh. Test 
checks has also been applied to plug the loopholes.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Efforts made to establish strong internal controls needs to be apprised. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
To implement a robust system of Internal Audit and in order to implement the 
check and balances in the financial matters, Chandigarh Administration has initiated the 
process for creation of Accounts and Internal Audit Cell consisting of 05 posts of 
Accounts Functionaries, which is under process. 
 
 
Sd/- 
(Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter- I for comments of the Committee) 
 
 

7 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee also note the payment issue which occurred during the probation 
period and the ongoing review of policies. The Committee recommend expeditious 
clarification and establishment of clear guidelines for payments during the probationary 
period. This, in their opinion, is essential to prevent ambiguity and ensure adherence to 
standard procedures. The Ministry should promptly finalize the review of policies and 
provide clear directives regarding payment protocols for personnel during their 
probationary period. A transparent and well-defined policy framework will not only avoid 
potential financial irregularities but also promote consistency and fairness in payment 
practices. 
 
[Para 2 of the 122nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, it is submitted that w.e.f. 01.04.2022, 
the service conditions for employees of UT, Chandigarh are governed by Central Civil 
Services Rules as per Govt. of India MHA Notification No.G.S.R 230(E) dated 
29.03.2022. In central civil services rules, full pay and allowances are admissible during 
the probation period. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
No further comments, please. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
 
Sd/- 
                  (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
 
  

8 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee acknowledge the ongoing efforts to trace missing bills. The 
Committee, here, recommend implementing robust record-keeping measures, including 
digitization, to enhance traceability and accountability. They feel that thorough 
documentation is crucial for transparency and effective audit processes. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should prioritize the completion of digitization efforts for all 
relevant records, ensuring a comprehensive and easily accessible database. This will 
facilitate efficient tracking of bills and vouchers thus minimizing the risk of missing 
documents. The Committee would like to encourage the Ministry to establish stringent 
procedures for record maintenance to prevent future challenges in document retrieval. 
 
[Para 3 of the 122nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the Police Department is now 
exercising to prepare various e-bills such contingency payments, payment of education 
allowance, Dress Allowance etc. to ensure digitization of office records. Salary Bills are 
already being prepared through e-Sevarth portal.  E-Office is also being used in the 
department to ensure digitization of office procedures and maintenance of office records 
and its retrieval.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
No further comments, please. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
  
 
                                 Sd/- 
                (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee observe substantial discrepancies, particularly in the 
disbursement of funds within the Department. They note from the Audit findings that 
inadmissible payments totaling to Rs.1.60 crore were made to Police personnel due to 
internal and IT control deficiencies. In light of this, the Committee recommend for swift 
initiation of recovery procedures to reclaim the entire amount. Furthermore, the 
Committee stress the importance of assigning responsibility for the lapses in 
disbursement, urging a clear delineation of accountability for Drawing and Disbursing 
Officers. 
[ Para 4 of the 122nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, due recoveries have been made from 
the beneficiaries/police personnel and an amount of Rs.21.53 lakh is outstanding as on 
02/2024. Rs. 3.07 lakh is pending against absentee/retired/deceased police personnel 
out of which Rs. 2,06,651 is under recovery from one police personnel who was going 
absent earlier but has joined duty now, therefore, the recovery is expected to be made 
by January 2025 and for balance of Rs. 1,01,232, the Chandigarh Police Department is 
making efforts to recover the amount from the families of deceased police personnel. 
Recovery of the remaining amount of Rs.18.46 lakh is under process, out of which (i) an 
amount of Rs. 8,83,422 is expected to be recovered by January 2025, (ii) bill of Rs. 
56,329 has been traced out by the crime branch and payment has been verified and 
found genuine, hence, not to be recovered, (iii) case to recover Rs. 5,07,171 from 
DCRG has been referred to AG, UT, Chandigarh, (iv) for an amount of Rs 2,71,270, 
bank account has been freezed and recovery is to be made after obtaining orders from 
appropriate court of law (District and Sessions Court, Chandigarh) and (v) for an 
amount of Rs. 1,27,270, it is submitted that concerned official was under suspension 
and his subsistence allowance was also stopped as he had not been reporting, hence, 
recovery will be re-initiated once he joins duty.  
A case FIR No.25 has already been registered at PS-3, Chandigarh which is 
under investigation by crime branch and the dealing hands responsible for preparing 
such bills of inadmissible payments have been suspended and 13 officials have been 
arrested so far by the Crime Branch during the investigation of case and departmental 
action has also been initiated against them. Further, regular departmental enquires 
have also been initiated against other delinquent officials to ascertain their roles in 
embezzlement so that penal action also be taken against the defaulters. 
 The accountability of DDOs can only be ascertained upon the outcome of 
investigation and will be reported after outcome of investigation. 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Final action still awaited. 

10 
 
 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, an amount of Rs.20,93,641/- is 
outstanding as on 06/2024, out of which Rs.5,17,808/- is under recovery and is 
expected to be fully recovered by Jan, 2025.  Rs.1,01,232/- is outstanding against 
deceased/absentee and department is trying to making correspondence with families of 
such officials to recover the amount with the help of SIT.  Rs.12,91,002/- is outstanding 
against a retired official namely Sh. Jasvir Singh, 1062/CP and the Police department, 
Chandigarh has submitted an application in the District Court, UT of Chandigarh to 
recover the amount from him out of the seized amount of Rs.32.00 lakhs. Rs.56,329/- 
has been verified and not to be recovered.   An amount of Rs.1,27,270/- is also 
outstanding against one official who is under suspension.The amount will be recovered 
as soon as he reports to the Police Department, Chandigarh.   
 
 
                                   Sd/- 
   (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter- I for comments of the Committee) 
  

11 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
In addressing specific instances of financial irregularities, the Committee 
emphasize the need for disciplinary measures against officials responsible for making 
incorrect entries that resulted in unauthorized benefits. They are also inclined to 
recommend corrective actions be taken to ensure adherence to established rules and 
regulations.  
[ Para 5 of the 122nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, a case FIR No.25 has already been 
registered at PS-3, Chandigarh which is under investigation by crime branch and the 
dealing hands responsible for preparing such bills of inadmissible payments have been 
suspended and 13 officials have been arrested so far by the Crime Branch during the 
investigation of case and departmental action has also been initiated against them. 
However, regular departmental enquires have also been initiated against other 
delinquent officials to ascertain their roles in embezzlement so that penal action also be 
taken against the defaulters.   With the help of NIC, various checks such as capping of 
maximum admissibility of allowances, inclusion of Date of Retirement has also been 
applied. Periodical internal checks are also being applied to ensure adherence to 
established rules and regulations. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
In view of the initiations taken by the Ministry, no further comments, please. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
 (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
To ensure financial accuracy, the Committee would like to stress upon a 
comprehensive internal check, specifically for Pay, arrears, LTC, TA, Medical claims 
etc. This internal audit should be conducted regularly to rectify excess, double, or 
inadmissible payments, thereby safeguarding against future financial irregularities. 
[ Para 6 of the 122nd  Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, with the help of NIC, various checks 
such as capping of maximum admissibility of allowances, inclusion of Date of 
Retirement has also been applied. Periodical internal checks are also being applied to 
ensure adherence to established rules and regulations and avoid any overpayments.  
To implement a robust system of internal audit, a proposal is also under process for 
creation of 05 posts of Accounts functionaries. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Proposal to establish Robust system of internal audit is pending. Final action 
taken would be awaited. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
To implement a robust system of Internal Audit and in order to implement the 
check and balances in the financial matters, Chandigarh Administration has initiated the 
process for creation of Accounts and Internal Audit Cell consisting of 05 posts of 
Accounts Functionaries which is under process. 
 
 
 
                                 Sd/- 
 (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
 
 
  

13 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
Recognizing the pivotal role of IT systems in financial management, the 
Committee would also like to underscore the importance of a thorough review to be 
undertaken. They would recommend the incorporation of provisions in the system to 
promptly deactivate the salary accounts of retired or terminated employees, with the aim 
of recovering Rs.1.60 crore of inadmissible payments. They would also recommend that 
validation checks within the IT systems should be implemented to cap various 
allowances at their maximum limits, and thereby mitigate the risk of overpayments. 
[Para 7of the 122nd  Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, with the help of NIC, UT, Chandigarh, 
various checks such as capping of maximum admissibility of allowances, inclusion of 
Date of Retirement has also been applied.  Moreover, now enhancement in pay of 
officials other than annual increment have been started to be mapped with the approval 
of Central Treasury, UT, Chandigarh thereby ensuring double checks to avoid over 
disbursal of salary. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
No further comments, please. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
  
 
 
                   Sd/- 
   (Ashutosh Agnihotri) 
Additional Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/5/2022-CPD(CHD) dated   October,2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/no replies 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NEW DELHI:           
12 February, 2025                               
 23 Magha 1946 (Saka)   
                        
 
                     K.C. VENUGOPAL  
                     Chairperson, 
           Committee on Public Accounts 
  
  
 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

18 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. XXXXX 
b. XXXXX  
c. XXXXX  
d. XXXXX  
e. XXXXX  
f. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 

19 
 
122nd Report (17th LS) on ‘Audit of Pay and Allowances in Police 
Department, UT,  Chandigarh’ 
g. XXXXX  
h. XXXXX 
i. XXXXX 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
07 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4,5,6 and 7 
 
Total: 07 
Percentage: 
100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which the Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 