 
 
 
26 
 
“IRREGULARITIES IN RECEIPT AND 
UTILISATION OF COMPENSATION” AND 
“GROSSLY IRREGULAR AND MANIPULATED 
AWARD AND EXECUTION OF WORK RELATING 
TO THE RENOVATION OF THE BASEMENT AT 
INDIA HOUSE, LONDON, LEADING TO UNDUE 
BENEFITS BEING EXTENDED TO THE 
CONTRACTOR”  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 87th Report (17th 
Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY- SIXTH   REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
PAC NO.2420   T W E N T Y  S I X T H  R E P O R T     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)  (EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA)          
 
     [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 87th Report (17th Lok Sabha)]  MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS    Presented to Lok Sabha on:  29.07.2025  Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  29.07.2025    L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I    July, 2025/ Shravana,1947 (Saka)   
“IRREGULARITIES IN RECEIPT AND UTILISATION OF COMPENSATION” AND “GROSSLY IRREGULAR AND MANIPULATED AWARD AND EXECUTION OF WORK RELATING TO THE RENOVATION OF THE BASEMENT AT INDIA HOUSE, LONDON, LEADING TO UNDUE BENEFITS BEING EXTENDED TO THE CONTRACTOR” 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                    (iii) 
 COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................    (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................      1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024-25) 
held on 17.06.2025.  
II Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Eighty Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma         - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P      - Director 
3. Smt. Malvika Mehta          - Deputy Secretary  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty Seventh Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on “Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of compensation and 
Grossly irregular and manipulated award and execution of work relating to the 
renovation of the basement at India House, London, leading to undue benefits 
being extended to the Contractor”.  
 
2. The Eighty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
7th February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 
17th June, 2025 Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.   An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighty Seventh Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
  
 
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
                 Public Accounts Committee 
  
  

 
 
Chapter I 
Report 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government i.e. the Ministry of External Affairs on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty Seventh Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on “Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of compensation” and 
"Grossly irregular and manipulated award and execution of work relating to the 
renovation of the basement at India House, London, leading to undue benefits 
being extended to the Contractor". 
2. The Eighty Seventh Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 07 
February, 2024, contained 05 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations /Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of External Affairs and are broadly categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para No. 2& 5 
          Total:02 
           Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No.: Nil 
     Total:NIL 
            Chapter:III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para No.: 1 
     Total:01 
            Chapter: IV 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: 3&4 
Total: 02 
        Chapter: V 

 
 
 
3. The Committee’s examination of the aforesaid subject had revealed gross 
irregularities in receipt and utilization of compensation as well as award and execution 
of work by the High Commission of India, London. In the first para, the Committee had 
noted that the High Commission of India had irregularly engaged a private party, 
authorising it to receive and retain government receipts of ₹ 78.41 lakh in its private 
bank account and disburse a substantial part of the receipts towards the Mission’s own 
expenditure. 
In the second para, the Committee had observed that High Commission of India, 
London undertook work relating to renovation of the basement at the India House, at a 
cost of GBP (British Pound) 744,971 (approx.₹ 6.63 crore at that time), without prior 
approval from the Ministry of External Affairs. The initial award of the work was made to 
an ineligible company through an irregular and manipulated tendering process which 
was followed by award of extra work to the same company without tendering, thereby 
extending undue benefit to it. Further, additional work was awarded based on fraudulent 
quotations, to an associated ineligible company, which was incorporated immediately 
prior to the award of work and dissolved following receipt of payments.  
4. The Committee had recommended that action be taken for initiating 
criminal proceedings against those involved in such irregularities; thattraining may 
mandatorily be given on relevant rules and regulations to all officials who are posted in 
Missions so as to obviate recurrence of such irregularities;that the extant internal audit 
mechanism within the Ministry/ Missions may be urgently revamped and strengthened 
and the mandate/ terms of reference of internal audit be extended to include transaction 
and compliance audit and specific timelines for taking action on the observations of 
internal audit may be prescribed;that the online dashboard onboarding all major 
construction & renovations projects be established on priority within a strict 
timeframeand a special audit of the Missions may be carried out.    
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs in respect of 
all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as contained in their Eighty 
Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this 
Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 

 
 
of their Observations /Recommendations made in the original report which merit 
comments. 
6.      The Committee desire the Ministry of External Affairs (henceforth referred to 
as ‘the Ministry’) to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapters I and V within three months of the 
presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 - Criminal case/ major penalty 
7. The Committee in their original report no. 87 had recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee note Audit’s findings that the Mission took a decision to accept 
compensation of GBP 90,000 from a property Developer without the approval of 
the Ministry and without any documented justification for the amount accepted. It 
also irregularly authorized a private party to receive and retain government 
receipts by way of the compensation paid by the Developer amounting to Rs. 
78.41 lakh in its private bank account. Further, in violation of rules, the Mission 
allowed use of these receipts directly to incur expenditure. In addition, actions 
and decisions taken by Mission functionaries were not adequately documented to 
obscure these gross irregularities and the Ministry was systematically kept in the 
dark in the matter. 
In the other case, the Mission undertook renovation works costing GBP 744,971 
(approx. Rs. 6.63 crore) without authority and due approvals, and resorted to 
irregular splitting of works to evade approvals from higher authority and open 
bidding. It adopted a grossly manipulated process for award of works to the same 
person, and made post facto additions and alteration in the scope of work which 
led to undue benefits being extended to Contractors.  
The Ministry’s response on the matter that no mala fide intent could be 
established with evidence is intriguing. Evidently there has been an open 
violation of rules and processes which is also indicative of supervisory failure and 
possible collusion between Mission officials and the agencies. Further, the 
Inquiry Committee that was formed by the Ministry also concurred with Audit’s 
findings.  Considering the facts of the matter in entirety, a far more stringent 
action should have been initiated and taken in the matter, whereas the Ministry 
merely restricted it to disciplinary proceedings. The Committee, therefore desire 
that action be taken for initiating criminal proceedings against those involved in 
such irregularities and the Committee be apprised thereof.” 
 
8.  The Ministry in their Action taken notes (ATNs) submitted the following 
reply:- 

 
 
“Upon a comprehensive review, it has been found that there were certain 
irregularities in the transactions under scrutiny.  In response to these 
findings, the Ministry has already undertaken punitive measures after 
following an exhaustive inquiry process. In light of the punitive actions 
already initiated by the Ministry and in the absence of necessary evidence 
to support criminal charges against the concerned officials, the Ministry is 
of the view that pursuing criminal proceedings against the concerned 
officials may not be warranted.”  
 
 
9. Audit gave the following comments on the ATNs:- 
 
“PAC may take a view on the Ministry’s reply that criminal proceedings 
against the concerned officials may not be warranted in absence of 
necessary evidence.” 
 
10. The Committee had observed that there had been an open violation of 
rules and processes by the High Commission, London in both the paras 
viz. accepting compensation from a property Developer without the 
approval of the Ministry and without any documented justification for the 
amount accepted; irregularly authorizing a private party to receive and 
retain government receipts and using them to incur expenditure of the 
Mission and undertaking renovation works without authority and due 
approvals irregularly splitting them and manipulatingthe process for award 
of works. This according to the Committee was indicative of supervisory 
failure and possible collusion between Mission officials and the agencies 
and therefore, the Committee had recommended that action be taken for 
initiating criminal proceedings against those involved in such irregularities 
and the Committee be apprised thereof.  
 The Committee are pained to note the feeble reply of the Ministry that 
punitive action has already been initiated by the Ministry and that there is 
absence of necessary evidence to support criminal charges against the 
concerned officials. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
Ministry is trying to protect the delinquent officers when audit has clearly 
established violation of rules and processes. The Committee have been 
time and again witnessing such cases of violation of existing rules and 
guidelines by missions abroad and strongly feel that a strong deterrent 
action must be taken to obviate recurrences of such instances. The 
Committee, accordingly, reiterate their recommendation and exhort the 
Ministry to initiate criminal proceedings against the responsible officers.  
 
 

 
 
Recommendation No. 3 - Revamping and strengthening of the Internal Audit 
Mechanism 
11.  The Committee made the following observation/recommendation in their original 
report:- 
“The Committee, in their earlier reports (30th and 61st Reports (16th LS) and 112nd 
Report (16th LS)   and 17th Report (17th LS)) have continuously emphasized on 
the need for a strong and robust internal audit mechanism within the Ministry of 
External Affairs to audit its Missions abroad. However, the Committee are 
extremely disappointed to note that the response of the Ministry has been very 
casual.  In the instant cases, the Ministry found out about such irregularities after 
Audit highlighted them. Apart from this, the Ministry's response, which states that 
the internal audit set up has not brought any particular cases to the Ministry's 
attention is a matter of concern to the Committee.  It appears from the Ministry's 
response that they are oblivious of the state of affairs of the Missions, given that 
the Audit has pointed to a widespread prevalence of such irregularities in almost 
all Missions.Furthermore, the deplorable state of affairs continuing in the 
Ministry's monitoring is revealed by the Ministry's statement that its performance 
evaluation and monitoring system has not discovered any systemic vulnerability 
in its administrative and financial controls and processes among its 206 
Missions/Posts spread throughout the world. Had Audit not pointed out the 
irregularities, the Ministry would have remained unaware of such acts of 
embezzlement being carried out right openly. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the extant internal audit mechanism within the Ministry/ 
Missions needs to be urgently revamped and strengthened. The Committee while 
noting from the reply of the Ministry that Internal Audit of the Monthly Cash 
Accounts of Indian Missions/Posts abroad are carried out by the Office of Pr. 
Chief Controller of Accounts, MEA as per approved Annual Audit Plan desire that 
the mandate/ terms of reference of internal audit be extended to include 
transaction and compliance audit and specific timelines for taking action  on the 
observations of internal audit may also be prescribed.” 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
“The Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts in the Ministry has been 
instructed to conduct remote audits/test checks for all Missions, periodically, 
using the IMAS data/Vouchers & Notings being sent by Missions to 
Headquarters. The Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts has also been 
instructed to coordinate its audit calendar/cycle with the audits being carried out 
by C&AG (including its offices abroad) in order to ensure that each Mission 
undergoes at least one audit (internal or C&AG) during a 3–4 year period.” 
13. The following are the vetting comments of Audit on the reply:- 
 

 
 
“The checklists prepared for such remote audits/ test checks, the details of the 
remote audits conducted and the findings of such audits along with the 
effectiveness of the remote audits/test checks may be submitted to the PAC.” 
 
14.  The Ministry submitted the following reply on the observations of Audit :- 
 
“Check lists and details for remote audits/ test checks are being compiled by the 
Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts, Ministry of External Affairs.” 
 
15.  Inview of the failure of the Ministry in finding out irregularities of the 
nature pointed out by Audit, the Committee had recommended that the 
extant internal audit mechanism within the Ministry/ Missions may be 
urgently revamped and that the mandate/ terms of reference of internal 
audit be extended to include transaction and compliance audit and specific 
timelines for taking actionon the observations of internal audit may be 
prescribed. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that Office of 
the Principal Controller of Accounts in the Ministry has been instructed to 
conduct remote audits/test checks for all Missions periodicallyand to 
ensure that each Mission undergoes at least one audit (internal or C&AG) 
during a 3 - 4 year period. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
details of such remote audit conducted from the last five years till date and 
their findings. Further, the Committee are disappointed to note that there is 
no specific response of the Ministry on the revamping ofthe internal audit 
mechanism or on the inclusionof transaction and compliance audit of the 
Missions. The Committee emphasize that revamping of the internal audit 
mechanism is of paramount importance given the frequent occurrence and 
non-detection of such cases of blatant violation of rules and regulations. 
Internal audit will help uncover potential risks, vulnerabilities, and areas of 
weakness within the Missions allowing for proactive risk management and 
mitigation strategies to be developed. The Committee therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and desire to be apprised of the progress in this 
regard. 
Recommendation No. 4 - Measures being taken for monitoring of projects and 
functioning of Missions 
16. The Committee in their original report recommended as under 
“The Committee observe that the instant cases have revealed a severe short 
coming in the monitoring of Missions by the Ministry. Despite the efforts of the 
Ministry to simplify the procedural complexity by standardization of 
documents/templates and detailed guidelines, the Committee are of the view that 
the irregularities pointed out here which reveal open subversion of rules and 
processes are indicative of persistent failure in Monitoring by the Ministry. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that a Performance Evaluation and 

 
 
Monitoring System - PEMS 3.0 has been rolled out for monitoring of 
Missions/Posts operations, results of which are made part of periodic inspections 
of the Missions/Posts. The Committee also note that Ministry is in process of 
establishing an online dashboard on boarding all major construction & 
renovations projects for real-time monitoring, addressing queries, challenges, 
taking remedial measures etc. Further, a Contract cum project management unit 
is also being established for aiding Missions/Posts in contract & project 
management. The Committee expect the Ministry to appropriately accommodate 
in the proposed system necessary measures for avoiding lapses such as the 
ones pointed out by Audit. The Committee desire that the aforesaid dashboard 
and project management unit may be established on priority within a strict 
timeframe, the impact of the measures taken may be assessed and the 
Committee be apprised thereof.” 
 
17. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
“The setting up of a Project Management Unit in the Ministry is underway 
and the progress in this regard is being closely monitored. The work 
related to development of an online dashboard for monitoring of real estate 
projects is progressing smoothly and expected to be completed in the near 
future.” 
18. Audit gave the following comments on the reply of the Ministry:- 
“Further progress made in setting up of Project Management Unit as well as 
online dashboard for real estate projects may be intimated to PAC.” 
 
19.  The Ministry submitted the following reply on the observations of Audit:- 
 
“The process of setting up of Project Management Unit is progressing smoothly. 
Online dashboard for real estate projects is being prepared and is expected to be 
completed in the near future.” 
 
20. Observing severe shortcomings in the monitoring of Missions by the 
Ministry, the Committee had recommended setting up of theproposed 
Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System - PEMS 3.0 and its 
dashboard on priority and also analysis of the impact of the measures so 
taken. The Committee are perplexed to note from the reply of the Ministry 
that the process of setting up of the system and the dashboard is still not 
complete and is expected to be completed in the near future. The 
Committee cannot understand why, in the first place, the system has not 
been implemented yet and secondly why a definitive timeline has not been 
given for implementation of the system. Delay in implementation of the 
system would lead to unchecked violations and more lapses in such 

 
 
construction projects. The Committee, therefore, desire that the monitoring 
be system be implemented in a strict timeframe and a provision in the 
system be included whereby photographs of the projects be also uploaded 
at each stage.  
Recommendation No. 5 - Comprehensive check in all Missions of India 
21.  In their original report, the Committee stated the following:- 
“The Committee note that Audit through these two paras highlighted instances 
which came to their notice in the course of test audit for the period. The 
Committee have also in their reports presented earlier, recommended conducting 
a review of functioning of all the missions so to ensure adherence to stipulated 
rules and guidelines. The Ministry has also recognized that there has been laxity 
in the mechanism for monitoring activities in the Missions. The Committee are of 
the view that the irregularities highlighted by Audit point towards prevalence of 
systemic lapses and subversion of rules in the Missions. As the nature of these 
irregularities is very serious and has grave ramifications in terms of misuse of 
money of the public exchequer, the Committee recommend that a special audit of 
the Missions may be carried out and appropriate action may be taken against 
defaulters on the basis of findings of such an audit, and the Committee may be 
apprised thereof.” 
22. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
“The Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts in the Ministry has been 
instructed to conduct remote audits/test checks for all Missions, 
periodically, using the IMAS data/Vouchers & Notings being sent by 
Missions to Headquarters. Missions have also been asked to furnish 
quarterly reports to the Office of the Principal Chief Controller of Accounts 
in the Ministry, as per check–list attached, including information on cases 
of procurement made beyond their delegated financial powers.” 
23.  Audit submitted the following vetting comments on the above-mentioned reply:- 
 
“Ministry may apprise the details of remote audit conducted and quarterly reports 
containing information on the cases of procurement beyond their delegation, 
received from Pr. Controller of Accounts, to the PAC.” 
 
24.  The Ministry furnished the following reply on the comments of Audit:- 
 
“Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts, Ministry of External Affairs is 
compiling the check lists and details for remote audits/ test checks.” 
 

 
 
25. As the nature of the irregularities highlighted by Audit was very 
serious and had grave ramifications in terms of misuse of money of the 
public exchequer, the Committee had recommended that a special audit of 
the Missions may be carried out and appropriate action may be taken 
against defaulters on the basis of findings of such an audit. In response, 
the Ministry have merely stated that the Principal Controller of Accounts in 
the Ministry has been instructed to conduct remote audits/test checks for 
all Missions periodically. The Committee are absolutely chagrined to note 
that the Ministry has not even considered the recommendation of the 
Committee and has just submitted a casual reply. The Committee take 
serious exception to the lackadaisical tone and tenor of the reply. Had the 
Ministry been serious in its efforts to remedy the constant malaise of 
Missions acting on their own behalf without paying any heed to the 
Ministry and openly flouting norms, such incidents would not have seen 
light of day.The Committee are gravely concerned by the blatant misuse of 
public exchequer’s money and exhort the Ministry to arrange to conduct 
special audit in time bound manner of its High Commission in London(UK) 
along with a test check of other significant Missions where Audit has 
consistently raised issues of irregularities in expenditure. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
Mandatory Training on GFR, 2017 and other relevant Government Rules and 
regulations 
The Committee find that both the cases examined reveal that there has been 
blatant violation and disregard of administrative & financial rules by the Commission. The 
Ministry, in its reply has stated that it has formalized the model tender document and 
standard agreement template for engagement of Architect Consultants for matters of 
property redevelopment or construction projects.  Yet, the Committee find it surprising to 
note the obvious lack of documentation on the manner of appointment of Consultants and 
the irregular parking/retention of Government receipts in a private account. The Committee 
are aghast to note the statement of the representatives of the Ministry that there was an 
element of lack of understanding of rules with regard to maintenance and utilisation of the 
money received outside the Consolidated Fund of India. Concerning the second instance, 
the Committee note from the audit findings that not only was there irregular piece-mealing 
of the expenditures and manipulation of the tendering process, but the Mission also 
engaged with a ‘fly-by-night' company that was set up solely to secure these works for 
another contractor to whom nearly all of the renovation project's work had been entrusted. 
As being unaware of rules cannot be used as an excuse for violating the statutory 
stipulations, the Committee recommend that henceforth, training may mandatorily be given 
on General Financial Rules, 2017 and other relevant rules and regulations such as the 
Central Receipts and Payments Rules, 1983; CCS Conduct Rules; Delegated Financial 
Powers of HOMs/HOPs etc. to all Officials concerned who are posted in the Missions so as 
to obviate recurrence of such irregularities.  
[Recommendation No. 2 of 87th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action taken 
The Ministry’s Foreign Service Institute has incorporated special training 
programs focusing on (i) General Financial Rules, 2017 and other relevant rules & 
regulations such as the Central Receipts and Payment Rules, 1983 (ii) CCS Conduct Rules 
and (iii) Delegated Financial Powers of HOMs/HOPs, in its training structure. These training 
programmes have been made mandatory for all MEA officers proceeding on foreign 
postings as well as for career progression in the Indian Foreign Service.  
 
(Y.K. Sailas Thangal) 
Additional Secretary (GEM) 
 

 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
A copy of latest orders, regarding mandatory training programs for all MEA officers 
proceeding on foreign postings, may be apprised to PAC. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
Copy of latest orders regarding mandatory training programs for MEA officers 
proceeding on foreign postings are attached.. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Comprehensive check in all Missions of India 
The Committee note that Audit through these two paras highlighted instances 
which came to their notice in the course of test audit for the period. The Committee have 
also in their reports presented earlier, recommended conducting a review of functioning of 
all the missions so to ensure adherence to stipulated rules and guidelines. The Ministry has 
also recognized that there has been laxity in the mechanism for monitoring activities in the 
Missions. The Committee are of the view that the irregularities highlighted by Audit point 
towards prevalence of systemic lapses and subversion of rules in the Missions. As the 
nature of these irregularities is very serious and has grave ramifications in terms of misuse 
of money of the public exchequer, the Committee recommend that a special audit of the 
Missions may be carried out and appropriate action may be taken against defaulters on the 
basis of findings of such an audit, and the Committee may be apprised thereof. 
[Recommendation No. 5 of 87th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action taken 
The Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts in the Ministry has been instructed to 
conduct remote audits/test checks for all Missions, periodically, using the IMAS 
data/Vouchers & Notings being sent by Missions to Headquarters. Missions have also 
been asked to furnish quarterly reports to the Office of the Principal Chief Controller of 
Accounts in the Ministry, as per check–list attached, including information on cases of 
procurement made beyond their delegated financial powers. 
(Y.K. Sailas Thangal) 
Additional Secretary (GEM) 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may apprise the details of remote audit conducted and quarterly reports 
containing information on the cases of procurement beyond their delegation, received 
from Pr. Controller of Accounts, to the PAC.  
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts, Ministry of External Affairs is compiling the 
check lists and details for remote audits/ test checks.  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Criminal case/ major penalty 
The Committee note Audit’s findings that the Mission took a decision to accept 
compensation of GBP 90,000 from a property Developer without the approval of the 
Ministry and without any documented justification for the amount accepted. It also 
irregularly authorized a private party to receive and retain government receipts by way 
of the compensation paid by the Developer amounting to Rs. 78.41 lakh in its private 
bank account. Further, in violation of rules, the Mission allowed use of these receipts 
directly to incur expenditure. In addition, actions and decisions taken by Mission 
functionaries were not adequately documented to obscure these gross irregularities and 
the Ministry was systematically kept in the dark in the matter. 
In the other case, the Mission undertook renovation works costing GBP 744,971 
(approx. Rs. 6.63 crore) without authority and due approvals, and resorted to irregular 
splitting of works to evade approvals from higher authority and open bidding. It adopted 
a grossly manipulated process for award of works to the same person, and made post 
facto additions and alteration in the scope of work which led to undue benefits being 
extended to Contractors.  
The Ministry’s response on the matter that no mala fide intent could be established with 
evidence is intriguing. Evidently there has been an open violation of rules and 
processes which is also indicative of supervisory failure and possible collusion between 
Mission officials and the agencies. Further, the Inquiry Committee that was formed by 
the Ministry also concurred with Audit’s findings.  Considering the facts of the matter in 
entirety, a far more stringent action should have been initiated and taken in the matter, 
whereas the Ministry merely restricted it to disciplinary proceedings. The Committee, 
therefore desire that action be taken for initiating criminal proceedings against those 
involved in such irregularities and the Committee be apprised thereof. 
[Recommendation No. 1 of 87th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 
Upon a comprehensive review, it has been found that there were certain irregularities in 
the transactions under scrutiny.  In response to these findings, the Ministry has already 
undertaken punitive measures after following an exhaustive inquiry process. In light of 
the punitive actions already initiated by the Ministry and in the absence of necessary 

 
 
evidence to support criminal charges against the concerned officials, the Ministry is of 
the view that pursuing criminal proceedings against the concerned officials may not be 
warranted.  
 
(Y.K. Sailas Thangal) 
Additional Secretary (GEM) 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
PAC may take a view on the Ministry’s reply that criminal proceedings against the 
concerned officials may not be warranted in absence of necessary evidence.  
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
Ministry has no further comments to offer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Revamping and strengthening of the Internal Audit Mechanism 
The Committee, in their earlier reports (30th and 61st Reports (16th LS) and 112nd 
Report (16th LS)   and 17th Report (17th LS)) have continuously emphasized on the need 
for a strong and robust internal audit mechanism within the Ministry of External Affairs to 
audit its Missions abroad. However, the Committee are extremely disappointed to note 
that the response of the Ministry has been very casual.  In the instant cases, the 
Ministry found out about such irregularities after Audit highlighted them. Apart from this, 
the Ministry's response, which states that the internal audit set up has not brought any 
particular cases to the Ministry's attention is a matter of concern to the Committee.  It 
appears from the Ministry's response that they are oblivious of the state of affairs of the 
Missions, given that the Audit has pointed to a widespread prevalence of such 
irregularities in almost all Missions.Furthermore, the deplorable state of affairs 
continuing in the Ministry's monitoring is revealed by the Ministry's statement that its 
performance evaluation and monitoring system has not discovered any systemic 
vulnerability in its administrative and financial controls and processes among its 206 
Missions/Posts spread throughout the world. Had Audit not pointed out the irregularities, 
the Ministry would have remained unaware of such acts of embezzlement being carried 
out right openly. The Committee are of the considered view that the extant internal audit 
mechanism within the Ministry/ Missions needs to be urgently revamped and 
strengthened. The Committee while noting from the reply of the Ministry that Internal 
Audit of the Monthly Cash Accounts of Indian Missions/Posts abroad are carried out by 
the Office of Pr. Chief Controller of Accounts, MEA as per approved Annual Audit Plan 
desire that the mandate/ terms of reference of internal audit be extended to include 
transaction and compliance audit and  specific timelines for taking action  on the 
observations of internal audit may also be prescribed. 
[Recommendation No. 3 of 87th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts in the Ministry has been instructed to 
conduct remote audits/test checks for all Missions, periodically, using the IMAS 
data/Vouchers & Notings being sent by Missions to Headquarters. The Office of the 
Principal Controller of Accounts has also been instructed to coordinate its audit 
calendar/cycle with the audits being carried out by C&AG (including its offices abroad) 

 
 
in order to ensure that each Mission undergoes at least one audit (internal or C&AG) 
during a 3–4 year period. 
(Y.K. Sailas Thangal) 
Additional Secretary (GEM) 
 
 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The checklists prepared for such remote audits/ test checks, the details of the 
remote audits conducted and the findings of such audits along with the effectiveness of 
the remote audits/test checks may be submitted to the PAC. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
Check lists and details for remote audits/ test checks are being compiled by the 
Office of the Principal Controller of Accounts, Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Measures being taken for monitoring of projects and functioning of Missions 
The Committee observe that the instant cases have revealed a severe short 
coming in the monitoring of Missions by the Ministry. Despite the efforts of the Ministry to 
simplify the procedural complexity by standardization of documents/templates and detailed 
guidelines, the Committee are of the view that the irregularities pointed out here which 
reveal open subversion of rules and processes are indicative of persistent failure in 
Monitoring by the Ministry. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that a 
Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System - PEMS 3.0 has been rolled out for 
monitoring of Missions/Posts operations, results of which are made part of periodic 
inspections of the Missions/Posts. The Committee also note that Ministry is in process of 
establishing an online dashboard on boarding all major construction & renovations projects 
for real-time monitoring, addressing queries, challenges, taking remedial measures etc. 
Further, a Contract cum project management unit is also being established for aiding 
Missions/Posts in contract & project management. The Committee expect the Ministry to 
appropriately accommodate in the proposed system necessary measures for avoiding 
lapses such as the ones pointed out by Audit. The Committee desire that the aforesaid 
dashboard and project management unit may be established on priority within a strict 
timeframe, the impact of the measures taken may be assessed and the Committee be 
apprised thereof. 
[Recommendation No. 4 of 87th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 

 
 
Action taken 
The setting up of a Project Management Unit in the Ministry is underway and the 
progress in this regard is being closely monitored. The work related to development of 
an online dashboard for monitoring of real estate projects is progressing smoothly and 
expected to be completed in the near future.  
(Y.K. Sailas Thangal) 
Additional Secretary (GEM) 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Further progress made in setting up of Project Management Unit as well as online 
dashboard for real estate projects may be intimated to PAC.   
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
The process of setting up of Project Management Unit is progressing smoothly. Online 
dashboard for real estate projects is being prepared and is expected to be completed in 
the near future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
  
 
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) HELD ON 17thJUNE, 2025 FROM 1430 HRS. ONWARDS 
  
The Committee met on Tuesday from 1430 hrs. to 1710 hrs. on 17thJune, 2025 in 
Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
 Shri  K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 LOK SABHA 
 
  
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
4. Shri Jai Parkash  
5. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad   
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
7. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
8. Shri BalashowryVallabhaneni  
9. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Praful Patel 
11. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray  
12. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi  
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri H Ram Prakash  Joint Secretary 
2. Ms, Archna Pathania  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Malvika Mehta  Deputy Secretary 
6. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA   
 
1. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri - Dy. C&AG 
2. Ms. Kavita Prasad -  Director General 
3. Ms. Reena Saha -  Director General 
4. Shri I. R. Inamdar -  Principal Director 
 
 

 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
1. Dr. Rajesh S. Gokhale - Secretary 
2. Dr. Alka Sharma -  Scientist ‘H’ 
3. Dr. Anamika Gambhir -  Scientist ‘G’ 
4. Dr. Onkar Tiwari -  Scientist ‘F’ 
5. Mr. Avtar Singh Sandhu -  CCA 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
1. Dr. N. Kalaiselvi - DG, CSIR & Secretary 
2. Shri Chetan Prakash -  Financial Advisor 
3. Shri Mahendra Kumar Gupta - Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson on behalf of the Committee expressed deep sorrow and 
heartfelt prayers and condolences to the victims and families of all those affected by tragic crash 
of UK-bound Air India Flight AI-171 in Ahmedabad on 12 June 2025 and  observed two minutes 
silence as mark of respect. 
3. Then the Chairperson welcomed the Hon’ble Members and the Officers of Comptroller 
and Auditor General (C&AG) to the sitting. The Committee took the first item on the agenda 
namelyconsideration and adoption of three draft Reports. The Committee considered the (i) 
Draft Action Taken on 87th Report (17th LS) on “Irregularities in receipt and utilisation of 
compensation and Grossly irregular and manipulated award and execution of work relating to 
the renovation of the basement at India House, London, leading to undue benefits being 
extended to the Contractor” and adopted with some minor changes. The Committee then 
considered other two draft reports on (ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx (iii) xxxx  xxxx
 xxxx xxxx adopted them without any modification. 
4. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx  
5. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx  
6. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
7.  xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
8. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
9. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
10. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.  

 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide para 5 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations - 05 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.2 and 5  
 
- Total: 02 
Percentage – 40% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
  
-Nil- 
 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage - 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Para No.1      
 
- Total: 01 
Percentage– 20% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies: 
Para Nos. 3 & 4 
- Total: 02 
Percentage –40% 
 
 