38 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF AGRICULTURE CROP 
INSURANCE SCHEMES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 78th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
________________________________________________ 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
ii 
 
 
PAC NO. 2432 
 
 
T H I R T Y - E I G H T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF AGRICULTURE CROP 
INSURANCE SCHEMES 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their 78th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
                              
 
 
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  04.02. 2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19. 12. 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December 2025/ Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
Page | i  
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I.* Minutes of the 18 th Sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) held on 17-12-2025. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Seventy-
Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
* To be appended later.  

 
Page | ii  
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
  
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal               -     Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania             -     Director 
3. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma     -     Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh             -    Committee Officer 

 
Page | iii  
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Seventy Eighth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Performance Audit of Agriculture Crop 
Insurance Schemes" relating to the relating to the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare.  
 
2. The Seventy Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18.12.2023. The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) considered and adopted 
the Thirty Eighth Report at their Sitting held on 17th December 2025. Minutes of the 
Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report. 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventy Eighth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  K. C. VENUGOPAL 
17 December, 2025 Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
Page | 1  
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Seventy Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Performance Audit of 
Agriculture Crop Insurance Schemes” relating to the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare. 
 
2. The Seventy Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2023, contained sixteen 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry 
of agriculture and Farmers Welfare have been broadly categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1-16 
 
                  Total:      16      
Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
   Total:         00 
                                                                                                Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
             NIL 
Total:  00 
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            NIL  
 Total: 00 
Chapter - IV 
 
 

 
Page | 2  
 
 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  
The Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their 
Seventy Eighth Report.   
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventy Eighth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this 
Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which 
require reiteration/merit comments.  
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to 
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the report, positively within three months of the 
presentation of the report to the Parliament.  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
(Non maintenance of Data base)  
6 The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that under NAIS guidelines, the IAs were only required 
to provide returns/statistics to GOI (and not the States). Audit observed that 
IAs did not provide periodic (monthly or quarterly) returns on NAIS to the 
Governments. Instead statistical data to support their claims were furnished at 
the time of requirement of funds. No separate requirements regarding 
furnishing of periodic returns/statistics were issued under MNAIS and WBCIS 
till they were integrated under NCIP. Thereafter (i.e., from Rabi season 2013-
14), IAs were required to furnish monthly progress returns/ statistics or any 
information demanded by the Governments. The NCIP guidelines also 
stipulated that IAs were required to obtain and upload comprehensive details 
of insured farmers on their websites. However, Audit had pointed out that IAs 
did not furnish monthly progress reports/ statistics to the Government even 
under the NCIP nor upload details of insured farmers on their websites. 
Moreover, neither DAC&FW nor AIC verified and analyzed the statistical data 
at the time of release of funds. According to the information made available to 
the Committee, DAC&FW admitted in December 2016 that beneficiary data 
was not available with them or the IAs and that the same were maintained by 
the banks. In view of the fact that prior to 2013-14, under the schemes, IAs 
were required to provide periodic (monthly and quarterly) returns on NAIS to 
the Governments, the Committee are constrained to observe that IAs failed to 
meet this guideline and instead they furnished statistical data to support their 
claims at the time of requirement of funds. Regrettably, the IAs continued to 
deviate from the stipulated guidelines even after 2013-14 which sought them 

 
Page | 3  
 
 
 
to obtain and upload comprehensive details of insured farmers on their 
websites. In light of the fact that the fund requirements were assessed based 
on the beneficiary data, the Committee are of the view that the methodology 
adopted by DAC&FW to ascertain the authenticity of the statistical data 
provided by the IAs needs to be examined. The Committee also feel that 
absence of specific guidelines on role of DAC&FW or IAs in maintaining the 
database of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop- wise and area-wise) led to such 
a situation where substantial financial contribution was made by the 
Governments and their agencies without confirming whether it reached the 
intended beneficiaries. In view of the above, the Committee are constrained to 
observe that the erstwhile schemes were not formulated taking into 
consideration the very basis of targeted beneficiaries. The Committee are 
hopeful that database of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop-wise and area-wise) 
is updated and made available on real time basis on the online portal that has 
since been made operational, and is accessible to DAC&FW, IAs and 
Banks/Fls. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures 
taken towards ensuring real time updation of data.”  
 
Action Taken Reply of Ministry 
7. The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare in their action taken reply 
stated as under:- 
“The Government has taken following steps to strengthen the data base of 
the scheme: 
 National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) developed for 
PMFBY has digitized the entire implementation process thereby seamlessly 
integrating all the stakeholders on one platform for obtaining/uploading 
details of individual farmers insured under PMFBY. 
 Dashboard has been developed enabling downloading of scheme data 
from a single source. 
 The NCIP incorporates facilities for auto calculation of premium s u b s i d y  
( s u b s i d y  m o d u l e )  a n d  claims (DigiClaims Module). 
 Direct payment of claim amount on the bank accounts of beneficiaries 
insured farmers. 
 Insured farmers can track/check their application and claim status on the 
 portal. 
 Capturing yield data based on Crop Cutting Experiments for calculation of 
admissible claims.  
 Through Aadhar seeding effective de-duplication of beneficiaries. 
 Further, module for online verification of land details has also been 
integrated with NCIP.” 
Vetting comments of Audit 

 
Page | 4  
 
 
 
8. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: 
“Measures taken by the Ministry towards real time updation of data as 
applicable in current scheme may be provided to PAC.” 
Ministry’s Final Reply  
9. “The Government has developed a digital portal for real-time data updation by 
various stakeholders, viz. Banks, Insurance Companies, Insurance Intermediaries, 
States/UTs and Farmers. 
o This includes granular data at farmer, land-parcel and crop level 
information entered by the enrolment channels viz. Banks, Insurance 
Intermediaries and Insurance companies at the time of enrolment for 
the specific season. 
o Details of pre-harvest crop losses and crop yield losses to calculate the 
eligible claim amount to be paid to the farmers 
o Payment of calculated claim amount to the eligible farmers using PFMS 
payment gateway 
o Calculation of Central and States share of premium subsidy amount 
and remittance of same to the Insurance Companies through PFMS 
payment gateway 
o Real-time weather data information is also being collated under WINDS 
initiative for usage in technology based crop yield estimation and 
various other purposes of Crop Insurance and Disaster Management 
o Various Mobile Applications have also been developed for usage by 
different stakeholders including the farmers for various activities like 
below: 
(a)Enrolment under the scheme 
(b)Tracking of application status Registration of pre-harvest stage crop 
losses 
(c)Tracking of Claim Status 
(d)Crop Loss Assessment 
(e)Crop Heath Monitoring 
(f)Crop Yield Estimation at Harvesting Stage” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 

 
Page | 5  
 
 
 
10. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that database 
of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop-wise and area-wise) be updated and made 
available on real time basis on the online portal that had since been made 
operational, and was accessible to DAC&FW, IAs and Banks / Fls. The 
Committee had further desired to be apprised of the measures taken towards 
ensuring real time updation of data. The Ministry in their reply submitted that a 
digital portal had been developed for real-time uploading and updation of data 
at farmer, land and crop level by various stakeholders.  Since beneficiary data 
is the very basis of assessing fund requirements, the failure of implementing 
agencies in maintaining up-to-date database results in inefficiencies and 
reduced transparency, the Committee emphasise the mandatory updates by 
various agencies needs to be enforced to ensure data integrity, objectivity and 
usability. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the current status of 
the real time updation of data by the various stakeholders on the digital portal.  
 
Recommendation No. 7 
(Coverage of farmers) 
11. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under: 
“Audit scrutiny revealed that coverage of farmers in the country as well as in the 
nine selected States under the erstwhile schemes was very low compared to 
the population of farmers as per Census 2011. While the percentage coverage 
of farmers in the country for crops covered under Kharif season ranged from 14 
per cent to 22 per cent and from 8 per cent to 12 per cent in case of crops 
covered under Rabi season, the percentage coverage of farmers in nine 
selected States ranged from 26 per cent to 42 per cent for crops covered under 
Kharif season and from 9 per cent to 16 per cent in the case of crops covered 
under Rabi season. Further, coverage of non-loanee farmers was negligible. 
No data of sharecroppers and tenant farmers was maintained despite the fact 
that the guidelines provided for their coverage under the schemes. Audit also 
observed that though the budget allocation included specific provisions for 
coverage of SC/ST category, no data of such coverage and utilisation of funds 
for this category was maintained. According to the information furnished to the 
Committee, some of the factors attributable to low coverage of farmers were 
lack of awareness about the schemes among the farming community and 
delays in settlement of claims to farmers. Taking note of the fact that the 
percentage of coverage of farmers under the schemes was very low despite the 
fact the entire insurance claim liabilities of the farmers were being borne by the 
Governments, the Committee are of the considered view that the factors 
attributable for the poor performance of the schemes are required to be 
identified and appropriately addressed. The Committee, while seeking to be 
apprised of the percentage of farmers covered under the PMFBY, also desire to 
be apprised of the remedial measures taken by the Department and its 

 
Page | 6  
 
 
 
implementing agencies to further improve the performance of the ongoing 
scheme so that maximum numbers of farmers are covered under the scheme.” 
 
Action Taken Reply of Ministry 
12.  The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare in their action taken reply 
stated as under: 
 “PMFBY currently implemented in 22 States/UTs, however the scheme has 
been implemented in 27 States/UTs in one or more seasons since its inception 
in 2016.  Two more States – Telangana and Jharkhand are re-joining the 
scheme from Kharif 2024 season.   A total of 56.9 crore farmer applications 
have been insured for a sum insured of more than Rs 16.02 lakh crores during 
the period of 7 years of implementation of PMFBY.   Farmer enrollment under 
the scheme has increased from 27% in 2021-22 to 39% in 2022-23 and 42% in 
2023-24.  Approximately, 4 crore farmers with more than 13 crore farmer 
policies have been enrolled during 2023-24.   Area insured has also showing 
increasing trends on year to year basis say there was 13% increase in 2021-22, 
22% in 2022-23 and 38% in 2023-24.  Coverage of non-loanee farmers has 
also increased under the scheme.  It is expected that about 55% of total 
coverage under the scheme during 2023-24 would be of non-loanee farmers.  
The scheme has became1st largest crop insurance scheme in the world in 
terms of farmer enrolments and 3rd largest in terms of insurance premiums. 
Remedial measures taken by the Government to improve to farmer coverage 
are as follows: 
i)  Awareness about the schemes among the farming community  
            The Government has taken several steps to create substantial   
awareness about the scheme amongst beneficiaries so that they can enroll 
themselves voluntarily in all the implementing States/UTs under the scheme to 
increase the coverage in terms of different crops and areas. The Government 
has made provisions to ensure availability of adequate funds for awareness of 
PMFBY. The revised Operational Guidelines for PMFBY which came into effect 
from 1st October 2018 have inter-alia provided that the insurance companies 
should compulsorily spend atleast 0.5% of the total gross premium collected by 
them for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities.   
            The Government has actively supported the awareness activities being 
carried out by the States, implementing Insurance Companies, financial 

 
Page | 7  
 
 
 
institutions, and Common Service Centres (CSCs) network to disseminate key 
features of PMFBY amongst farmers and members of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs). 
            Further, a structured awareness campaign ‘Crop Insurance Week/Fasal 
Bima Saptah’ has been initiated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare since Kharif 2021 season onwards. The core focus of the campaign is 
to increase the awareness about benefits of the scheme, sensitize the 
stakeholders and to increase overall enrolment of farmers, thereby helping 
them to reap the benefits of crop insurance with special focus on identified 
aspirational/tribal districts.   
            Along with this, ‘Fasal Bima Pathshalas’ are also being organized at 
village/GP level for knowledge building of farmers on various aspects of 
scheme implementation.  
            Apart from this, other activities for awareness generation involve the 
publicity of key features and benefits of the scheme through advertisements in 
leading National and local newspapers, airing of audio-visual spots on regional 
/ local channels, distribution of IEC material in local languages, dissemination of 
SMS through Kisan / National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) portal and 
organisation of online workshops of all stakeholders including farmers, 
Panchayat Members, and other key stakeholders. 
            Government had also organized a nationwide Doorstep Crop Insurance 
Policy/receipt Distribution mega drive – ‘Meri Policy Mere Haath’. Hard copies 
of crop insurance policy receipts are distributed to farmers enrolled under 
PMFBY through special camps at gram Panchayat/village level. All 
implementing State/UT Governments along with respective insurance 
companies have been organizing Gram Panchayat level mega policy 
distribution drive.    
            The systematic monitoring of IEC activities has been diligently overseen 
by the Central IEC Advisory Committee. This committee, in close collaboration 
with local Insurance Companies, assumes a pivotal role in ensuring the 
effective implementation and impact assessment of the IEC initiatives related to 
crop insurance. 

 
Page | 8  
 
 
 
  
ii) Settlement of claims to farmers. 
  
The Government has taken following steps to address the delay in settlement 
of claims to the farmers: 
 National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) developed for 
PMFBY has digitized the entire implementation process thereby seamlessly 
integrating all the stakeholders on one platform for obtaining/uploading 
details of individual farmers insured under PMFBY. 
 Dashboard has been developed enabling downloading of scheme data 
from a single source. 
 The NCIP incorporates facilities for auto calculation of premium subsidy 
(subsidy module) and claims (DigiClaims Module). 
 Direct payment of claim amount on the bank accounts of beneficiaries 
insured farmers. 
 Insured farmers can track/check their application and claim status on the 
 portal. 
 Capturing yield data based on Crop Cutting Experiments for calculation of 
admissible claims.  
 Through Aadhar seeding effective de-duplication of beneficiaries. 
 Further, module for online verification of land details has also been 
integrated with NCIP. 
             
(iii)    Based on the experience and feedback from the stakeholders, the 
Operational Guidelines of the Scheme have been revised and revamped w.e.f. 
Rabi 2018 and Kharif 2020 respectively. Further, Government has taken 
following steps to increase coverage under the scheme: 
  
 Implementing State Govts/UTs are being persuaded regularly to bring more 
crops and areas under the ambit of Crop Insurance Schemes to increase 
coverage. 
 There is a provision of performance and evaluation of implementing 
Insurance Companies under the Schemes, in which one of the important 
criteria for ranking is % of non-lonaee farmers enrolled. If insurance 
companies are not able to meet the target then there is provision of 
adverse ranking for Insurance Companies. 
  
 To ensure proper reach of the scheme at the village level, facility for 
enrolment of farmers through Common Service Centres, Grama One (in 
Karnataka), online mode on Crop Insurance portal, crop insurance app, 
AIDE app for crop insurance at door-step of the farmers has been 
activated. 
  
 Provision has been made to earmark expenditure of 0.5% of gross 
premium on ICE activities. 

 
Page | 9  
 
 
 
  
 Infusion of technology for timely settlement of claims like YES-Tech (Yield 
Estimation based on Technology) – It is aided by data inputs, such as 
remote sensing indices, weather indices, crop phonological information, soil 
types etc., interfaced with accepted technology/approaches. 
  
YES-TECH has been implemented for paddy and wheat crops with minimum 
30% yield estimation through YES-Tech from Kharif 2023. 10 big states have 
joined it 
  
WINDS (Weather Information Network and Data System) – A network of 
Automated Weather Stations (AWS) at Taluka/Block level and Automated Rain 
Gauges (ARG) at Gram Panchayat level is proposed to provide all weather 
information to farmers and agriculture to various government and other units.”  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: 
“Remedial measures have been taken by the Ministry towards improving the 
farmers coverage and early settlement of the farmers’ claims. Hence, in view 
of reply no further comment.” 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
14. The Ministry have not provided any Updated Action Taken Reply. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
15. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the 
factors attributable for the poor performance of the schemes under PMFBY 
like lack of awareness about the schemes and delays in settlement of claims 
etc. be properly addressed. The Committee had further desired to be apprised 
of the percentage of farmers covered under the PMFBY and the remedial 
measures taken by the Department and its implementing agencies to further 
improve the performance of the ongoing scheme in order to ensure maximum 
coverage of farmers. The Ministry in their reply have stated that farmers’ 
enrolment under the schemes is gradually increasing and various measures 
have been taken by the Ministry to create awareness about the schemes 
amongst beneficiaries.  
While acknowledging the measures undertaken by the Ministry, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation that measures be taken so that maximum 
number of farmers are covered under the scheme. The Committee also 
observe that tailored awareness campaigns using local languages are must to 

 
Page | 10  
 
 
 
educate farmers about the benefits, procedures and eligibility of crop 
insurance schemes so as to increase coverage under the insurance schemes. 
The Committee also desire to be informed of the progress in respect of 
coverage of farmers under the insurance schemes particularly sharecroppers, 
tenant and non-loanees farmers. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
(Crop Cutting Experiment) 
16. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that one of the requirements as per the operational 
guidelines of the schemes is to obtain accurate and timely yield data based on 
the stipulated number of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) at the level of 
insurance unit which is village/village panchayat for major crops and may be a 
higher unit for minor crops. Against this requirement, the Committee note that 
the infrastructure and manpower at ground level is hugely deficient in terms of 
both quality and numbers making it difficult to undertake CCEs in such large 
numbers, thereby delaying timely settlement of claims of farmers. Towards 
this end, the Committee have been informed by the Department that the 
revised operational guidelines for PMFBY (Section 20) envisage the use of 
innovative technologies for accurate crop yield estimation and timely 
settlement of claims and initiatives like Pilot Study on Optimization of Crop 
Cutting Experiments (CCEs) and Improving Crop Yield Estimation, Smart 
Sampling Technique and Optimization of CCEs (Pilots and implementation), 
Gram Panchayat Level Direct Yield Estimation using Technology (Pilots) etc. 
While acknowledging the significance of the initiatives taken by the 
Department, the Committee also feel that immediate necessary action may be 
taken to provide adequate manpower and infrastructure at the ground level 
and stress on the need to involve local farmers in CCEs. Further, while 
emphasizing the need to ensure that the Crop Cutting Experiment (CCEs) 
techniques/methods employed by the Departments concerned are accurate to 
gauge the impact and extent of crop failure, the Committee recommend that 
best practices of CCEs of different States may also be emulated across the 
country to have accurate and timely data on crop yield.” 
 
Action Taken Reply of Ministry 
17. The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare in their action taken reply 
stated as under: 
“Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) to estimate the yield for calculating 
claims under PMFBY are being conducted by the concerned State 
Governments as per the guidelines and supervision of National Statistical 

 
Page | 11  
 
 
 
Office (NSO) earlier known as National Sample Survey Organizations 
(NSSO).    
  
Keeping in view the difficulties in manual CCEs original and Revamped 
Operational Guidelines (OGs) for Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
(PMFBY) envisage use of improved technology to ensure minimum 
dependence on manpower and at the same time for timely settlement of 
farmers claims.  Accordingly, for better transparency of yield calculation 
process, CCE Agri app has been developed to make the entire process 
paperless and real-time. All data captured through the app is time-stamped 
and geo-tagged.  The use of CCE Agri App was made mandatory for 
intimate data of CCE on National Crop Insurance Portal w.e.f.  Kharif 2018. 
  
With a view to reduce total number of CCEs and improving distribution of 
locations for conducting CCEs under PMFBY, DAC&FW, through MNCFC 
had initiated smart sampling technique. This reduction in number of CCEs 
has led to efficient manpower & budgetary planning, more precise and 
focused approach for quality data collection, timely data consolidation and 
early claim settlement and also increased objectivity & reliability of yield 
data. 
Use of Satellite/Remote Sensing and related technology for loss assessment 
and direct yield estimation at Gram Panchayat level.  After various pilot 
studies YES-Tech (Yield Estimation based on Technology) has been 
approved for implementation wherein it has been made mandatory for the 
States to calculate atleast 30% yield through these methods and 70% 
through traditional CCEs methods for timely settlement of claims.  This 
percentage will be increased in due course of time.  State Government of 
Madhya Pradesh has accepted this technology for 100% yield estimation in 
the State. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
18. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: 
“Steps taken to involve local farmers and to emulate the best practices of 
CCEs of different States may be provided to PAC.” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
19. The Ministry in their Updated Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
“Local farmer whose plot is chosen for conducting CCEs for the crop and 
season is mandatorily part of the team comprising of Field level Govt. 
functionaries (VAO, Agriculture Assistant etc.) & representative of Insurance 

 
Page | 12  
 
 
 
Companies. The Crop Cutting Experiments are conducted using a Mobile 
Application for ensuring transparency and faster collation of yield data for 
calculation of eligible claims. As per Crop Yield estimation manual, farmer 
representative is required to sign the forms/documents which are used by 
VAO at the spot/time of CCE. 
  
The Smart-Sampling technique has been introduced under the scheme to 
ensure secrecy and transparency in sampling of plot for conducting CCEs. 
Further Technology Based Yield Assessment under YESTECH has also 
been introduced under the scheme ensure reduce possible moral hazard 
and errors in manual process. 
  
These interventions have been adopted by 9 major states & UTs and 
department is making efforts to include more number of states under these 
technology solutions to increase efficiency and transparency in the crop yield 
estimation process.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
20.  The Committee in their original Report had recommended the emulation of 
best practices of CCEs of different States across the country to have accurate 
and timely data on crop yield.  
The Ministry in their reply stated that Smart-sampling technique and 
technology based Yield Assessment under YESTECH had been introduced 
under the CCE to obtain accurate data regarding crop yield. 
Taking note of the measures undertaken by the Ministry, the Committee are of 
the considered opinion that Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs), being the 
cornerstone of India’s agricultural statistics system for providing objective 
and ground-level data on crop yields, form the basis of estimating crop yields 
and production in India, especially for the purpose of crop insurance claims 
under PMFBY and agricultural planning. Due to growing importance of 
accurate agricultural data, the relevance of CCEs has assumed greater 
significance. The Committee emphasise on the accuracy, consistency and 
transparency of the CCE methodology so that the Government can 
significantly enhance the credibility of yield estimates, ensure timely 

 
Page | 13  
 
 
 
insurance payouts under PMFBY and make informed decisions on resource 
allocation. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that the 
best practices of CCEs of States may be implemented across different states 
of the country and further desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
****** 
  

 
Page | 14  
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
(Mechanism for timely release of funds by State Governments) 
     The Committee note that under NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS, funds were released 
by GOI and State Governments to AIC on 50:50 basis towards share in premium 
subsidy along with claims over and above 100 per cent of premium collected under 
NAIS (for food and oilseed crops) to the Implementing Agencies (IAs). In turn, AIC 
released to private Insurance companies their share of premium subsidy (MNAIS 
and WBCIS). Audit scrutiny revealed that though Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) invariably released their share on time, instances of 
delayed release of the subsidy by State Governments were observed. The 
Committee observe that in view of the fact that the very basis of the funding pattern 
designed under schemes required GOI and State Governments to release their 
share in premium subsidy along with claims, any delay by State Governments would 
have surely impacted the release of insurance claim to affected farmers, thereby 
defeating the very objective of providing timely financial assistance to the farming 
community which faced partial or full failure of crops due to natural calamities, pests 
and disease. The Committee, while expressing the view that the DAC&FW should 
have played a proactive role to Impress upon the States to scrupulously follow the 
guidelines of the erstwhile schemes, are hopeful that necessary steps have been 
taken to ensure timely release of funds by the State Governments in the 
implementation of the PMFBY, which is currently operational. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
During the implementation of erstwhile crop insurance schemes, the Government of 
India took adequate measures to ensure providing of timely financial assistance to 
the farmers.  State Governments were repeatedly urged to pay their share timely 
through various correspondences at the highest level including Hon’ble Agriculture 
Minister. 
 Based on the recommendations of the C&AG Report on the Performance Audit of 
the Agriculture Crop Insurance Schemes from Kharif season 2011 till Rabi 2015-16, 
the then crop insurance schemes were reviewed and following new provisions 
regarding timely payment of State Government’s share have been incorporated in 
the existing Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and further revised and 
revamped from Rabi 2018, 2020-21 and 2023-24: 
 In the PMFBY, States have to deposit upfront premium subsidy through 
opening of an Escrow Account by the States. 

 
Page | 15  
 
 
 
 To ensure timely payment of claims to the farmers, with the approval EFC, 
GOI share of premium subsidy has been delinked from the State share and 
released without waiting for the State share.  The States are subsequently 
informed to pay their respective share. 
 Definite timelines have been laid down for various activities by the State 
Governments and insurance companies. 
 Intensive monitoring of fund released by States is being made. 
 Further, penalty provision has been incorporated in revised operation 
guidelines highlighting that States have to pay penal interest @ 12% per 
annum in case of delay in release of State share of Premium Subsidy to 
implementing insurance companies beyond three months of prescribed cut-
off date/submission of requisition by Insurance Companies. 
 States delaying the release of subsidy beyond stipulated timelines shall not 
be allowed to participate in upcoming seasons. 
 To ensure proper and timely monitoring, all the transactions both Central 
and State Government share in premium subsidy, are being routed through 
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) with effect from 2021-22. 
 Based on the recommendations of the working Group constituted to 
examine the Alternative Risk Mitigation Mechanisms to rationalize the 
premium pricing, enhancing underwriting capacity and challenges faced in 
implementation of PMFBY and suggest remedial measures, various 
Alternative Risk Management Models of Profit & Loss Sharing, Cup & Cap 
(60-130) & Cup & Cap (80-110) have been introduced under the scheme 
from 2023-24.  This will on one hand help states with the multiple options to 
choose from as per their agriculture practices and agro-climatic 
requirements and on the other hand rationalize their fiscal expenditure on 
premium subsidies. 
Vetting Comments of Audit  
Necessary steps have been taken by the Department for providing timely financial 
assistance to the farmers.  Hence no further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply  
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
(Savings under NAIS with Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited) 
The Committee note that in terms of NAIS guidelines issued in July 1999, the IA 
(GIC till March 2003 and AIC thereafter) was required to meet the entire liabilities up 
to 100 percent of premium in the case of food crops and oilseeds, and 150 per cent 
of premium in the case of commercial and horticultural crops. Liabilities in excess of 
these limits were to be shared equally by GOI and the State Governments till 

 
Page | 16  
 
 
 
complete transition to actuarial regime in a period of five years. Thereafter, all claims 
up to 150 per cent of premium would be met by the IA for a period of three years, the 
limit of which would increase to 200 per cent thereafter. Claims above these limits 
would be met out of a corpus fund to be created with equal contributions of GOI and 
the State Governments. However, the guidelines were silent on the utilization of 
savings, if any, due to difference between premium collected and claims payable by 
AIC. Audit observed that during the period of operation of NAIS (from Rabi 
season1999-2000 to Rabi season 2015-16, i.e., 33 seasons), AIC had accumulated 
savings of 2,518.62 crore, from the collection of premium (amount of premium 
collected: ₹14,056.81 crore less AIC's share of claims paid: 11,538.19 crore) and 
due to the absence of guidelines regarding the fate of savings retained the same. 
Audit also noticed that the Ministry of Finance directed AIC in December 2009 to 
release 200 crore to DAC&FW stating that these funds were being drawn from the 
retained profits/ reserves (created out of NAIS activities) of AIC as a prelude to the 
recasting of the scheme and stopping the excess premium of individual States being 
appropriated as profits by AIC. The Committee were apprised that consequent upon 
objection by the Audit on retention of saving by AIC, the DAC&FW took up the matter 
with AIC and Ministry of Finance to return the savings on the ground that AIC was 
being reimbursed all operational expenses for implementation of the scheme, and 
there was no justification for AIC to retain the savings. As per the information made 
available to the Committee by the DAC&FW, the matter was under consideration. 
While hoping that a decision may have been taken on the matter by now and the 
issue of adjustment of savings under NAIS has been taken to its logical conclusion 
by DAC&FW, Ministry of Finance and AIC, the Committee express optimism that a 
system for utilization of savings would have been evolved by now. The confusion 
over retention of savings by AIC was created due to absence of specific guidelines in 
this regard. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry have taken necessary 
measures to plug the loopholes, found in the erstwhile schemes, in the new scheme 
and a well deliberated rule/provision regarding utilization of premium have been 
incorporated in the guidelines on implementation of the PMFBY. The Committee 
wish to be apprised of the necessary details in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Under the Operational Guidelines of PMFBY, Government has taken following steps 
to plug the loopholes in the erstwhile crop insurance scheme in this regard:  
 The system of savings in the erstwhile schemes has been dispensed with 
in PMFBY & the scheme is being implemented on actuarial premium basis.  
 Under PMFBY, the Govt. support is limited to upfront premium subsidy and 
liability of claims vests entirely with the implementing Insurance 
Companies.  Any shortfall or excess/savings in premium received is the 
responsibility of the insurance companies. 
 However, at the demand of various States/UTs and as per 
recommendations of the Working Group constituted to examine Alternative 

 
Page | 17  
 
 
 
Risk Mitigation Mechanisms to rationalize the scheme structure various 
Alternative Risk Management Models of Profit & Loss Sharing, Cup & Cap 
(60-130) & Cup & Cap (80-110) have been introduced under the scheme 
from 2023-24, under which if no claim/less claim (than certain limit) arises 
under the scheme, then a portion of the premium paid by the state will go 
into the state treasury itself.  On the other hand, if claims are more than the 
certain limit, the claims are paid by the concerned Government 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The system of savings in the erstwhile schemes has been dispensed with in 
PMFBY and the scheme is being implemented on actuarial premium basis. 
Necessary steps taken by the Department.  Hence in view of reply, no further 
comment. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
(Release of funds to private companies) 
As per the operational guidelines of schemes, IAs i.e., AIC as well as other 
empanelled private insurance companies were responsible for providing crop 
insurance to farmers under the agriculture crop insurance schemes. Further IAs 
were required to receive details of insured farmers from the nodal points (of the 
concerned Bank/Financial Institutions), and calculate the claims, if any. In the case 
of MNAIS and WBCIS, the private insurance companies forward the claims for 
premium subsidy to AIC, which in turn, include their own premium subsidy claims 
and approach GOI and State Governments for release of their shares. In respect of 
NAIS, AIC approaches GOI and State Governments for their share of premium 
subsidy and claim liabilities. On receipt of funds from GOI and State Governments, 
AIC release the premium subsidy to the private insurance companies (in respect of 
MNAIS and WBCIS) and claim amounts (in respect of NAIS) to the nodal points. 
However, the Committee note that the Agriculture Insurance Company (AIC) 
released ₹3,622 crore as premium subsidy to 10 private insurance companies 
without compliance to any of the guidelines. In reply Ministry contended that AIC 
released the subsidy to private companies only after they submitted the entire 
coverage data to DAC & FW, on the basis of which 2 specific directions to release 
the funds to private companies were given by DAC & FW and hence subsidy was 
released as per procedure and there was no deliberate negligence by AIC. The 

 
Page | 18  
 
 
 
Department had also submitted that AIC being one of the implementing agencies 
could not undertake verification of coverage of other insurance companies as other 
companies had their objections. The Committee are discontented over the stand of 
the DAC&FW for not undertaking verification of coverage of other insurance 
companies, and feel that AIC, being the agency for releasing payment to private 
insurance companies, was responsible for exercising due diligence before releasing 
the payments and ensure compliance to the operational guidelines of schemes. The 
Committee are of the view that necessary directions ought to have been issued to 
the implementing agencies, including empanelled private insurance companies, to 
mandatorily undertake physical verification of details of claims of insured farmers 
from the nodal points before release of fund.  Further, the Committee recommend 
that a timeframe may also be fixed for periodic evaluation of the performance of all 
empanelled insurance companies. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
As per clause 2(i) of Guidelines issued by Govt. of India vide their letter dated 
09.10.2009, all Private Insurance companies were required to submit their 
provisional/estimated data regarding Crops, Areas, SI, Premium, Coverage, etc. to 
AIC, based on the districts allotted to them.  After consolidating the data, the demand 
of 50% of GoI fund was raised by AIC from Govt. of India and same was disbursed 
to the Private Insurance companies according to the conditions mentioned in the 
covering letter of GoI for releasing the fund.   
As per clause 2(iv) of these Guidelines, AIC receives coverage data from the Private 
Insurance companies for onward submission to MOA&FW, in the capacity of fund 
routing agency. 
Further, as per current provisions of PMFBY, implemented from Kharif 2016 season, 
Government has made following provisions with regard to physical verification of 
beneficiaries and coverage: 
 The verification of beneficiaries is inbuilt in the National Crop Insurance 
Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) developed for PMFBY. 
 Capturing of individual farmer data along with Aadhar details has ensured 
de-duplication and proper verification. 
 Module for online verification of land details including record of rights 
(ROR) presently has been implemented in most of the States covering 
more than 90% of the insured area under the scheme. 
 Claims under PMFBY are now worked out and disbursed directly to the 
bank accounts of the beneficiaries through Digi Claim Module on NCIP 
using Public Finance Management System (PFMS) credentials. 
 Government Subsidy is also being provided to Insurance Companies on the 
basis of enrolment of individual farmers data (including data on coverage) 
on the NCIP. 
 Under PMFBY demand, disbursement and utilisation of funds towards 
premium subsidy by the Government (both Central and State Government) 
is being generated and settled through NCIP from the data base of 

 
Page | 19  
 
 
 
individual insured farmers, uploaded by concerned enrolment agencies and 
approved by Insurance companies on Portal itself. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Action taken to 
i. mandatorily undertake physical verification of details of claims of insured 
farmers from the nodal points before release of fund, and 
ii. fixation of a timeframe for periodic evaluation of the performance of all 
empanelled insurance companies may be provided to PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
(i) Since the department has developed a digital portal for capturing real-time 
enrolment data of individual insured farmers directly entered by the Banks, Insurance 
Intermediaries and Insurance Companies, therefore department has real-time data 
availability on the digital portal of PMFBY (www.ncip.gov.in) for verification, 
reconciliation and monitoring of the data. Further, since claims of eligible farmers are 
also processed through the same digital portal using PFMS platform, the department 
has a visibility and real-time monitoring of claim settlement being done by the 
Insurance Companies. 
Further, the claims being remitted are also validated and confirmed through 
remittance details shared by the concerned banks using PFMS gateway. 
Accordingly, there is a full tracking system available for payable premium subsidy 
and claim settled by the Insurance companies. Farmer can also track their 
application status along with claim payment status through the digital portal and 
mobile application developed for the same.  
Through this mechanism, the committee's direction for end to end tracking and 
verification of claims is being compiled with. 
(ii)  As per provisions of revamped Operational Guidelines of the scheme is to be 
closely monitored by the concerned Nodal Department of the State Government at 
the end of the completion of each 1-year interval comprising of at least two crop 
seasons i.e. Kharif and Rabi through ascertaining the company's skills, commitment 
and efficiencies for providing cost effective and efficient insurance services to 
farmers. For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key 
performance indicators with assigned weightage has been worked out and is as 
given in the Operational Guidelines (extracts enclosed).   The base data to be used 
for the evaluation may be extracted from National Crop Insurance Programme 
(NCIP). The Nodal department has to share their evaluation report with respective 
Insurance Company for their comments and confirmation. Each Insurance Company 
has to be given enough opportunity to present their views and substantiate their 
observations with valid data/proofs. Nodal Department shall evaluate such additional 

 
Page | 20  
 
 
 
data/proofs submitted by Insurance Company and accordingly review their 
evaluation report and submit to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare.   
  
Once the Performance Evaluation report has been accepted and finalized after 
validation by the Central Government MoA&FW, the corresponding actions is to be 
taken by the Ministry along with similar actions by the Nodal Department of the state. 
  
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
 Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
(Reinsurance) 
       The Committee note that as per NAIS guidelines, AIC was required to 
obtain appropriate re-insurance cover in the international re-insurance market. 
However, AIC had arranged for re-insurance support only for their own share of 
claims under NAIS, it had not arranged re-insurance support for the share of claims 
to be borne by GOI and the State Governments. In this regard, AIC stated that as 
regards NAIS (for food and oilseed crops), Governments acted as reinsurers by 
sharing the risk whenever the claims exceeded the stipulated margin. In so far as 
actuarially rated products like WBCIS, MNAIS and NAIS (for commercial and 
horticultural crops) were concerned, where AIC was fully responsible for all the 
claims, adequate reinsurance protection was availed of. The Committee observe 
from the reply of AIC that while the scheme (NAIS) guidelines provided that IA (AIC) 
was responsible for arranging re-insurance support for the entire scheme claims 
under NAIS and not for the AIC portion alone, the reply of AIC was conspicuously 
silent on the observation of Audit on reduction of liabilities of GOI and the State 
Governments to the extent of Rs.21,989.24 crore, if the re-insurance cover was 
obtained. In view of the fact that huge financial support could have been provided as 
pointed out by Audit in the wake of seeking re-insurance cover in the international re-
insurance market, the issue of divergence of guidelines by AIC needs to be enquired 
into. The Committee, therefore while emphasizing the need for devising a robust 
compliance mechanism, desire that reason for failure to comply with the NAIS 
guidelines be identified and appropriate action taken against the erring officials 
responsible for it.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
The directions of the Committee are noted for compliance.  However, the following 
action taken by the government are also brought to the notice of the Committee:   
Under erstwhile NAIS flat/administered premium rates ranging between 2% to 
3.5% were charged from farmers and claims over and above 100% of the premium 
collected by AIC (sole implementing agency) were to be shared equally by Centre 
and State Governments.   In case of commercial/horticultural crops actuarial 
premium was charged by AIC and claims liability was to be shifted to the AIC in a 
phased manner over five years.  Transition to actuarial regime was envisaged in a 
period of five years and accordingly a Clause was introduced in the Operational 

 
Page | 21  
 
 
 
Guidelines which stipulates that efforts will be made by IA to obtain appropriate 
reinsurance cover for the proposed NAIS in the international Reinsurance market.  
  Further, with the transition of the scheme on actuarial basis over a period of 5 years 
the Government liability was to be shifted from subsidizing claims to subsidizing 
premium only.  However, since reinsurance is data-driven and based on actuarial 
analysis of the past loss history, reinsurance arrangement was feasible when the 
risks were actuarially priced, which is being done under the current regime.    
 
Vetting Comments of Audit  
 
Specific reply regarding the reasons for failure to comply with guidelines is not 
given.  Status of devising a robust compliance mechanism and action taken to 
against the erring officials is also not provided. Therefore, the same may be 
furnished to PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 As per directions of the PAC, AIC was advised to constitute an Internal Inquiry 
Committee to examine the matter and submit its findings to Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare for further appraising the PAC.  Accordingly, an 
internal committee was constituted in AIC who deliberated on all the provisions of 
NAIS, State-wise, season-wise and crop-wise performance of the scheme, 
implementation of individual based loss assessments in case of localized calamities, 
formation of corpus fund and withdrawal of various financial liabilities on sun set 
basis and transition to actuarial regime within 3-5 years after implementation etc.    
Committee submitted its report to DA&FW on 26th June, 2024.  Keeping in view all 
the aspects of NAIS and critically examining the applicability of reinsurance 
protection against historical loss ratio of 400% and flat premium rates, the enquiry 
committee has opined that GIC and AIC were only IA of the Scheme and have never 
been unquestionably authorized by way of administrative approval for negotiating 
reinsurance terms and conditions on behalf of Central and State Governments as 
well as sharing of remaining risk over and above the available reinsurance 
protection, if any.  Accordingly, the Committee has concluded that no diversions 
were made in the NAIS guidelines by the Implementing Agency. 
 
After examination of the Report of the Internal Inquiry Committee constituted by AIC 
and considering the fact that DA&FW is the nodal Department for Crop Insurance 
scheme; DFS being the nodal Department handling administrative matters of AIC 
and GIC being the public sector reinsurer, a committee was constituted in the 
Department with DFS and GIC as members to re-examine the issue in the light of 
the recommendations of PAC and the findings submitted by the Internal Inquiry 
Committee. 
 
The Government Committee deliberated the matter in its two meetings and found  
(a) the Joint Group established by the Government in 2004 to examine 
improvements to the cop insurance scheme linked reinsurance coverage solely to an 
actuarial pricing mechanism.  

 
Page | 22  
 
 
 
(b) The provisions of premium rates, subsidy sharing of risks between stakeholders 
is well defined in Para 8 of guidelines. However, clause 17 of the guidelines only 
mentions that efforts are to be made by Implementing Agency (IA) to obtain 
appropriate re-insurance cover.   
(c) AIC has informed the committee that "Efforts were made by the General 
Insurance Corporation of India (GIC) the then administrative agency of the scheme, 
in the initial stages after introduction of NAIS to get reinsurance for Government part 
as well, but due to low administered premium rates no reinsurer was ready to give 
reinsurance even to GIC. In fact, the Government was the reinsurer for claims over 
and above 100% of premium under NAIS, which also dissuaded the reinsurers. 
However, GIC/AIC bought reinsurance for their own part where actuarial premium 
rates were charged for annual commercial/horticulture crops for which they got 
reinsurance for NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS". Hence, efforts were made as per 
guidelines.  
(d) Further, the administrative approvals issued every year were silent on 
mechanism / modalities etc to be adopted for re-insurance.  
(e) There was delay in shifting to actuarial regime, which otherwise would have 
clearly brought the scheme under reinsurance cover.  
Thus, the Committee concluded that the policy decision was for covering risks 
through Government Budget and there were no clear directions to Implementing 
Agency (IA) for obtaining reinsurance. As such, this committee could not identify any 
lapse on the part of IA (AIC/GIC). 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
(Submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs)) 
 The Committee note that DAC&FW issued standing instructions to AIC in March, 
2014 to mandatorily furnish state-wise and company-wise UCs to DAC&FW within a 
week of release. Further, National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP) guidelines 
require Bank/Fls to submit UCs to IAs within 15 days of credit of claims amounts to 
beneficiary farmers. Audit scrutiny revealed that AIC did not furnish periodic returns, 
as mandated, to DAC&FW. Instead, AIC furnished UCs only at the time of 
requirement of fresh funds from DAC&FW. As regards the guidelines for submission 
of UCs by Banks/Fls, Audit observed that in many cases Bank/FIs failed to submit 
UCs to AIC. Regarding reason for failure to furnish Utilization Certificates by AIC 
within a week of release of funds as required by the Department, the Department 
stated that Crop insurance schemes are multi-agency schemes and fulfilling the 
roles and responsibilities was the responsibility of each stakeholder, this also 
depended upon fulfilment of responsibility by other stakeholders. Moreover, on its 
part, AIC had adhered to the timelines of UC submission subject to the Financial 
institutions/banks and other insurance companies fulfilling their responsibilities. In 
the opinion of the Committee, AIC cannot shy away from the responsibility of 

 
Page | 23  
 
 
 
furnishing UCs in a time bound manner by merely placing the onus on the Banks/Fls. 
The Committee therefore, while expressing surprise over the manner the funds were 
released without verifying the requirements based on any documentary proof, stress 
on the need to evolve a mechanism to ensure strict compliance of guidelines of the 
PMFBY for timely submission of UCs for enabling maximum utilization of funds for 
the benefit of the farmers.  
Action Taken by Ministry          
The Committee’s concern regarding implementation of a mechanism for timely 
submission of UCs by all ICs has been taken care of through implementation of 
Subsidy Module on National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) where demand is raised 
by ICs on the NCIP and disbursement of subsidy is also made on NCIP.  Therefore, 
record of each demand/release is available on the NCIP doing away with the need 
for obtaining utilization certificates from agencies.   ICs can mark their payments as 
received there and a digital UC may be generated from module which can be 
downloaded in required format.  
Further, under new guidelines of release of funds under Central Sector Schemes, 
being implemented from 2022-23, the PMFBY has been integrated to the Treasury 
Single Account (TSA) system, wherein subsidy funds are assigned to the Central 
Nodal Agency (i.e. AIC)’s Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Account and actual releases 
are made based on the demand received and with the approval of DA & FW.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
(Non maintenance of Data base) 
 The Committee note that under NAIS guidelines, the IAs were only required to 
provide returns/statistics to GOI (and not the States). Audit observed that IAs did not 
provide periodic (monthly or quarterly) returns on NAIS to the Governments. Instead 
statistical data to support their claims were furnished at the time of requirement of 
funds. No separate requirements regarding furnishing of periodic returns/statistics 
were issued under MNAIS and WBCIS till they were integrated under NCIP. 
Thereafter (i.e., from Rabi season 2013-14), IAs were required to furnish monthly 
progress returns/statistics or any information demanded by the Governments. The 
NCIP guidelines also stipulated that IAs were required to obtain and upload 
comprehensive details of insured farmers on their websites. However, Audit had 
pointed out that IAs did not furnish monthly progress reports/ statistics to the 

 
Page | 24  
 
 
 
Government even under the NCIP nor upload details of Insured farmers on their 
websites. Moreover, neither DAC&FW nor AIC verified and analyzed the statistical 
data at the time of release of funds. According to the Information made available to 
the Committee, DAC&FW admitted in December 2016 that beneficiary data was not 
available with them or the IAs and that the same were maintained by the banks. In 
view of the fact that prior to 2013-14, under the schemes, IAs were required to 
provide periodic (monthly and quarterly) returns on NAIS to the Governments, the 
Committee are constrained to observe that IAs failed to meet this guideline and 
instead they furnished statistical data to support their claims at the time of 
requirement of funds. Regrettably, the IAs continued to deviate from the stipulated 
guidelines even after 2013-14 which sought them to obtain and upload 
comprehensive details of insured farmers on their websites. In light of the fact that 
the fund requirements were assessed based on the beneficiary data, the Committee 
are of the view that the methodology adopted by DAC&FW to ascertain the 
authenticity of the statistical data provided by the IAs needs to be examined. The 
Committee also feel that absence of specific guidelines on role of DAC&FW or IAs in 
maintaining the database of beneficiaries (farmer-wise, crop- wise and area-wise) 
led to such a situation where substantial financial contribution was made by the 
Governments and their agencies without confirming whether it reached the intended 
beneficiaries. In view of the above, the Committee are constrained to observe that 
the erstwhile schemes were not formulated taking into consideration the very basis 
of targeted beneficiaries. The Committee are hopeful that database of beneficiaries 
(farmer-wise, crop-wise and area-wise) is updated and made available on real time 
basis on the online portal that has since been made operational, and is accessible to 
DAC&FW, IAs and Banks/Fls. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
measures taken towards ensuring real time updation of data.  
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
The Government has taken following steps to strengthen the data base of the 
scheme: 
 National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) developed for 
PMFBY has digitized the entire implementation process thereby seamlessly 
integrating all the stakeholders on one platform for obtaining/uploading 
details of individual farmers insured under PMFBY. 
 Dashboard has been developed enabling downloading of scheme data 
from a single source. 
 The NCIP incorporates facilities for auto calculation of premium s u b s i d y  
( s u b s i d y  m o d u l e )  a n d  claims (DigiClaims Module). 
 Direct payment of claim amount on the bank accounts of beneficiaries 
insured farmers. 
 Insured farmers can track/check their application and claim status on the 
 portal. 

 
Page | 25  
 
 
 
 Capturing yield data based on Crop Cutting Experiments for calculation of 
admissible claims.  
 Through Aadhar seeding effective de-duplication of beneficiaries. 
 Further, module for online verification of land details has also been 
integrated with NCIP. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Measures taken by the Ministry towards real time updation of data as applicable in 
current scheme may be provided to PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply  
The Government has developed a digital portal for real-time data updation by various 
stakeholders, viz. Banks, Insurance Companies, Insurance Intermediaries, 
States/UTs and Farmers. 
o This includes granular data at farmer, land-parcel and crop level information 
entered by the enrolment channels viz. Banks, Insurance Intermediaries and 
Insurance companies at the time of enrolment for the specific season. 
o Details of pre-harvest crop losses and crop yield losses to calculate the 
eligible claim amount to be paid to the farmers 
o Payment of calculated claim amount to the eligible farmers using PFMS 
payment gateway 
o Calculation of Central and States share of premium subsidy amount and 
remittance of same to the Insurance Companies through PFMS payment 
gateway 
o Real-time weather data information is also being collated under WINDS 
initiative for usage in technology based crop yield estimation and various 
other purposes of Crop Insurance and Disaster Management 
o Various Mobile Applications have also been developed for usage by different 
stakeholders including the farmers for various activities like below: 
(a)Enrolment under the scheme 
(b)Tracking of application status Registration of pre-harvest stage crop losses 
(c)Tracking of Claim Status 
(d)Crop Loss Assessment 
(e)Crop Heath Monitoring 
(f)Crop Yield Estimation at Harvesting Stage 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter 1 for comments of the Committee) 

 
Page | 26  
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
(Coverage of farmers) 
         Audit scrutiny revealed that coverage of farmers in the country as well as in the 
nine selected States under the erstwhile schemes was very low compared to the 
population of farmers as per Census 2011. While the percentage coverage of 
farmers in the country for crops covered under Kharif season ranged from 14 per 
cent to 22 per cent and from 8 per cent to 12 per cent in case of crops covered under 
Rabi season, the percentage coverage of farmers in nine selected States ranged 
from 26 per cent to 42 per cent for crops covered under Kharif season and from 9 
per cent to 16 per cent in the case of crops covered under Rabi season. Further, 
coverage of non-loanee farmers was negligible. No data of sharecroppers and tenant 
farmers was maintained despite the fact that the guidelines provided for their 
coverage under the schemes. Audit also observed that though the budget allocation 
included specific provisions for coverage of SC/ST category, no data of such 
coverage and utilisation of funds for this category was maintained. According to the 
information furnished to the Committee, some of the factors attributable to low 
coverage of farmers were lack of awareness about the schemes among the farming 
community and delays in settlement of claims to farmers. Taking note of the fact that 
the percentage of coverage of farmers under the schemes was very low despite the 
fact the entire insurance claim liabilities of the farmers were being borne by the 
Governments, the Committee are of the considered view that the factors attributable 
for the poor performance of the schemes are required to be identified and 
appropriately addressed. The Committee, while seeking to be apprised of the 
percentage of farmers covered under the PMFBY, also desire to be apprised of the 
remedial measures taken by the Department and its implementing agencies to 
further improve the performance of the ongoing scheme so that maximum numbers 
of farmers are covered under the scheme.  
Action Taken  
PMFBY currently implemented in 22 States/UTs, however the scheme has been 
implemented in 27 States/UTs in one or more seasons since its inception in 2016.  
Two more States – Telangana and Jharkhand are re-joining the scheme from Kharif 
2024 season.   A total of 56.9 crore farmer applications have been insured for a sum 
insured of more than Rs 16.02 lakh crores during the period of 7 years of 
implementation of PMFBY.   Farmer enrollment under the scheme has increased 
from 27% in 2021-22 to 39% in 2022-23 and 42% in 2023-24.  Approximately, 4 
crore farmers with more than 13 crore farmer policies have been enrolled during 
2023-24.   Area insured has also showing increasing trends on year to year basis 
say there was 13% increase in 2021-22, 22% in 2022-23 and 38% in 2023-24.  
Coverage of non-loanee farmers has also increased under the scheme.  It is 
expected that about 55% of total coverage under the scheme during 2023-24 would 
be of non-loanee farmers.  
 

 
Page | 27  
 
 
 
The scheme has became1st largest crop insurance scheme in the world in terms of 
farmer enrolments and 3rd largest in terms of insurance premiums. 
Remedial measures taken by the Government to improve to farmer coverage are as 
follows: 
i)  Awareness about the schemes among the farming community  
            The Government has taken several steps to create substantial awareness 
about the scheme amongst beneficiaries so that they can enroll themselves 
voluntarily in all the implementing States/UTs under the scheme to increase the 
coverage in terms of different crops and areas. The Government has made 
provisions to ensure availability of adequate funds for awareness of PMFBY. The 
revised Operational Guidelines for PMFBY which came into effect from 1st October 
2018 have inter-alia provided that the insurance companies should compulsorily 
spend atleast 0.5% of the total gross premium collected by them for Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) activities.   
            The Government has actively supported the awareness activities being 
carried out by the States, implementing Insurance Companies, financial institutions, 
and Common Service Centres (CSCs) network to disseminate key features of 
PMFBY amongst farmers and members of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
            Further, a structured awareness campaign ‘Crop Insurance Week/Fasal Bima 
Saptah’ has been initiated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare since 
Kharif 2021 season onwards. The core focus of the campaign is to increase the 
awareness about benefits of the scheme, sensitize the stakeholders and to increase 
overall enrolment of farmers, thereby helping them to reap the benefits of crop 
insurance with special focus on identified aspirational/tribal districts.   
            Along with this, ‘Fasal Bima Pathshalas’ are also being organized at 
village/GP level for knowledge building of farmers on various aspects of scheme 
implementation.  
            Apart from this, other activities for awareness generation involve the publicity 
of key features and benefits of the scheme through advertisements in leading 
National and local newspapers, airing of audio-visual spots on regional / local 
channels, distribution of IEC material in local languages, dissemination of SMS 
through Kisan / National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) portal and organisation of 
online workshops of all stakeholders including farmers, Panchayat Members, and 
other key stakeholders. 
            Government had also organized a nationwide Doorstep Crop Insurance 
Policy/receipt Distribution mega drive – ‘Meri Policy Mere Haath’. Hard copies of 
crop insurance policy receipts are distributed to farmers enrolled under PMFBY 
through special camps at gram Panchayat/village level. All implementing State/UT 
Governments along with respective insurance companies have been organizing 
Gram Panchayat level mega policy distribution drive.    
            The systematic monitoring of IEC activities has been diligently overseen by 
the Central IEC Advisory Committee. This committee, in close collaboration with 
local Insurance Companies, assumes a pivotal role in ensuring the effective 
implementation and impact assessment of the IEC initiatives related to crop 
insurance. 
  
ii) Settlement of claims to farmers. 

 
Page | 28  
 
 
 
  
The Government has taken following steps to address the delay in settlement of 
claims to the farmers: 
 National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) developed for 
PMFBY has digitized the entire implementation process thereby seamlessly 
integrating all the stakeholders on one platform for obtaining/uploading details 
of individual farmers insured under PMFBY. 
 Dashboard has been developed enabling downloading of scheme data from a 
single source. 
 The NCIP incorporates facilities for auto calculation of premium subsidy 
(subsidy module) and claims (DigiClaims Module). 
 Direct payment of claim amount on the bank accounts of beneficiaries insured 
farmers. 
 Insured farmers can track/check their application and claim status on the 
 portal. 
 Capturing yield data based on Crop Cutting Experiments for calculation of 
admissible claims.  
 Through Aadhar seeding effective de-duplication of beneficiaries. 
 Further, module for online verification of land details has also been integrated 
with NCIP.    
(iii)    Based on the experience and feedback from the stakeholders, the Operational 
Guidelines of the Scheme have been revised and revamped w.e.f. Rabi 2018 and 
Kharif 2020 respectively. Further, Government has taken following steps to increase 
coverage under the scheme: 
  
 Implementing State Govts/UTs are being persuaded regularly to bring more 
crops and areas under the ambit of Crop Insurance Schemes to increase 
coverage. 
 There is a provision of performance and evaluation of implementing Insurance 
Companies under the Schemes, in which one of the important criteria for 
ranking is percentage of non-lonaee farmers enrolled. If Insurance Companies 
are not able to meet the target then there is provision of adverse ranking for 
Insurance Companies. 
  
 To ensure proper reach of the scheme at the village level, facility for 
enrolment of farmers through Common Service Centres, Grama One (in 
Karnataka), online mode on Crop Insurance portal, crop insurance app, AIDE 
app for crop insurance at door-step of the farmers has been activated. 
  
 Provision has been made to earmark expenditure of 0.5% of gross premium 
on ICE activities. 
  
 Infusion of technology for timely settlement of claims like YES-Tech (Yield 
Estimation based on Technology) – It is aided by data inputs, such as remote 

 
Page | 29  
 
 
 
sensing indices, weather indices, crop phonological information, soil types 
etc., interfaced with accepted technology/approaches. 
  
YES-TECH has been implemented for paddy and wheat crops with minimum 
30% yield estimation through YES-Tech from Kharif 2023. 10 big states have 
joined it. 
  
WINDS (Weather Information Network and Data System) – A network of 
Automated Weather Stations (AWS) at Taluka/Block level and Automated 
Rain Gauges (ARG) at Gram Panchayat level is proposed to provide all 
weather information to farmers and agriculture to various government and 
other units.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Remedial measures have been taken by the Ministry towards improving the farmers 
coverage and early settlement of the farmers’ claims. Hence, in view of reply no 
further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 (Please see Para 15 of Chapter 1 for comments of the Committee) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
(Delay in issue of notification) 
 The Committee note that as per operational guidelines of the erstwhile schemes, 
State Governments were required to notify the crop, area and insurance company 
one month in advance of each crop season and also nominate the concerned 
insurance company. However, the Committee found that there were delays of up to 
132 days, 136 days and 171 days in case of NAIS, MNAIS and WBCIS respectively 
in issuance of such notifications by the nine States selected by Audit. Explaining the 
reasons, the Department stated that the delays were due to administrative reasons. 
While taking exception to the prolonged administrative delays leading to non 
issuance of notifications of important nature, the Committee desire that appropriate 
action may be taken against the officials responsible for the delay. The Committee 
would also like to point out that insurance scheme benefits can only be availed by 
those farmers who had taken loans for notified crops in notified areas.  Moreover, in 
the absence of notification. Banks and FIs would be unaware of basic Information 
like insurance covered crops, areas covered and insurance company which would in 
turn impede the intended beneficiaries from availing the benefits of the schemes on 
time. The Committee would, therefore, stress on impressing upon the State 

 
Page | 30  
 
 
 
Governments to ensure issue of notifications of insured crops and areas covered, 
under the PMFBY, along with details of the nominated Insurance companies in a 
time bound manner.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
To tackle the issue of delay in notification by the States, provision of selection of 
insurance company for three years has been made in Revamped Operational 
Guidelines from Kharif 2020 season.  Due to these provisions States are notifying 
the scheme for three years and issue of delay in notification has decreased 
significantly. 
Further, the notification is being digitized on National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) 
for speedy access to the insurance companies for initiating timely action for 
coverage of beneficiaries under the scheme.  
Tendering process has also been digitized on NCIP to complete the process at the 
earliest. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Action taken by the Ministry for notification is being digitized on NCIP for speedy 
access to the insurance companies.  Hence in view of reply no further comment. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
(Functioning of Reference Weather Stations (RWS)) 
 The Committee find that Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance 
Scheme (RWBCIS) which empowers the State Level Coordination Committee on 
Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) to select some Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) 
Reference Weather Stations (RWS) aims to mitigate the hardship of the insured 
farmers against the likelihood of financial loss on account of anticipated crop loss 
resulting from adverse weather conditions relating to rainfall, temperature, wind, 
humidity etc. Further, RWBCIS uses weather parameters as "proxy" for crop yields in 
compensating the cultivators for deemed crop losses. Audit scrutiny revealed that 
there were glaring deficiencies in the functioning of the RWS like non monitoring of 
RWSs, non-reliability on the accuracy of data collected by RWSs, non-installation of 
RWSs, non-certification of AWS equipments provided by third party data provider 
etc. According to Audit, such deficiencies led to delay in providing weather data to 
Agriculture Department. In this regard, the Department had pointed out that State 
Governments specify the weather stations in the notifications for implementation of 

 
Page | 31  
 
 
 
the schemes which include the weather stations of Indian Meteorological Department 
and it is the responsibility of the State Government to ensure correctness of data. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the role of monitoring the functioning of RWSs and 
ensuring accuracy of data collected rests with the State Governments, the 
Committee are of the view that DAC&FW should also play a proactive role and 
impress upon the State Governments to review the functioning of all Reference 
Weather Stations (RWSs) and also undertake inspections for necessary updations 
so as to ensure accurate weather predictions. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the measures taken towards ensuring real time updation of 
data/information, received from the RWSs, on the website of the Department 
concerned. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
The PMFBY/Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCI) 
envisages use of technology implementation of these schemes.  Accordingly, various 
improved technologies have been introduced in the implementation of these 
schemes. As regards Automatic Weather Stations/Automatic Rain-Gauges WINDS 
(Weather Information Network & Data System) - is a pioneering initiative by the 
Government to set-up a network of Automatic Weather Stations & Rain Gauges at 
Taluk/Block and Gram Panchayat level to create a strong database of hyper-local 
weather data for the different Govt. and other entities to use for all farmer and 
farming oriented services. The data so collected will be used for claim assessment 
under Parametric Crop insurance (including RWBCIS), Yield estimation through 
Technology, Crop-Region specific Agriculture Advisories to the Farmers, Disaster 
Risk Resilience & Mitigation needs.  
As of now the country has approx. 13,000 AWS and 20,000 ARGs installed for all 
institutions including IMD. Under WINDS, an additional 3,500 AWS and Approx. 1.6 
lakh ARGs are proposed to be established across the country. IMD and DA&FW has 
collaborated for setting up this system.  A portal has also been developed to handle 
the data at national level.  All real-time data from these Stations get reflected on 
national portal and used for various purposes including weather insurance. 
Detailed manuals, guidelines, SOPs have been issued to ensure implementation of 
WINDS.  A Working Group has been constituted for working out the modalities of 
partnership between IMD and DA&FW for WINDS programme and for setting up 
quality assessment & quality checking protocol of WINDS data within the Quality 
Assurance Programme (QAP) framework. 
Nine states namely, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala & Karnataka shall be implementing 
WINDS in this FY. More number of the States are being approached for inclusion 
into WINDS framework. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Steps taken for undertaking inspections of all Reference Weather Stations (RWSs) 
for necessary updation may be provided to PAC. Further status of active Automatic 

 
Page | 32  
 
 
 
Weather Stations & Automatic Rain-Gauges along with measures taken towards 
ensuring real time updation of data/information received from the RWSs on the 
website of the Department and action taken regarding undertaking inspections for 
ensuring accurate weather predictions may be provided to PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
Under WINDS initiative for generating hyper-local weather data for the utilization for 
Crop Insurance, Precision Agro-Advisories and Disaster Management, Department 
has collaborated with IMD for setting up Standards for establishments of Automatic 
Weather Stations &Automatic Rain Gauges as well as the standardization of weather 
parametric sensor specifications to capture the following weather parameters 
accurately and precisely: 
 Temperature 
 Humidity 
 Rainfall 
 Wind Speed & Direction 
A portal has been developed for obtaining all data of active weather stations across 
the country under WINDS initiative.  Further, the department has constituted a joint 
working committee comprising of officials of DA&FW and IMD to develop Quality 
Assurance and Quality Checking Protocols to ensure accuracy and objectivity of the 
data being captured through these AWS/ARGs.   
Further, only the data passing these quality standards is being ingested in the 
WINDS portal for public dissemination and subsequent use for various purposes.  
The AWS/ARG are installed by the Winds Implementing Agencies selected through 
open bidding conducted by the States/UTs. The model adopted by the Govt. is 
based on rental cost of weather data rather than Capex investment for procurement, 
installation and maintenance of machines. The implementing Agencies are 
responsible for procurement, installation and maintenance of AWS/ARGs under the 
initiative. They are paid the monthly rental cost for the weather data based on cost 
discovered through open tenders.   
The data validated through Quality Protocols only is considered for making payment 
to the implementing agencies.  All such data validation is being done in collaboration 
and under the guidance of IMD. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 

 
Page | 33  
 
 
 
(Crop Cutting Experiment) 
     The Committee note that one of the requirements as per the Operational 
Guidelines of the Schemes is to obtain accurate and timely yield data based on the 
stipulated number of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) at the level of insurance unit 
which is village/village panchayat for major crops and may be a higher unit for minor 
crops. Against this requirement, the Committee note that the infrastructure and 
manpower at ground level is hugely deficient in terms of both quality and numbers 
making it difficult to undertake CCEs in such large numbers, thereby delaying timely 
settlement of claims of farmers. Towards this end, the Committee have been 
informed by the Department that the Revised Operational Guidelines for PMFBY 
(Section 20) envisage the use of innovative technologies for accurate crop yield 
estimation and timely settlement of claims and Initiatives like Pilot Study on 
Optimization of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) and Improving Crop Yield 
Estimation, Smart Sampling Technique and Optimization of CCEs (Pilots and 
implementation), Gram Panchayat Level Direct Yield Estimation using Technology 
(Pilots) etc. While acknowledging the significance of the initiatives taken by the 
Department, the Committee also feel that immediate necessary action may be taken 
to provide adequate manpower and infrastructure at the ground level and stress on 
the need to involve local farmers in CCEs. Further, while emphasizing the need to 
ensure that the Crop Cutting Experiment (CCEs) techniques/methods employed by 
the Departments concerned are accurate to gauge the impact and extent of crop 
failure, the Committee recommend that best practices of CCEs of different States 
may also be emulated across the country to have accurate and timely data on crop 
yield.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) to estimate the yield for calculating claims under 
PMFBY are being conducted by the concerned State Governments as per the 
guidelines and supervision of National Statistical Office (NSO) earlier known as 
National Sample Survey Organizations (NSSO).    
  
Keeping in view the difficulties in manual CCEs original and Revamped Operational 
Guidelines (OGs) for Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) envisage use of 
improved technology to ensure minimum dependence on manpower and at the same 
time for timely settlement of farmers claims. Accordingly, for better transparency of 
yield calculation process, CCE Agri app has been developed to make the entire 
process paperless and real-time. All data captured through the app is time-stamped 
and geo-tagged.  The use of CCE Agri App was made mandatory for intimate data of 
CCE on National Crop Insurance Portal w.e.f.  Kharif 2018. 
 With a view to reduce total number of CCEs and improving distribution of locations 
for conducting CCEs under PMFBY, DAC&FW, through MNCFC had initiated smart 
sampling technique.  This reduction in number of CCEs has lead to efficient 
manpower& budgetary planning, more precise and focused approach for quality data 
collection, timely data consolidation and early claim settlement and also increased 
objectivity & reliability of yield data. 

 
Page | 34  
 
 
 
Use of Satellite/Remote Sensing and related technology for loss assessment and 
direct yield estimation at Gram Panchayat level.  After various pilot studiesYES-Tech 
(Yield Estimation based on Technology) has been approved for implementation 
wherein it has been made mandatory for the States to calculate atleast 30% yield 
through these methods and 70% through traditional CCEs methods for timely 
settlement of claims.  This percentage will be increased in due course of time.  State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh has accepted this technology for 100% yield 
estimation in the State. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Steps taken to involve local farmers and to emulate the best practices of CCEs of    
different States may be provided to PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
Local farmer whose plot is chosen for conducting CCEs for the crop and season is 
mandatorily part of the team comprising of Field level Govt. functionaries (VAO, 
Agriculture Assistant etc.) & representative of Insurance Companies. The Crop 
Cutting Experiments are conducted using a Mobile Application for ensuring 
transparency and faster collation of yield data for calculation of eligible claims. As 
per Crop Yield estimation manual, farmer representative is required to sign the 
forms/documents which are used by VAO at the spot/time of CCE. 
  
The Smart-Sampling technique has been introduced under the scheme to ensure 
secrecy and transparency in sampling of plot for conducting CCEs. Further 
Technology Based Yield Assessment under YESTECH has also been introduced 
under the scheme ensure reduce possible moral hazard and errors in manual 
process. 
  
These interventions have been adopted by 9 major states & UTs and department is 
making efforts to include more number of states under these technology solutions to 
increase efficiency and transparency in the crop yield estimation process.         
  
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter 1 for comments of the Committee) 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
 (Delay in settlement of claims) 
The Committee note that National Crop Insurance Programme guidelines mandated 
settlement of claims by Implementing Agencies within 45 days of receipt of 
Government subsidy and receipt of yield/weather data from State Governments. 
Audit scrutiny of records of AIC revealed that during 2011-16, five out of the nine 
selected States took more than the prescribed time of 45 days with delays of up to 
1,069 days in processing claims. The Committee have been informed that there 
were delays in settlement of claims due to non-receipt of subsidy share of State 
Governments, litigations, verification of claims by State Governments, reconciliation, 

 
Page | 35  
 
 
 
booking errors etc. Taking serious note of the inordinate delays of up to 1,069 days, 
much beyond the stipulated period of 45 days in processing the claims, the 
Committee are constrained to observe that the basic objective of the schemes to 
provide timely benefit of insurance claim to the farmers who were at risks like natural 
calamities, pests and disease that lead to partial or full failure of crops was denied. In 
this regard, the Committee would express the view that insurance coverage premium 
received from the farmers be reimbursed proportionately along with interest accrued, 
in the event of non- receipt of fund share from State Governments. The Committee, 
while being hopeful that all necessary actions have been taken to ensure 
Implementation of the guidelines of the new schema in true spirit, would emphasize 
on ensuring that the prescribed time limits for settlement of claims are adhered to 
without fail. In this regard, the stakeholders concerned are also to be issued strict 
guidelines for effective implementation of the scheme.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
Several interventions have been implemented recently in the scheme to minimize the 
delay in settlement of claims, the details of which are as under: 
a. Freedom to States to choose alternative risk management mechanisms in 
addition to original PMFBY,  
b. Provision of escrow account for States for timely release of premium subsidy 
for facilitating timely settlement of claims, 
c. New technological initiatives to increase transparency and rationalize yield 
estimation and premium rates, namely  
i. Yield Estimation System Based on Technology (YES-TECH) for gradual 
migration to Remote-Sensing based yield estimation to help assess fair 
and accurate crop yield estimation.  Initially, it has been made mandatory 
for the States to calculate 30% yield through these methods and 70% 
through traditional CCEs methods for timely settlement of claims.  This % 
age will be increased in due course of time.  State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh has accepted this technology for 100% of yield estimation in the 
State. 
ii. Weather Information Network and Data System (WINDS) for establishing 
network of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Automatic Rain-Gauges 
(ARG) for collecting hyper-local weather data at GP & Block level;   
iii. Collection of Real-time photos and Observations of Crops (CROPIC) for 
Geo-tagged photographs for validation of sown Crop with Insured Crop 
and use of pictorial analytics for Objective Crop Damage Assessment & 
Crop Yield Estimation; 
iv. Development of a dedicated module namely, “DigiClaim” module on 
National Crop Insurance Portal through which claim settlement process 
has been automated using Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS).  In this module, the claims are calculated and timely remittance 

 
Page | 36  
 
 
 
of claims amount is being made directly to farmers account w.e.f. Kharif 
2022 season claims.  This has also helped the Government both Central 
and State in tracking and monitoring of claim settlement process.  Claims 
of over Rs.16,000 crore to about 1 crore farmers have so far been settled 
through Digiclaim module. 
d. Further, penalty provision has been incorporated in revised operation 
guidelines highlighting that States have to pay penal interest @ 12% per 
annum in case of delay in release of State share of Premium. 
 
e. Release of central government matching share of premium subsidy by 
delinking it with that of the state government thereby ensuring proportionate 
release of claims by the insurance company.  
Detailed manuals, guidelines, SOPs have been issued to ensure implementation of 
above. Further, most of these initiatives being technology driven are being 
incorporated in the system. 
Vetting Comments of Audit  
In view of reply no further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
           
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 12 
(Coverage of excess sown area) 
The Committee note that as per NCIP guidelines, loans given for unsown areas was 
not covered by the scheme. However, Audit observed that in the Beed District, 
Maharashtra, for Kharif season in 2015, against the cultivable area of 66,042 
hectare, the area sown and insured was 51,397 hectare and 1,11,615 hectare 
respectively. Thus, insured area exceeded sown area by 117% which led to double 
and triple payment of insurance to farmers on the same crop. Considering the fact 
that the Taluka Agricultural Officer maintains the report on the sowing area, Banks 
and Insurance company keep record of farmers and area sown, the Committee fail to 
fathom the basis of the huge variation in the details of areas sown vis-à-vis insured. 
In this regard, the Committee have been informed that the Department had rectified 
and resolved the issue of insurance coverage of unsown area through remote 
sensing technology operated by the Mahalanobis National Crop Forecasting Centre. 
While taking note of the efforts of the Department, the Committee are hopeful that 

 
Page | 37  
 
 
 
the data published by the Mahalanobis National Crop Forecasting Centre are also 
made available to all Departments/Stakeholders concerned seeking 
feedbacks/inputs. The Committee recommend that details of cultivable area, sown 
area, farmers etc. are also made available on a common platform to ensure easy 
access for all stakeholders. The Committee also recommend that the State 
Governments concerned closely monitor the status during the crop season, through 
their District Level Monitoring Committees (DLMC). The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the concrete action taken by the Department in this regard. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Government has made several interventions to eliminate/reduce the difference 
between area actually sown and insured by farmers: 
o National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) has been developed as a single source 
of data on PMFBY/RWBCIS. 
o Under PMFBY use of smartphone/CCE Agri App has been made mandatory 
thus ensuring accurate and timely receipt of CCE data. 
o Crop survey app is being used to verify the crop sown at individual 
survey/land parcel. 
o De-duplication by Aadhar seeding and land record integration had minimized 
the problem of over insurance and application of area correction factor. 
o Integration of Land Records of States with the National Crop Insurance Portal 
(NCIP) to get correct details of land parcels insured. Now land records of 90% 
insured area have been integrated with the NCIP. 
o Remote Sensing Technology (satellite imagery / drones) is being used to 
determine the actual area sown instead of depending upon the eye 
estimations. 
o New technologies like Yield Estimation through Technology (YESTECH), 
Weather Information Network Data System (WINDS), Collection of Real-time 
Photos and Observation of Crops (CROPIC), etc. to improve the 
implementation of the scheme.  
o In case of differences/disputes relating to actual area sown, the farmers can 
approach the authorities concerned through the Unified Krishi Rakshak 
Helpline portal which has been created for online grievance redressal and 
monitoring by States and the Centre. 
o Further, a provision of Stratified Grievance Redressal Mechanism, viz. District 
Level Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC), State Level Grievance 
Redressal Committee (SGRC) has been made in the Revised Operational 
Guidelines of the Scheme to resolve such complaints. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry has not made any specific reply regarding the extent to which the excess 
actual data is minimalised in light of the several actions taken by the Ministry. The 
same may be furnished to PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 

 
Page | 38  
 
 
 
Digital Land Record validation of 10 major States covering more than 90% of area 
under insurance has been integrated into National Crop insurance Portal (NCIP), 
real-time. Digital land record validation at the time of enrolment is done across these 
States together with mandatory requirement for Aadhaar Number for getting enrolled 
under the scheme as per Section 7 of the UIDAI Act has ensured that the instances 
of excess insurance of area under the scheme come down drastically since Kharif 
2020 onwards. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
(Need for strengthening the Monitoring mechanism) 
The Committee note that as per Clause 18 of NAIS guidelines, the scheme was to 
be implemented in accordance with the operational modalities as worked out by IA in 
consultation with DAC&FW and the operation of the scheme was to be reviewed 
annually. Further, DAC&FW and the IA were also required to prepare periodical 
appraisal reports on the scheme. Audit observed that no such report was prepared 
by the DAC&FW/RA even after 14 years of operation of the schemes. No Technical 
Support Unit (TSU) under the guidance of the DAC&FW was established to monitor 
the implementation of the crop Insurance schemes, product structuring, 
standardization and benchmarking of products, rationalization of premium 
rate/subsidy, issuing guidelines for installation and accreditation of weather stations, 
creation of national grid for statistical data for the purpose and issuance of directives 
to insurance companies. According to DAC&FW, the crop insurance schemes were 
being monitored regularly through various measures. Even the State Level 
Coordination Committees on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) and District Level Monitoring 
Committee (DLMC) were not constituted. In the opinion of the Committee, since 
Government of India and State Governments incur substantial financial liabilities on 
account of premium subsidy and claim reimbursement under the schemes, the 
monitoring mechanism should have been made more effective and robust. The 
Committee would like to caution that non-constituting a robust monitoring committee 
would cast doubts on the efficacy of the system of disbursal of funds as no appraisal 
reports are prepared, data maintained and feedback obtained from the concerned 
Implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore recommend that the monitoring 
mechanism should be strengthened so as to ensure that every penny of the 
Government is duly accounted for. 
 Action Taken by Ministry 
The monitoring mechanism under the existing crop insurance schemes has been 
strengthened by using technological interventions like development of National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP) for automation of implementation process and a single 
source of data, Digiclaim Module on NCIP helps monitoring/tracking of claim 
settlement process.  The implementation of existing schemes is also reviewed/ 

 
Page | 39  
 
 
 
monitored constantly through weekly video conferences, one to one meetings with 
the stakeholders on regular basis, through State Level Coordination Committee on 
Crop Insurance at State level and by the National Level Monitoring Committee 
(NLMC) at national level. As on 1st May, 2024, the scheme is also monitored through 
National Level Review Conferences.  As on 1st May, 2024, 11 such conferences 
have been held.    
  
In order to support the implementation of the scheme, the Cabinet approved the 
provision of setting up of a Technical Support Unit (TSU).  Accordingly, w.e.f. 2018 
National Technical Support Unit (NTSU)/Central Project Monitoring Unit (CPMU) has 
been set up through United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The role of 
the TSU/CPMU is to provide support and advice on risk classification & rating, 
research & development of new products, methodology for loss assessment, legal 
works, workshop/training & capacity building, along with the use of technology 
including innovation/ replication, digitization of administration of Schemes and 
monitoring of the scheme etc. through NCIP.  
 
The Government is committed to enhancing the operational efficiency of PMFBY, 
ensuring prompt claim settlement and farmers insurance services to farmers.  It is 
the endeavour of this Department to constantly improve the schemes based on 
learning and discussion of stakeholders, Operational Guidelines (OGs) of 
PMFBY/RWBCIS were revised and further revamped for implementation effect from 
1st October, 2018 (i.e. from Rabi 2018-19 season) and 1st April, 2021 (i.e. from Kharif 
2020 season).   OGs of the scheme have further been revised w.e.f. Kharif 2023 
season. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Necessary steps taken by the Ministry.  Hence no further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 14 
 (Lack of awareness) 
    Audit observed that 97 per cent of the farmers had opted for sum insured 
equivalent to loan amount under NAIS, indicating that either the loanee farmers were 
intent on covering the loan amount only (in which case, the scheme acted more as 
loan insurance than as crop insurance) or were not aware or informed appropriately 
by loan disbursing Bank/Fls about the full provisions of the scheme. Further, 63 per 
cent of the farmers surveyed during audit were not aware of the schemes. In view of 
huge proportion of farmers surveyed found to have been unaware of the schemes, 

 
Page | 40  
 
 
 
the Committee are constrained to observe that Departments concerned have failed 
in adequately disseminating information on the agricultural insurance schemes to the 
farmers. With a view to reach out to targeted farming community in right earnest, the 
Committee are of the view that all measures should have been taken to disseminate 
the benefits of the schemes both through print and electronic media and 
Melas/workshops organized as part of awareness campaign. Further, to ensure 
better coordination and prompt redressal of grievances of farmers, the Committee 
recommend that the possibility of nominating local public representatives as 
members to the State Level Coordination Committees on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) 
and District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) may be explored.   
Action Taken by Ministry 
The Government has taken several steps to create substantial awareness about the 
scheme amongst beneficiaries so that they can enroll themselves voluntarily in all 
the implementing States/UTs under the scheme to increase the coverage in terms of 
different crops and areas. The Government has made provisions to ensure 
availability of adequate funds for awareness of PMFBY. The revised Operational 
Guidelines for PMFBY which came into effect from 1st October 2018 have inter-alia 
provided that the insurance companies should compulsorily spend atleast 0.5% of 
the total gross premium collected by them for Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities.   
 
The Government has actively supported the awareness activities being carried out 
by the States, implementing Insurance Companies, financial institutions, and 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) network to disseminate key features of PMFBY 
amongst farmers and members of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
 
Further, a structured awareness campaign ‘Crop Insurance Week/Fasal Bima 
Saptah’ has been initiated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare since 
Kharif 2021 season onwards. The core focus of the campaign is to increase the 
awareness about benefits of the scheme, sensitize the stakeholders and to increase 
overall enrolment of farmers, thereby helping them to reap the benefits of crop 
insurance with special focus on identified aspirational/tribal districts.   
 
Along with this, ‘Fasal Bima Pathshalas’ are also being organized at village/GP level 
for knowledge building of farmers on various aspects of scheme implementation.  
 
Apart from this, other activities for awareness generation involve the publicity of key 
features and benefits of the scheme through advertisements in leading National and 
local newspapers, airing of audio-visual spots on regional/local channels, distribution 
of IEC material in local languages, dissemination of SMS through Kisan/National 
Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) portal and organisation of online workshops of all 
stakeholders including farmers, Panchayat Members, and other key stakeholders. 
 
Government had also organized a nationwide Doorstep Crop Insurance 
Policy/receipt Distribution mega drive – ‘Meri Policy Mere Haath’. Hard copies of 
crop insurance policy receipts are distributed to farmers enrolled under PMFBY 

 
Page | 41  
 
 
 
through special camps at gram Panchayat/village level. All implementing State/UT 
Governments along with respective insurance companies have been organizing 
Gram Panchayat level mega policy distribution drive.    
 
The systematic monitoring of IEC activities has been diligently overseen by the 
Central IEC Advisory Committee. This committee, in close collaboration with local 
Insurance Companies, assumes a pivotal role in ensuring the effective 
implementation and impact assessment of the IEC initiatives related to crop 
insurance. 
  
State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) and District Level 
Monitoring Committee (DLMC) are administrative committees for implementation of 
the PMFBY, wherein decisions regarding administration of the scheme are being 
taken.  Furthermore, there are two farmers representatives are also made members 
of the scheme.   
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHAs) have been 
formed to ensure better coordination among all the elected representatives in 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/Municipal Bodies) for efficient and time-bound development and 
monitoring of the schemes.   State Governments have been advised to present the 
progress/report of Grievance Redressal Committees (i.e. both District and Block 
level) in DISHA. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Necessary steps taken by the Ministry.  Hence no further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 15 
(Non-furnishing of data to Audit) 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that despite repeated requests for 
furnishing details of funds received by Agriculture Insurance Company of India 
Limited (AIC) as contribution from State Government for implementation of Schemes 
during 2011-12 to 2016-17, the same was not provided to the Audit by Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW). In reply, the 
Department stated that due to reasons like time taken by AIC to compile and re-
conciliation of data with its respective Regional Offices and State Governments and 
also the delayed demand (almost at the end of their study) by the Audit Party, 
furnishing of said data to the Audit Party was delayed. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the onus of timely furnishing requisite data lies with the Department and 
the AIC and thus basic data like details of fund contribution of State Governments 

 
Page | 42  
 
 
 
should be readily available with the nodal Implementing agency, i.e. the AIC and the 
Department. The Committee, therefore desire that in future both the Department and 
the Insurance companies should timely provide data/records as and when sought by 
Audit for effective scrutiny.  
Action Taken by Ministry 
Under the erstwhile Crop Insurance Schemes, data/records were obtained from the 
concerned insurance companies in physical/manual/electronic modes. Therefore, 
there was delay in collection of data. Under existing schemes, a National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP) has been developed as a single source of data/records.   All 
the data/records are available on NCIP and it can be provided to the Audit Party on 
real-time basis.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Ministry have not offered any comments in the updated action taken reply. 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 16 
(Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)) 
The Committee note that in 2016, the Government introduced the Pradhan Mantri 
Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and re-structured WBCIS by replacing NAIS and NCIP. 
PMFBY which aims to provide a comprehensive insurance cover against failure of 
the crop thus helping in stabilising the income of the farmers covering all Food & 
Oilseeds crops and Annual Commercial/Horticultural Crops for which past yield data 
is available and for which requisite number of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) are 
being conducted under General Crop Estimation Survey (GCES). The Committee 
also note that as per revised operational guidelines of PMFBY, various initiatives 
have been envisaged to address some of the shortcomings noticed during the 
implementation of the previous schemes. The remedial measures taken by the 
Department inter- alia include collection of details of individual Insured farmers (both 
loanee and non-loanee) like name, fathers' name, Bank Account number, Aadhaar 
number, village, categories small and marginal/SC/ST/women, insured acreage, 
Insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, Government subsidy etc. and 
submission of electronically using web form or Core Banking Solution Integration 
module along with electronic submission of crop wise consolidated declarations on 
or before final cutoff date by Bank branches/Common Service Centers/ 
Intermediaries: developing a National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) to facilitate 
better administration and coordination amongst all stakeholders viz. farmers, States, 
insurers and banks as well as real-time dissemination of information and 

 
Page | 43  
 
 
 
transparency; making available Yield data based on CCES online on National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP) to the concerned Insurance Company by the State 
Government within a month from the date of final harvest of individual crop payment 
of interest @12% to farmers by insurance companies for late settlement of claims 
and by States to insurance companies for late remittance of premium subsidy to 
ensure transparency, accountability and timely payment of claims to farmers, day to 
day monitoring system with weekly video conferences, one to one meetings on State 
specific issues with States and insurance companies concerned, weekly meeting of 
insurance companies, making of provisions to disburse all admissible claims directly 
to the bank accounts of eligible farmers through Crop Insurance Portal with PFMS 
for better transparency and accountability; comprehensive publicity and awareness 
programme to educate the farmers about the benefit of crop insurance schemes 
through electronic and print media, farmers' fair, exhibitions, SMS, short films, 
documentaries etc.; utilization of 0.5% of gross premium collected by insurance 
companies for publicity and awareness generation; activation of Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) for non-loanee farmers and online enrolment to provide the services 
besides traditional modes like banks and insurance intermediaries. While 
appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department under PMFBY, the Committee 
hope that the shortfalls and deficiencies found in the implementation of the earlier 
schemes have been adequately addressed and corrective measures taken in regard 
to the ongoing Scheme. To ascertain the effectiveness of the new scheme viz. 
PMFBY, the Committee recommend that a study covering the aspects of enrolment 
in crop insurance by farmers, coverage of States, insurance claims made vis-a-vis 
settled, amount of interest paid to farmers by insurance companies for late 
settlement of claims and by States to insurance companies for late remittance of 
premium subsidy since its inception may be undertaken so that gaps are identified 
and necessary corrective actions taken for effective implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee are of the considered view that this will go a long way in achieving 
the intended objective of supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector by 
way of providing financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out 
of unforeseen events; stabilizing the income of farmers to ensure their continuance 
in farming; encouraging farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural 
practices and ensuring flow of credit to the agriculture sector which will contribute to 
food security, crop diversification and enhancing growth and competitiveness of 
agriculture sector besides protecting farmers from production risks. In addition to 
above, while emphasizing on the need for concerted effort to provide insurance 
coverage to every vulnerable farmer across the country, the Committee desire that 
along with benefits of technology viz. Aadhar linked land records, DBT facilities, the 
Department may also explore the possibility of integrating data base of Kisan Card, 
Soil Health Card etc. for easing the delivery mechanism. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Impact study of the implementation of the scheme through an independent agency is 
a regular feature for continuance of the scheme.  An impact study of the PMFBY was 
conducted in 2019-20 through an independent agency M/s Spectrum Planning 

 
Page | 44  
 
 
 
(India) Ltd. A study on implementation of PMFBY and recommend the best option for 
effective implementation especially in most vulnerable district has also been 
conducted through National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA), New Delhi.  Further, a 
study on Evaluation of Mega Awareness Campaign of PMFBY has also been 
conducted through the National Institute of Agricultural Extension and Management 
(MANAGE) in 2023.  All these reports and previous study reports are available on 
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP)- www.pmfby.gov.in. 
            As regards integrating of data of PMFBY with other schemes, based on the 
budget announcement 2023, the Ministry of Agriculture is now building Digital Public 
Infrastructure (DPI) for agriculture. The DPI is built as an open source, open 
standard and interoperable public good. This will enable inclusive, farmer-centric 
solutions through relevant information services for crop planning and health, 
improved access to farm inputs, credit and insurance, help for crop estimation, 
market intelligence, and support for growth of Agri Techs industry and start-ups. The 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has hence envisioned Agri Stack and 
Krishi DSS.  
  
Agri Stack is a collection of Registries, Datasets, APIs, and IT Systems enabled by 
Policies, Standards, and Guidelines that makes the data in Agriculture interoperable 
for the development of innovative services and solutions by government entities and 
the private sector.  Integration of PMFBY portal with that of Agri stack is under 
development.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Status of corrective action taken based on the study reports and the status of 
implementation of Digital Public Infrastructure for agriculture may be provided to 
PAC. 
In addition to above, it is requested that final Action Taken Report duly signed by the 
Competent Authority may be forwarded to PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
The Government has approved the Digital Agriculture Mission on 2nd September, 
2024 with an outlay of Rs. 2817 Crore. The Mission seeks to enable a robust 
digital agriculture ecosystem in the country for driving innovative farmer-centric 
digital solutions and making available timely and reliable crop-related information 
to all the farmers in the country. The Mission envisages the creation of Digital 
Public Infrastructure for Agriculture such as Agristack, Krishi Decision Support 
System, Comprehensive Soil Fertility & Profile Map and other IT initiatives 
undertaken by Central Government/State Governments. Agristack project is one 
of the major components of this Mission, which consists of three foundational 
registries or databases in the agriculture sector, i.e., the Farmers’ Registry, Geo-
referenced village maps and the Crop Sown Registry, all created and maintained 
by the State Governments/Union Territories. The Government is providing 

 
Page | 45  
 
 
 
administrative and technical supports to the all the states for 
implementation of the Mission 
  
The ‘Farmer ID’ includes comprehensive and useful data on farmers' demographic 
details, land holdings, and crops sown, enabling farmers to digitally identify and 
authenticate them for accessing benefits and such as credit, insurance, procurement 
etc. As on 11.12.2024, a total of 81,90,926 Farmer IDs has been created and Digital 
Crop Survey (DCS) has been undertaken in 436 Districts in Kharif 2024. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare O.M. No. 14014/06/2017-Credit II (Part II) dated 22.01.2025) 
 
XXXXXX 
  

 
Page | 46  
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Page | 47  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
            NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Page | 48  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:        K.C. VENUGOPAL 
17 December, 2025                      Chairperson,            
26 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)              Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

 
Page | 49  
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  16 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee         Total : 16  
which have been accepted by the Government:           Percentage: 100 
    Para Nos. 1 to 16 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of    Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
   Para Nos.  -  Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which replies of the Government have not been    Percentage: 0 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
    Para Nos. -  Nil 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:   Percentage: 0 
    Para No.  -    Nil 