18 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO RUNNING 
OF SUVIDHA EXPRESS TRAINS: SOUTH 
WESTERN RAILWAY 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One 
Hundred and Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha)]  
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS  
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
iii 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) (ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.02.2025 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Ninth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  

 
 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh        -                  Committee Officer 
 
  

 
 
v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
           
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on “Loss of revenue due to running of Suvidha Express Trains: South Western 
Railway” relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
  
2.       The One Hundred and Thirty ninth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken 
Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th February, 
2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
  
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
  
5.       An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 139th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
  
                            
 
  

 
 
2 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One Hundred and Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Loss of revenue 
due to running of Suvidha Express Trains: South Western Railway” relating to 
the Ministry of Railways. 
 
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which was 
presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2024, contained two 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry 
of Railways have been broadly categorized as under : 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 2-3 
 
                Total:      02      
Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
   Total:         0 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
             NIL 
Total:  0  
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            NIL  
Total:      00 
Chapter - V 

 
3 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Railways. The Committee had 
accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their One Hundred and 
Thirty Ninth Report.   
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred 
and Thirty Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original 
Report which require reiteration/merit comments.  
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of 
the report, positively within three months of the presentation of this report to 
the Parliament.  
          
6. Recommendation at Para No. 2 
 The Committee took note of the fact that despite the suggestion of 
Commercial department, South Western Railway Administration failed to convert 
Suvidha Express trains running with poor patronage to Tatkal special/superfast 
express which resulted in the loss of revenue. However, the Ministry in their Action 
Taken Note stated that the analysis for the period ,2016 to 2021 showed that the 
actual earning was more to the extent of Rs.7.9 crore when a comparison was drawn 
between actual earning and the earning potential, and this could not be deemed as 
loss. The Committee did not find this  reply of the Ministry to be justifiable nor 
tenable and inferred that South Western Railway did not take cognizance of the 
suggestion of Commercial Department which led to the loss of revenue of Rs. 80.74 
crore. The Committee were of the view that the Ministry should have ensured that 
there was proper co-ordination amongst various authorities of Railways. The 
Committee were of the view that the main aim of introducing Dynamic fare structure 
or “surge pricing” was Revenue Optimization and Efficient Resource Allocation. The 
Committee, however, noted that in case of the Suvidha Express, Dynamic pricing of 
fares led to loss of revenue and under utilization of seats. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that Indian Railway should reassess the application software used in 
calculating the dynamic pricing structure so as to maximize the revenue generation 
at all times. 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 

 
4 
 
 SWR vide their reply dated 21.12.2021 to Provisional para had already 
furnished year wise comparative earning potential of trains and actual earning of 
Suvidha trains in which it was informed that Railways earned Rs.7.9 crore more in 
actual earnings by running Suvidha trains during 2016 to 2021. Further, the same 
was also reiterated in the reply for Action taken note. 
In view of above, it is again reiterated that there is no loss involved in running of 
Yesvantpur-Jaipur Suvidha train. 
 
8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments: 
 MoR’s reply is based on the comparison made between potential earnings of 
Mail/express and the actual earnings of the Suvidha Train. 
 
9. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated 
as under: 
 Yeswantpur-Jaipur Suvidha Express was running as a regular time-tabled Suvidha 
service. Therefore, earnings of Suvidha trains were compared with the potential 
earnings of Mail/Express regular time-tabled service. 
  
10. The Committee in their Report had observed that the failure of South-
Western Railway (SWR) to convert Suvidha Express trains running with poor 
patronage to Tatkal special/superfast express resulted in loss of revenue to 
the tune of Rs 80.74 crore. The Committee did not find this reply of the Ministry 
to be justifiable nor tenable and inferred that South Western Railway did not 
take cognizance of the suggestion of Commercial Department which led to the 
loss of revenue of Rs. 80.74 crore. The Committee were of the view that the 
Ministry should have ensured that there was proper co-ordination amongst 
various authorities of Railways. The Committee also noted that in case  the 
Suvidha Express, dynamic pricing of fares led to loss of revenue and under 
utilisation of seats, recommended that Indian Railways should reassess the 
application software used in calculating the dynamic pricing structure so as to 
maximize the revenue generation at all times. The Ministry in their Action 
Taken Notes have submitted that there is no loss involved in running of 
Yesvantpur-Jaipur Suvidha train and Railways earned Rs.7.9 crore more in 
actual earnings by running Suvidha trains during 2016 to 2021. 
The Committee are surprised to note that Railways have stated that dynamic 
pricing has resulted in revenue generation of Rs. 7.9 crore when earnings of 
Suvidha trains are compared with the potential earnings of Mail/Express.     

 
5 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that the Railways should keep it in 
mind that abnormally high fares may act as a deterrent for passengers in 
choosing Railways over air travel and Indian Railways cannot afford to be 
selective about its customers, and accordingly review the fares to arrive at an 
appropriate solution. Railways should also cater to the needs of those people, 
who find Railways as the one of the  medium of transportation within their 
means. Therefore, Railways should come up with a pricing mechanism that 
enjoys broader support and helps to improve its finances, through volume 
business. Considering the  justification of generating more revenue by 
Yasvantpur-Jaipur Suvidha Express while running the train with vacant seats, 
the Committee are of the view that  rationalization of fares, as already 
suggested by Commercial Department and recommend by the Committee, 
would fetch more revenue to Railways and remain passenger friendly.  
11. Recommendation at Para no.3 
The Committee noted from audit observation that utilisation of berths in 2A and 3A 
class was less than 60 percent during the period, 2016-2021. The Committee were 
unable to accept the argument forwarded by the Ministry in their written reply that 
occupancy of trains varies from season to season depending upon factors such as 
holidays, festivals etc. particularly when other trains on the same route had an 
average occupancy of 144 percent. Considering the fact, the Committee were of the 
view that swift action should have been taken on the issue so that earnings of the 
Railway did not plummet. The Committee could only recommend that continuous 
review of occupancy pattern and revenue earned should invariably be undertaken so 
that corrective action could be taken even during a short span of time. The 
Committee also recommended that in such kind of instances thorough ground work 
should be undertaken before the introduction of new trains so that optimum 
utilization could be  achieved. 
12. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
Review of occupancy and rationalization of Passenger fare are done on regular 
basis based on occupancy of trains. Based on occupancy the following actions have 
been taken: 
(i)  Discounted schemes were introduced. 
(ii)  Tatkal quotas were rationalized in certain trains. 
(iii) Fares are rationalized from time to time. 
(iv)  Attachment of Sleeper coaches were allowed in Fully AC 3 tier Humsafar trains. 

 
6 
 
(v)  Where AC-3 tier is running underutilised over certain sections, the same are 
converted into AC chair Car with lower fare. 
(vi)  Where Sleeper class is running underutilised over certain sections, the same are 
converted into second class unreserved/sleeper class unreserved with lower fare. 
With regard to the observation of the Committee that thorough ground work should 
be done before introduction of new trains so as to achieve optimum utilisation, it is 
stated that the extant practice is in line with the observations made by the Committee 
and before introduction of new trains, IR takes into account both the operational 
feasibility and commercial/traffic justification into account. Commercial department of 
Zonal Railways regularly keep watch on the travelling pattern. In this regard, 
requests of passenger/business associations, chamber of commerce and Public 
representatives including Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative 
Assemblies are also taken into consideration to ensure optimum utilisation of 
resources and also the occupancy of the train. 
13.   While vetting the above ATNs, Audit made the following comments: 
No comments 
14. While observing  the fact that utilization of berths in 2A and 3A class was 
less than 60 percent during the period from 2016 to 2021, the Committee had  
recommended that continuous review of occupancy pattern and revenue 
earned should invariably be undertaken so that corrective action could be 
taken even during a short span of time and thorough ground work should be 
undertaken before the introduction of new trains so that optimum utilization is 
achieved. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated that review of 
occupancy and rationalization of Passenger fare are done on regular basis 
based on occupancy of trains and measures like introduction of discounted 
schemes, rationalization of fares and Tatkal Quotas, attachment of Sleeper 
coaches in Fully AC 3 tier Humsafar trains, conversion of underutilized AC-3 
tier into AC chair Car with lower fare etc. were undertaken. Railways take into 
account both the operational feasibility and commercial/traffic justification 
before introduction of new trains. 
The Committee reiterate that there should be regular study of utilisation 
pattern of the Suvidha Trains so that necessary modifications can be done in 
order to achieve optimum utilisation of berths. The Committee are of the view 
that keeping in mind that flexi-fare work both ways - hikes and declines, the 
railways should consider higher occupancy of berths by lowering the price. 
Besides, mechanism regarding differential pricing for preferred berths and AI 
model for optimisation of seats in order to identify demand pattern and rejig 
the allocation of seats may be adopted by the Railways to increase occupancy.  
  
  

 
7 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee take note of the fact that despite the suggestion of Commercial 
department, South Western Railway Administration failed to convert Suvidha 
Express trains running with poor patronage to Tatkal special/superfast express which 
resulted into the aforementioned loss. However, the Ministry in their Action Taken 
Note stated that the analysis for the period 2016 to 2021 showed that the actual 
earning was more to the extent of Rs.7.9 crore when a comparison is drawn between 
actual earning and the earning potential, and this cannot be deemed as loss. The 
Committee do not find this reply of the Ministry to be justifiable nor tenable and infer 
that South Western Railway did not take cognizance of the suggestion of 
Commercial Department which led to the loss of revenue of Rs. 80.74 crore. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry should have ensured that there is proper 
co-ordination amongst various authorities of Railways. The Committee are of the 
view that the main aim of introducing Dynamic fare structure or “surge pricing” is   
Revenue Optimization and Efficient Resource Allocation. The Committee, however, 
note that in case of the Suvidha Express Dynamic pricing of fares led to loss of 
revenue and under utilization of seats. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Indian Railway should reassess the application software used in calculating the 
dynamic pricing structure so as to maximize the revenue generation at all times. 
                                          (Recommendation/Observation No.2 of 139th Report of 
                                                                                Public Accounts Committee) 
                                                                                                     (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 SWR vide their reply dated 21.12.2021 to Provisional para had already furnished 
year wise comparative earning potential of trains and actual earning of Suvidha 
trains in which it was informed that Railways earned Rs.7.9 crore more in actual 
earning by running Suvidha trains during 2016 to 2021. Further, the same was also 
reiterated in the reply for Action taken note. 

 
8 
 
In view of above, it is again reiterated that there is no loss involved in running of 
Yesvantpur-Jaipur Suvidha train. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
MoR’s reply is based on the comparison made between potential earnings of 
Mail/express and the actual earnings of the Suvidha train. 
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by the Audit vide their U.O. No. 517-
Rly/SWR/12-29/2021 dated 25.07.2024. 
Updated Comments of the Ministry 
Yeswantpur-Jaipur Suvidha Express was running as a regular time-tabled Suvidha 
service. Therefore, earnings of Suvidha trains were compared with the potential 
earnings of Mail/Express regular time-tabled service. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I.        
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note from audit observation that utilization of berths in 2A and 3A 
class was less than 60 percent during the period, 2016-2021. The Committee are 
unable to accept the argument forwarded by the Ministry in their written reply that 
occupancy of trains varies from season to season depending upon factors such as 
holidays, festivals etc. particularly when other trains on the same route had an 
average occupancy of 144 percent. Considering the fact, the Committee are of the 
view that swift action should have been taken on the issue so that earnings of the 
Railway do not plummet. The Committee can only recommend that continuous 
review of occupancy pattern and revenue earned should invariably be undertaken so 
that corrective action could be taken even during a short span of time. The 
Committee also recommended that in such kind of instances thorough ground work 
should be undertaken before the introduction of new trains so that optimum 
utilization is achieved. 
                                          (Recommendation/Observation No.3 of 139th Report of 
                                                                                Public Accounts Committee) 
                                                                                                     (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 

 
9 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Review of occupancy and rationalization of Passenger fare are done on regular 
basis based on occupancy of trains. Based on occupancy the following actions have 
been taken: 
(i)  Discounted schemes were introduced. 
(ii)  Tatkal quotas were rationalized in certain trains, 
(iii) Fares are rationalized from time to time. 
(iv)  Attachment of Sleeper coaches were allowed in Fully AC 3 tier Humsafar trains. 
(v)  Where AC-3 tier is running underutilized over certain sections, the same are 
converted into AC chair Car with lower fare. 
(vi)  Where Sleeper class is running underutilized over certain sections, the same are 
converted into second class unreserved/sleeper class unreserved with lower fare. 
With regard to the observation of the Committee that thorough ground work should 
be done before introduction of new trains so as to achieve optimum utilization, it is 
stated that the extant practice is in line with the observations made by the Committee 
and before introduction of new trains, IR takes into account both the operational 
feasibility and commercial/traffic justification into account.  Commercial department 
of Zonal Railways regularly keep watch on the travelling pattern. In this regard, 
requests of passenger/business associations, chamber of commerce and Public 
representatives including Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative 
Assemblies are also taken into consideration to ensure optimum utilization of 
resources and also the occupancy of the train. 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
 No comments 
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by the Audit vide their U.O. No. 517-
Rly/SWR/12-29/2021 dated 25.07.2024. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I.       
  
 
  

 
10 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
11 
 
CHAPTER IV 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
            NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
12 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 
            
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 

 
13 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 
from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
14 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft 
reports may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. XXXXXXXXXXX  
b. XXXXXXXXXXX  
c. XXXXXXXXXXX  
d. XXXXXXXXXXX  
e. XXXXXXXXXXX  
f. XXXXXXXXXXX  
g. XXXXXXXXXXX  
h. XXXXXXXXXXX  
i. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their 139th Report (17th LS) on ‘Loss of Revenue due to Running of 
Suvidha Express Trains: South Western Railway’ 

 
15 
 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise 
the Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY NINTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 2 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos.  2 and 3 
Total: 2 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
 