      37 
 
 
SHORT COLLECTION OF FEES DUE TO APPLICATION 
OF INCORRECT EXCHANGE RATE IN FIXING THE 
FEES FOR OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA CARD 
SCHEME” AND “IRREGULARITIES IN SETTING UP OF 
INDIAN CULTURAL CENTRES BY INDIAN MISSIONS 
AT WASHINGTON AND PARIS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
              
  
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
 
                         PAC NO. 2431   
 
 
 T H I R T Y  S E V E N T H R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(202 5-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
                                       
   
                                                                              
         Presented to Lok Sabha on:     04.02.2026 
 
                    Laid in Rajya Sabha on:    19.12.2025 
  
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2025 /Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
SHORT COLLECTION OF FEES DUE TO APPLICATION OF 
INCORRECT EXCHANGE RATE IN FIXING THE FEES FOR 
OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA CARD SCHEME” AND 
“IRREGULARITIES IN SETTING UP OF INDIAN CULTURAL 
CENTRES BY INDIAN MISSIONS AT WASHINGTON AND 
PARIS 

 
CONTENTS 
 PAGES 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)               (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2024-25)                        (v) 
INTRODUCTION                                    (vi) 
 
 
REPORT 
*Not appended 
 PART- I  
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 1 
 
A. PARA 2.1 :  SHORT COLLECTION OF FEES DUE TO 
APPLICATION OF INCORRECT EXCHANGE RATE IN FIXING 
THE FEES FOR OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA CARD 
SCHEME 
 
2 
 FIXATION OF OCI FEES IN EUROZONE COUNTRIES  
 FIXATION OF OCI FEES IN UK  
B.  Para 2.2 - IRREGULARITIES IN SETTING UP OF INDIAN 
CULTURAL CENTRES BY INDIAN MISSIONS AT 
WASHINGTON AND PARIS 
 
 INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON SETTING UP A CULTURAL 
CENTRE AT WASHINGTON 
 
 ESTABLISHMENT OF INDIAN CULTURAL CENTRE AT PARIS  
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  
(2024-25) held on 12-12-2024. 
 
II* Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  
(2025-26) held on 17-12-2025. 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash             - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Ms. Malvika Mehta   - Deputy Secretary   
4. Ms. Khyati    - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 

 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 

 
vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (202 5-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this  Thirty-Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Short collection of fees due to application of incorrect exchange rate 
in fixing the fees for Overseas Citizenship of India Card scheme and Irregularities 
in setting up of Indian Cultural Centres by Indian Missions at Washington and 
Paris” based on Para 2.1 & 2.2 of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) 
Report No. 24 of 2022 relating to the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
2. The C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022 was laid on the Table of the House on 
20.12.2022. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee selected the aforesaid subject for examination 
and took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs on the 
subject under examination on 12th December, 2024. Based  on  the  oral  evidence  and  
written  replies,  the  Committee  examined  the  subject  in  detail during its term 202 5-
26. 
4. The Public Accounts  Committee (2025-26) considered and adopted the Draft 
Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 17-12-2025. The Minutes 
of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience,  the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing the 
requisite information to the Committee. 
 
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  K. C. VENUGOPAL 
  17   December, 2025 Chairperson, 
  26 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
Part-I  
INTRODUCTORY 
The Public Accounts Committee  decided to undertake a detailed examination 
of Paras 2.1 and 2.2 of Comptroller and Audit or General Report No 24 of 2022 
relating to the Ministry of External Affairs  (MEA). These paragraphs examine the 
subject “Short collection of fees due to application of incorrect exchange rate in 
fixing the fees for Overseas Citizenship of India Card scheme” and “Irregularities 
in setting up of Indian Cultural Centres by Indian Missions at Washington and 
Paris” respectively.  
2. In Para 2.1 of the said C&AG Report, Audit has highlighted failure of the 
Missions/Posts in extending the revised Rate of Exchange (RoE) for local 
currencies as prescribed by the Ministry of External Affairs  (MEA) for calculating 
visa fee in the Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) scheme and lack of monitoring by 
the Ministry in ensuring compliance of its directions. This led to short levy of fees 
being charged by the Missions/Posts in issue of OCI cards leading to loss of       
₹ 58.23 crore. 
3. In Para 2.2, Audit brought up the issue of purchase of two properties for 
setting up Indian Cultural Centres at Paris (2011) and Washington (2013) by 
Ministry of External Affairs which could not be put to use as Cultural Centres 
even after l apse of 11 and 9  years respectively  as of 2022 . The expenditure 
incurred on purchase of property for ICC Washington along with its 
renovation/refurbishment amounting to ₹ 41.93 crore remained unused. Similarly, 
the property for ICC Paris procured at a cost of ₹ 30.03 crore (2011) remained 
unused as on June 2022.  In addition, an irregular expenditure of ₹ 14.89 crore 
incurred on hiring a local security agency for an under-renovation building. 
4. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Mi nistry of 
External Affairs on the subject at their sitting held on 12 th December 2024 to 
examine the issues in depth. On the basis of oral evidence and written 
information obtained on various aspects of the aforementioned two paras under 
consideration, the Committee conducted an examination of the matters raised as 
detailed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
 
 

 
2 
 
PARA 2.1 : SHORT COLLECTION OF FEES DUE TO APPLICATION OF 
INCORRECT EXCHANGE RATE IN FIXING THE FEES FOR OVERSEAS 
CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA CARD SCHEME 
FIXATION OF OCI FEES IN EUROZONE COUNTRIES 
5. The Committee understand that ‘fresh issue of OCI cards’ accounts for a 
substantial portion of the OCI services  provided by the MEA through various 
Missions/Posts located worldwide . As per the audit findings, MEA issued 
consolidated instructions (March 2017), regarding rationalisation of the visa fees 
structure to all Missions/Posts, communicating  the revised rates of visa fees  
which was ipso facto also applicable for calculating the fee for OCI scheme and 
was valid till March 2020.  
6. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Government of India, has fixed                         
(25 February, 2009) the fee for issue of OCI cards as USD 275.   As per the Ministry’s 
instruction, the fees for the issue of the OCI card in respect of Eurozone 
Countries (EZC) was required to be revised to € 262 effective from 01 April 2017. 
17 Missions/Posts in the EZC did not revise the fees for the issue of OCI cards 
using the revised Rate of Exchange (RoE) of USD 1= € 0.95, w.e.f. 1 April 2017 
which resulted in short levy of fees by € 46 (€ 262 - € 216) on each instance an 
OCI card was issued. The Audit findings reveal that the Ministry of External 
Affairs (MEA) issued clarifications in August 2017 and November 2019 regarding 
revised fee structures for the OCI Card Scheme only to select Missions in the 
Eurozone countries, leaving most others unaware. As a result, these Missions 
continued charging the outdated fee of €216 instead of the updated €262 based 
on the revised RoE of USD 1 = €0.95, as mandated on 16 March 2017. It was 
only in January 2020 that the MEA informed all 17 EZC Missions/Posts of their 
non-compliance and urged adherence. This delay led to a cum ulative revenue 
loss of ₹16.26 crore from 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2020 due to the non -revision 
of OCI card fees. 
7. The Committee sought clarification from the Ministry on why it took 3 years 
to notify and apply  the revised exchange rates and how did they ultimately find 
out about the short collection. The Ministry submitted as follows: 
“Ministry of External Affairs extends a number of consular services like 
passport, visas, attestations, OCI, PIO etc. Ministry’s circular of March 
2017 did not specifically mention about the revised exchange rate in 
respect of OCI fees. In response to clarification sought by certain Missions, 
the Ministry had clarified to only those Missions that the revised exchange 
rate will be applicable to OCI fees, while presuming that the remaining 

 
3 
 
Missions were following the revised exchange rate. However, after 
observation of the Audit Team in some Missions in the Euro Zone, Ministry 
took notice of this short collection and immediately issued a clarification to 
the Missions in January 2020.” 
8. The Committee inquired about the Ministry’s extant mechanism to ensure 
that Missions/Posts implement its orders in letter and spirit. The Ministry 
responded as follows: 
“Ministry has issued detailed guidelines with instructions to Missions/Posts 
to revise the Consular, Passport and Visa/OCI fees vis -à-vis USD every 
year on 1st of April in case of fees being charged in local currencies and 
every three years on 1st April in case of fees being charged in convertible 
hard currencies on the basis of Official Rates of Exchange conveyed by 
the Foreign Exchange Section of the Ministry in order to avoid gaps in 
implementation. Ministry has also put an online monitoring system (e -
Samiksha/PEMS) to oversee the correct implementation of its guidelines”.  
9. The Committee questioned the Ministry whether they have fixed any 
responsibility for the loss owing to non-compliance of its directions by Missions to 
which the Ministry responded as follows: 
“Due to lack of clarity regarding OCI fees in the Ministry’s circular, Missions 
in the Euro Zone applied revised exchange rate for visa fees, however, 
they inadvertently missed applying the revised R oE for OCI fees. 
Therefore, it will not be feasible to fix responsibility for the loss.” 
10. The Committee inquired about the specific measures the Ministry had 
taken to avoid recurrence of such ambiguity in circulars/guidelines and 
misinterpretation and laxity in implementation of the instructions issued by 
Ministry in future. The Ministry submitted as follows: 
“Detailed guidelines have been issued by the Ministry vide its circular 
dated 12.03.2021 to avoid recurrence of such ambiguity in application of 
RoE for fixation of Consular, Visa and OCI fees.   
Since then Ministry has put in place an online reporting platform (MEA e - 
Samiksha) for Missions / Posts abroad in  which application of correct rates 
of exchange is authenticated regarding correct levying of fees for all 
Consular, Visa and Passport Services including for OCI Card. These 
reports are generated on a quarterly basis.” 

 
4 
 
11. The Committee asked the Ministry whether the online platform e-Samiksha 
calculates the applicable fee based on current exchange rate automatically or 
human intervention is required for calculation/authentication and the process of 
such authentication to be carried out on MEA e -Samiksha portal. The Committee 
also desired to know how the Ministry ensure correct rates are being applied via 
this portal, in response to which the Ministry submitted: 
“e-Samiksha does not calculate the applicable fee based on current 
exchange rate automatically. Mission has to calculate and fix the amount 
manually as per changes in the value of the respective currency in which 
fees are collected.  
 Mission has to upload a copy of the order fixing Consular, Visa and OCI 
fees on the portal. Ministry checks the order and if any discrepancy is 
found, it is communicated to the Mission for immediate rectification.”   
 
FIXATION OF OCI FEES IN UK 
12. The Committee learnt that in February 2017,  High Commission of India 
(HCI) London increased the existing visa fees by only 10 per cent  citing 
reciprocity and impact on tourism , even though the RoE devaluation required 23 
per cent increase . The Audit findings highlight that HCI London and its 
Consulates failed to comply with the Ministry directives . Thereafter, while the 
Mission revised the visa fees in March 2017, it continued to charge the OCI fees 
at the lower rate.  
13. The Committee note from the audit findings that had the Mission used the 
prevalent RoE of US$ 1 = £ 0.81 instead of £0.69, the revised fee of issue of 
fresh OCI Cards would have been £ 223 as against £ 191 which resulted in a 
loss of ₹ 41.97 crore on issue of fresh OCI cards at a lower exchange rate, 
during F ebruary 2017 and March 2020.  Details of loss on issue of fresh OCI 
cards at a lower exchange rate are given in table below:- 
 
Mission/Post 
Fees required to be 
fixed as per 
Ministry 
instructions (in £) 
Fees fixed by 
HCI London  
(in £) 
Difference  
(in £) 
Total number 
issued 
Short collection of 
fees for issue of OCI 
Cards (in £) 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F) 
HCI London 223 191 32 76802 24,57,664 

 
5 
 
CGI Birmingham 223 191 32 66701 21,34,432, 
CGI Edinburgh 223 191 32 2786 89,152 
                                                                                                                Total 146289 46,81,248 
                                                                                           Total in ₹ (@GB P1 = Rs.89.65)     ₹ 41,96,73,883 
 
14. The Committee further note that  the Ministry has termed this loss as 
“notional”. According to Audit, the contention of notional revenue loss was  not 
correct as it was due t o the fact that  the Ministry did not issue a specific 
clarification extending the revised RoE of Visa fee in local currencies  to OCI 
scheme as well; and the Missions/Posts  failed to take cognizance of the 
directions of both the MHA and the MEA regarding  fixation of fee for OCI scheme 
which inter-alia provided that the methodology for the fixation of fee for OCI 
Scheme in local currency was to be the same as that for determining visa fees. 
15. The Committee inquired from the Ministry whether HCI was empowered to 
limit the increase by 10% only instead of the decision of MEA to revise OCI Fee 
by 23% w.e.f. March, 2017. The Ministry submitted the following response: 
“Ministry is the Competent Authority to decide any deviation from the 
instructions regarding rate of exchange. Missions are expected to seek the 
concurrence of the Ministry in case any change is proposed. “ 
16. When the Committee asked the Ministry of External Affairs whether it was 
consulted before taking a decision by HCI London to limit the hike by 10% and 
whether MEA had concurred the decision of HCI London , the Ministry submitted 
as follows:  
“HCI London locally assessed that hike in OCI fee immediately after Brexit 
would adversely impact normal travel of Indian Diaspora to India and thus 
would be perceived as an anti -diaspora measure. Therefore, HCI London 
decided to increase the OCI fee only by 10% and Ministry was not 
consulted before this decision was taken. No separate 
approval/concurrence from Ministry has bee n communicated to the 
Mission. “ 
17. The Committee desired the Ministry to  furnish the documentary evidence 
or basis cited by HCI London to support their claim that a hike of 32 pounds for 
one time issue of fresh OCI Cards would adversely impact Tourism and normal 
travel of the Indian Diaspora to India. The Ministry submitted as follows: 

 
6 
 
“No separate study or calculation is available with the Ministry. As the 
assessment was done by HCI London in 2017, records are not available to 
prove the basis of the decision to increase the fees by only 10%. “ 
18. When asked to provide a copy of the order issued by HCI, L ondon to limit 
the hike by 10%, the Ministry responded that “Records are not available.” 
19. The Committee enquired w hether the Missions furnish any data regarding 
revision of r ates yearly/ 3-year basis to MEA and the mec hanism for analyzing 
such data and w hether any discre pancy ha d been noticed. The Ministry 
submitted in their written replies as follows: 
“Missions furnish copy of fixation order on yearly/ 3-year basis to the 
Ministry.  
Ministry checks the fixation order and cross verifies it with the rate of 
exchange issued by the Ministry. No discrepancy has been noticed so far.  
HCI London, took the conscious decision in the light of broader policy 
directions of the Government to engage with Indian Diaspora and 
encourage them to visit India as part of promotion of 3Ts (Tourism, Trade 
and Technology) initiatives and also to utilize their expertise and to 
encourage them to invest in India. In this regard Our Missions / Posts 
make consistent efforts to promote these 3Ts as per the policy instructions 
issued from Ministry in the light of directions of Hon’ble PMs statements.” 
20. The Committee enquired how the HCI London took a conscious decision in 
2017 as to not to invoke the March 2017 order on the basis of circular regarding 
3Ts dated 01.10.2021. The Ministry replied in their written submissions as 
follows: 
“HCI London’s decision was not based on the specific guidelines on 
promoting 3Ts. It was based on the generic importance of tourism and 
intended as a goodwill gesture for the people of Indian origin since a 
higher fee may have had an impact on the number of people applying for 
OCI cards and thus impacting Mission’s outreach.” 
 
21. The Committee asked h ow it was construed by the Missions and the 
Ministry that a one -time increase of some pounds would  deter the promotion of 
the 3Ts, to which the Ministry replied as follows: 

 
7 
 
“On account of Brexit, there was steep devaluation of the British Pound. 
Our Mission/Posts in UK took a conscious policy decision to implement an 
increase of 10% in exchange rate instead of 23% based on their 
assessment that a steep increase would have impacted tourism to India. “ 

 
8 
 
Para 2.2 - IRREGULARITIES IN SETTING UP OF INDIAN CULTURAL 
CENTRES BY INDIAN MISSIONS AT WASHINGTON AND PARIS 
22. The Committee learnt that the Ministry of External Affairs had purchased 
two properties for setting up Indian Cultural Centres at Paris (2011) and 
Washington (2013). The Committee understand that due to inherent deficiencies, 
such as significant structural concerns an d issues of encroachment at ICC 
Washington and delay in renovation (Paris), these properties could not be put to 
use as Cultural centres  till date . T he expenditure incurred on purchase of 
property for ICC Washington along with its renovati on/refurbishment amounting 
to ₹ 41.93 crore remained infructuous.  Similarly, the property for ICC Paris 
procured at a cost of ₹ 30.03 crore remained unused with an irregular 
expenditure of ₹ 14.89 crore on hiring a local security agency for an under -
renovation building.  
INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON SETTING UP A CULTURAL CENTRE AT 
WASHINGTON 
23. The Embassy of India, Washington DC, USA (EoI) purchased a property in 
August 2013 at ‘1438 U -Street’, Washington DC for a consideration of $5.75 
Million, with a view to have its own cultural centre  which now  remains in an 
abandoned condition and is unsuitable for conduct of any cultural activities . Audit 
findings indicate that before acquiring the said property, EoI was aware  of a 
neighboring petrol station, existing encroachments, and a structural stability 
report identifying issues such as water infiltration, roof needing replacement, 
deteriorated floor joints, and potential costs to repair the damaged marble 
façade. Additionally, the report specified that the second floor was suitable only 
for office use and would require further analysis to confirm its capacity for 
gatherings.  
24. The Committee note that despite full awareness of the property’s structural 
defects, the extensive renovations required, and associated encroachments, the 
Ministry issued a revised sanction of $8.15 million in July 2013.  Audit findings 
highlight that the property had  unresolved encroachment since 2013 and two 
post purchase reports of EoI indicated inherent potential Vapor Encroachment 
and the poor cement quality in the Property. The Committee find that d espite the 
fact that the Ministry was aware that the 103 -year-old Property had significant 
structural concerns as also issues of encroachment, it did not opt out from 
procurement of the same and consequently took on avoidable liabilities. 
25. The Committee note that after procurement of the property in August 2013, 
the Ministry accorded approval to hire Architect-consultant (Consultant) for 

 
9 
 
interior renovation only in August 2015. The Consultant’s independent analysis in 
November 2015 of the Property revealed signs of distress, impaired structural 
integrity, water infiltration, large cracks within stone in the main entrance, cracks 
on the ground floor and potentially missing end -support in the second floor etc. In 
April 2016, t he Consultant furnished detailed list of works, testing and 
permissions to be obtained for renovation of Property and also submitted in May 
2016 proposals of interior works for review before preparing final tender 
documents.  
26. According to Audit, EoI Washington subsequently dropped the renovation 
proposal of ‘U-Street’ property in May 2019 on the plea that US Government had 
offered a separate plot for the Embassy and suggested that no further 
expenditure be incurred on renovation of the Property and also suggested to 
lease an alternate property which could serve as the cultural centre on a 
temporary basis. MEA then assessed the property and suggested in February 
2020 that disposal of ‘1438 U -Street’ property should be considered only if the 
sale price is more than what had been spent so far by the Government on this 
property. A property evaluation report commissioned by the EoI in March 2020  
valued the property at Rs. 22.38 crore.  
27. The Committee understand that b oth the EoI and the Ministry deviated 
from guidelines requiring them to refrain from purchasing properties involving 
huge renovation c ost and associated legal issues. Audit  noted that a s a result, 
the Ministry resorted to injudicious acquisition of the Property by incurring 
expenditure of ₹ 41.93 crore (up to September 2021) without any intended result.  
28. The Committee note from the background note submitted by the Ministry 
that a Ministry Team visited Washington DC in 2023 to evaluate the ‘1438 U -
Street’ property following which, General Financial Rules (GFR) provisions and 
local laws were aligned and revised tender documents were submitted for 
Ministry approval, which was concurred only by May 2023.  However, the Ministry 
submitted that the building permit obtained in 2020 had expired and the architect 
intimated that subsequent to change in building codes of Washington DC in 
2022, the designs and documents as per the new codes required to be obtained 
for which additional payments was demanded which the Ministry did not concur  
with.  
29. A second team visited the property in April 2024 and deemed the property 
unsuitable for housing consular and trade promotional activities considering its 
locational disadvantage (high crime rate in the area, limited parking space, poor 
connectivity) and structural deficiencies.  

 
10 
 
30. In their background note , the Ministry submitted inter-alia that the delay in 
renovation of the property was primarily due to restrictions in local law and also 
major divergence in tendering practices locally vis -à-vis GoI norms.  The Ministry 
submitted that approvals for undertaking the renovation works took considerable 
time, in addition to the time taken subsequently for obtaining local municipal body 
approvals. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF INDIAN CULTURAL CENTRE AT PARIS  
31. The Committee note that the Embassy of India, Paris (Mission) purchased 
a p roperty for ₹ 30.03 crore in March 2011 for establishing an Indian Cultural 
Centre (ICC). The Committee in their earlier reports - 30th and 61st Reports of the 
16th Lok Sabha observed from the audit findings that this property purchased for 
establishing an ICC, lacked primary conditions to be modified as an ICC. Further, 
the Audit revealed that the Mission incurred annual expenditure of approx. ₹ 1.24 
crore on its 24 -hour security. The Committee was assured by the Ministry that 
renovations/ refurbishments in the building were to be completed by 2016. 
32. The Committee find that the Mission intimated the Ministry  in April 2022  
that modification and renovation work at ICC Paris was estimated to be 95 per 
cent complete. Audit noted that despite the assurance to the PAC (March 2015) 
to complete the work by 2016, as of June 2022, the work was still in progress. 
The Audit revealed that t he reasons for delay included resolving design 
deficiencies, meeting norms for fire safety, selection of Contractors, bankruptcy 
of a major Contractor (M/s Lacroix) in 2019, etc. Thus, the property purchased in 
2011 at a cost of ₹ 30.03 crore for setting up an ICC remains unused till date.  
33. The Committee found that in April 2011, the Embassy of India in Paris 
sought Ministry approval to  provide 24-hour security to the property seeking to 
extend services of existing security provider of the Embassy residence to the ICC 
property as well , citing exceptional circumstances. The Ministry  directed the 
Mission to forward the proposal  as per GFR and full justification and at least four 
comparable quotations. However, the Mission, circumvented the directions of the 
Ministry and the GFR,  and approached the Indian Council of Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) directly, which approved the proposed hiring of the  security agency for 
the ICC building at monthly char ges of €15,171.26 (₹ 9.81 lakh ). Audit scrutiny 
revealed that the Mission bypassed the Ministry’s directions and obtained a direct 
sanction from the ICCR for such hiring, without apprising it of the Mini stry’s 
directions. ICCR, while sanctioning the hiring of the security agency, sought the 
Mission’s funds requirements for the FY 2011 -12 only, implying that the sanction 
was valid only for the year 2011 -12. Despite this, the Mission continued to incur 

 
11 
 
expenditure on the said security agency during the subsequent years as well. 
Thus, of the total expendit ure from 2011 -12 to September 2021 amounting to ₹ 
14.89 crore, expenditure amounting to ₹ 13.87 crore for the period from April 
2012 to September 2021 was without approval of the MEA and sanction of ICCR.  
34. After audit scrutiny, the Mission sought regulariz ation in January 2019, but 
the Ministry deemed it grossly irregular , and ICCR questioned the continued                     
24-hour security need. The Ministry withheld approval for the continued security 
hiring until a security  audit was conducted  and although the Bureau of Security 
(BoS) requested clarification in March 2019,  the Mission again bypassed it  
approaching ICCR  to allow continued hiring of LSGs . The ICCR advised (May 
2019) the Mission to send a proposal to the Ministry.  The Mission sought 
regularisation of the said expenditure since 2012 and also sought Ministry’s 
instructions on whether it should discontinue the services. Based on Ministry’s 
directive (September 2020), the Mission proposed installation of CCTVs to  the 
Ministry in February 2021 which was approved and was further advised  to de -
hire LSGs till fresh security assessments. Audit findings show  that the Mission 
had released payments till September 2021 and still continued to hire the LSGs.  
35. During its examination, the Committee inquired about the current status of 
the Indian Cultural Centres in Paris and Washington, to which the Ministry 
responded as follows: 
 “ICC Washington DC 
In April 2024, a Property Management Team  (PMT) led by AS&FA visited 
Washington DC to assess and inspect Government -owned properties, 
including the ‘U-Street’ property. PMT recommended that the property may 
either be sold or put to some other use.  Subsequently, Mission examined 
the matter and had endorsed the recommendation of the PMT that the 
property should be sold, considering the observations and facts 
enumerated by PMT that it is unsuitable for most Embassy activities due to 
its locational disadvantage viz. high crime rate in the area, limited parking 
space, poor connectivity as well as structural deficiencies. The matter to 
dispose of the property is currently under consideration of the Ministry.  
While this process is on, periodic inspection of the property is regularly 
undertaken so as to ensure its overall security and upkeep. 
Emergency repairs are being carried out regularly to avoid deterioration of 
the property. Further, the property is being used for storage of some 
Embassy materials. Further, US Department of State has recently 

 
12 
 
informed that if the sale or renovation of property is not initiated by June 
30, 2025, the diplomatic property tax exemption will be withdrawn. 
ICC Paris 
The project is 98% complete and the renovation work is likely to be 
completed by January 2025.” 
36. The Committee sought clarification on the Ministry’s plans to address the 
prolonged non-utilization of these properties and the avoidable expenditure they 
continue to incur. The Ministry provided the following response:  
“ICC Washington 
The proposal to dispose of the property is under active consideration of the 
Ministry. 
ICC Paris 
The property was under renovation from 2015 and the renovation work is 
scheduled for completion in January 2025. The project work has been 
delayed due to multiple reasons beyond the Mission’s control, such as: 
Bankruptcy of one of the contractors i.e. M/s Lacroix, who was then 
replaced by M/s SPID with the intervention of French Court (viz. Judicial 
Administrator of the Nanterre Court) in 2019. 
COVID 19 pandemic and consequential supply issues brought the project 
work to a complete halt for a long time. 
Resolving design deficiencies, meeting norms of fire safety, etc.  
Restrictions imposed by the local government due to the Paris Olympics 
and Paralympics during June to September 2024. 
Backing out of contractor M/s Tertio and delay in finding its replacement.” 
37. In the context of the ICC building in Washington, the Ministry in their fresh 
background note on the subject selected for the term 2025 -26 of the Committee 
submitted as under: - 
“Ministry is open to examining reasonable and prudent proposal for future 
of the property.” 

 
13 
 
38. The Committee desired to know  the measures undertaken to upkeep  and 
maintain each property  and funds utilised year -wise for this. The Ministry 
submitted as follows: 
“ICC Washington DC 
Regular repair and maintenance which comes to the notice of the Mission 
is carried out on a regular basis. No separate yearly fund is ear -marked for 
the property. However, nominal utility bills (water, sewage and electricity) 
are paid by the Mission. These payments pertain to minimum monthly 
charges applied by the utility providers for the building. 
ICC Paris 
The building is under renovation.” 
39. Regarding the property in Washington, t he Committee asked the Ministry 
for rationale to  not hire Consultant for a professional assessment before 
purchasing a 103 year old property and sanction ing amount of US $ 5.75 million 
and to hire  a consultant after 2 years of purchase . The Ministry submitted  the 
following  in their written replies: 
As part of due diligence before purchasing the property, M/s Eh lert Bryan 
PE was assigned the job of ascertaining the structural soundness of the 
building. The structural survey report submitted by M/s Ehlert/Bryan, Inc. 
states that, “Although there are some structural issues that would need to 
be addressed as part of a general renovation, the building is in good 
structural condition. Ehlert/Bryan Inc. made the following observation with 
regard to residual life of the building. “The primary Building structure has a 
useful life of 50 years, if the moisture infiltration issues are resolved, the 
structure is appropriately repaired, and the structure is maintained.” 
After completion of all formalities of the purchase, a draft request for 
Proposal (RFP) for appointment of Architect Consultant to carry out the 
interior renovations of the property was forwarded to the Ministry in May 
2014. Ministry sought some clarifications for examining the RFP, which 
were answered by the Mission. While the RFP was being examined in the 
Ministry, a Property Team led by DG (ICCR) visited and held a meeting 
with the Office of Foreign Missions, US State Department to understand 
the local regulations for redevelopment of Diplomatic Property. After this, 
Ministry approved the RFP which was published by the Mission in July 
2015. Due procedure for evaluation of Technical and Financial Bids was 

 
14 
 
followed and M/s Studios Architect was selected as Architect Consultant 
and consultancy agreement was signed with them for interior renovation of 
the property in October 2015.” 
40. During the course of oral evidence  on the issue of delay in acquisition of 
properties abroad, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
“……. Our procedures for approving acquisitions of properties are 
interminably long. We will never succeed or make a success consistently 
of buying properties abroad if the procedures do not change….” 
41. The Committee inquired whether the Ministry acknowledged the total 
expenditure of ₹41.93 crore incurred on the property in Washington  as a loss. 
The Ministry responded as follows: 
 Given that Washington DC is an important capital city with a siz eable 
Indian diaspora, there was an imperative need to have an independent 
Cultural Centre in the city. The U -Street property in Washington DC was 
purchased for use as a cultural centre after following due processes of 
physical inspection, legal due diligence, market evaluation and structural 
assessment. However, due to various reasons including the complicated 
local legal and statutory procedures, the property could not be renovated 
completely and put to use. Nonetheless, GoI has not incurred loss on 
account of acquiring this property since the asset still belongs to the 
Government.” 
42. The Committee asked the Ministry about the official  responsible to engage 
the Structural Analyst who did not report the factual position on the structural 
stability of the ‘U-street’ property in Washington. The Committee wanted to know 
whether the Ministry took any penal action against the Structural Analyst or if any 
penalty was imposed  for misleading the Mission/MEA. The Ministry replied as 
follows: 
Proper due diligence was taken before purchasing the property, M/s Eh lert 
Bryan PE was assigned the job of ascertaining the structural soundness of  
the building. The structural survey report submitted by M/s Ehlert Bryan, 
Inc. states that, “Although there are some structural issues that would need 
to be addressed as part of a general renovation, the building is in good 
structural condition”. Ehlert Bryan Inc. made the following observation with 
regard to residual life of the building, “The primary building structure has a 
useful life of 50 years, if the moisture infiltration issues are resolved, the 
structure is appropriately repaired, and the structure is maintained.” The 

 
15 
 
property was purchased after considering all the factors enumerated by the 
Structural Analyst, as above, at that point of time.” 
43. The Committee asked the steps taken by the Ministry  to deal with the 
restrictions posed by the local laws and details of  the parameters of tendering 
process. The Committee also wanted to know w hat prompted the Embassy to 
deviate from the local tendering process and time taken for the Embassy to seek 
approval from local municipal body. The Ministry submitted as follows: 
The Mission did not go in for any tendering process. Insofar as steps to 
deal with the restrictions posed by the local laws are concerned, it may be 
noted that had the Mission gone for tendering process, there would have 
been strict adherence to the local laws at the end of the Mission.” 
44. The Committee asked w hy the Ministry did not take cognizance of the 
recommendations of the Property Team which suggested that the property 
should be either considered for sale or may be utilized for some other purpose. 
The Committee also wanted to know whether  the Ministry prepare a proposal or 
blueprint as to how they intend ed to use the property  after having invested a 
considerable amount  for its upkeep and maintenance. The Ministry replied as 
follows: 
In April 2024, a Property Management Team (PMT) led by AS&FA visited 
Washington DC to assess and inspect the Government -owned properties, 
including the U -Street property. PMT recommended that the property may 
either be disposed of or put to some other use.  Subsequently, Mission 
examined the matter and had endorsed the recommendation of the PMT 
that the property should be sold, considering the observations and facts 
enumerated by PMT that it is unsuitable for most Embassy activities due to 
its locational disadvantage viz. high crime rate in the area, limited parking 
space, poor connectivity as well as structural deficiencies. The matter to 
dispose of the property is under consideration of the Ministry.” 
45. The Committee wanted to know the reasons behind the decision to acquire 
the said  Washington property in haste, without having  a report on structural 
safety. The Ministry submitted as follows in their written response: 
The Ministry of External Affairs and ICCR had been actively pursuing the 
proposal for opening of a Culture Center in Washington DC for over two 
decades keeping in perspective the strategic importance of India -US 
relations as well as the presence of a sizeable Indian diaspora in the US. 
Being the capital city, Washington DC has an overheated real estate 

 
16 
 
market where the demand clearly outstrips the supply thereby severely 
impacting the availability of suitable properties. At the time, there were very 
few viable options available that fulfilled the requisite criteria of functional 
suitability, space requirements, residual life, security, location, good 
connectivity, etc. This made the task of identifying a suitable property for 
the Culture Centre in Washington extremely onerous and time consuming. 
Ministry and ICCR acted in good faith and in larger public interest towards 
acquisition of the said property and this was backed by technical advice as 
available at that point of time. Considering the circumstances in 2013 and 
the two to three decades long hunt for a suitable property in a severely 
supply-crunched market, the decision to acquire the property was well 
deliberated and justified. Two properties were initially shortlisted for 
possible purchase to be used as cultural centre, i.e. properties located at 
L-Street and U -Street. Both properties had their advantages and 
disadvantages for making an informed and considered decision. While GoI 
was still processing the matter, the owner of L -Street property informed 
that this property had been sold to another buyer at USD 5.9 million. 
Hence, it was decided to consider purchasing U -street property at a 
negotiated price of USD 5.75 million. 
The U-Street property was purchased after factoring in all the assessments 
based on physical inspection by the PMT, market evaluation, legal due 
diligence, and structural assessment carried out by the industry experts. 
Further, the structural firm M/s Ehlert Bryan Inc hired for carrying out the 
structural evaluation had observed that, “Although there are some 
structural issues that would need to be addressed as part of a general 
renovation, the building is in good structural condition. The primary building 
structure has a useful life of 50 years if the moisture infiltration issues are 
resolved, the structure is appropriately repaired, and the structure is 
maintained.” 
The structural condition of the property may have deteriorated now due to 
passage of time. Besides, the locality now appears to be unsuitable, which 
was also opined by the PMT in April 2024.” 
46. The Committee ask ed the Ministry whether it had fixed  responsibility for 
purchasing a dilapidated and uns uitable property in Washington, and incurring 
huge financial loss. The Ministry replied as follows: 
As per the Ministry’s guidelines for acquisition of properties, all due 
process with regard to purchase of property (i.e. physical inspection, legal 

 
17 
 
due diligence, structural assessment and market evaluation) was followed 
prior to acquisition. However, due to various reasons including the 
complicated local legal and statutory procedures, the property could not be 
renovated completely and put to use. Since all due processes were 
followed, no action was initiated to fix responsibility. There is no loss to GoI 
since the asset is still owned by the Government.” 
47. The Ministry while responding to the queries of the Members, submitted 
the following during oral evidence in respect of ICC building in Paris: 
“………It was in a very upscale area of Paris, and that it befitted acquisition 
by the Government of India. Once the property was acquired, there was a 
concern that was raised by the architect consultant that maybe for the use 
as a cultural centre, this property might not be ideal because apparently, it 
had only one entry/exit. If you have a large number of people gathering, 
then usually European building by -laws require that you need to have 
multiple entries and exits in the case of a fire disaster……………………….. 
………But, again, I would point out that the substantive need for having 
security guards cannot be denied in a city like Paris, for a building such as 
this, where as soon as we had purchased the building, the French 
authorities had told us that buildings such as these are vulnerable to 
squatting and occupation by homeless immigrants, foreign immigrants  
sometimes, and you need to take care of this by hiring security guards…..” 
48. Regarding the ICC building in Paris, the Committee questioned the 
Ministry if the Mission can bypass its  directions and make irregular expenditure 
for almost a decade without Ministry’s approval. The Committee also desired to 
know the steps taken since the audit findings and the irregular e xpenditure made 
by the Missions. The Ministry submitted as follows in their written replies: 
Following the purchase of the property, the Mission had immediately, in 
April 2011, requested Ministry for authorisation to hire local security guards 
(LSGs) for safeguarding the property on the terms and conditions 
applicable for the Embassy Residence. BOS Division advised the Mission 
to follow due process for hiring LSGs and seek Ministry's authorisation. 
Mission, inadvertently sent the proposal to ICCR and received ICCR's 
approval for hiring the LSGs for the Financial Year 2011 -12. The Mission 
subsequently sought ICCR's approval for continued hiring of LSGs in 2013, 
2017 and 2018, but received no response from ICCR. In the meantime, the 
Mission continued to hire LSGs without sanction either from the Ministry or 
ICCR. The Mission had exigent reasons for hiring LSGs to secure the 

 
18 
 
building as the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs had advised that 
unoccupied properties in Paris are vulnerable to illegal occupation by 
homeless immigrants and eviction is difficult. Under the circumstances, 
Mission was constrained to deploy security guards.” 
49. The Committee asked the Ministry to  provide details of action taken to fix 
the responsibility  for bypassing the Ministry and incurring unsanctioned 
expenditure for such a long period to which they replied as follows: 
Mission acknowledges all the procedural lapses in hiring of the LSG, 
including those highlighted by audit. The same have been reviewed and 
streamlined.  A combined hiring process of LSG’s for the Indian Culture 
Centre along with other GoI buildings in Paris was carried out at the 
Ministry’s recommendation and one LSG is now deployed at the Indian 
Culture Centre in Paris since April 2024.” 
50. The Committee asked the Ministry regarding wh o approved the 
circumvention of procedure thereby authorizing the Mission to bypass the 
Ministry and approach ICCR directly for hiring of secur ity agency for the ICC 
building. The Ministry submitted as follows: 
Based on Mission’s proposal to hire LSGs, ICCR approved (20 April 2011) 
hiring of security agency for ICC building at monthly charges of Euro 
15,171.26 (Rs. 9.81 lakh) and also indicating that the requirement of funds 
was for FY 2011 -12 only. Mission continued to incur expenditure on said 
security agency during subsequent years as well due to the necessity to 
protect the property.” 
51. The Committee enquired regarding the reasons behind release/sanction 
grant by ICCR without getting it approved /vetted from the nodal Ministry. The 
Ministry submitted the following reply: 
As per ICCR, “they were not aware that the Mission had bypassed the 
Ministry and approached ICCR directly.  Further, the Mission had 
conveyed in writing to ICCR that the Security Agency proposed to be hired 
for the ICC Paris building was the same that was already approved by the 
Ministry for Embassy Residence on a 24x7 basis after following due 
process of the Ministry, including inviting quotations, etc. as per GFR.  The 
Embassy also stated that they intended to hire the Agency at the same 
rates and on the same Terms & Conditions approved already by MEA and 
also affirmed that they had found the Agency’s services over the previous 
nine months since they were hired, satisfactory”.” 

 
19 
 
52. The Committee inquired about the reasons for adhering to tender 
procedures when initially hiring the security agency, to which the Ministry stated 
as follows:  
Following the purchase of the property, the Mission had immediately, in 
April 2011, requested Ministry for authorisation to hire local security guards 
(LSGs) for safeguarding the property on the terms and conditions 
applicable for the Embassy Residence. BOS Division advised the Mission 
to follow due process for hiring LSGs and seek Ministry's authorisation. 
Mission sent the proposal to ICCR and received ICCR's approval for hiring 
the LSGs for the Financial Year 2011 -12. The Mission subsequently 
sought ICCR's approval for continued hiring of LSGs in 2013, 2017 and 
2018, but received no response from ICCR. In the meantime, the Mission 
continued to hire LSGs without sanction either from the Ministry or ICCR. 
The Mission had exigent reasons for hiring LSGs to secure the building as 
the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs had advised that unoccupied 
properties in Paris are vulnerable to illegal occupation by homeless 
immigrants and eviction is difficult.” 
53. The Committee desired to know whether any  fresh security assessment 
has been carried out by the Mission and if any action has been taken in this 
regard by the Ministry, to which the Ministry replied as under: 
A fresh assessment has been carried out and Mission has been permitted 
to hire 01 Local Security Guard (LSG) for night duty at the Indian Culture 
Centre in Paris w.e.f.  April 2024.” 
54.  The Committee enquired from the Ministry  how it  intended to regularize 
the unsanctioned expenditure of Rs. 13.87 crore incurred from April 2012 to 
September, 2021 on hiring of security agency which was incurred without the 
approval of the Ministry. The Ministry replied as follows: 
The documents submitted by the Mission are being examined by the 
Ministry and will be put up for administrative approval of Competent 
Authority in due course.” 
55. The Committee asked the Ministry to justify the delay in completion of work 
of the Cultural Centre at Paris by 6 years, particularly in view of the assurance 
given to the Committee that the work would be completed by 2016 whereas the 
works were still in progress till 2022. The Ministry submitted as follows: 

 
20 
 
After purchase of the building, the Ministry appointed a Consultant -
Architect in May 2015 and rectification of design deficiencies, meeting 
revised norms for fire safety, selection of contractors, the work on 
renovation of Swami Vivekananda Cultural Center (SVCC) in Paris started 
in June 2018.  The work schedule was, however, adversely affected by 
bankruptcy of the main contractor M/s Lacroix in Feb 2019 and Covid -
induced supply chain issues. The project also remained stalled due to time 
taken in requisite approvals from Ministry on various additional variations 
carried out in the project. In  July 2023, another company M/s. TERTIO/Ms. 
Steamo, responsible for electrical & HVAC works, also backed out from the 
project. As per the Consultant Architect, the work is scheduled to be 
completed by end of January 2025.” 
56.  When asked to inform the Committee about the clarification submitted by 
the Mission to the Bureau of Security (BOS) of the Ministry on the need for hiring 
security agency for 24 hours and the  subsequent action taken by the BOS in the 
matter, the Ministry submitted in their written replies as follows: 
The Mission informed that the reason for continuation of hiring was the 
advice of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs that unoccupied properties 
in Paris were vulnerable to illegal occupation by homeless immigr ants and 
eviction is difficult. Further, there was increased risk of burglary due to 
presence of purchased equipments and renovation material in the building. 
Due to deteriorating situation in Paris and presence of high value assets in 
the building, hiring of LSGs was essential at SVCC. 
The Mission was advised to de -hire the existing guards, take a fresh 
sanction, conduct tendering and submit comprehensive proposal for 
approval of Ministry.” 
57. The Committee asked the Ministry regarding  the powers and functions of 
Bureau of Security. The Ministry replied with the following in their written replies: 
BOS Division handles the overall security requirements of Ministry of 
External Affairs including its subordinate offices in India and Mission/Posts 
abroad.  These include various aspects of security viz. physical security, 
access control, operational security, personal security, crisis management 
plans, etc.  The Division also makes assessment of requirement of security 
personnel; conducting need analysis of requirement of security equipment, 
review of security arrangement in place both in India and abroad; 
assessing security sensitivity; liaising with other Ministries and agencies on 
matters related with security; and other aspects connected with security.” 

 
21 
 
58. The Committee asked the Ministry if they wished to submit any other 
information for their consideration, to which they submitted as follows: 
“Ministry purchased both properties after due diligence and procedural 
lapses/delays have been streamlined and noted for future compliance also. 
ICC Paris property is ready for use by end of January 2025 and Ministry is 
actively considering to dispose of the ICC Washington property.” 
59. When deposed, the Secretary to the MEA also stated before the 
Committee as follows: 
“……. In the cases before the hon. Committee today, there is a little doubt 
that there are errors that took place. There is oversight that happened, and 
mistakes may have been committed. But I would also submit for the 
Members of the Committee that none of these actions were taken with any 
mala fide whatsoever. The things that may have happened, that actions 
that have been taken place may have been on account of lack of familiarity 
with the rules on the part of any particular person or genuine mistakes that 
may have been made…” 
60. However, in the context of the property at Paris, the Ministry in their fresh 
background note on the subject selected for the term 2025 -26 of the Committee 
submitted as under: - 
“(a) The renovation work is near completion. The works related to 
electricity, elevator, HVAC, painting, seating of auditorium hall have 
already been completed. Some of the additional as well as minor works, 
based on recommendations of the external inspection and regulatory 
authority M/s Bureau Veritas are being undertaken.  
b) M/s Bureau Veritas along with the Consultant Architect are in 
process of preparing the relevant documents for submission to French 
Municipal Authorities to seek approval for utilization of the Cultural Centre. 
Once the permission from the local authorities is obtained, the building will 
be ready for public use.  
c)  The Indianization aspect of the project is being undertaken 
separately in consultation with the Ministry and M/s Cottage Emporium. 
Cottage Emporium has suggested certain artworks and paintings which the 
Consultant architect is examining for curation.” 
61. With regard to regularization of expenditure on hiring of security services 
since 2011, the Ministry in June 2025 have submitted the following:- 

 
22 
 
“The Mission has provided all documents (notings, vouchers, invoices) 
pertaining to the hiring of LSG for SVCC Paris to the Ministry for evaluation 
and regularization. The regularization towards hiring of LSGs from M/s 
ESP at SVCC Paris from April 2011 to October 2021 amounting to Euro 
2,002,209.86 (INR 18.6 crore) is under consideration with the Ministry as 
on date.” 
62. In the context of infructuo us expenditure on such acquisitions, the 
representatives of the Ministry during oral evidence stated the following:- 
“In the sphere of property management and procurement processes, the 
Ministry has formalized model tender documents and standard agreement 
templates employed for engagement of architect consultants, project 
management consultants, contractors and service providers. The model 
documents have had a positive impact on our initiatives pertaining to 
construction and renovation of properties, annual maintenance contracts 
and execution timelines. Further, the Ministry has developed a global 
estate management portal which is currently being tested internally to 
confirm different functionalities. All proposals and activities related to 
renting, acquisition, renovation, construction etc. would be exchanged and 
monitored through this online portal. Sincere efforts have been made 
towards housing our Chanceries and Embassy Residences in G OI-owned 
properties rather than rented properties.” 
63. The Committee during their examination of the subject also came across 
the Fifth Report of 18 th Lok Sabha of Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
External Affairs on the subject “Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Ministry of 
External Affairs” . The following submissions made by MEA on ICCR are  
reproduced below:- 
“Para 5.29  On the Committee’s query regarding the cost incurred 
on construction of ICCR Cultural Centres at Washington and Paris so far 
and the reasons for the delay, the Ministry in their written reply have 
submitted as under: 
 
“Elaborating on the efforts being made by ICCR to further generate 
additional resources, the Ministry has stated that ICCR’s cultural 
Centres abroad are either co-located in our Embassies or are 
treated as adjunct diplomatic entities of our Embassies. Therefore, 
they are restricted bylocal laws from engaging in commercial 
activities...” 

 
23 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee observe that in the two audit paras pertaining to the 
Ministry of External Affairs, discrepancies in application of rates of exchange led 
to loss of revenue.  Besides, there was infructuous expenditure in acquiring and 
management of properties in Washington DC and Paris while both properties 
remained unused for more than a decade. 
In Audit Para 2.1, the Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs 
directed Missions and Posts to rationalise the visa fees structure based on the 
revised Rate of Exchange (RoE) for calculation of visa fees ipso facto applicable 
to the Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) scheme . 17 Missions in Euro Zone 
Countries and 3 Missions in UK failed to comply with the revised RoE, resulting in 
non-compliance with the Ministry’s directives. The Committee note that non -
application of the revised RoE  by the Missions, le d to cumulative loss of ₹16.26 
crore revenue between 01 April 2017 and 31 March 2020. Similarly, the Committee 
observe from audit findings that the High Commission of India in London 
deviated from the prescribed RoE, resulting in a loss of revenue of ₹41.97 crore 
between February 2017 and March 2020.  The inconsistent application of the RoE 
and the lack of clear, uniform instructions contributed to a cumulative revenue 
shortfall of ₹58.23 crore. 
In Para 2. 2, the Committee fin d that the  MEA engaged in imprudent 
expenditure in acquisition of properties for establishment of I ndian Cultural 
Centres (ICCs) in Washington and Paris. The Committee note that t he property in 
Washington, purchased for ₹41.93 crore, was found to have subst antial structural 
deficiencies and was deemed uns uitable for cultural activities and subsequently 
renovation efforts were abandoned. Similarly, the property in Paris  acquired for 
₹30.03 crore, experienced significant delays in renovation, and irregular expenses 
totaling ₹14.89 crore were incurred for security services without proper approval. 
The Commi ttee observe that failure of Ministry in exercising due diligence has 

 
24 
 
resulted in infructuous expend iture amounting to ₹86.85 crore with both the 
properties remaining unused till date. 
 Based on detailed examination of the subjects, the Committee have 
recorded their observations and recommendations on issues highlighted in both 
audit paras, in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Ensuring Clarity and Uniformity in Communications 
 
 The Committee note from the audit observation that certain Missions/Posts 
failed in applying revised Rate of Exchange (RoE) for local currencies as 
prescribed by MEA in calculation of visa fees for the OCI scheme and the Ministry 
failed in monitoring the compliance of its directions. The Committee also note 
that the revised rates of visa fees effective from 01 April 2017 were ipso facto 
applicable for calculating the fee for OCI scheme and were valid till March 2020. 
The Committee observe that 17 Missions/Posts in the Euro zone countries (EZC) 
did not carry out the revision of fees for the issue of OCI Cards at the revised rate 
of exchange of USD1=Euro 0.95 w.e.f 1 April, 2017. The Committee note that the 
Ministry provided clarification only to those missions which sought clarity while 
others co ntinued to charge the old fees and  it was only in January 2020, the 
Ministry informed all Missions in the EZC to comply with its directions regarding 
revised Rate of Exchange. As a result of this, there was a  cumulative loss of 
revenue of Rs. 16.26 crore from 01 April 2017 to 31 March 2020.  The Committee 
fail to understand why clarification was issued only to certain Missions which had 
applicability for all the missions in the EZC.  
 Taking note of the fact that the Ministry has put in place an online reporting 
platform - MEA e - Samiksha for Missions/Posts abroad by which rates of 
exchange are authenticated on quarterly basis for correct levying of fees , the 
Committee urge the Ministry to develop  a software for automatic calculation of 
applicable rates of exchange and fees on all the services being provided by its 
Missions to minimize any scope of errors.  

 
25 
 
Further, the Committee are of the view that loss of revenue of Rs. 16.26 crore is a 
reflection of the Ministry’s failure to  communicate to all its mission and also 
adequately monitor consistent adherence to its directives. The Committee note 
that the Ministry presumed that the Missions other than those who sought 
clarifications were following the revised exchange rate, show poor supervision 
and work culture in Mission/HCI abroad.  It is very clear that the MEA acted only 
after Audit observation shows the lackadaisical approach to matters of financial 
propriety by Mission s abroad. The Ministry’s inaction is a clear procedural lapse 
which has resulted  in loss of public money.   The Committee do not accept the 
Ministry’s contention and this approach shows its lack of seriousness on 
financial matters.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that any clarifications  
issued by the Ministry  applicable to all Mi ssions should be addressed to all 
concerned Missions/Posts and Departments to ensure uniformity in 
implementation.  The Committee further desire that the Ministry must ensure that 
all updates on fee calculations and revised RoE are communicated promptly, to 
all its Mission/Posts.  The Committee also desire that accountability be fixed for 
such procedural lapses resulting in financial loss to the exchequer so to avoid its 
recurrence in future.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Adherence to rules and documentation by Missions 
 
  The Committee observe that the HCI London did not comply with the 
Ministry’s directives to appropriately revise the fees for issue of fresh OCI card 
and only increased the fees by 10 percent instead of 23 percent even though it 
revised the visa fees as per the extant directions. This l ed to a loss of ₹ 41.97 
crore of revenue. The Committee note that the Ministry is the authority competent 
to decide on any deviation on rate of exchange and Missions need to seek 
concurrence of the Ministry in case they wish to make any deviation from the 
direction.  The Committee note from the Ministry’s submissions that HCI London 
locally assessed and perceived the impact of a hike in OCI fee and decided to 
increase the fees by 10 percent instead of prescribed 23 percent without 

 
26 
 
informing or seeking any a pproval from them. The Committee are also surprised 
to note that no records are available with either HCI, London or the Ministry 
regarding the decision to hike the OCI fees by only 10%. The Committee are of the 
considered view that regardless of the justification, in case of any deviation from 
the extant rules/guidelines, the HCI London should have reported to and taken 
concurrence from the Ministry. The Committee are also unclear as to why the 
Ministry did not seek an explanation nor take any action against the officers in 
HCI, London responsible for the deviation which caused financial loss to the 
exchequer. The Committee observe with great concern that the Ministry viewed 
the loss of Rs 41.97 crore due to lower rate of fees for issue of OCI cards as 
‘notional’ which shows a callous approach of the officials in the Mission.  Though 
the Ministry is trying to explain that lower rate of fees for OCI cards were due to 
promotion of 3 T’s  namely Trade, Tourism and Technology , but lack of records 
and absence of clear directives by Ministry for such an action  does not stand up 
for scrutiny. Officials of MEA should be sensitized to maintain proper documents 
in taking decisions and authorizations in routine administrative matters so as to 
adhere probity and transparency as it follows funds of the Government. Though 
the Ministry has accepted that errors have happened and considered that such 
errors are bonafide, the Committee while giving the benefit that there may not be  
malafide intentions, find such revenue loss unacceptable by a government 
department.  The Committee note that the Ministry is the final authority in such 
matters which demands that proper responsibility and accountability need to be 
fixed. In this regard, the Committee recommend MEA to explicitly issue clear 
instructions that any decision having financial implications need to be viewed 
very seriously and proper procedure should be laid down by the Ministry. 
The Committee observe that n ot adhering to guidelines and not seeking 
accountability for deviations from instructions indicate laxity in the working of 
both the Mission and the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Ministry in ensuring adherence to its rules and regulations by 
Missions. The Committee are of the view that t he lack of proper records to decide 
on such matters show that the Missions abroad do not follow proper procedure in 
routine day to day administrative matters. The Committee emphasize on standard 

 
27 
 
operating procedure and documentation being a key aspect of good governance 
and recommend that the Ministry must ensure diligent documentation and 
digitization of all records in its Missions to obviate recurrences of such nature. 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should issue suitable directions 
to all Missions  to follow due office procedure and  to establish  clear lines of 
responsibility and accountability. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Setting up of Indian Cultural Centre at Washington  - Harmonising p roperty 
procurement practices with local laws 
 
 The Committee observe from Audit findings that the Ministry had 
purchased a property in 2013 for setting up an Indian Cultural Centre (ICC) in 
Washington in 2013, which remains unutilized till date. The Committee find that 
the 103 -year-old Washington property, acquired for $5.75 million along with 
sanction for renovation was unsuitable due to encroachment issues, structural 
deficiencies and an unfavorable location. The Committee find it disconcerting 
that despite prior knowledge of structural and locational deficiencies, the Ministry 
proceeded with the purchase.  
The Committee observe that the Ministry engaged a consultant for renovations in 
2015 after lapse of two years since the purchase, and then  abandoned the 
renovation plan in 2019, citing the offer of an alternative plot by the U.S. 
Government. The Committee note that in 2020, another assessment by Property 
Management Team of the Ministry suggested selling the property if the sale price 
exceeded the total expenditure incurred . Property evaluation  report 
commissioned by the Embassy of India in Washington in March 2020 valued the 
property at Rs. 22.38 crore which is half the total cost paid for the property. The 
Committee observe that subsequently in 2023, a team of officials of the Ministry 
visited Washington DC to evaluate the property after which renovation approvals 
were obtained in 2023 though the building permit had already expired, requiring 

 
28 
 
the architect to reapply and amend plans as per the updated 2022 Washington 
D.C. building codes.  
The Committee note the Ministry’s contention that delays in renovation were 
attributed to restrictions under local law and significant differences between local 
tendering practices and Government of India norms. The Committee are of the 
view that the absence o f a timely response to address these challenges has 
resulted in prolonged inaction and delayed decision -making. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should develop a standardized due 
diligence framework  including checklists , for future property acquisitions, 
ensuring thorough assessment of location, structural viability , adequate parking 
and other requirements and renovation costs as well as comprehensive legal and 
regulatory assessment before purchase. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry engage legal experts familiar with local laws and develop country -
specific procurement guidelines that ensure compliance with both local laws and 
GoI norms, for future purchase of property. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Diplomatic Property Tax Exemption 
 
 The Committee observe that another assessment of the Washington DC 
property was carried out in 2024 by the Project Monitoring Team (PMT) which 
deemed the property unsuitable due to high crime rates, poor connectivity, 
inadequate parking, and structural deficiencies. The Committee had been 
informed that the diplomatic property tax exemption granted by the U.S. 
authorities would be withdrawn if the sale or renovation of the property was not 
initiated by June 30, 2025. The Ministry had informed the Committee that the 
proposal to dispose of the property was under active consideration of the 
Ministry. However, the Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry in their 
fresh background note on the same subject state s that Ministry is open to 
examining reasonable and prudent proposal for future of the property. The 
Committee are chagrined at the inconsistent stance of the Ministry on the matter 

 
29 
 
and take serious exception to the callous reply with no mention of the status of 
property tax exemption granted by the U.S. authorities till June 30, 2025 . The 
Committee would also like to be apprised whether t ax exemption has been 
withdrawn, and steps taken to extend the same, along with  the financial 
implication and the steps taken by the EoI, Washington/ Ministry to either sell the 
property or to use it gainfully. The repeated shifts in the Ministry's position, 
despite claims of the property's unsuitability, raise serious questions on the 
actual situation on the ground and the Committee desire O/o C&AG to examine 
and submit a report on the current position of this building to PAC.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that, the issue relating to the ICC may be 
reviewed at the highest level and appropriate  decision to renovate or sell out the 
property at existing market prices be taken. The Committee may be apprised of 
the decision taken in this regard. In the interim, t he Committee would urge MEA 
to explore the possibility of renting it out to earn some revenue. 
The Committee also note the Ministry’s submission that while buying the 
property at Washington, t he same was purchased after factoring in all the 
assessments based on physical inspection by the PMT, market evaluation, 
legal due diligence, and structural assessment carried out by the industry 
experts. On the other hand, the committee note that in 2024, the PMT 
recommended that the property should be sold, as it was unsuitable for 
most Embassy activities due to its locational disadvantage viz. high crime 
rate in the area, limited parking space, poor connectivity as well as 
structural deficiencies. In view of the contradictory opinions by the two 
PMTs, the Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised on how these 
PMTs are selected / appointed and how there were contradictory views 
expressed by the PMTs at the time of buying and selling of the same 
property. 
 
 
 

 
30 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Goal Specific property acquisitions 
 
 The Committee observe that the building purchased in Washington for the 
purpose of establishing Indian Cultural Centre was located near a petrol station, 
had encroachments, issues of water infiltration, and lacked capacity for 
gatherings. Reports also revealed that the property unsuitable for consular and 
trade promotional activities due to its locational disadvantages . The Committee 
note that the Ministry failed to consider its suitability for establishing a cultural 
centre and the necessary requirements for such a building  while purchasing the 
property and  it was Ministry’s apparent failure to evaluate the appropriateness of 
the building prior to purchase. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry must ensure goal -specific 
property acquisitions and would like that  if an Indian Cultur al Centre is to be 
established, MEA  must consult ICCR  or other such institutions , and clearly 
ascertain requirements of the property. T he Committee , further, desire that the 
Ministry should prepare a checklist of essential and desira ble requirements for 
properties in consultation with such cultural agencies  both in general and for 
specific purposes, to avoid expenditure on infructuous acquisitions.  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Expenditure Irregularities and Consistent Delays in setting up of ICC, Paris 
 
 The Committee note that the Embassy of India, Paris (Mission) purchased a 
property for ₹ 30.03 crore in March 2011 for establishing an Indian Cultural Centre 
(ICC) which remains incomplete as on date. In their 30th and 61st Reports (16th LS), 
the Committee had observed on the same issue that the Ministry had disregarded 
the reports of the Architects and proceeded with the acquisition of an unsuitable 
property for the establishment of the ICC at Paris which ultimately resulted in the 
underutilization of the property and wasteful expenditure on its maintenance. The 
Ministry had embarked on extensive renovation works in the property which 
remain incomplete till today. The Committee note that, despite being assured that 

 
31 
 
the renovation would be concluded by 2016, the property is yet to be fully 
completed till date even  after a span of 14 years.  The Ministry attributed the 
delays in the renovation work to various factors, including the bankruptcy of one 
of the contractors, the COVID -19 pandemic, the resolution of design deficiencies, 
restrictions imposed due to the Paris Olympics and Paralympics, the withdrawal 
of another contractor, and the delay in identifying a suitable replacement. The 
Committee note that , the project also remained stalled due to time taken in 
requisite approvals from Ministry on various additional variations carried out in 
the project. 
The Committee are dismayed by the Ministry's and Mission's approach to the 
establishment of the ICC, which first was improperly acquired in 2011 followed by 
an unduly prolonged renovation since last 14 years which is still ongoing. The 
representatives of the Ministry while deposing before the Committee had 
informed that the building was 98% complete and would be finalized by January 
2025.  
The Committee are deeply concerned by the repeated misrepresentation by the 
Ministry regarding the completion of the renovation works, having been 
consistently assured of its imminent completion, and yet finding that the building 
remains unfinished .  The Committee  therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should take concrete steps to ensure early completion of the renovation so that 
the building can be put to its intende d use as Indian Cultural Centre . The 
Committee are made to w onder if MEA is seriously considering using this 
building as ICC . The Committee, further recommend that , in their next round of 
audit or as special audit , the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) may inter-
alia examine the status of completion of the aforesaid building  and its utilization 
as cultural centre and apprise this Committee of their findings.   
 
 
 
 

 
32 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
ICC, Paris - Irregular Expenditure on hiring of local security agency 
 
The Committee note from the findings of Audit, that irregular expenditure 
was incurred by EOI Paris for hiring of security services for ICC building. In 2011, 
the Mission sought approval from the Ministry for the procurement of security 
services, but the Ministry directed the Mission to forward the proposal as per  
prescribed procedures. The Committee observe from the Ministry’s submissions 
that, despite not receiving authorization from the Ministry, the Mission 
"inadvertently" submitted a proposal to the I ndian Council of Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) and received its approval for the fiscal year 2011 -12. Moreover, the 
Mission continued to hire Local Security Guards (LSGs) without the requisite 
approval from either the Ministry or the ICCR. The Mission has repeatedly cited 
constraints and exigent circumstances to justify the irregular expenditu re, 
amounting to ₹ 13.87 crore . The Committee are  alarmed by the circumvention of 
the established rules and procedures by the Mission, as well as the attempt by 
the Mission to categorize the irregularities as "inadvertent." While the Committee 
acknowledge that the Mission may have been constrained to hire the security 
guards due to the exigent security challenges, the matter could have been 
escalated and brought to the notice of the Ministry for their urgent approval.   
The Committee fail to understand the constraints faced by the Mission to forward 
proposal to Ministry as per prescribed procedure. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Ministry against the Mission for not adhering 
to their instructions.  
The Committee are also surprised that the irregular expenditure remained 
unnoticed at the time of approval of yearly budget of the Ministry  and question 
the role of the Financial Advisor in MEA who need to ensure that financial 
guidelines are scrupulously followed by the Missions in such matter.  The 
Committee are equally disturbed to note how the ICCR sanctioned funds to 
Mission and the basis to continue giving funds  without seeking Ministry’s 
sanction is also not clear. The Committee wonder as to how the Ministry was 
silent when its Mission obtained fund from ICCR. 

 
33 
 
 The Committee also observe that the Ministry is reviewing the proposal to 
regularize the irregular expenditure incurred by the Mission in Paris and would 
like to be apprised of status. The Committee recommend that a mechanism be 
developed whereby such emergent situations faced by Missions may be allowed 
to be escalated and resolved on priority  and d etailed S tandard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) on the same may be prepared.  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
ICCR and Indian Cultural Diplomacy activities 
 
The Committee note that both the properties in Washington  and Paris were 
acquired for the purpose of establishing Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs), but have 
remained unutilized till date. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of External Affairs, responsible for 
operating the Indian Cultural Centres, plays a crucial role in cultural diplomacy 
and its activities contribute significantly towards India’s foreign policy and 
enhancing India’s Global profile. In this respect, t he Committee refer to a 
submission made by the Ministry to the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
[Para 5.29 of Fifth report (18th Lok Sabha) ] that “ICCR’s cultural Centres abroad 
are either co -located in our Embassies or are treated as adjunct diplomatic 
entities of the Embassies  and therefore, they are restricted by local laws from 
engaging in commercial activities.”  
The Committee find it deeply concerning that the Ministry ha s not only 
failed to effectively utilize the  aforementioned properties but also failed to 
establish ICCs in two major cities  in globally key countries, thereby defeating the 
very purpose of ICCR, being the broader mission of cultural outreach , which in a 
way impacts the global image of the country.  
In this context, the Committee would like the Ministry to furnish details how 
ICCR managed their activities in view of lack of functional ICC in these cities and 
how much additional expenditure has been incurred  while carrying out activities 
of ICCR in Washington DC and Paris. The Committee  also recommend that the 

 
34 
 
Ministry utilize the services of the ICCR to develop ICCs in Washington and Paris 
to assess the  cultural diplomatic activities and their potential impact on bilateral 
relations and submit a report on the efforts undertaken to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Global Estate Management Portal 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that infructous expenditure on unutilized 
properties is reflective of systemic flaws in the Ministry’s property management 
practices and indicate s gaps in pre -acquisition assessment and project 
execution. The Committee note that the Ministry has formalized model tender 
documents and standard agreement templates employed for engagement of 
architect consultants, project management consultants, contractors and service 
providers. The Committee also observe from the Ministry’s submission that a 
Global Estate Management Portal is being developed to exchange and monitor a ll 
proposals and activities related to renting, acquisition, renovation, construction 
etc. The Committee recommend that the Ministry may expedite the development 
of the portal  inclusive of  Model tender documents , standard agreement 
templates, pre -acquisition property assessment protocol , model contracts for 
engagement of architects, consultants, service providers, etc. on the online portal 
and roll out its implementation urgently . The Committee desire that the portal be 
equipped with real time monitoring tools so that inter-alia delays in 
renovations/completion/acquisition of propert ies beyond a fixed time trigger 
alerts along with escalation matrix for resolving issues. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Instituting Mandatory Training Programs to Enhance Competency and 
Compliance 
 
The Committee find that the instances examined  by Audit , including the     
₹ 58.23 crore shortfall in OCI fees, ₹  86.85 crore in property mismanagement, 

 
35 
 
including ₹ 14.89 crore in irregular expenditure on hiring security services, reveal 
a disturbing pattern of non -compliance, adhocism and operational lapses which 
indicate inadequate training of personnel.  The Committee note with concern that 
lack of clarity in app lying of the GoI rules for expenditure , non-adherence  to 
General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017, and  lack of  following the property 
management protoco ls demonstrated by the officials,  point to impairment in 
fundamental understanding of regulations among officials . While the Committee 
acknowledge the Ministry’s efforts through the Capacity Building Plan, iGOT 
Karmayogi modules, mandatory pre -departure training, and the Know Your 
Ministry repository, they find additional measures are needed to address the 
intricate operational demands faced by personnel, particularly in a globally 
dispersed workforce. The Committee are not entirely convinced by the Ministry’s 
submission that such lapses are instances of merely isolated shortcoming.  
The Committee note that the Ministry may have to work in compliance with 
local laws/rules in different countries/geographies. Underscoring the need for  
sustained and targeted capacity enhancement , the Committee desire developing 
and implementing  a c omprehensive annual Internal Training and Capacity 
Building Module tailored to meet the custom work profile of officials in MEA.  The 
training may be certified and linked to the Annual Performance Assessment 
Report of the officers.  The Committee recommend that w orkshops be conducted 
at regular intervals to discuss  case studies drawn from past lapses to reinforce 
practical learning.  The Officials may be trained under suitable training programs 
from MoF/CGA/CAG , etc.  The Committee further recommend that MEA should 
consult Ministry of Finance/C&AG/CGA etc. and prepare a suitable Office Manual 
applicable, to be followed by Indian Missions/HCs/Posts abroad. 

 
36 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, the Committee observe that persistent issues of deviations 
by officials from prescribed financial rules and extant instructions regarding 
exchange rates; absence of documentation, insufficient monitoring by Ministry 
and lack of due diligence in property acquisitions reflect a culture of laxity and 
have resulted in considerable financial and reputational loss to the Government 
exchequer. The Committee emphasize that accountability, transparency, and 
financial prudence must form the core principles guiding all actions of the 
Ministry and its Missions abroad. The Committee, therefore, enjoin upon the 
Ministry of External Affairs to conduct a thorough enquiry in both the matters of 
application of incorrect exchange rates and setting up of the Indian Cultural 
Centres in Washington and Paris and fix accountability on erring officials in 
Headquarters and Missions/Posts. The Committee further desire that appropriate 
administrative action be initiated against the officers, including disciplinary 
proceedings wherever warranted, for non -compliance with Ministry directives, 
failure to maintain proper records, circumventing Ministry’s orders and inefficient 
and delayed utilization of the properties acquired in Washington and Paris and 
prolonged time period taken for renovation.  
The Committee also note from the Ministry’s submission that the extant 
GoI procedures, particularly in case for approving acquisitions of properties, are 
interminably long and require change.  The Committee also recognize that MEA 
and its missions abroad have to deal with different situations in different 
countries. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry, in consultation with 
Ministry of Finance and O/o C&AG, may explore the possibility of amending GoI 
procedures and develop suitable procedures for carrying out essential works in 
Missions abroad as well as property acquisitions on country specific basis 
ensuring financial discipline to the best extent. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  K. C. VENUGOPAL 
 17   December, 2025 Chairperson, 
 26    Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee 
 

 
37 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 9 th SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) HELD ON 12th DECEMBER, 2024  
 The Committee met on Thursday from 1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 12 th December, 2024 in 
Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT  
 Shri  K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 LOK SABHA 
 
  
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
4. Shri C. M. Ramesh  
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
6. Prof. Sougata Ray  
7. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi  
8. Dr. Amar Singh  
9. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
10. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
11. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
12. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
13. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
14. Dr. K. Laxman  
15. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray  
16. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P  Director 

 
38 
 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  Deputy Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Mehta  Deputy Secretary 
7. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Vikram Misri - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Anurag Agarwal - Special Secretary & Financial Advisor 
3. Shri Y K Sailas Thangal - Additional Secretary (GeM & Estt.) 
4. Shri Sanjiv Ranjan - Officer on Special Duty (Admn.) 
5. Shri K Nandini Singla - Director General (ICCR) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA   
1. Ms. Atreyee Das - Dy. C&AG 
2. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri - Dy. C&AG 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
4. Shri Rajeev Kumar Pandey - Director General 
 
Part A 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Officers from the 
Office of Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) to the sitting, which had been 
convened to take briefing followed by oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
External Affairs on the subject ‘Short collection of fees due to application of incorrect 
exchange rate in fixing the fees for Overseas Citizenship of India Card scheme” and 
“Irregularities in setting up of Indian Cultural Centres by Indian Missions at Washington 
and Paris” based on Paras 2.1 and 2.2 of C&AG Report No 24 of 2022.’ Audit officials 
then briefed the Committee on the irregularities highlighted in the said audit paras such 
as non-application by 17 Missions of rates of exchange revised by MEA,; loss of 41.96 
crores due to irregular revision of exchange rate by HCI, London and its Consulates, 

 
39 
 
lack of assessment of structural feasibility while purchasing  properties, divergence of 
tendering practices, potential vapour encroachment, unauthorized and infructuous 
expenditure, and lack of action by ministry in view of the irregularities highlighted by the 
Audit.  
3.  Then the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs and asked them to apprise the Committee on the reasons for frequent audit 
observations and the action taken thereon. 
4.  Thereafter, the witnesses introduced themselves and the Secretary (External 
Affairs) apprised the Committee on the steps taken to improve processes based on 
Audit observations viz. Comprehensive policy review for fixation of rate of exchange for 
determining consular, passport and visa fees, online reporting portal for Missions and 
abroad, Model tender documents and standard agreement for engagement of architect 
consultants for property management, developing global estate management portal. He 
further stated that the decision to increase OCI fees in UK by only 10 percent instead of 
23 percent was based on conscious policy decision in light of direction of the Govt. to 
engage with diaspora. He also stated that Ministry has put in online monitoring 
mechanism for the application of correct rates of exchange - e-Samiksha. The Secretary 
further clarified in respect of property acquired for Indian Cultural Centres in Washington 
that delays in renovations were mainly due to restrictions in local law and major 
diversions in tendering practices locally vis -a-vis GOI norms and a separate plot has 
been offered by US Govt in 2019 for use of Embassy. In respect of property in Paris, the 
Secretary stated that all possible efforts are being undertaken for completion of project 
and the building will be put to use by 2025 and that the proposal for regularisation of 
hiring of local security guards in Paris is under consideration.  
5. During the discussion, Members raised numerous points concerning key issues 
highlighted in audit para like lack of standardised policy for exchange rate issues, failure 
to issue clear instructions, lack of uniformity in fee revisions, fixation of responsibility for 
faulty decision making, infructuous expenditure on property which remains unutilised, 
systemic changes brought in for monitoring and fixing accountability in property 
management overseas, , lack of penal actions against those who made decisions 
beyond authority, pending proposal for regularisation of expenditure, etc. 
6. Taking note of the issues raised by the Committee, the Secretary (External 
Affairs) submitted the Committee that there were errors occurred and was lack of 
oversight but also emphasised none of the actions were with any mala fide intentions 
whatsoever and have been on account of lack of familiarity with rules and that a number 
of measures have been put in place in light of audit observations and further apprised 

 
40 
 
the Committee on the developments that took place in respect of properties in 
Washington and Paris. 
7.  Thereafter, the Chairperson asked the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs to furnish the information that was not readily available with them along with the 
replies to the List of Points being sent to them by the Committee Secretariat within 
fifteen days. 
 
Part B 
X  X   X  X   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X   
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has 
been kept on record.  
 
 
 
 
 
 