 
 
      50  
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE OFFSETS 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
 
PAC NO. 2470   
 
 
F I F T I E T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
(EIG HTE ENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  23.07.2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   22.07.2026 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July, 2026 / Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE 
OFFSETS 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2026-27)                (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)                (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – II (DEFENCE) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)                     (v) 
INTRODUCTION                 (vi) 
 
REPORT 
 
PART- I 
 
I. Introduction 1 
II. Evolution of Defence Offsets 2 
III. Implementation of Offsets as per DAP 2020 4 
IV. Present Status 5 
V. Impact Assessment of Offset Policy  9 
VI. Manohar Parrikar - Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses (MP-IDSA) 
Recommendations 
11 
VII. Monitoring Mechanism 14 
VIII. Issues related to Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) 15 
IX. Technology Acquisition 16 
X. Impact Assessment of Offsets Policy 17 
XI. Foreign Direct Investment 18 
XII. DPP Amendment 2015 19 
XIII. Defence Offsets Policy – Global Perspective 21 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 27-37 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the First sitting of the Sub-Committee – II (Defence) of Public 
Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 03-11-2025.* 
 
II. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Sub-Committee – II (Defence) of Public 
Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 05-12-2025.* 
 

ii 
 
III. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Sub-Committee – II (Defence) of Public 
Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 18-12-2025.* 
 
IV. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Sub-Committee – II (Defence) of Public 
Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 22-04-2026.* 
 
V. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) 
held on 04-06-2026.* 
 
 
*Minutes not appended.  

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2026-27) 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
1.  Smt. Mamta Kemwal                 - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Archna Pathania               - Director 
3.  Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma      - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Charanjeet Singh - Committee Officer 
5.  Ms. Pragya Nama                     - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP from Rajya Sabha with effect from 
08.06.2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Jai Parkash 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Dr. C M Ramesh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Vacant 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
22. Vacant 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2025-26) 
 
 
 
  
 
 Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2nd April, 2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Vacant 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-II (DEFENCE) OF 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
i. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi   - Convener 
ii. Dr. C.M. Ramesh    - Alternate Convener 
iii. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  - Member  
iv. Shri Tejasvi Surya   - Member  
v. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy - Member  
vi. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad  - Member  
vii. Shri T.R. Baalu    - Member  
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fiftieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on “Management of Defence Offsets” based on Chapter III of C&AG Report No. 20 of 
2019 relating to the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production). 
2. The C&AG Report No. 20 of 2019 was laid on the Table of the House on 
23.09.2020. 
3. The Sub-Committee - II on “Defence” was constituted by the Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) for detailed examination of the subjects related to Ministry of 
Defence. The Sub-Committee worked under the convenorship of Smt. Aparajita 
Sarangi, Member of PAC and Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha. Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-2026) selected the aforesaid subject and allocated the same to Sub-
Committee – II (Defence) for examination and Report.  
4. The Sub-Committee-II (Defence) of Public Accounts Committee (2025-2026) 
took briefing by Audit on 03.11.2025 and 05.12.2025. Thereafter, Sub-Committee took 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence 
Production) on the aforementioned subject on 18.12.2025. The Sub-Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 22.04.2026. 
Subsequently, the Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts 
Committee (2026-2027) during their sitting held on 04.06.2026. The Minutes of the 
sittings are appended to the Report. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- II of 
the Report. 
6. The Committee thank Sub-Committee-II (Defence) of the predecessor 
Committee (2025-26) for taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject. 
7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) for tendering evidence before 
the Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with 
the examination of the subject. 
8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                        Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 

PART – I 
 
I. Introduction  
 
1. The Report No. 20 of 2019 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
contained the results of audit of Defence Offsets in Capital Contracts. The Report 
contained significant results of the Performance Audit of the Defence Offsets which 
were contracted or implemented during the period 2012-13 to 2017- 18. The instances 
mentioned in this Report were those which came to notice in the course of test audit 
for the period 2012-13 to 2017-18. Further, status of implementation of offsets relating 
to period subsequent to 2017-18 have also been included in the Report. The report 
was based on the results of the test audit carried in the year 2018-19 at different 
directorates of Integrated Headquarters MoD (Army, Air Force & Navy), Defence Offset 
Management Wing and Controller General of Defence Accounts. Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) have selected the subject for detailed examination. The Sub 
Committee – II (Defence) of Public Accounts Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Defence based on this report on 18th December, 2025. 
 
2. An offset is a mechanism generally established with the triple objectives of: (a) 
partially compensating for a significant outflow of a buyer country's resources in large 
purchase of foreign goods (b) facilitating induction of technology and (c) adding 
capacities and capabilities of domestic industry. The Offset provisions in a Contract 
makes it obligatory on the foreign suppliers to either reverse purchase, execute export 
orders or invest in local industry or in research and development in the buyer country. 
 
3. Dr. Vijay Kelkar Committee (2005) recommended an offset policy to be pursued 
in the acquisition procedures for enabling greater participation of private sector in 
defence production and to bring in technology and investment to the Country.  
 
4. Defence Offset Policy was first promulgated under Defence Procurement 
Procedure (DPP) 2005. The policy was expected to lead to induction of technology 
and add capacities and capabilities of the Indian defence industry.  
 
5. As per DPP 2006, following was required to be invested in India to fulfil the 
Offset obligation: 
 30 per cent of the estimated cost of the acquisition valuing 300 crore (revised 
to 2,000 crore as per DPP 2016) and above in Buy (Global) category 
acquisition.  
 30 per cent of the foreign exchange component in Buy & Make with Transfer of 
Technology (ToT) category.  
 
6. Acquisition Wing in the Department of Defence is responsible for technical and 
commercial evaluations of Offset proposals. The Defence Offset Management Wing 
(DOMW) under the Department of Defence Production (DDP) has been mandated to 

2 
 
monitor the discharge of Offset obligations. The Controller General of Defence 
Accounts is nominated as an internal auditor for auditing the offset claims submitted 
by the vendors. 
 
7. Audit observed that there were several risks associated with the implementation 
of offset provisions in defence contracts viz. (a) inadequate technical evaluation of 
offset offer, (b) shortfall in fulfilment of offset obligations by vendors, (c) non- levy and 
non-recovery of penalty for shortfall in meeting offset commitments, (d) absence of 
linkages between offset and main contracts and (e) non- achievement of desired 
outcomes. 
 
8. The process of implementation of offset involves the following stages:  
I. Acceptance of Necessity (AON) approval of the main procurement by 
the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC). During AON processing, 
inclusion of offset provisions or their waiver is also approved  
II. Scrutiny and finalization of technical and commercial offers of main 
procurement and offset contracts  
III. Signing of offset and main contract and disclosure of Indian Offset 
Partner (IOP) and project details by vendors - vendors are free to 
select eligible IOPs as per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP).  
IV. Submission of quarterly/half-yearly reports by vendors and monitoring 
of implementation of offsets by DOMW  
V. Levy of penalty/taking corrective action in case of shortfall in offset 
discharge and  
VI. Assessing impact of offset implementation  
 
9. Audit observed that there have been significant gaps/shortcomings at each of 
these stages. 
 
II. Evolution of Defence Offsets  
 
10. As stated above, the Defence Offset policy has evolved over time. Salient 
features of the evolution in progressive DPPs are mentioned below: - 
 
(a) DPP 2005 
 
 Offset discharge avenue was through purchase of products, 
components and services from Defence Public Sector Undertakings 
(DPSU)/ Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) or any industry identified in 
consultation with Industry Association. In addition, Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) in Indian Public Sector Undertaking for defence 
industrial infrastructure was also an eligible avenue. 
 Quantum of offset was 30% on Rs 300 Cr or more of AoN cost. 

3 
 
 5% penalty was applicable on annual unfulfilled portion of offsets. 
 
(b) DPP 2006 
 
 FDI in Indian organizations engaged in R&D added as an offset 
discharge avenue. Also, vendors were given the freedom to select Indian 
Offset Partners (IOPs).  
 Defence Offset Facilitation Agency (DOFA) was created. 
 
(c) DPP 2008 
 
 List of defence products eligible for offset discharge was introduced. 
 Banking of offset credits was introduced with 02 years validity. 
 
(d) DPP 2011 
 
 Civil Aerospace & Internal Security products were added to list of 
eligible products under offsets. 
 Offset discharge also permitted by Tier-I vendors on behalf of main 
vendor. 
  
(e) DPP 2011 (Revised and issued in Aug 2012) 
 
 Transfer of Technology (ToT) and Technology Acquisition in areas of 
critical technologies only to Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) added as offset discharge avenue. Further, list of 
critical defence technology areas for ToT to DRDO was introduced. 
 Enhancement of offset banking period from 2 years to 7 years. 
 Concept of multiplier to promote Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) as IOP and ToT by DRDO introduced. 
 DOFA renamed as Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW). 
 
(f) DPP 2016 
 
 Applicability of offsets was limited for contracts with Acceptance of 
Necessity (AoN) cost of 2000 Cr or more as against 300 Cr. 
 Vendor was given the flexibility to choose IOP at any time of the 
contract duration prior to claiming offset credit. 
 
(g) DAP 2020 
 
 No offsets applicable in all ab-initio Single Vendor Cases including 
Inter Governmental Agreement (IGA)/Foreign Military Sales (FMS). 

4 
 
 Offset discharge promoted in specific avenues through multipliers. 
 Offset discharge through Civil Aerospace was discontinued. 
 Offset Banking was discontinued. 
 Investment in defence manufacturing, ToT to Government institution 
and DRDO permitted by entities other than vendor/Tier – I vendor on a 
case-to-case basis 
 
11. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has mandated discharge of offset obligations by 
vendors under different categories of defence acquisitions with the primary objective 
of leveraging the capital acquisitions and technology to develop the Indian Defence 
Industry by :-  
 
(a) Fostering development of internationally competitive enterprises. 
(b) Augmenting capacity for Research, Design and Development related to 
defence products and services. 
 
12. As per the extant guidelines in force vide Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 
- 2020, the Offsets clause is applicable for ‘Buy (Global)’ categories of procurement 
where the estimated Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) cost is Rs 2000 crores or more. 
No offsets are applicable in all ab-initio Single Vendor cases, including procurements 
based on Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA)/ Foreign Military Sales (FMS). 
Learning from the experience in implementing the Offset policy over the years since 
DPP 2005, the Ministry has gradually fine-tuned the Offset Policy and the guidelines 
thereof to strengthen the domestic defence industrial base together with other synergic 
sectors. This has resulted in the enhancement of the available avenues for discharge 
of offsets along with amplification of the list of products/ services and technologies.  
 
13. The offset mechanism has evolved over the years and has incorporated 
enabling provisions to attract investment and technology to enhance capability of the 
domestic defence manufacturing sector and promote ‘Make in India’ initiative. The 
Indian industry has received Defence business in excess of USD 13.2 billion through 
offsets. Further, the Indian Offset Partners (IOP) base has been expanded to more 
than 350 vendors out of which 95% are from the private sector. Also, MSMEs have 
benefitted through assignment of multipliers in offset credits with almost 40% of the 
IOP base being constituted by MSMEs.  
 
III. Implementation of Offsets as per DAP 2020 
 
14. Ministry has taken various measures to streamline the process and 
considerable changes have been made in the Defence Offset Guidelines over the past 
years to facilitate the vendors in discharging offsets. The details of the same are given 
below:- 
 

5 
 
(a) The vendor has been given flexibility to discharge offset obligation 
through any one or a combination of the following methods: 
 
(i) Direct purchase of, or executing export orders for eligible products and 
services. 
(ii) Investment in defence manufacturing through FDI or direct investment 
or JV or through non-equity route for co-production, co-development 
and production or licensed production of defence products.  
(iii) Investment in ToT to Indian enterprises for manufacture of eligible 
products.  
(iv) Acquisition of technology through ToT to Government institutions and 
establishments.  
(v) Technology acquisition by DRDO in areas of critical technology. 
 
(b) The vendor is also allowed to fulfil its offset obligation through its Tier-I 
sub-vendors (Foreign partners of the main vendor who developed major 
systems of the platform e.g. Engine, Avionics etc) to the extent of their work 
share (by value). 
 
(c) Offset policy also permits change of Discharge Avenue, change of IOP 
and re-phasing of annual offset obligation during the period of discharge with 
the approval of Competent Authority to facilitate the vendor in discharge of 
offsets. 
 
(d) Measures have been taken to fast track the discharge of offset by 
providing online digital portal from 2019 onwards for credit claim submission, 
audit and evaluation and assignment of credits. 
 
IV. Present Status 
 
15. The present position of offset contracts as well as the implementation status is 
mentioned below:- 
 
 Total Offset Contracts – 56  
 Offset Contracts completed and closed – 20  
 Offset Contracts completed and under final audit – 10  
 Ongoing Offset Contracts – 26  
Total Offset Obligation USD 13,215.00 Million 
Obligation Due till 08th Dec, 2025 USD 10,022.93 Million  
(75.84 % of total obligation) 

6 
 
Offset Discharge Claimed till 08th Dec, 
2025 
USD 9,452.19 Million 
(94.30% of obligation due) 
 
16. On being asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to address the gaps 
and shortcomings identified in the CAG Report regarding adequacy of the current 
Offset Policy and whether the Ministry has initiated any revision of the Defence Offset 
Policy to address the evolving needs of the defence procurement process including 
the systemic improvements made in the Offset Guidelines, the Ministry in their written 
reply stated as under: 
 
“13 recommendations were forwarded by C&AG under following categories: 
(i) Achievements of objectives of offset policy 
(ii) Defence Offset Guidelines 
(iii) Monitoring of Offset Contracts  
 
Finalized Action Taken Note (ATN) on all recommendations were forwarded by 
MoD and vetted by C&AG. Details of various steps taken by the Ministry 
towards management of offsets are enumerated below. 
Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were introduced in the Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the recommendation of Kelkar 
Committee.  With the learning and the experience gained since then, the Offset 
Policy has been fine-tuned over the years to address genuine concerns of the 
industry and to facilitate foreign vendors to discharge offsets effectively. 
Accordingly, offset guidelines in DPP have been amended from time to time by 
the Ministry to address the evolving defence procurement philosophy. This has 
resulted in the increase of eligible avenues for discharge of offsets. Other 
measures introduced to make the policy more effective and user friendly are as 
under: 
 
(a) Graduating successively from only public enterprises to include both 
private and public enterprises as offset partners to ensure more 
participation of private industries in defence manufacturing. 
(b) Specifying and enlarging the eligible products and services under 
offsets to enhance domestic capability in desired areas of defence 
manufacturing and promote ‘Make in India’. 
(c) Allowing equity and non-equity investments in defence sector to 
promote defence technology-based investments through offsets. 
(d) Incentivising investment in kind in terms of transfer of technology/ 
equipment to Indian enterprises, Govt. Institutions and establishments 
including DRDO by providing higher multiplier upto 4, to enhance 
technological capabilities in defence manufacturing. 
(e) Incentivizing involvement of MSMEs, by inclusion of multipliers to 
promote larger participation of the MSMEs in defence manufacturing. 

7 
 
(f) Incentivizing investment in defence manufacturing in Defence 
Industrial Corridors (DICs) notified by the Department of Defence 
Production, MoD to promote establishment of defence industrial 
ecosystem in DICs. 
(g) Enabling acquisition of state – of – the - art critical technologies by 
DRDO. 
(h) Allowing discharge of obligations through entities other than 
vendor/Tier-I sub-vendor for investment and/or ToT on a case-to-case 
basis to increase the probability of high value ToTs coming to the 
country. 
(i) Extension of the discharge timeframe to allow sufficient time to the 
vendors for meeting their offset obligations 
(j) Enhancing the reporting cycle to real time submission of offset claims 
through online portal (earlier as per DPP 2016 it was on 6 monthly 
basis) to fast track the process of offset discharge claims. 
 
17. Observing that the CAG Report mentions non-compliance by foreign vendors 
with offset obligations, on being asked about measures being taken to ensure that 
foreign vendors meet their offset commitments in full and on time, the Ministry in their 
written Reply stated as under: 
 
“Earlier, the vendors were required to give details of Indian Offset Partners, 
products and work share along with supporting documents in the technical 
offset proposal as per offset guidelines. However, the vendors have been 
expressing difficulties in providing these details at technical evaluation stage 
sighting that these activities would be undertaken after contract signing and 
therefore are prone to changes later on. Another major challenge towards post 
contract management is timely and meaningful disposal of contract 
amendment requests received from the vendors for change of IOP/Product etc. 
Resolution of these issues was a long-drawn-out procedure since the earlier 
DPPs did not have provisions for handling such issues. The resolution of these 
issues have been catered by introducing an amendment to the offset 
guidelines after approval of Defence Acquisition Council (DAC), whereby 
vendors have been given an option to provide details of IOPs and products 
even after signing of contracts making it more realistic. Further, the process for 
contract amendment has been made flexible by allowing change of Indian 
Offset Partners (IOPs) and offset components for the signed contracts.” 
18. When asked about a detailed report on the number of offset obligations that 
have been met and those that remain outstanding, along with the reasons for delays 
or non-fulfilment, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“As on date, contracted offset obligation amounting to USD 2,438.32 Million in 
20 offset contracts has been successfully met. Offset obligation amounting to 

8 
 
USD 632.08 Million in 10 offset contracts has been submitted by the vendor in 
their respective contracted Period of Performance and obligations are likely to 
be met after audit. Out of offset obligations of USD 9,915.38 Million in 26 
ongoing offset contracts, obligation of USD 5,467.82 Million is already 
submitted by the vendor. The delay in fulfilment of offset obligations is primarily 
because some of the offset projects, originally planned at the time of signing 
of offset contract could not materialise.” 
19. On the present status of defence offsets, the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence, during oral evidence held at 18.12.2025 stated as under: 
 
“Till now, 56 offset contracts have been signed with an offset obligation of US 
$13.215 billion. These obligations are to be met up to 2033. As a result of this 
policy, 350 Indian offset partners have been added to the defence ecosystem. 
Out of these 350, 146 are MSMEs. More than 95 per cent of these IOPs are 
from the private sector. Before 2005, almost all of the defence manufacturing 
ecosystem was dominated by DPSUs. So, this paved the way for introducing 
the private sector in a big way. A few JVs with foreign OEMs were also formed 
to meet the offset obligation. Capability, in our view, has been created in 
precision manufacturing, precision optics, advanced composites, titanium 
forging, electrical and electronic components, and complex aerostructures.” 
20. To a specific query with regards to what was pre-2014 the percentage of 
domestic manufacturing out of the total defence production in the country and what 
is the percentage post-2014, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The value of defence production surge to Rs. 1.54 Lakh Crore in 2024 – 25 
from Rs 46,429 Crore in 2014 – 15. Further, Defence Exports have reached Rs. 
23,622 Crore in 2024 – 25 from Rs. 1,000 Crore in 2014.” 
21. As regards, Total offset obligation, total Penalty due, total discharge claim, and 
the amount credited, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The requisite data is tabulated below: 
(All values in Million USD) 
Total Offset Obligation 13,215.00 
Total penalty imposed 94.98 
Total Obligation Due till 14th Jan, 2026 10,022.93  
Total Offset Discharge Claimed till 14th Jan, 2026 9,237.64 
Total Offset Claims Disposed off (Credited + 
Rejected) till 14th Jan, 2026 
7,242.55 

9 
 
 
22. Audit observed that offsets were introduced in 2005 and the first offset contract 
was signed in 2007. From 2007 till March 2018, 46 offset contracts have been signed 
for ₹66,427 crore. From 2007 till December 2018, ₹19,223 crore worth of offsets 
should have been discharged. However, the vendors have claimed discharge of only 
11,396 crore (59 per cent) worth of offsets. The rate of claim of discharge of offsets 
has been about 1,300 crore per year. The remaining offset obligations of ₹55,000 crore 
(66,247 crore - ₹11,396 crore) can be claimed up to 2024 i.e. next six years. However, 
against the claimed discharge of 11,396 crore, Controller General of Defence Accounts 
(CGDA) has accepted claims of only ₹5,457 crore (48 per cent). Rest of the claims are 
either pending at CGDA/DOMW or have been rejected by CGDA on account of various 
deficiencies in the claims. 
 
23. Audit noted that out of the three avenues for discharge, 90 per cent of value of 
offsets was contracted to be discharged through direct purchase of products/services 
out of which only 36 per cent could be discharged or claimed to be discharged. Only 
3.5 per cent was contracted to be discharged through FDI with IOPs. None of the FDIs 
were discharged as on December 2018. 
 
24. Audit noted that in 36 out of a total of 46 offset contracts, 100 per cent offset 
obligation of 21,435 crore was proposed to be fulfilled through direct purchase or 
import of goods and services from IOPS by the foreign vendor. In remaining ten offset 
contracts, discharge of offset obligation was to be through a combination of direct 
purchase, export and FDI/TOT. 
 
V. Impact Assessment of Offset Policy 
 
25. Having noted the CAG Report observation that offsets had not significantly 
contributed to the development of the domestic defence industry, the Ministry were 
asked about steps being taken to ensure that offsets are directed towards 
strengthening India's indigenous defence capabilities. To this the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as follows:  
 
“MoD/DOMW is making constant efforts in association with Indian Industry 
Associations to increase the participation of domestic industry in offsets. 
Requirement of industrial license has been liberalized. Further, the list of items 
requiring license has been significantly pruned and most of the components 
have been taken out from the purview of licensing requirement. As a result, 
no. of IOPs has increased to 371 as on date. The list of IOPs has been 
uploaded on DOMW Portal for reference of OEMs and the same is updated 
as and when new IOP is approved.” 
 

10 
 
26. The Ministry in their oral evidence also furnished cumulative annual turnover of 
67 IOPs (MSME) vs Turnover Attributable to offsets as follows:  
 
 
 
27. The Ministry, during their oral evidence explained the aforementioned chart as 
follows:  
 
“This slide, in fact, summarises and seeks to underscore the impact of offsets 
on MSMEs in particular. We were able to obtain data of the annual turnover of 
67 IOPs that are MSMEs from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The black line 
indicates the cumulative turnover of all these 67 IOPs, while the red line 
indicates the turnover attributable to offsets. If we look at 2020, the total 
turnover of these 67 IOPs was to the tune of Rs. 5,147 crore, out of which 
around Rs. 1,824 crore was attributable to offsets. This means roughly 35 per 
cent of the turnover was coming by way of offsets. We are seeing an annual 
increase in the total turnover of these 67 IOPs taken together. In 2024, we find 
that the total turnover has increased to Rs. 8,956 crore, whereas the portion 
attributable only to offsets is around Rs. 2,314 crore, which is roughly 25 per 
cent. This is because the period of discharge is getting over for most contracts. 
We already have 30 contracts that have ended, and these vendors are no 


11 
 
longer supplying only for the purpose of discharging offset obligations. This 
indicates that even after the discharge period is over and the contracts have 
closed, these MSMEs have continued production and continued supply to 
international OEMs. In a way, they have entered the global supply chain, which 
was the objective of the offset policy.” 
 
VI. Manohar Parrikar - Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses (MP-IDSA) 
Recommendations 
 
28. To a specific query regarding any independent assessments or audits 
conducted to evaluate the performance of Offset agreements and their alignment with 
the national defence strategy and recommendations of the Institute of Defence Studies 
and Analysis (IDSA) on the Offset Policy, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“IDSA carried out a study to evaluate the performance of offsets contracts in 
2018. Recommendations of IDSA and their implementation status are as 
under: 
Total No. of IDSA Recommendations  - 13        
Implemented     - 08  
Under Examination    - 02  
Not Feasible for Implementation  - 03 
 
SI. 
No. 
IDSA Recommendation Implementation Status 
Implemented 
1.  Focus on Technology, Equity 
Investment and High value 
project 
Implemented 
In DAP 2020 changes were 
made to promote ToT and 
Investment by providing 
additional multipliers as 
follows:- 
Investment through FDI/JVs 
etc. – 1.5 
Investment in DICs – 2 
Critical Tech. Acquisition by 
DRDO – 4 
2.  Expand IOP base Implemented 
The number of IOPs has been 
increased from 171 in 2017 to 
371 presently. This list has 

12 
 
SI. 
No. 
IDSA Recommendation Implementation Status 
been uploaded on the DOMW 
portal for reference of OEMs. 
The list is updated as and 
when any new IOP is 
approved. 
3.  Channel offset to desired 
areas- MoD may pre-select a 
shelf of project and 
technologies which could be 
demanded as offsets 
Implemented 
Technology to be acquired 
through offsets is vetted and 
approved by a Technology 
Acquisition Committee. 
A Separate List of Critical 
technologies for Technology 
Acquisition by DRDO 
provided in DAP 2020. 
4.  Scrutinize offsets for their 
merits 
Implemented 
Technical Offset Evaluation 
Committee (TOEC) is 
mandated to scrutinize the 
offset proposals for 
compliance with the 
objectives of the offset policy. 
5.  Create a single window 
agency to manage offsets 
Implemented 
DOMW is the de-facto single 
window agency to manage 
offsets in MoD. 
6.  Put the offset information in 
public domain 
Implemented 
This information has been 
uploaded on the DOMW 
portal. The same is being 
updated regularly as and 
when required.  
7.  Set up Defence Offset fund Implemented 
Funding for start-ups is being 
provided through Innovations 
for Defence Excellence 
(iDEX) scheme managed by 
MoD. 

13 
 
SI. 
No. 
IDSA Recommendation Implementation Status 
8.  Enlarge the charter of 
DOMW- include additional 
tasks such as conduct 
surveys on Indian defence 
industry, organize 
conferences, coordinate 
industrial visits etc 
Implemented 
These activities are being 
carried out by a separate 
division viz. Defence 
Industries Promotion (DIP) in 
DDP/MoD. 
Under Examination 
9.  Apply the principle of 
additionality and causality to 
determine eligibility of offsets  
Under Examination 
This recommendation is 
under examination for 
implementation in running 
offset contracts. The 
recommendation has been 
incorporated in revised offset 
guidelines under 
consideration in DAP 2025. 
10.  Audit value addition 
certificate of IOPs 
Under Examination 
Audit of value addition and 
periodic performance audit of 
offsets is being examined. 
Not Feasible 
11.  Apply the principle of value 
addition to both 
manufacturing and services 
Not feasible 
Segregation of imported & 
indigenous content is difficult. 
Hence, this recommendation 
is not feasible for 
implementation. 
12.  Lower the threshold and 
increase the offset 
percentage 
Not feasible 
Lowering the threshold will 
not meet the intended 
objectives of the offset policy. 
Hence, status quo is 
recommended on the issue. 
13.  Apply different offset 
quantum for G-to-G contract 
Not feasible 

14 
 
SI. 
No. 
IDSA Recommendation Implementation Status 
Offsets are not applicable in 
G-to-G contracts as per DAP 
2020. 
 
VII. Monitoring Mechanism 
 
29. When asked about monitoring mechanism for the Offset Policy 2005, to track 
the progress of Offset obligations and steps being taken to ensure transparency in 
offset agreements and their implementation, the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under: 
 
“Online Offset Portal of DOMW has been made operational from 01 May 2019 
to facilitate speedy submission, verification and monitoring of Offset claims. 
With digitised offset management, Management Information System (MIS) 
reports are generated through the offset portal for data analysis, tracking the 
progress of offset discharge under each offset contract and enabling decision 
making on offset implementation. All offset claims are verified and 
communicated electronically through the Offset Portal for enhanced 
transparency, accountability and efficiency” 
30. Further, on a similar query, the representatives of Ministry of Defence, during 
oral evidence held at 18.12.2025 stated as under: 
 
“Joint Secretary (AERO) is in charge of monitoring offsets, and under her, there 
are a few officers on deputation from the Armed Forces and from other 
organisations, and they carry out regular reviews. Reviews also happen at my 
level every month or every third month, or whenever any specific issue arises. 
Otherwise, the Joint Secretary carries out the regular review.” 
31. To a specific query regarding presence of a dedicated team within the Ministry 
responsible for ensuring the effective implementation of offset agreements, the 
Ministry in their written replies stated as under:  
 
“Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW) under the Department of 
Defence Production in the Ministry of Defence is de-facto single window 
agency for effective implementation of offset agreements.” 
32. When asked how does the Ministry track and enforce compliance with delivery 
timelines for Offset obligations, and how often delays are reported, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as under: 
           

15 
 
“The offset discharge methodology as outlined in the DPPs/DAP specifies a 
robust mechanism wherein the Foreign Original Equipment Manufacturers 
(FOEMs) have to submit periodic performance reports (Quarterly/ six monthly) 
to MoD/DOMW. These performance reports give a comprehensive assessment 
of the offset obligation discharged by the FOEM in accordance with the 
contractual offset discharge schedule. Further, the audit agency furnishes a 
consolidated Audit Report for each offset contract at the end of the performance 
year which denotes the offset obligation disposed of vis-à-vis the annual 
obligation. This audit report also indicates the penalty applicable in case of any 
shortfall in annual offset discharge by the FOEM. Accordingly, MoD/DOMW 
initiates suitable action on the FOEM as per the applicable offset guidelines.” 
33. On being asked what penalties are being imposed on foreign vendors who fail 
to meet their offset obligations within the stipulated timelines, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as under: 
             
“As per the Defence Offset Guidelines, if a vendor fails to fulfil the offset 
obligation in a particular year in accordance with the annual phasing as agreed 
in the offset contract, a penalty equivalent to 5 percent of the unfulfilled offset 
obligation will be levied on the vendor.” 
34. On being asked about the measures undertaken to ensure that comprehensive 
annual reports on implementation of Offset system are submitted to the Defence 
Acquisition Council on annual basis, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
follows: 
 
“After completion of financial year, a comprehensive annual report on 
implementation of Offsets is being submitted by DOMW to Defence Acquisition 
Council (DAC) through Acquisition Wing.” 
VIII. Issues related to Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) 
 
35. When asked, how the list of Indian offset partners is prepared, the stakeholders 
involved in its preparation and does this list vary from vendor to vendor, the Ministry in 
their written response stated as follows: 
 
“As per the Defence Offset Guidelines, the OEM/Tier-I sub-vendor is free to 
select the Indian offset partner (IOP) for implementing their offset obligations 
provided the IOP has not been barred from doing business by the Ministry of 
Defence. The vendor has an option either to provide details of IOP at the time 
of signing of offset contract together with main procurement contract or even 
after signing of offset contracts i.e. one year prior to discharge of offset 
obligations or at the time of seeking offset credits. DOMW approves the IOP 
after due scrutiny. Once the IOP is approved, it is added to the list of approved 

16 
 
IOPs and uploaded on DOMW portal. Vendors can choose the IOP from this 
pre-approved list of IOPs or request addition of new IOP at any time during the 
contract duration. The list is updated as and when any new IOP is approved.” 
 
IX. Technology Acquisition  
 
36. Technology acquisition was to be assessed by a Technology Acquisition 
Committee (TAC) to be constituted by DRDO with the approval of Scientific Advisor 
(SA) to Raksha Mantri (RM). The assessments would cover both technical as well as 
financial parameters, including valuation of technology and also indicate the time 
frame and strategy for utilizing the technology. The TAC would send its 
recommendations duly approved by SA to RM, to the Technical Manager (TM) within 
a period of 4-8 weeks of its constitution, for incorporation in the TOEC Report.  
 
37. Audit noted that post DPP 2013, five Technology Acquisition proposals under 
offset contracts were received till July 2018. DRDO did not find the technology offered 
acceptable in four cases, due to various reasons viz. design knowhow and technology 
already existed, Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and DRDO could not 
finalize technologies of interest to DRDO, and OEMs opted for other avenues for 
discharge of offset obligations. In the remaining one case, TAC had been completed 
and the report submitted to TM(Air) in March 2015 and subsequently to DG 
(Acquisition). However, it is yet to be finalised.       
 
38. On being asked about specific initiatives being undertaken to ensure that 
offsets lead to genuine skill development and technology transfer to Indian personnel 
and companies, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The following policy and process reforms have been done in defence offsets: 
(i) Transfer of Technology (ToT) to Govt. Institutions including DRDO 
added as avenue of offset discharge.  
(ii) List of critical defence technology areas for ToT to DRDO introduced 
as separate Annexure. 
(iii) To incentivize transfer of technology to Indian industry/ DRDO/ OFB/ 
DPSUs and to attract direct investment, higher multipliers have been 
provided. 
(iv) Discharge of offset obligations through entities other than vendor/Tier-
1 sub-vendor has been envisaged for investments/Transfer of 
Technology on case-to-case basis.” 
 
39.  The Ministry were asked if they can provide an update on the success or failure 
of past offset contracts in terms of delivering on technology transfer and what were the 
reasons for not providing details of FDI attributable to defence offsets to the Audit by 

17 
 
the Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW). To this, the Ministry in their written 
reply stated as under: 
 
“While other avenues such as FDI and ToT have been available to the vendors 
but these avenues have not been utilized for offset discharge since the 
discharge of offsets through products and services is preferred by the vendors 
as compared to the other avenues. Further, there were challenges faced in 
valuation and processing of ToT proposals received after signing of offset 
contracts. In order to overcome these challenges, detailed guidelines have 
been issued in 2024. Seven ToT proposals under offsets have been received 
and are under consideration.” 
 
40. Further, on the issue of technology transfers, the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence, during oral evidence held at 18.12.2025 stated as under: 
 
“What we pointed out in our report was that there were several instances where 
ToT was offered, but it was not found useful by DRDO probably because just 
as manufacturing has improved significantly over the last 10-15 years, DRDO’s 
capabilities and R&D maturity have also improved. So a lot of technologies 
being offered – what we found in our report was that DRDO said, “We already 
know these technologies; we do not need them.” Technology has also become 
an area where everyone wants to offer second or third-grade technology.” 
 
X. Impact Assessment of Offsets Policy  
 
41. On being asked regarding how the Ministry track and evaluate the actual impact 
of Offset contracts on India’s defence capabilities, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as follows: 
 
“Tracking and monitoring of offset contracts is being done through DOMW 
online portal. The basic purpose of offset contracts is to develop the domestic 
defence industries through various discharge avenues such as purchase of 
products & services, FDI, ToTs etc. Defence business available to Indian 
Industry through offsets is approx. USD 13,215 Million, out of which USD 
9,237.64 Million has been discharge through Indian Offset Partners. This has 
helped in development of domestic defence manufacturing capability.”  
42. On being asked how the Ministry ensures that offset agreements align with 
India’s long-term defence strategy, particularly with respect to self-reliance 
(Atmanirbhar Bharat) and modernization of the armed forces, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as follows: 
 

18 
 
“The offset policy which was introduced in 2005 from DPP 2005 was gradually 
modified and amended over a period of time from DPP 2005, 2006, 2008, 2011, 
2011(revised and issued in 2012), 2013, 2016 and finally in DAP 2020. This 
was based on the experience gained during contract management, hurdles 
faced by the vendors in discharge of offset and making the policy clear and 
transparent directed towards the growth of Indian industry. Along with the 
production of entire platforms, components and software were also allowed as 
avenues for attracting investment towards development of defence industry in 
the private sector and MSMEs. Transfer of technology and MSMEs were 
promoted by providing multipliers to make vibrant and capable defence eco 
system in the country. Targeted areas of technology and critical technologies 
were also identified through inter departmental consultation within the Ministry. 
Policy guidelines were framed to resolve bottlenecks and make the whole 
process transparent and at the same time in the interest of our defence industry. 
These efforts resulted in the development of a fairly large Defence Industrial 
Base and many Indian companies could find their way into the global supply 
chain of foreign vendors. Therefore, in DAP 2020 offsets through products and 
services at the component and sub assembly level was disincentivized and 
ToTs were further incentivized with multipliers. It was observed that the ToT 
guidelines outlined in DAP2020 lacked clarity and therefore detailed guidelines 
were issued in 2024 for evaluation and processing of ToT proposals.” 
43. To a specific query regarding how are offset contracts aligned with the most 
pressing defence requirements of the country including in areas like aerospace, naval 
systems, and cybersecurity and how the domestic industry has been strengthened as 
a result of Defence Offset Policy, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The offset policy evolved over a period of time and avenues were added 
considering the development of the defence industry in India. The policy 
outlined in DPP 2005 had avenues of products and services along with FDI in 
Indian Public Sector Companies. Additional avenues of FDI in R&D, Transfer 
of Technology, offset banking, product and services in civil aerospace, internal 
security were added in subsequent DPPs. Further to cater to the development 
of defence industry, offset discharge through MSMEs, investment in Defence 
Industrial Corridors, Transfer of Technology in listed critical technologies were 
incentivized with multipliers. The offset proposals submitted by the bidders are 
scrutinized for compliance of offset policy through independent Technical Offset 
Evaluation Committees (TOEC) as part of the bidding procedure.” 
XI. Foreign Direct Investment  
 
44. Audit noticed that according to DPP 2013, FDI in four sectors of (i) Defence, (ii) 
Inland/coastal security, (iii) Civil aerospace and (iv) Services related to eligible 
products, qualify for discharge of offset obligations.     

19 
 
 
45. Audit stated that DOMW did not provide details of FDI attributable to defence 
offsets. Hence, audit used the data relating to FDI in Defence Sector captured and 
maintained by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) to understand 
status of FDI in defence. Audit analysis of DIPP data revealed that FDI in defence 
sector ranked consistently in the 60 to 62 position out of the 63 sectors. This would 
indicate that measures taken to promote FDI in defence has not been successful. 
        
 
46. Ministry stated (May 2019 and October 2019) that the figures of FDI taken from 
DIPP reports did not capture complete details as FDI data are captured only under two 
heads, which does not give correct picture. The Ministry added that it was proposing 
to introduce additional avenues for offset discharge for investment in specific projects 
and investments in SEBI registered funds. Ministry stated that further consultation and 
detailed study on the additional avenue is underway and once implemented the 
proposal would largely address the concerns brought out by the CAG.   
   
47. On being asked the reasons for not providing details of FDI attributable to 
defence offsets to the Audit by the Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW) the 
Ministry stated as under: 
  
“While other avenues such as FDI and ToT have been available to the vendors 
but these avenues have not been utilized for offset discharge since the 
discharge of offsets through products and services is preferred by the vendors 
as compared to the other avenues. Further, there were challenges faced in 
valuation and processing of ToT proposals received after signing of offset 
contracts. In order to overcome these challenges, detailed guidelines have 
been issued in 2024. Seven ToT proposals under offsets have been received 
and are under consideration.” 
 
XII. DPP Amendment 2015  
 
48. The DPP 2013 was amended in August 2015 by which (a) Secretary DP was 
made the competent authority for any change in IOP and offset component and (b) 
Para 8.2 of DPP Offset Guidelines was amended according to which, if the vendor is 
unable to provide details pertaining to IOPS and Products to the Technical Offset 
Evaluation Committee (TOEC), the vendor can provide the details at the time of 
seeking offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset obligations through that 
IOP . The amendment was applicable with immediate effect to all offset contracts and 
ongoing procurement cases, irrespective of the applicable DPP.  
 
49. To a specific query regarding whether the Ministry carried out consequential 
work after assessing the full import of the amendment to para 8.2 of DPP 2013 in 

20 
 
order to ensure consistency between different parts of DPP , the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as follows: 
 
“Clause 8.2 of DPP 2013 was suitably amended in 2015. Vendor was given the 
freedom to select IOP, products and ToT post signing of contract. Detailed ToT 
guidelines were also issued in Apr 2024. Since promulgation of the said 
amendment, vendors have exercised this option in 08 offset contracts and no 
discrepancies have been observed.” 
50. As far as Impact of offset policy on MSMEs in Defence Sector is concerned 
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:  
 
 “The offset mechanism has evolved over the years and has incorporated 
enabling provisions to attract investment and technology to enhance capability 
of the domestic defence industry. The industry has received defence business 
of over USD 13.2 billion through offsets. Further, the Indian Offset Partners 
(IOP) base has been expanded to more than 370 vendors. MSMEs have 
benefitted through assignment of multipliers in offset credits with almost 40% of 
the IOP base being constituted by MSMEs. 
 An analysis of offset discharge through Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) 
shows that they have established their capability in production of components 
and sub-assemblies of defence products and many of them have become a part 
of the global supply chain of foreign defence contractors post completion of 
offset contract. The cumulative turnover of 67 MSME IOPs was compared with 
the cumulative offset claims submitted for these IOPs over the 5-year period 
from 2020 to 2024. The data shows that after the year 2022, the turnover of 
these IOPs has increased despite decrease in offset claims. This indicates that 
these IOPs have been growing even after the offset contracts have been 
completed.” 
 
51. When asked about the current status of DAP 2025 and highlights of the 
changes being suggested to improve the offset policy in the DAP 2025, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated as under: 
             
 “DAP 2025 is being drafted in consultation with various stakeholders. Further 
development of Indian defence industry largely depends on their acquisition 
of capability to manufacture state-of-the-art platforms with the help of latest 
defence technologies. To achieve this, there is a need for both enhancing the 
capability for in-house R&D and acquisition of latest technologies from 
FOEMs. Hence, it is felt that the emphasis of offsets should shift to 
acquisition of defence technologies from FOEMs. 
 The country is not fully self-reliant with regard to Maintenance, Repair & 
Overhaul (MRO) of military aircrafts and helicopters. This is an area of 
concern and development of MRO facilities related to military aircrafts and 

21 
 
helicopters within the country is essential, considering the strategic 
importance of air support in military operations. MRO facilities for military 
aircrafts & helicopters will improve their availability and operational readiness 
besides cost savings, job creation and skill development. 
 Recommendation regarding changes in the Offset Policy: In view of the 
changing defence requirements, it is recommended that the Offset 
Guidelines may be revised to restrict the eligible avenues for discharge of 
offsets in the Offset Guidelines to the following two avenues: 
a. FDI for setting up of MRO facilities for aircrafts and helicopters for 
military use and 
b. Transfer of Technology (ToT) to Government institutions and 
establishments including DRDO, DPSUs and Indian enterprises both 
Public sector and Private sector (excluding wholly owned subsidiaries / 
JVs of foreign vendors). 
 Further, it is suggested to amend/include certain provisions related to offset 
discharge in the Offset Guidelines. These suggestions are given below: 
(i) Indian Offset Partner for offsets discharge through ToT shall not be a 
wholly owned subsidiary or Joint Venture (JV) of foreign vendor. 
(ii) Group Companies of the main vendor may be allowed to discharge 
offset obligation in order to enlarge the pool of ToT providers and 
increase the probability of high value ToTs coming to the country. 
(iii) There may be a provision for substitution of offset clause against 
Indigenous Content (IC) to provide flexibility in processing the 
procurement cases in terms of prioritizing between know-how (getting 
production technology) and know-why (production technology together 
with design). 
(iv) Indian Offset Partner for discharge of offsets through FDI in MRO 
facilities shall be a Indian JV of foreign vendor. 
(v) The policy may incorporate an indemnity clause against non-
performance in offset discharge. 
(vi) Multiplier of 2 is may be allowed for discharge of offset through 
investment in MRO facilities in notified Defence Industrial Corridors. All 
other multipliers may be dispensed with.” 
XIII. Defence Offsets Policy – Global Perspective 
 
52. On being asked about studying and adopting global best practices for defence 
Offsets to finetune India’s offset strategy, the Ministry in their written reply responded 
as follows: 
        
“Most of the countries follow their own offset policy tailored to their strategic 
objectives and geopolitical situation, however the modes of offsets have been 
similar Most of the nations like, Brazil, Japan and Turkiye focused on Transfer 
of Technology, Licensed Production, job creation, development of domestic 

22 
 
Defence Industrial base and buy back of products and services. In India too, 
the policy had been similar where the policy focused on local production, 
Transfer of Technology and purchase of products and services by vendors.” 
 
53. As regards any other instances of offset policy being followed internationally, 
the Ministry in their written response stated as follows: 
 
(i) “Defence offsets have played a crucial role in the Global defence industry, 
facilitating technology transfer, economic development and strengthening of 
defence industrial base. After WW II, United States facilitated its NATO 
alliance to expand their military force. As part of the offer, generous offsets 
were offered to assist the development of alliance country’s Defence 
Industrial Base (DIB). Similar strategy was followed for Israel, Japan, South 
Korea and Taiwan, where security and geostrategic cooperation enabled 
transfer of defence technology. It was observed that defence offsets primarily 
benefitted the aerospace sector of the recipient nation because of high 
technology and its spillover effect towards civil industry. 
(ii) It was also observed that each nation evolved policies as per their priorities. 
Governments had multiple objectives while seeking defence offsets which 
include acquiring of new technology, supporting key industries, gaining 
access to new markets, generating exports and forming strategic and long-
term alliances with established multinational firms. Some developing nations 
like Singapore and Taiwan earmarked specific areas or had targeted offsets. 
They thus had structured defence acquisition and offsets demands to 
achieve their objectives. On the other hand, countries like Brazil seem to be 
motivated by regional ambitions to control the development of an indigenous 
ability to produce range of weapons in country and therefore had technology 
transfer centric offsets. 
(iii) An analysis of the Offset policies of selected countries and its role towards 
the development of their domestic industries has been done in the 
subsequent paras. The selected countries have similarities with India in 
terms of economic status and security challenges for appropriate comparison 
and relevant conclusion. 
(iv) Brazil: The key aim behind Brazil’s Offset Policy was to strengthen national 
security through development of armaments industry while stimulating the 
civilian industrial sector and helping the economy to become strong and 
technologically advanced. Though the offsets were introduced formally in 
1988, Brazil leveraged the defence acquisitions to import the latest military 
technologies through licensed production co-production, joint ventures and 
transfer of technology. The Govt. used reciprocal arrangements for 
expensive imports through trade laws, regulations and incentives. The initial 
step was formation of Embraer Corporation in 1969. It proved to be leader in 

23 
 
absorption of foreign aeronautical technologies that came by its way of 
offsets. 
a. Xavante a trainer/tactical support aircraft was manufactured 
under licence from Aeromacchi, Italy. This program was followed 
by the agreement for co-development and co-production of 266 
attack aircraft called the AMX for the two nations. The benefits to 
the Brazilian defence industry included computer aided design 
and manufacturing, composite materials and engine technologies 
besides their work share on aircraft structural assemblies. 
Although the program was run by Embraer however multiple 
Brazilian subcontractors were rolled in for the program. 
b. SIVAM, a monitoring, surveillance, communication and Air Traffic 
Control system for Brazil’s amazon basin area was also a 
successful program with Raytheon of USA and Embraer and 
ATECH (company set up by Brazil for development, operations, 
maintenance and software upgrades). 
c. In 1988 a Govt. to Govt. contract was signed between France and 
Brazil to licence produce anti-tank and assault helicopter with 
100% offset spread over 10 years. The offset package had few 
technology transfers to Brazilian companies, licenced production 
of Helicopters and buy back of Tucano Trainer aircraft produced 
by Embraer. 
d. It was observed from the above that formation of JVs with foreign 
OEMs resulted in the development and upgradation of Military 
industry in Brazil. As a result, enhancement of civilian industrial 
and technological base happened. The process was leveraged 
with Brazil’s cheap labour, raw material supply and investments 
for developing the capability to absorb technology. 
 
(v) Japan: Japan was virtually obliterated in WW II by the allied powers. Offsets 
with active US support played a key role in the development of industry. 
Japan received huge number of licenses of military systems from United 
States. During 1960-88, almost 28 licenses were given to Japan for major 
weapon systems pertaining to fixed and rotary wing aircraft, components, 
sub systems, engines and missiles. Japan was able to absorb foreign 
technology cost effectively, producing major systems at a lower cost as 
compared to off the shelf purchases. The policy fostered a strong, 
technologically advanced and self-reliant Defence Industrial Base (DIB). 
Offsets fostered several beneficial spin offs, industrial synergy, project 
management and system integration expertise. The spin offs also resulted in 
the development of civil industry, for example, the brakes of the Japanese 
bullet train were developed from F-16 fighter aircraft ToT. The Mitsubishi 
Heavy Industries plant producing F-16 Fighters utilized the same skilled 
operators and process machinery for producing Boeing Civil Jets. Almost 70 

24 
 
% of Boeing’s foreign procurement for Boeing 767 aircraft was from 
Japanese firms. 
 
a. Defence - civil industry pollination provided an enabling 
mechanism for Japan’s civil and dual use industry such as 
aerospace, telecommunication, electronics, computers, 
machinery etc. in the technological advancement of defence 
products and processes. 
(vi) Israel: Israel is another example of the importance of a strategic security 
alliance between technology provider and recipient nation for the success of 
defence offsets and development of DIB. The key reason was steadfast US 
support. 
a. In 1994 US gave F/A-18 and F-151 fighters to Israel in a deal of 
approx USD 2 Billion. With that came industrial collaboration 
program worth USD 1.45 Billion with 40 Israeli companies which 
included technology transfer, funding and involvement of R&D 
institutions. The program was completed seven years ahead of 
schedule. Primary aim of Israeli offsets program was joint working 
of Israeli and foreign OEMs to develop long term mutually 
beneficial partnership. 
b. Israel invested heavily in R&D and skilling of its human resource 
which resulted in transforming its fledgling industry of 1948 to the 
present where three of the Israeli firms figure in SIPRI top 100 
defence companies. Israeli exports between 2005-17 total up to 
USD 8.4 Billion which is demonstrative of strong DIB supported 
by a military ecosystem of efficient R&D, skilled human resources, 
high technology base, innovative Govt. policies and US support. 
c. Some examples of cutting-edge technology achieved as a result 
are Arrow Anti-Ballistic Missile Defence System, Python-5 short 
range air to air missile and OFEG satellite system. 
d. The offset programs in Israel led to long term strategic 
cooperation agreements which continued long after the 
obligations were met. The key developments were observed in 
Computers, Communication and electronics sector followed by 
metal, engineering, infrastructure and biotechnology. The key was 
long term partnerships and the element of ‘causality’, which 
resulted in additional business due to offset contract and not 
routine buy backs. 
 
(vii) Turkiye: Turkiye is also an example of successful leveraging of defence 
offsets to create an indigenous defence industry. The aim of its offset policy 
was to enhance localization and innovation in Turkish industry and improve 
production and technological capability. Turkiye, being a key NATO ally, 
received crucial US support in the development of DIB.  The efforts began in 

25 
 
1984 with the purchase of 160 F-16 fighters from USA under Peace Onyx I 
program. In this contract 152 F-16 jets were produced under license by newly 
formed Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) which was a Joint Venture 
Company between US and Turkiye. TAI acquired technology and assembled 
46 F-16 jets for Egypt and upgraded Jordan and Pakistan’s F-16 fleet. During 
1984 to 2002 Turkiye signed 21 offsets contracts. 
 
a. Subsequently, more JVs were formed to produce EW Radars with 
US, joint production of CN-235 Transport Aircraft with Spain, 
Basic Trainer Aircraft with Italy and helicopters with Eurocopter (a 
joint European venture) and many others. 
b. Offsets enabled defence exports, induction of new technology 
and job creation in Turkiye. Capability acquired by Turkiye to 
manufacture additional defence products was directly attributable 
to defence offsets.” 
 
54. The Ministry also provided some success stories with regard to impact of offset 
policy on domestic defence manufacturing as follows: 
 
(i) VAR Electrochem Pvt Ltd: The company became an IOP with MBDA in 2017 
to supply thermal batteries for the proximity fuses of missiles. The products 
supplied by the company against offsets total to around USD 47.28 Million. 
The company supplied 35000 batteries in about 2.5 years. The technical 
acumen gained from weapons system offsets is being utilized in manufacture 
of thermal batteries for various missiles of DRDO. Automated dry room 
infrastructure created through the offsets enabled them to develop capability 
of manufacturing 100 batteries in a single shift. The company has become part 
of the global supply chain of MBDA which is a major weapon system 
manufacturer of fighter aircraft weapons 
(ii) Micron Instruments: The Company became an IOP with BAE Systems and 
Thales France for discharging offsets. The products supplied were ammunition 
fuses and Rocket motors. The products supplied by the company against 
offsets total to around USD 45.94 Million. The benefits from offsets resulted in 
growth of business and the company becoming part of the Global supply chain 
of BAE Systems, Thales, KNDS and Rheinmetall. 
(iii) Kineco Kaman Composites India Ltd: The Company became an IOP with 
Boeing and BAe Systems in the offset contracts. It supplied composite aircraft 
structures to Boeing and BAe Systems for various aircraft and other military 
applications like consoles for aircraft, Engine Nacelle parts etc. The products 
supplied by the company against offsets total to around USD 27.15 Million. 
The Company now has become part of the Global supply chain of BAe 
Systems, GKN aerospace, Airbus, Israeli Aircraft Industries and Safran. The 
domestic clientele of the company include HAL, ISRO, Adani Defence and 

26 
 
JSW Defence to supply items like Radomes for LCA, UAV composite parts, 
composite parts for space ships etc. 
(iv) Alpha Design Technologies Private Ltd: The Company became IOP to MBDA 
in the offset contracts for Missiles and Israeli Aircraft Industries for Radars. The 
Company’s product list includes Simulators, Electro optics, Air Defence 
Systems and its parts, Avionics, C4I Communications etc. The Company has 
done offsets for about USD 167.7 Million. The experience gained in offsets and 
the technical acumen generated resulted in the growth of the company and its 
product variety. Present domestic clientele of the company include HAL 
(aircraft parts for LCA and SU 30 aircarfts), MoD (various projects of Army, 
Navy, Air Force and DRDO), Ministry of Home Affairs (Projects for Police and 
Para Millitary Forces), BEL, BDL and ISRO. The company has confirmed an 
order book of about 5000 Cr spread over next 5 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Introductory 
An offset is a policy instrument used in major foreign defence 
procurements to achieve three key objectives: reduce the outflow of national 
resources, facilitate the transfer of advanced technology, and strengthen the 
domestic industrial base. Under this mechanism, foreign vendors are 
contractually required to undertake compensatory measures such as reverse 
purchasing, fulfilling export obligations, or investing in local industry and 
research and development within the purchasing country. The concept was 
formally recommended in India by the Dr. Vijay Kelkar Committee (2005), which 
advocated an offset policy to enhance private sector participation in defence 
production and to attract technology and investment into the country. Acting on 
this recommendation, the Defence Offset Policy was introduced in the Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2005. Institutionally, the Acquisition Wing of the 
Department of Defence conducts the technical and commercial evaluation of 
offset proposals. The Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW), functioning 
under the Department of Defence Production, is responsible for monitoring the 
fulfilment of offset obligations. Additionally, the Controller General of Defence 
Accounts serves as the internal auditor for verifying offset claims submitted by 
vendors.  The Audit Report No. 20 of 2019 contained significant results of the 
Performance Audit of the Defence Offsets in Capital Contracts which were 
contracted or implemented during the period 2012-13 to 2017-18. The 
Committee’s examination of the subject and their observations/ 
recommendations on the issues relating to Defence Offsets as brought out in 
the Audit Report and updated information received from the Ministry are detailed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Defence Offsets: Importance and Reorientation 
1. The Committee observe that rapid expansion of India’s defence industry 
under initiatives like Make in India and Aatmanirbhar Bharat has placed a 

28 
 
renewed importance on defence offsets. As India seeks to reduce import 
dependence and build self-reliance, defence offsets, especially in form of 
transfer of technology can act as a key policy tool to accelerate this shift. They 
facilitate the inflow of advanced technology, investment, and technical expertise 
from foreign firms, helping bridge gaps in research and development, 
manufacturing, and systems integration. The Committee also feel that offsets 
also strengthen domestic supply chains, support MSMEs, and promote skill 
development and opine that if effectively implemented, they contribute to 
sustainable capability building rather than mere contractual compliance. 
However, the Committee observe that a significant amount of time has lapsed 
since the performance audit of this policy. The Committee therefore, to have a 
fresh perspective on the recent challenges being faced in the implementation of 
Defence Offsets Policy, recommend that the Ministry ensure that all defence 
offsets obligation which were pending as on 31st December 2025 be cleared with 
immediate effect. Further, the Committee recommend that a special audit be 
conducted in the matter to better ascertain the status of implementation of 
Defence Offsets Policy. 
 
The Strategic Need for Continuity and Strengthening of Defence Offsets 
 
2. The Committee have been apprised that most of the countries follow their 
own offset policy tailored to their strategic objectives and geopolitical situation 
and modes of offsets (Transfer of Technology, Licensed Production, job 
creation, development of domestic Defence Industrial base and buy back of 
products and services) have been similar in nations like Brazil, Japan and 
Turkiye. Considering the growth of Indian defence sector and its renewed 
position in the global supply chain, the Committee are of the opinion that Indian 
Defence Offsets policy needs to be revisited with improved vigour so that a 
coherent defence industrial strategy is adopted that give primacy to domestic 
capacity building. The Committee observed that at present cap defence 
purchases of ₹2000 crore or more are considered for defence offsets and feel 
that this may lead to leaving a lot of defence purchases from the net of defence 
offsets. Considering the importance of Defence offsets in the Indian economy, 
the Committee are concerned that with the present model, there may not be 

29 
 
much inflow of defence offsets after the fulfilment of current obligations as has 
been observed with the reducing trend of inflow of offsets. To ensure that 
constant inflow of defence offsets is maintained along with the defence 
purchase remaining economically feasible, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of making defence offsets 
universal for every defence capital acquisition without any threshold although 
with a lower percent of offset obligation than current 30 percent.  
 
Enhanced Focus on Transfer of Technology/Research and Development as 
Offset Avenue 
3. The Committee note audit observation that the projected discharge of 
substantial offset obligations exceeding ₹55,000 crore coupled with a 
historically limited number of Indian Offset Partners (IOPs), presents a 
significant challenge requiring the Ministry's urgent intervention. The Ministry 
has submitted that the base of offset partners has expanded to approximately 
350 IOPs within the defence manufacturing sector, of which 146 (nearly 42 per 
cent) are Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and over 95 per cent 
of these partners are from the private sector thereby indicating enhanced 
private sector participation. The Committee have also observed that the Ministry 
neither seems to possess any metric to calculate actual impact of the defence 
offset policy of Indian Defence Sector’s development nor has instructed any 
detailed study into this matter to ascertain how to better utilize the defence 
offsets. While acknowledging the growth in the Indian defence manufacturing 
sector, the Committee are constrained to note that it remains to be seen whether 
the core spirit of the Defence Offset Policy has been adequately internalised. 
Observing that defence technologies have multiple spillover effects as has been 
observed in case of the brakes of the Japanese bullet train being developed 
from F-16 fighter aircraft Transfer of Technology (ToT), the Committee, urge the 
Ministry to evolve innovative mechanisms and strategic frameworks such as 
inclusion of critical technologies from civil sector in defence offset avenues to 
ensure the effective and timely utilisation of offset obligations within the 
stipulated period. 
 

30 
 
 
 
Prioritization of Transfer of Technology as the Primary Source of Defence Offset. 
 
4. While noting the periodic amendments made to the Defence Offset Policy 
in 2006, 2008, 2011, 2016 and 2020, the Committee feel that although these 
amendments were made to better align the offsets with changing needs of the 
times, these amendments still did not have the intended impact and the 
consequential changes were not reflected proportionately in transfer of 
technology to Indian defence manufacturers. To change this, the Committee 
observe that a strategic transition is required in the defence offsets policy, 
moving beyond the current emphasis on production and services toward a more 
robust focus on the Transfer of Technology (ToT). The Committee believe that 
achieving self-sufficiency in meeting military equipment requirements is a 
necessity for the safety of nation. Since the progression of domestic vendors 
toward the manufacturing of advanced components and complex systems is 
fundamentally contingent upon a greater inflow of high-end technology and 
innovation, the Committee, therefore, recommend that rather than persisting 
with piecemeal modifications, a comprehensive and holistic reorientation of the 
Defence Offset Policy must be undertaken to ensure its alignment with the 
needs of evolving technological landscape and requirements of the domestic 
defence industry.   
 
Preparation of List of Technologies for Ensuring Targeted Offsets 
5. The Committee have been apprised about offsets model opted by 
countries like Singapore and Taiwan by earmarking specific areas or targeted 
offsets. These countries had structured defence acquisition and offsets 
demands to achieve their objectives. The Committee believe that a similar 
approach needs to be opted for by the Ministry and they must try to achieve 
targeted and directed offsets. The Committee opine that focus on certain 
specific areas for acquisition of technologies is needed which will specifically 
result in supporting key industries for production of state of art equipment and 

31 
 
gaining access to new markets, generating exports and forming strategic and 
long-term alliances. While the Committee are aware that as reform, a list of 
critical defence technology areas for ToT to DRDO has been introduced they 
hope that this can become the primary area for negotiating defence offsets. For 
this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence along with major 
stakeholders of the defence manufacturing industries should revisit this list of 
technologies that are being actively sought not only by DRDO but also Indian 
Defence manufacturers and ensure that the same is used for discharge of 
offsets by foreign original equipment manufacturers (FOEMs) so as to better 
align technologies being offered by foreign vendors with need of the Indian 
defence industry. 
 
Preparation of List of Indian Offsets Partners to be considered for Offsets 
6. The Committee observe that the list of technologies for offsets and list of 
IOPs eligible for offsets are hardly reviewed and updated, The Committee feel 
the time is ripe for a coordinated effort to bring together various stakeholders 
in the Indian defence manufacturing sector viz Indian Defence Startups and 
MSMEs, Government bodies and institutions involved in development of 
defence technology and foreign vendor. The Committee feel the need for a 
common body to act as a common hub for spoke for all these different avenues 
of Defence Manufacturing sector to come together.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry seek the active involvement of the Department of 
Commerce to compile a comprehensive repository of emerging start-ups within 
the defence sector. Furthermore, to ensure seamless coordination between the 
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Commerce, and diverse industry 
stakeholders, the Committee recommend the constitution of a joint forum for 
ensuring seamless coordination between various stakeholders so that policy 
framework remains aligned with the evolving dynamics and requirements of the 
market. 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
 Rationalization of products eligible for consideration of Offsets  
 
7. The Committee note that given the significant maturation of the Defence 
Acquisition Procedure (DAP) since its inception, the prescribed product list for 
offset discharge now warrants a comprehensive rationalisation. It is observed 
that certain products within the domestic industry have attained a degree of 
maturity and market acceptance whereby they remain commercially viable 
independent of offset support. Consequently, the Committee find no 
justification for the continued inclusion of such products towards the fulfilment 
of offset obligations. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that the product 
list be pruned to exclude items that have achieved a satisfactory level of 
international acceptance. While acknowledging that this may necessitate a 
short-term adjustment for specific industrial units, the Committee are of the 
view that such a measure would facilitate more focused and meaningful policy 
intervention for sectors that continue to require strategic support. 
 
Rationalization of Offset Avenues 
8. The Committee observe from the Audit findings that 46 offset contracts 
were signed as per DPPs from 2006-11 and 2013. In 36 contracts, against 90 per 
cent of the total offset value contracted for discharge through the direct 
purchase of products and services, only 36 per cent of the obligation was 
successfully discharged or claimed. In remaining 10 contracts where discharge 
of obligations was to be through a combination of direct purchase, export and 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) with Indian Offset Partners (IOPs), only a 
minuscule percentage was proposed for Transfer of Technology (ToT) and FDI.  
The Committee are of the view that in spite of provision of additional avenues 
of offset discharge like ToT and FDI, the overwhelming reliance on direct 
purchase is not suitable for growth of defence sector in India in terms of 
technological innovation and expertise. Taking note of the poor rate of 
discharge of offset contracts in terms of ToT and FDI in various acquisitions, 

33 
 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry may consider tweaking the policy 
so far as to restrict direct purchase upto a threshold and mandating that at least 
50 per cent of the discharge be executed through either Transfer of Technology 
(ToT) or through FDI.  
The Committee are of the opinion that technology and investment can act as 
stepping stone in the growth of Indian Defence Sector. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Ministry should focus more on discharge of offsets through 
ToT and FDI 
 
9. Additionally, taking note of the Ministry’s submission that the country is 
not fully self-reliant with regard to Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul (MRO) of 
military aircrafts and helicopters, the Committee find it an area of concern and 
given the strategic importance of air power in military operations recommend 
that  for discharge of offsets FDI in MRO facilities,  the Ministry must ensure that 
the Offset Parter is Indian or an  Indian Joint Venture and not a subsidiary of 
foreign vendor so as to bring investment and technology into Indian defence 
sector. 
 
Rationalization of Multipliers 
10. The Committee note that under the Defence Offsets policy 2020, the 
vendor has been given flexibility to discharge offset obligation through any one 
or a combination of the following methods - (a) Direct purchase of, or executing 
export orders for eligible products and services (b) Investment in defence 
manufacturing through FDI or direct investment or JV or though non-equity 
route for co-production, co-development and production or licensed production 
of defence products (c) Investment in ToT to Indian enterprises for manufacture 
of eligible products (d) Acquisition of technology through ToT to Government 
institutions and establishments and (e) Technology acquisition by DRDO in 
areas of critical technology. The Committee further note that since Defence 
Procurement Policy 2011, Concept of multiplier to promote Micro, Small, and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) as IOP and ToT by DRDO has been introduced and 
presently, investment in terms of transfer of technology/ equipment to Indian 

34 
 
enterprises, Govt. Institutions and establishments including DRDO has been 
incentivised by providing higher multiplier (upto four). The Committee feel that 
providing so many avenues and multipliers has resulted in dilution of the intent 
of transfer of technology under Defence Offsets Policy and despite the presence 
of multipliers, the policy is yet to generate significant outcomes in this area. The 
Ministry has suggested that in the Offsets policy multiplier of two being allowed 
for discharge of offset through investment in MRO facilities in notified Defence 
Industrial Corridors and that all other multipliers may be dispensed with. 
Agreeing with the submission of the ministry, the Committee opine that to 
ensure that the policy is able to effectively target a few core areas and not just 
general inflow of offsets in defence manufacturing sector, the Ministry may 
explore the feasibility of introducing Multiplier of two for key areas and 
technologies being sought by the department and consider doing away with all 
other multipliers. 
 
Monitoring Mechanism 
11. The Committee learn from audit findings that there are issues like non-
discharge of offset obligations by vendor, submission of incorrect offset claims, 
non-scrutiny of offset claims, slow pace of verification and delay in forwarding 
of Quarterly Progress Reports (QPR) to MoD/DOMW. The Ministry apprised the 
Committee that an end-to-end online portal was launched in 2019 to facilitate 
the online submission, processing, audit verification, and final crediting of 
offset claims and the offset discharge methodology as outlined in the DPPs/DAP 
specifies a robust mechanism wherein the foreign original equipment 
manufacturers (FOEMs) have to submit periodic performance reports 
(Quarterly/ six monthly) to MoD/DOMW for comprehensively  assessing the 
offset obligation discharged by the FOEM in accordance with the contractual 
offset discharge schedule. The Committee wonder that despite the presence of 
such a strong mechanism, instances of offsets obligations not being met are 
getting reported. While the Committee appreciate the adoption of Online Offset 
Portal of DOMW by the Ministry from 01 May 2019 to facilitate speedy 
submission, verification and monitoring of Offset claims, they are constrained 

35 
 
to express concern regarding whether the prescribed timelines for each stage 
of the process are being strictly maintained. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry establish clear, mandatory timelines for every 
stage of the verification process within their digitised framework and ensure 
rigorous compliance therewith, so as to ensure that the end-to-end system is 
not only seamless but also remains strictly time-bound so that in case offset 
obligations are not being met timely, they can be highlighted at an early stage. 
 
Reducing Rejection of claims due to Deficiencies in Contract 
12. The Committee observe from the Audit findings that against a claimed 
discharge of ₹11,396 crore, claims amounting to only ₹5,457 crore i.e. 48 per 
cent of the total claims, have been accepted by the Controller General of 
Defence Accounts (CGDA) and the remaining claims are either pending with the 
CGDA/Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW) or have been rejected due to 
various deficiencies. The Ministry informed the Committee during oral evidence 
that 56 offset contracts worth US $13.215 billion have been signed till date with 
scheduled discharge by 2033. Further, out of offset obligations of USD 9,915.38 
million in 26 ongoing offset contracts, obligation worth 5,467.82 million 
(approximately 55 percent of total offsets) is already submitted by the vendor. 
The delay in fulfilment of offset obligations is primarily because some of the 
offset projects, originally planned at the time of signing of offset contract could 
not materialise. The Committee note with concern that close to 45 percent of 
offsets obligations remain yet to be fulfilled. Further, the Ministry’s statement 
regarding delay/non-materialization of offsets project at a later stage indicates 
that there exist loopholes and lacunae in the defence offset finalization process. 
The Committee are of the considered view that the emergence of such 
deficiencies at the settlement stage reflects inadequacies in the planning and 
contract management processes of the Ministry; they, therefore, recommend 
that a comprehensive study be undertaken to analyse the reasons for the 
rejection of claims so that such deficiencies do not creep into future contracts. 
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry consider associating the 
CGDA/DOMW at early stages of contract preparation itself to preclude the 

36 
 
recurrence of such rejections and ensure the seamless discharge of offset 
obligations. 
Penalty for not adhering to Offset Obligation 
13. The Committee note with concern the Audit findings highlighting the 
persistent failure of vendors to adhere to their offset commitments. As per the 
Defence Offset Guidelines, there is a provision for levying penalty equivalent to 
5% of the unfulfilled offset obligation on the vendor in case of unfulfillment of 
offset obligation. There are also cases of inordinate delays in discharge of offset 
obligations. The Committee regard such protracted delays as a serious lapse on 
the part of the vendor and are of the considered view that the penal provisions 
enshrined in the contracts must be invoked effectively to ensure that vendors 
honour their sovereign commitments. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry furnish a comprehensive statement detailing all instances wherein 
penalty clauses have been invoked, the quantum of penalties imposed, and the 
actual recovery effected by the Ministry of Defence to date in this regard. 
Further, observing that even the penalties are not acting as a deterrence for the 
FOEMs to not default on their offset obligations, the Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry may consider including within the policy an 
indemnity clause against non-performance in offset discharge. 
 
14. The Committee are further of the opinion that in order to ensure better 
compliance of the offset discharge, the Ministry should consider incorporating 
robust contractual linkages within the main procurement agreement to correlate 
the performance of offset obligations with the execution of the principal 
contract. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry may review the 
feasibility of integrating deliverables under offset contracts into the primary 
procurement schedule so that the performance guarantee stipulated in the main 
contract be made contingent upon the satisfactory discharge of offset 
obligations.  
 
 
 

37 
 
Continuous Outcome Evaluation of Defence Offsets Policy 
15. The Committee observe from the Audit findings that no formal 
mechanism currently exists for the periodic assessment of outcomes arising 
from the implementation of the offset policy. Regarding internal monitoring, the 
Ministry apprised the Committee that the Joint Secretary (Aero) oversees offset 
monitoring, supported by officers on deputation from the Armed Forces and 
other organisations, with periodic reviews conducted at the level of Secretary 
(DP) on a monthly or quarterly basis, or as specific exigencies arise. While 
noting these existing arrangements, the Committee are of the considered view 
that systematic review and monitoring are indispensable for ensuring that the 
objectives of the Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) are fulfilled in letter and 
spirit and for the timely detection of procedural lapses. The Committee having 
been apprised of a new Online Offset Portal of DOMW made operational from 01 
May 2019 to facilitate speedy submission, verification and monitoring of Offset 
claims hope that the new mechanism will help in tracking the progress and 
implementation of offset discharges. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that quarterly reviews through this portal be made mandatory to ensure that the 
administrative and functional processes of the defence offset policy are subject 
to continuous and rigorous institutional oversight. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                        Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 