 
 
 
22 
 
FAILURE OF THE CMPFO MANAGEMENT TO 
TAKE TIMELY DECISION TO REDEEM 
DEBENTURES OF DEWAN HOUSING FINANCE 
CORPORATION LIMITED LED TO AVOIDABLE 
LOSS OF RUPEES 315.35 CRORE  
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- SECOND   REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
PAC NO. 2416   T W E N T Y  S E C O N D  R E P O R T    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA)           
 
   MINISTRY OF COAL     Presented to Lok Sabha on: 25.07.2025              Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  25.07.2025     L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I    July, 2025/ Shravana,1947 (Saka)   
FAILURE OF THE CMPFO MANAGEMENT TO TAKE TIMELY DECISION TO REDEEM DEBENTURES OF DEWAN HOUSING FINANCE CORPORATION LIMITED LED TO AVOIDABLE LOSS OF RUPEES 315.35 CRORE  

 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2024-25) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION   ………………………………………………… (iv) 
 Report  
 PART I  
 Introduction…….  
 Investment Sub-Committee…..  
 Issue of recovery of Money…..  
 Role of Ministry of Coal vis-a-vis CMPFO…  
 RBI and NCLT Issue…  
 Action Against Commissioner Issue…..  
 Systemic Safeguards for Future Course Correction…  
 PART II  
 Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee   
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2024-25) held on 19th November, 2024 
 
II Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2024-25) held on 29th April, 2025 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma     - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave             - Deputy Secretary  

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-second Report (18th  Lok 
Sabha) on “Failure of the CMPFO Management to take timely decision to 
redeem debentures of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited led to 
avoidable loss of Rupees 325.35 crore” based on Para 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 1 
of 2023, relating to the Ministry of Coal. 
 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 1 of 2023 was laid on the Table of the House on 
27th March 2023. 
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (2024-2025) selected the aforesaid 
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Coal on the subject matter on 19th November 2024.  Based on the oral 
evidence and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
4. The Public Accounts Committee (2024-2025) considered and adopted 
the Draft Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 29th April 
2025. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- II of 
the Report. 
 
6.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Coal for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
 
7.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the 
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)    
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
 
1 
 
 
PART - I 
INTRODUCTION 
1. The Para 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 1 of 2023 included matters relating to 
Failure of Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation to ensure the safety of its 
investments due to lackadaisical approach in redeeming debentures of Dewan 
Housing Finance Corporation Limited despite adverse credit ratings led to avoidable 
loss of ₹ 315.35 crore. 
 
2. The Committee on Public Accounts (2024-2025), decided to examine Para no. 
2.1 of aforesaid C&AG Report which deal with the subject “Failure of the 
Management to take timely decision to redeem debentures of Dewan Housing 
Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL) resulted in avoidable loss ofRs.315.35crores”. 
 
3. The Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) considered the subject for 
detailed examination, took oral evidence of the representatives of  Ministry  of  Coal 
and Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation(CMPFO) and  obtained written  replies  
on  the  same.  Based on the oral evidence and  written  replies,  the  Committee  
examined  the  subject  in  detail.   
 
4. Audit Report highlights that Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation 
(CMPFO), under the administrative control of Ministry of Coal (MoC), is governed by 
the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (Act). The 
Board of Trustees (BoT), administrative agency for CMPFO, consists of Secretary, 
Ministry of Coal as Chairman, Commissioner, CMPFO as ex-officio member, Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Coal, Joint Secretary cum Financial Advisor, Ministry of Coal 
and 11 other members. The Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner is the ex-
officio member of the Board and the overall in-charge of the Organisation. 
 
5. As per Audit report, CMPFO invests the investible funds to generate optimum 
returns ensuring safety of the investments. CMPFO appoints portfolio managers who 
are responsible for investing the funds and monitoring the investments on a 
continuous basis. The scope of services of portfolio managers, inter-alia, provided 
that the services shall include investment management, renewing, reshuffling, and 
selling the Assets, etc., so as to ensure that the benefits accrue to the Trust. It also 

 
 
 
2 
 
 
provided for the prior approval of BoT for exercising any option. CMPFO also formed 
an Investment Sub-Committee which is responsible for reviewing the status of all 
investible funds and the performance of portfolio managers on quarterly basis. 
 
6. Audit pointed out that CMPFO, as on March 2020, had an investment of ₹ 
1,390.25 crore (Investment was made during the period May 2015 to February 2018) 
in Non-Convertible Debentures of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited 
(DHFL). The investment included Non-Convertible Debentures amounting to ₹ 864 
crore having an earlyredemption clause, which provided the investors right to dispose 
of the investments before maturity at par along with accrued interest in case any 
credit rating agency assign credit ratings of AA- or below. Balance Non-Convertible 
Debentures amounting to ₹ 526.25 crore did not carry such clause of early 
redemption.In this regard, Audit observed that CMPFO failed to take timely action for 
redemption of DHFL debentures despite adverse credit ratings resulting in avoidable 
loss of ₹ 315.35 crore. 
 
7. The summary of investments in DHFL by CMPFO, as provided by The 
Ministry, in a presentation during the oral evidence is provided as under: 
 
EVENT Description Value 
(in Rs. crore) 
Year 
Investment DHFL-NCD 716.00 2015-16 
Investment DHFL-NCD 672.55 2016-17 
Investment DHFL-NCD 1.70 2017-18 
Total  1390.35  
 
8. As per Audit Report a brief chronology of how the event unfolded is as under :  
 CARE (a rating agency) downgraded ratings of Non-Convertible 
Debentures of DHFL from AA+ in February 2019 to AA- in March 2019. 
The Portfolio Managers informed (March 2019) CMPFO regarding 
downgrading of rating and sought approval for early redemption of Non-
Convertible Debentures held in DHFL. 
 The option for exercising early redemption, based on the 
recommendations of Portfolio Managers, was proposed to be included 

 
 
 
3 
 
 
as one of the items for agenda in next BoT to be held on 26 March 
2019. The proposals were placed (20 March 2019) before 
Commissioner of CMPFO who accorded the approval (25 March 2019) 
for inclusion in the items of the agenda for upcoming BoT meeting. 
Despite approval of the Commissioner, the proposal for exercising early 
redemption was not included in the agenda of the BoT for discussion 
and obtaining approval of BoT.  
 The rating of Non-Convertible Debentures of DHFL was further 
downgraded (14 May 2019) to BBB- and subsequently removed (5 
June 2019) from credit watch of the rating agencies.  
 Owing to governance concerns and defaults in meeting various 
payment obligations, the Reserve Bank of India superseded (20 
November 2019) the Board of DHFL and filed a petition (29 November 
2019) before the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for initiation of Insolvency 
Process against the company. NCLT initiated (03 December 2019) 
insolvency proceedings againstDHFL and announced commencement 
of moratorium with effect from date of filling of petition i.e., 29 
November 2019. 
 The BoT finally approved (20 December 2019) the option for exercising 
early redemption in respect of Non-Convertible Debentures held in 
DHFL, though the above right had lapsed after commencement 
(November 2019) of moratorium.  
 Though the Investment Sub-Committee was required to meet quarterly 
for review of investments, it did not call for any meetings during the 
intervening period of BoT’s meeting (held on 26 March 2019) till 
commencement of moratorium (29 November 2019). Further, there was 
no BoT meeting held during the period to approve the proposal of 
exercising early redemption option.  
 As per the resolution plan of DHFL approved (7 June 2021) by NCLT, 
CMPFO received realisation proceeds of ₹ 662.58 crore only. 
  

 
 
 
4 
 
 
9. On being asked to furnish the composition of Board of Trustees (BoT) during 
the matter dealt with in the Audit, the Ministry has submitted a copy of Gazette 
notification dated 11.05.2017 constituting the Board of Trustees of CMPFO. 
10. Asked further as to when the next meeting of BoT was convened (20 
December 2019), was there anything in the Minutes of the next meeting as to why 
the Commissioner had not informed the Ministry, the Ministry informed that in the 
meeting of BoT held on 20thDecember 2019, there is no mention as to why the 
Commissioner had not informed the Ministry. 
11. When asked as to what justifies the reasons for delay of 6 months in taking 
action by the Board of Trustees, the Ministry in its written reply intimated as under: 
“The matter was first brought to the notice of concerned Joint Secretary(JS) of 
Ministry of Coal (MOC) by the Commissioner, CMPFO only on24thof 
June,2019.Upon receiving this information,MOC had taken cognizance of the 
issue. Accordingly, the Commissioner CMPFO was directed to take up the 
matterwith the Board of Trustees (BOT) vide its letter dated 02.07.2019 as 
theBOT was the appropriate authority to accord approval in this regard. 
However,the issue was brought before the BOTfor the first time in the meeting 
held on 20.12.2019.  It was the responsibility of the Commissioner CMPFO to 
haveplaced the matter with the BOT as directed by the Ministry with a sense of 
urgency, which he did not comply. It was on the part of theCommissioner 
CMPFO, being the Chief Executive Officer of the Organization, to have acted 
expeditiously on the issue.” 
  

 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
12. On enquiry if there was any administrative embargo on the Board of Trustees 
to exercise the option for early redemption, the Ministry in its written reply stated as 
under: 
 
“No. However, it is submitted thatthe matter was first brought to the notice of 
concerned Joint Secretary of MOC by the Commissioner, CMPFO only on 24th 
June, 2019. Upon receiving this information, MOC had taken cognizance of 
the issue. Accordingly, the Commissioner, CMPFO was directed to take up the 
matterwith the BOT vide its letter dated 02.07.2019 as the BOT was the 
appropriate authority to accordapproval in this regard. However,the issue was 
brought before the BOT for first time only in the meeting held on 20.12.2019.  It was 
the responsibility of the Commissioner CMPFO to have placed the matter with the 
BOT as directed by the Ministry with a sense of urgency, which he did not comply.” 
 
13. On being asked to clarify as to what led to this extraordinary situation and 
compulsion of poor decision making and that theycould not take an informed 
decision, also in which month the Ministry started getting the reports publicly about 
DHFL, the Ministry in their reply informed as under:- 
 
“It was the lackadaisical approach of the Commissioner,CMPFO which created 
the situation whereinthe matter was first brought to the notice of concerned 
Joint Secretary (JS) of Ministry of Coal (MoC) by the Commissioner, CMPFO 
only on 24th of June, 2019. Upon receiving this information, MoC had taken 
immediate cognizance of the issue. Accordingly, the Commissioner CMPFO 
was directed to take up the matter with the Board of Trustees (BOT) vide its 
letter dated 02.07.2019 as the BOT was the appropriate authority to accord 
approval in this regard. However, the issue was brought before the BOT for 
the first time in the meeting held on 20.12.2019.   
There is no record available in the Ministry to suggest that the Ministry was 
made separately aware of the DHFL issue except when the Commissioner 
informed the concerned JS, as per details given supra.” 
  

 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
14. When asked as to what led to a situation that agenda to consider proposal for 
early redemption was not adopted by the Board of Trustees, the Ministry informed 
that the matter was first brought to the notice of concerned Joint Secretary (JS) of Ministry of 
Coal (MoC) by the Commissioner, CMPFO only on 24th of June, 2019. Upon receiving this 
information, MoC had taken immediate cognizance of the issue. Accordingly, the 
Commissioner CMPFO was directed to take up the matter with the Board of Trustees (BOT) 
vide its letter dated 02.07.2019 as the BOT was the appropriate authority to accord approval 
in this regard. However, the issue was brought before the BOT for the first time in the 
meeting held on 20.12.2019.  It was the responsibility of the Commissioner CMPFO to have 
placed the matter with the BOT as directed by the Ministry with a sense of urgency, which he 
did not comply with. It was incumbent on the part of the Commissioner CMPFO, being the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Organization, to have acted expeditiously on the issue. 
 
15. When asked whether the investment was made after the approval of the BoT 
to invest in the Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL) or did it happen 
at the behest of the Commissioner andwhy the decision to redeem debentures was 
not taken in anticipation of the Board meeting, the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under: 
“CMPFO invests its fund through the Portfolio Managers selected by following 
the laid down procedure. Investment of funds, being a highly specialized 
function, an Agreement was signed on 12th Jan, 2012 between the CMPFO 
and Portfolio Managerswith,inter-alia the following stipulations:  
 
The Portfolio Manager shall assume day-to-day investment management of 
the Investible fund allocated to it and act as the investment manager with full 
discretionary authority and, in that capacity, make investment decisions and 
manage the investible fund in accordance with the Regulations and 
Restrictions stated herein and as amended from time to time. 
 
Accordingly, this agreement entrusted the Portfolio Managers with the task of 
making the investment decisions depending on their professional 
understanding and advice to take the best and prudent decisions. It is 
pertinent to mention that the Portfolio Managers are also bound to follow the 
category-wise investment pattern as defined by the Government of India(GoI) 
and choose from the available instruments. This investment in DHFL was 
made in strict adherence to the notifications issued by the Ministry of Finance, 
GoI under the Investment Pattern for Non-Government Provident Funds etc. 
 
As per the Clause 5 of the signed agreement, approval of the BOT was 
mandatory for taking any decision on redemption of debentures.” 
  

 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
16. When it was asked to clarify as to who took the decision to invest in a private 
company which is at high market risk and under what rules and procedures was this 
decision taken despite the fact that the Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited 
(DHFL) was already involved in misappropriation of funds with other States also right 
from 2015, the Ministry stated that the CMPF funds were invested in accordance with 
theMinistry of Finance (MoF) guidelines issued in this regard as mentioned in above 
para.As per the extant rules and practice the investment decisions are taken by the 
Portfolio Managers who have professional expertise in such matters. Therefore, in 
the case under question also investment decisions were taken by the Portfolio 
Managers only. 
 
17. On being asked to explain despite ill reputation of the Dewan Housing Finance 
Corporation Limited (DHFL), the Ministry did not have processes and procedure to 
guage the gravity of the situation so as to prevent investment of pensioner’s money in 
such bond, the Ministry stated in its written reply that the responsibility of investment 
decisions was on the Portfolio Managers subject to following the guidelines of the 
Ministry of Finance(MoF). The Portfolio Managers, being domain experts are 
engaged for their professional advice on investment matters.  
 
18. On being enquired that in a case IN 2018-19 involving investment of provident 
fund of ₹ 4,122 crore by the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (UPPCL) into 
the Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited an investigation revealed that the 
DHFL siphoned off ₹ 2,267 crore from the provident fund investments. Why the 
Ministry was not aware of such fraudulent affairs of DHFL andwhat kind of check and 
balance was put in place by the Ministry alsowhat punitive action has so far been 
taken in this regard by the Ministry, in this regard the Ministry explained as under:- 
 
“The Joint Secretary (JS) in-charge of CMPFO in the Ministry of Coal was 
made aware of the downgrading of the rating of DHFL by the Commissioner 
CMPFO on 24th June 2019. The CMPFO Commissioner was immediately 
advised to take necessary steps as mentioned above.  
  

 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
To prevent recurrence of such issues in future, the BOT has adopted various 
Systemic Safeguards which have since been implemented in the CMPFO. The 
details are as under:   
 
i. Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to the 
CMPFO has been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its 
meeting held on 20th December 2019 to the Investment Sub-Committee of 
the (BOT) of the CMPFO. This Committee comprises of the following 
members: 
(a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), MOC  
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  
(d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
 
ii. Further,investmentinGovernmentsecuritieshasbeenenhancedfrom50%to6
0% as an added conservative measure. This is even higher than the 
stipulated norms prescribed by the Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the 
investmentbracketforcorporatebonds has beenreducedfrom 35% to 20%. 
This has been done to reduce the investment in Debt 
relatedinstrumentsespeciallyprivatesectorbonds. 
 
iii. No fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
 
iv. The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ in line with EPFO which would 
enable the CMPFO to take decisions with regard to exit from 
downgraded portfolio in a time bound manner acting on defined trigger 
points such as reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting from Stock 
Exchange, promoter holding falling below 26%, credit rating of private 
sector companies and PSUs downgrading to AA and   AA-, respectively.  
 
v. Investment related matters arebeing monitored at various levels in the 
Ministry. Firstly, the External Concurrent Auditors monitor day-to-day 
activities of the Fund Managers. The Fund Managers in turn flag any 
unusual movement in investment to the Commissioner, CMPFO. In 
addition, the Investment Sub-Committee reviews the performance of 
investment in detail on quarterly basis wherein Fund Managers, External 

 
 
 
9 
 
 
Concurrent Auditorand the custodian bank also participate. Further, the 
Secretary, MoC reviews the overall performance of the CMPFO every 
month. The Portfolio Managers are also called in such meetings to 
present the status of Investment on quarterly basis. 
 
vi. In addition to the above, to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
the CMPFO is in the process of appointing a credible Third-Party Agency 
for overall monitoring of investments and suggesting intervention 
measures according to the market scenario. 
 
As indicated earlier, the then Commissioner, CMPFO was advised by the 
Ministry to put the matter before BOT. It is a case of a failure on the part 
of the then Commissioner, CMPFO rather than a Systemic failure. The 
Major Penalty proceedings have already been initiated against the then 
Commissioner, CMPFO for the lapses on his part.” 
 
19. On being asked as to why the matter was not referred to Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO) which is the appropriate authority because the whole 
action was taken only after the issue was referred to NCLT and a moratorium was 
imposed, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“On the basis of the preliminary enquiries by the Vigilance Divisions of 
CMPFO/Ministry of Coal (MoC), the matter was referred to the CVC for 
their First Stage Advice. The CVC vide its OM dated 22.12.2023 has 
advised for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings against the 
Commissioner, CMPFO. No recommendation for either filing a criminal 
case or any other proceeding was suggested by the CVC. Therefore, in 
line with CVC’s advice the process for initiation of Major Penalty 
Proceedings was started. However, after the Oral Evidencetaken on 19th 
Nov,2024 by the Hon’ble PAC, the legal opinion has been sought on this 
issue in line with opinion expressed by some of the Hon’ble Members of 
the PAC. Further, action will be taken as per the legal advice received 
from the ASG, Ranchi.” 
  

 
 
 
10 
 
 
20. When asked to explain out of a total investment of ₹ 1390 crore, the NCLT has 
given ₹ 662 crore, and there is loss of ₹ 315 crore.  What is the status of the balance 
Non-Convertible Debentures amounting to ₹ 526.25 and when asked to provide a 
detailed account of the total amount invested, total money recovered yet and total 
loss incurred by the CMPFO due to DHFL, the Ministry stated that NCLT approved 
the DHFL resolution plan making total realization of Rs.662.58 crores out of total 
investment of Rs.1390.25crores.Out of the realized amount of Rs. 662.58 crores, Rs. 
300.98 crore (113.93+187.05) was credited in cash in CMPFO account on 
30.09.2021 and Rs. 361.60 crores in the form of Piramal Securities.Out of cash 
receipt of Rs. 300.98 crores, Rs. 187.05 crores was against the NCD having early 
redemption clause. Thus, total avoidable loss was Rs.315.35 crores [Rs.864cr-(Rs. 
187.05cr cash+Rs. 361.60 cr Piramal security) due to non-invoking of early 
redemption clause by the CMPFO. 
      
21. When asked as to why did the Ministry failed to take timely action to safeguard 
CMPFO investment before the moratorium was initiated once the moratorium was 
imposed on DHFL by the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) in December 
2019, the right to exercise the early redemption got lapsed,  the Ministry stated that 
the matter was first brought to the notice of concerned Joint Secretary (JS) of Ministry 
of Coal (MOC) by the Commissioner, CMPFO only on 24th of June, 2019. Upon 
receiving this information, MOC had taken cognizance of the issue. Accordingly, the 
Commissioner CMPFO was directed to take up the matter with the Board of Trustees 
(BOT) vide its letter dated 02.07.2019 as the BOT was the appropriate authority to 
accord approval in this regard. However, the issue was brought before the BOT for 
the first time in the meeting held on 20.12.2019.  By then the RBI had superseded 
the Board of DHFL for filing a petition before the National Company Law Tribunal 
(NCLT) under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for initiation of Insolvency 
Process against the Company. 
  

 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
22. When to provide the details of manner of appointment of the Commissioner, 
CMPFO and also when asked to provide a copy of the rule/ guidelines pertaining to 
appoint of the Commissioner, CMPFO, the Ministry informed that Commissioner 
CMPFO is a Joint Secretary level post which is filled up by DoP&T on deputation 
basis through advertisement among the candidates who are empaneled for Joint 
Secretary level posts. 
23. When asked about the status of the action being contemplated against the 
Commissioner, CMPFO, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “With the approval of Hon'ble Minister of Coal, matter was referred to the 
CVC for seeking First Stage Advise on 03.11.2023. CVC vide its OM dated 
22.12.2023 has advised for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings against 
the Commissioner, CMPFO. The then Commissioner, CMPFObelongs to 
Indian Economic Service and had been released on15th June,2022 for his 
fresh posting decided by his Cadre Controlling Authority. Since the 
Disciplinary Authority in his case is his CadreControlling 
Organizationi.eDepartment of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of 
Finance,with the approval of Hon'ble Minister of Coal, the matter was sent to 
the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance on 
15.01.2024 for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings. The DEA has since 
issued the memorandum/charge-sheet to the Charged Officer on 17.05.2024. 
As informed by the DEA, Inquiry Officer and Presenting Officer have been 
appointed on 22.11.2024with the approval of Disciplinary Authority.” 
24. When enquired as to whether the Ministry of Coal have any disciplinary 
authority to deal with malpractices of Commissioner, CMPFO, the Ministry stated that 
the then Commissioner, CMPFO was an officer of Indian Economic Service (IES). 
The officer was relieved on 15thof June, 2022 fromMinistry of Coal (MoC) for joining 
his duties as decided by his CadreControlling Organization. Thus, the authority for 
taking departmental action against the then Commissioner, CMPFO lies with the 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance (MoF). Ministry of Coal 
has already furnished the details of irregularities noticed, draft charged 
memorandum and CVC’s Advice to the DEA. 

 
 
 
12 
 
 
25. When asked about the reasons for delay in initiating action and the status of 
the investigation against Commissioner, CMPFO, the Ministry informed that on 
receipt of a complaint alleging certain irregularities, theChief Vigilance Officer 
(CVO)CMPFO was asked to look into the matter and submit a report. The matter 
remained under examination at various levels in the Vigilance Divisions of CMPFO 
and Ministry of Coal. As the matter required examination in detail and several 
documents were to be examined, the report was submitted to the CVC for their First 
Stage Advice in October, 2023. 
The CVC recommended Major Penalty proceedings 
againstthethenCommissioner,CMPFO in December 2023. 
MinistryofCoalwiththeapprovalofHon’bleMinisterofCoal,hadreferred the matter to the 
Cadre Controlling Authority i.e. Department of Economic Aﬀairs(DEA), Ministry of 
Financeto   initiateMajorPenaltyproceedings against the then Commissioner. The 
DEA has issued the memorandum/charge-sheet to the Charged Officer on 
17.05.2024. As informed by DEA, Inquiry Officer and Presenting Officer have been 
appointed on 22.11.2024with the approval of Disciplinary Authority. 
26. As regards reasons for non-filing of criminal case against all responsible 
officers, it was informed by the Ministry that On the basis of the preliminary enquiries 
by the Vigilance Division of CMPFO/Ministry of Coal (MoC), the matter was referred 
to the CVC for their First Stage Advice. The CVC vide its OM dated 22.12.2023 has 
advised for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings against the Commissioner, 
CMPFO. No recommendation for filing a criminal case was suggested by the CVC. 
Therefore, in agreement with the CVC’s advice the process for initiation of Major 
Penalty Proceedings was started. Further,inthe Oral Evidencetaken on the 19thof 
November2024 bythe Hon’ble Public Accounts Committee(PAC), a suggestion was 
made by some of the Hon’ble Members of the PAC for initiating criminal action.Legal 
opinion has been sought from the ASG, Ranchi on this issue and further action will 
be taken as per the legal advice received. 
  

 
 
 
13 
 
 
27. When asked if there is anything in the Minutes of the Meeting of Board of 
Trustees on 26 March 2019 as to why the Commissioner, CMPFO did not inform the 
Ministry or BoT regarding the proposal of portfolio managers, it was informed that as 
per the agenda and Minutes of Board of Trustees  meeting held on 26th March 2019, 
the matter was neither placed on the agenda nor deliberatedupon in the Board of 
Trustees meeting. 
Investment Sub-Committee 
28. As regards role of the Investment Sub-Committee in deciding which bonds to 
invest in andwhat were the observations given to the Committee and what were the 
recommendations of the various Committee Members, the Ministry informed that as 
under: 
“Investment of funds, being a highly specialized function, an Agreement was 
signed between CMPFO and Portfolio Managers with inter alia the following 
stipulations: - 
 
The Portfolio Manager shall assume day-to-day investment management of 
the Investible fund allocated to it and act as the investment manager with full 
discretionary authority and, in that capacity, make investment decisions and 
manage the investible fund in accordance with the Regulations and 
Restrictions stated herein and as amended from time to time. 
 
Accordingly, this agreement entrusted the Portfolio Managers with the task of 
making the investment decisions depending on their professional competence 
and advice to take the best and most prudent decisions. It is further pertinent 
to mention that the Portfolio Managers are also bound to follow the category-
wise investment pattern as defined by the Government of India and choose 
from the available instruments.The Commissioner, CMPFO neither informed 
theInvestment Sub-Committee nor took any action to convene any meeting.” 
 
 It has also been informed by the Ministry that the Investment Sub-Committee 
meets quarterly to review the performance of investment in details on quarterly basis 
wherein Fund Managers, External Concurrent Auditor and the custodian bank also 
participate. 
  

 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
29. As regards actions being taken to ensure effective monitoring mechanism by 
CMPFO in fund management and measures to implement internal financial control 
including periodic reconciliation of its accounts with concerned Bank Accounts, the 
Ministry in its written reply has informed as under:- 
 
“To ensure effective monitoring following measures have been implemented in 
the CMPFO: 
i) Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to 
CMPFO has been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its 
meeting held on 20th December 2019 to the Investment Sub-Committee 
of the (BOT) of the CMPFO. This Committee comprises of the following 
members: 
   (a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), MOC  
   (b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
   (c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  
   (d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
ii) Further, investment in Government securities has been 
enhanced from 50% to 60% as an added conservative measure. This is 
even higher than the stipulated norms prescribed by the Ministry of 
Finance. Additionally, the investment bracket for corporate bonds has 
been reduced from 35% to 20%. This has been done to reduce the 
investment in debt related instruments especially private sector bonds. 
iii)  No fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
iv)  The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ in line with EPFO which 
would enable CMPFO to take decisions with regard to exit from 
downgraded portfolio in a time bound manner acting on defined trigger 
points such as reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting from stock 
exchange, promoter holding falling below 26%, credit rating of private 
sector companies and PSUs downgrading to AA and   AA-, respectively.  
v)  Investment related matters are being monitored at various levels 
in the Ministry. Firstly, the External Concurrent Auditors monitor day-to-
day activities of the Fund Managers. The Fund Managers in turn flag any 
unusual movement in the investment to the Commissioner, CMPFO. In 

 
 
 
15 
 
 
addition, the Investment Sub-Committee reviews the performance of 
investment in detail on quarterly basis wherein Fund Managers, External 
Concurrent Auditor and the custodian bank also participate. Further, the 
Secretary, MoC reviews the overall performance of CMPFO every month. 
The portfolio managers are also called in such meetings to present the 
status of Investment on quarterly basis.   
vi)  In addition to the above, to further strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism, the CMPFO is at an advanced stage of appointing a credible 
Third-Party Agency for overall monitoring of investments and suggestion 
on intervention measures according to the market scenario. 
vii)  A dedicated Finance Cadre is also in place in the CMPFO for 
strengthening of internal financial procedures. 
 
30. As regards implementation of the monitoring systems and their implementation 
on the ground, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The CMPFO has taken multiple initiatives to avoid recurrence of such 
incidents. The details are as under: - 
 
1) The BOT, in its 172nd meeting held on 20-12-2019 delegated the decision-
making authority to the Investment Sub-Committee to look in to any issue 
and take appropriate action timely with respect to the investments of the 
CMPFO made by the Portfolio Managers. 
 
2) The Board has also formulated the Standard Operating Procedure for the 
investment exit decision which completes in 11 days from the trigger event 
received by the CMPFO. Salient Features of the Exit Policy are as under: 
 
 Fund managers shall report to the Commissioner about the 
downgrading of credit quality in 2 days of trigger event. 
 A detailed report shall be shared in 4 days. 
 Convening of the Investment Committee meeting for 
recommendation for exit or otherwise. 
 On receipt of recommendation of Committee to exit, the Fund 
Managers shall prepare a detailed exit plan within 3 days. 
 The Committee shall deliberate and decide to exit within a day of 
receipt of such recommendation. 
  

 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
3) The process for appointing a Third-Party Agency (TPA) is at an advanced 
stage. The TPA would be empowered to overview the financial markets 
and provide informed input to the decision makers of the CMPFO. This 
mechanism is an additional layer to the professional input being provided 
by the Portfolio Managers.  
 
It is informed that no such high-risk case has been flagged by the Portfolio 
Managers and the Investment Sub-Committee.” 
 
31. Insofar as improvement in monitoring system is concerned and whether it has 
been able to flag a high risk case for CMPFO since this incident, the Ministry 
intimated that a t 
presentinvestmentinGovernmentsecuritieshasbeenenhancedfrom50%to60% as an added 
conservative measure. This is even higher than the stipulated norms prescribed by the 
Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the investmentbracketforcorporatebonds has 
beenreducedfrom 35% to 20%. This has been done to reduce the investment in debt 
relatedinstrumentsespeciallyPrivateSectorBonds. 
NofreshinvestmentsarebeingmadeinPrivateSectorBonds. No high risks have arisen since the 
DHFL incident.  
 
32. When asked to give reasons that could have contributed to  the failure of the 
Ministry and if they have devised a mechanism to call for periodical reports and 
robust monitoring to avoid such instances in future, the Ministry replied as under: 
 “Regularreview meetings of CMPFO are taken up at the level of 
theSecretary/Additional Secretary, MOC. Portfolio managers are also called in 
these meetings to present the status of Investment on quarterly basis.  The 
Investment Sub-Committee headed by the Joint Secretary &Financial Advisor 
(JS&FA)(who is a representative of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance) also monitors fund management status on a quarterly basis.Apart 
from the quarterly meetings, the Investment Sub-Committee has been 
empowered to meet as and when the exigency so demands.” 
 
33. As regards details of powers and functions delegated to Investment Sub-
Committee in the light of Audit observation that a resolution was passed giving 
powers to the Investment Sub-Committee for taking decision on all issues pertaining 
to investments of CMPFO, which could help in taking timely decision by the 
Investment Sub-Committee in future on such issues to avoid any loss to CMPFO, the 

 
 
 
17 
 
 
Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
“The CMPFO has taken multiple initiatives to avoid recurrence of such 
incidents. The details are as under: - 
4) The BOT, in its 172nd meeting held on 20-12-2019 delegated the decision-
making authority to the Investment Sub-committee to look in to any issue 
and take appropriate action timely with respect to the investments of 
CMPFO made by the Portfolio Managers. 
5) The Board has also formulated the Standard Operating Procedure for the 
investment exitdecision which completes in 11 days from the trigger event 
received by the CMPFO. Salient Features of the Exit Policy are as under: 
 Fund managers shall report to the Commissioner about the 
downgrading of credit quality in 2 days of trigger event. 
 A detailed report shall be shared in 4 days. 
 Convening of the Investment Committee meeting for 
recommendation for exit or otherwise. 
 On receipt of recommendation of Committee to exit, the Fund 
Managers 
 shall prepare a detailed exit plan within 3 days. 
 The Committee shall deliberate and decide to exit within a day of 
receipt of such recommendation. 
6) The process for appointing a Third-PartyAgency (TPA)is underway. The 
TPA would be empowered to overview the financial markets and provide 
informed input to the decision makers of CMPFO.This mechanism is an 
additional layer to the professional input being provided by the Portfolio 
Managers.” 
 
34. To a specific query regarding changes in internal financial advisory system 
that were suggested by the Office of C&AG and those of which are yet to be 
implemented, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
“Considering the C&AG’s observations regarding strengthening of internal 
finance as well as the developments in the financial markets and accounting 
standards, the Ministry in coordination with CMPF management has taken the 

 
 
 
18 
 
 
following initiatives for strengthening of the internal finance and accounting 
mechanism: 
1) Single Bank Pension Disbursement System. 
2) Centralized Pension Disbursement Cell 
3)  A dedicated Finance & Accounts cadre has been created.  
4) Adoption of Investment Exit Policy to standardize the exit process in case 
of default/downgraded has been implemented. 
5) To curtail the decision-making time, the authority has now been 
delegated to the Investment Sub-committee of BOT. 
6) The appointment of an independent Third-Party Agency to overview and 
monitor the day-to-day financial markets developments in respect of 
investments of CMPFO is underway.” 
Role of Ministry of Coal vis-a-vis CMPFO 
35. When enquired about the details of the role of Ministry of Coal in the activities 
of CMPFO and when was the Ministry informed about the matter, the Ministry 
informed that CMPFO is an Autonomous organization constituted under CMPF and 
MP Act 1948. Role of Ministry of Coal in the functioning of the CMPFO is limited to 
framing/amendment of Act and relevant schemes, constitution of BoT, appointment 
of Officers of the level of Regional Commissioner and Additional Commissioner, 
determination of rate of interest for Provident Fund, providing grant in aid, laying of 
Audited Annual Report of the CMPFO before the Parliament and other functions 
specified in the Act. Management of funds and other day to day activities are carried 
out by Commissioner CMPFO under general control and supervision of the 
Board.The matter was first brought to the notice of concerned Joint Secretary of the Ministry 
of Coal  by the Commissioner, CMPFO only on 24th of June, 2019.  
[[36. As regards the query relating as to how are decision regarding investment in 
Private sector is made by CMPFO and what is the level of approval, the Ministry 
stated that CMPFO invests its fund through Portfolio Managers selected by following 
the laid down procedure. Investment of funds, being a highly specialized function, an 
Agreement was signed on 12th Jan, 2012 between CMPFO and Portfolio 
Managerswith inter alia the following stipulations:  

 
 
 
19 
 
 
The Portfolio Manager shall assume day-to-day investment management of the 
Investible fund allocated to it and act as the investment manager with full 
discretionary authority and, in that capacity, make investment decisions and manage 
the investible fund in accordance with the Regulations and Restrictions stated herein 
and as amended from time to time. 
Accordingly, this agreement entrusted the Portfolio Managers with the task of making 
the investment decisions depending on their professional understanding and advise 
to take the best and prudent decisions. It is pertinent to mention that the Portfolio 
Managers are also bound to follow the category-wise investment pattern as defined 
by the Government of India and choose from the available instruments. 
37. When the Committee desired as to why no punitive action has been 
contemplated on the then Coal Secretary, the Ministry stated that The matter was first 
brought to the notice of concerned Joint Secretary (JS) of Ministry of Coal  by the 
Commissioner, CMPFO only on 24th of June, 2019. Upon receiving this information, MoC 
had taken cognizance of the issue. Accordingly, the Commissioner CMPFO was directed to 
take up the matter with the Board of Trustees  vide its letter dated 02.07.2019 as the BOT 
was the appropriate authority to accord approval in this regard. Subsequently, the issue was 
brought before the BOT for the first time in the meeting held on 20.12.2019. Thus, the matter 
came to the notice of the Secretary, Coal being the Chairman of BoT for the first time only in 
the month of Dec, 2019. 
In view of the above facts, there was no lapse on the part of the Secretary, Coal or 
any other official and the CVC in its Advice tendered to the MoC, has also taken a 
considered view and advised for Major Penalty proceedings to be initiated against the 
Commissioner CMPFO only. 
38. To a question whether their was an evident systemic failure of DFHL and what 
the role of the Ministry to mitigate the loss, the Ministry stated that it was the 
responsibility of the Commissioner CMPFO to inform the Ministry and have the 
matter placed before the BOT. The Ministry informed that only on 24th June, 2019 
the Ministry directed Commissioner on 2nd July,2019 itself to have the BOT 
convened. It was incumbent on the part of the Commissioner CMPFO, being the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Organization to have acted expeditiously on the issue. 
  

 
 
 
20 
 
 
39. Considering the fact that the Central Bureau of Investigation has sought 
permission from the Uttar Pradesh Government to investigate the roles of three 
senior bureaucrats in connection with the alleged irregularity in the investment of ₹ 
4,300 crore of UPPCL Employees’ Provident Fund in DHFL and other Housing 
Finance Corporations.   While the Uttar Pradesh Government has taken punitive 
action what prevents the Ministry of Coal from initiating criminal proceedings against 
the responsible officers, the Ministry informed that On the basis of the preliminary 
enquiries conducted by the Vigilance Divisions of CMPFO/Ministry of Coal (MoC) the 
matter was referred to the CVC for their First Stage Advice. CVC vide its OM dated 
22.12.2023 has advised for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings against the 
Commissioner, CMPFO. No recommendation for filing a criminal case was 
suggested by the CVC. Therefore, in line with the CVC’s advice the process for 
initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings was started. However, after the Oral 
Evidence takenby the Hon’ble PAC on 19th Nov, 2024, legal opinion has been sought 
on this issue in line with opinion expressed by some of the Hon’ble Members of the 
PAC. Further, action will be taken as per the legal advice as received from the ASG, 
Ranchi. 
40. When enquired whether any special initiatives have been taken by thethat the 
Money lost belonged to Pension Funds of Coal Mine workers, what steps are being 
taken by the Ministry to recover the money lost, the Ministry stated that As per the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 2016, the recovery for the financial creditors 
is as per the approved resolution plan. As per the NCLT Resolution Order in the 
case of DHFL, the Resolution for CMPFO dues has been a combination of the cash 
plus the bonds issued by the Piramal Capital & Housing Finance Ltd (Successful 
resolution applicant). The liability of the successful resolution applicant is limited to 
the consideration as per the approved resolution plan and there is no provision in the 
IBC for the creditor to seek recovery higher than what is envisaged under the 
approved resolution plan.  It may also be mentioned that the resolution process 
under IBC 2016 aims to resolve insolvency in time bound manner along with the 
moratorium wherein fresh litigation during the resolution period is prohibited. 
  

 
 
 
21 
 
 
Issue of recovery of Money 
41. As per the resolution plan of DHFL approved (7 June 2021) by NCLT, CMPFO 
received realisation proceeds of Rs. 662.58 crores only, when asked if the Ministry 
has formulated any plan to ensure recovery of remaining amount, the Ministry in their 
written reply furnished the following: 
“As per the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 2016, the recovery for the 
financial creditors is as per the approved resolution plan. As per the NCLT 
Resolution Order in the case of DHFL, the Resolution for CMPFO dues has 
been a combination of the cash plus the bonds issued by the Piramal Capital 
& Housing Finance Ltd (Successful resolution applicant). The liability of the 
successful resolution applicant is limited to the consideration as per the 
approved resolution plan and there is no provision in the IBC for the creditor to 
seek recovery higher than what is envisaged under the approved resolution 
plan.  It may also be mentioned that the resolution process under IBC 2016 
aims to resolve insolvency under time bound manner along with the 
moratorium wherein fresh litigation during the resolution period is prohibited.” 
42. On a query as to why did CMPFO made an investment in non-convertible 
debentures of Rs.526.25 crore without early redemption option in the first place 
considering the fact that security of investment is the primary consideration, the 
Ministry in written reply stated as under: 
“Investment of funds, being a highly specialized function, an Agreement was 
signed between CMPFO and Portfolio Managers with inter alia the following 
stipulations:- 
The Portfolio Manager shall assume day-to-day investment management of 
the Investible fund allocated to it and act as the investment manager with full 
discretionary authority and, in that capacity, make investment decisions and 
manage the investible fund in accordance with the Regulations and 
Restrictions stated herein and as amended from time to time. 
Accordingly, this agreement entrusts the Portfolio Managers with the task of 
making the investment decisions depending on their professional 
competence and advice to take the best and most prudent decisions. It is 
further pertinent to mention that the Portfolio Managers are also bound to 
follow the category-wise investment pattern as defined by the Government of 
India and choose from the available instruments.” 
 

 
 
 
22 
 
 
43. Ministry has stated that, even if the option had been exercised, it was 
notcertain whether it could have received/recovered the amount at that time. Isit a 
bail out for the inaction/delayed action on the part of BOT? 
PleaseprovidecogentreasonsforarrivingatthisconclusionandhowistheMinistryplanningt
o ensurethatatleasttheamount invested is recovered the Ministry in written reply 
stated as under: 
 
“It is difficult to ascertain the possibility and the extent of recovery if the option 
could have been exercised. However, since the credit rating downgrade of 
DHFL was very rapid, each such downgrade would have progressively eroded 
the company’s ability to pay off its liabilities.  ” 
 
RBI and NCLT Issue 
44. As per the Ministry’s Background Note, owing to governance concerns and 
default in meeting various payment obligations, the Reserve Bank of India 
superseded (20th November 2019) the Board of DHFL and filed a petition (29th 
November 2019) before the Hon'ble National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) under 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for initiation of Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (CIRP) against the company. The NCLT initiated (3rd December 
2019) CIRP against DHFL and announced commencement of moratorium with effect 
from 29th November 2019. After the NCLT announced commencement of 
moratorium with effect from 29th November 2019, NCLT approved the DHFL 
resolution plan making total realization of Rs. 662.58 crores out of total investment of 
Rs. 1390.25 crores. Out of the realized amount of Rs. 662.58 crores, Rs. 300.98 
crore (113.93+187.05) was credited in cash in CMPFO account on 30.09.2021 and 
Rs. 361.60 crores in the form of Piramal Securities. Out of cash receipt of Rs. 300.98 
crores, Rs. 187.05 crores were against the NCD having early redemption clause. 
Thus, total avoidable loss was Rs. 315.35 crores [Rs.864-(187.05 cash+361.60 
Piramal security) crores due to non-invoking of early redemption clause by CMPFO.  
  

 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
45. On being asked as to what were the reasons for inaction on the part of the 
Board of DHFL which prompted RBI to supersede the Board ofDHFL for filing petition 
before the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT)under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for initiation of Insolvency Process against the company, the 
Ministry in its written reply has stated as under: 
“The press release of RBI dated 20th November 2019 titled ‘Supersession of 
the Board of Directors and Appointment of Administrator – Dewan Housing 
Finance Corporation Limited’states as follows: 
In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 45-IE(I) of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934, the Reserve Bank has today superseded the Board of 
Directors of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL) owing to 
governance concerns and defaults by DHFL in meeting various payment 
obligations. Shri R. SubramanianKumar, ex-MD and CEO of India Overseas 
Bank has been appointed as the Administrator under Section 45-IE (2) of the 
Act. The Reserve Bank also intends to shortly initiate the process of resolution 
of the company under the insolvency and Bankruptcy (Insolvency and 
Liquidation Proceedings of Financial Service Providers and Application to 
Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2019 and would also apply to the NCLT for 
appointing the Administrator as the Insolvency Resolution Professional. 
(Supersession of the Board of Directors and Appointment of Administrator – 
Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited). 
Subsequently,the RBI inits press release dated 22nd November 2019 informed 
about the appointment of an Advisory Committee to Advise the Administrator 
of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Ltd. Further,the RBI initiated the 
process of corporate insolvency resolution process vide its press release 
dated November 2019.  The reasons for invoking theIBC by the regulator 
(RBI) could not be ascertained. However, the exposure of the DHFL vis-à-vis 
many financial entities including banks was large. IBC provides a time bound, 
structured and transparent resolution process under the regulator supervision 
(RBI appointed administrator as Resolution Professional) for resolution of 
defaulting entities.” 
  

 
 
 
24 
 
 
Action Against Commissioner Issue 
46. Ministry in its Background Note has highlighted thaton the basis of complaints 
received in April, 2022, preliminary reports of Chief Vigilance Officer, CMPFO and the 
then Commissioner were sought by CVO of this Ministry as per due vigilance 
procedure. Thereafter, Vigilance proceedings were taken up for fixing the 
responsibility in the matter as per stipulated provisions of Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) Manual. Meanwhile, in March, 2023, CAG Audit observed on 
failure of CMPFO to take timely decision to redeem debentures of Dewan Housing 
Finance Corporation Limited resulting in avoidable loss of 315.35 crore in its audit 
para-No. 2.1 of Report No.1 of 2023. Accordingly, CAG observations were duly 
incorporated during vigilance proceedings. After completion of the vigilance 
investigation in the Ministry, the matter was taken up with CVC for seeking Advice in 
October, 2023. CVC recommended Major penalty proceedings against the then 
Commissioner, CMPFO in December, 2023. Ministry of Coal with the approval of 
Hon'ble Minister of Coal, had referred the matter to Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance to initiate Major Penalty proceedings against the then 
Commissioner in January, 2024. Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of 
Finance, being the Cadre controlling authority in respect of Commissioner, issued 
Memorandum of Charges against the then Commissioner in the month of May, 2024. 
 
Systemic Safeguards for Future Course Correction  
47. The Ministry in its Background Note has provided a brief of systemic 
safeguards being implemented which are being presented as under: 
(i) InvestmentinGovernmentsecuritieshasbeenenhancedfrom50%to60%. 
Further, maximuminvestmentbracketincorporatebonds has 
beenreducedfromthe earlier 35% to 20%. This has resulted in reduction 
of investment in Debt 
relatedinstrumentsespeciallyprivatesectorbondsto35%from45%during 
last one year. 
(ii) NofreshinvestmentsarebeingmadeinPrivateSectorbonds. 
(iii) In order to avoid the procedural delays as was happened in redemption 
ofdebenturesofDHFL,theInvestmentSub-
committeeofBoardofTrustees,CMPFOcomprising(i)JointSecretary&Fina

 
 
 
25 
 
 
ncialAdviser,(ii)Commissioner,CMPFO,(iii)Director(Finance),CoalIndiaLi
mitedand(iv)Representativeof Employees 
Union,hasbeenauthorizedbyBoTinitsmeetingheldon20.12.2019totakede
cisiononinvestmentmattersofCMPFO. 
(iv) Pursuant to the decision of Board, CMPFO has now adopted an ‘Exit 
policy’ 
inlinewithEPFOwhichwouldenableCMPFOtotakedecisionwithregardtoexi
t from downgradedportfolioinatimeboundmanner acting on defined 
trigger points such as reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting 
from stock exchange, promoter holding falling below 26%, credit rating 
of private sector companies and PSUs downgrading to AA andAA- 
respectively.  
(v) Inadditiontothe above,CMPFOisinprocessofappointmentofcredible 
Third-
PartyAgencyforoverallmonitoringofinvestmentsandsuggestiononinterven
tion measuresaccordingtomarketscenario. 
(vi) As far as Monitoring Mechanism is concerned, investment related 
matters arebeing monitored by existing two-layered system. The ﬁrst at 
External ConcurrentAuditor level which monitors day to day activities of 
Fund Managers. The secondlayer of monitoring is at Investment Sub-
committee headed byJS & FinancialAdviser,MoC.InvestmentSub-
committeereviewstheperformanceofinvestmentin detail on quarterly 
basis wherein Fund Managers, External Concurrent Auditorand 
custodian bank also participate. In addition, the Ministry of Coal 
conducts quarterly reviews of fund management matters. 
 
48. When asked to give justificationin detail of the norms for exit policy, which the 
Ministry has laid out as to how much downgrade, and what are the trigger points. 
Also, why such exit policy was not in place or any safeguard measure to ensure 
slippage of funds, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“In order to ensure time bound action and to prevent recurrence of any such 
incident an Exit Policy has been brought in the CMPFO as per which a 
decision can be taken within 11 days of any activity being informed to the 
CMPFO.  Salient Features of the Exit Policy are as under: - 

 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
 Fund managers shall report to the Commissioner about the 
downgrading of credit quality in 2 days of trigger event. 
 A detailed report shall be shared in 4 days. 
 Convening of the Investment Committee meeting for recommendation 
for exit or otherwise. 
 On receipt of recommendation of committee to exit, the Fund 
Managers shall prepare a detailed exit plan within 3 days. 
 The Committee shall deliberate and decide to exit within a day of 
receipt of such recommendation. 
 
As per Ministry of Finance notification dated 14-08-2008 there was a 
permissible limit of up to 40% of investable funds under Corporate Bonds 
including bonds issued by Private Companies. As indicated in replies in 
earlier paras, the responsibility of taking investment related decisions had 
been entrusted to the Portfolio Managers being the appointed experts for 
the purpose. Additionally, they are also mandated to take their decisions 
within the framework of the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance 
from time to time. 
Exit Policy has been brought in the CMPFO as per which a decision can 
be taken within 11 days of any activity being informed to the CMPFO. 
Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to CMPFO 
has been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its meeting held on 
20th December 2019 to the Investment Sub-Committee of the (BOT) of the 
CMPFO. This Committee comprises of the following members: 
(a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), Ministry of Coal 
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited; and  
(d) A Representative of the Employees Union.” 
  

 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
49. On the question of as to what action taken or proposed to be taken by the 
Ministry to completely revamp the practice and procedures of the working of CMPFO, 
the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“To prevent recurrence of such issues in future, the BOT has adopted 
various Systemic Safeguards which have since been implemented in 
CMPFO. The details are as under:   
i)Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related 
to the CMPFO has been delegated by the Board of Trustees 
(BOT) in its meeting held on 20thDecember 2019 to the 
Investment Sub-Committee of the (BOT) of CMPFO. This 
Committee comprises of the following members: 
(a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), M/o coal  
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  
(d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
ii) Further, investment in Government securities has been 
enhanced from 50% to 60% as an added conservative measure. 
This is even higher than the stipulated norms prescribed by the 
Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the investment bracket for 
corporate bonds has been reduced from 35% to 20%. This has 
been done to reduce the investment in Debt related instruments 
especially private sector bonds. 
iii) No fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
 
iv) The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ in line with EPFO 
which would enable CMPFO to take decisions with regard to exit 
from downgraded portfolio in a time bound manner acting on 
defined trigger points such as reduction in net-worth by 20%, 
equity delisting from stock exchange, promoter holding falling 
below 26%, credit rating of private sector companies and PSUs 
downgrading to AA and   AA-, respectively.  
 

 
 
 
28 
 
 
v) Investment related matters are being monitored at various 
levels in the Ministry. Firstly, the External Concurrent Auditors 
monitor theday-to-day activities of the Fund Managers. The Fund 
Managers in turn flag any unusual movement in the investments 
to the Commissioner, CMPFO. In addition, the Investment Sub-
committee reviews the performance of investment in detail on 
quarterly basis wherein Fund Managers, External Concurrent 
Auditor and the custodian bank also participate. Further, the 
Secretary Coal reviews the overall performance of CMPFO every 
month. The Portfolio Managers are also called in such meetings 
to present the status of Investment on quarterly basis.   
 
vi) In addition to the above, to further strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism CMPFO is in the process of appointing a credible 
Third-Party Agency for overall monitoring of investments and 
suggestion on intervention measures according to the market 
scenario. 
vii) A dedicated Finance Cadre is also in placed in CMPFO for 
strengthening of internal finance procedures. “ 
 
50. As regards the present status of appointment of third-party agency andas to 
what measures have been taken to engage Third Party Inspection, the Ministry 
intimated that the process of the appointment of Third-Party Agency is at an 
advanced stage.The appointment of agency is likely to be made bythe end ofJanuary 
2025. CMPFO is at an advanced stage of appointing a credible Third-Party Agency 
for overall monitoring of investments and suggesting intervention measures 
according to the market scenario. Over and above, internal audit of CMPFO has also 
been initiated by the Ministry of Coal. It was conducted in the months of December 
2023 and September 2024. 
 
51. As regards steps being taken in the operation of Board of Trustees  to prevent 
recurrence of such issues in future, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:- 

 
 
 
29 
 
 
“To prevent recurrence of such issues in future, the BOT has adopted various 
Systemic Safeguards which have since been implemented in CMPFO. The 
details are as under:  
vii. Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to CMPFO 
had been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its meeting held on 
20th December 2019to the Investment Sub-committee of the (BOT) of 
CMPFO. This Committee comprised of the following members: 
(a) the Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser(JS&FA), MOC  
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  
(d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
viii. Further, 
investmentinGovernmentsecuritieshasbeenenhancedfrom50%to60% as 
an added conservative measure. This is even higher than the stipulated 
norms prescribed by the Dept of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
Additionally, the investment bracket for corporate bonds has been 
reduced from 35% to 20%. This has been done to reduce the investment 
in Debt related instruments especially private sector bonds. 
ix. No fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
x. The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ in line with EPFO which would 
enable CMPFO to take decisions with regard to exit from downgraded 
portfolio in a time bound manner acting on defined trigger points such as 
reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting from stock exchange, 
promoter holding falling below 26%, credit rating of private sector 
companies and PSUs downgrading to AA and   AA- respectively.  
xi. Investment related matters are being monitored at various levels in the 
Ministry. Firstly, the External Concurrent Auditors monitors day to day 
activities of the Fund Managers. The Fund Managers in turn flags any 
unusual movement in investment to the Commissioner, CMPFO. In 
addition, the Investment Sub-committee reviews the performance of 
investment in detail on quarterly basis wherein Fund Managers, External 
Concurrent Auditor and the custodian bank also participate. Further, the 
Secretary, MOC reviews the overall performance of CMPFO every month. 

 
 
 
30 
 
 
The portfolio managers are also called in such meetings to present the 
status of Investment on quarterly basis. 
xii. In addition to the above to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
CMPFO is in the process of appointing a credible Third-Party Agency for 
overall monitoring of investments and suggestion on intervention 
measures according to the market scenario.” 
52. On being asked about what systemic measures have been taken to prevent 
the occurrence of thisincident infuture? Haveany timelines been fixed forfast 
trackingandtimelyaction on theadvice of Portfolio Managers, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
“In order to ensure time bound action and to prevent any recurrence of any 
such incident an Exit Policy has been brought in the CMPFO as per which a 
decision can be taken within 11 days of any activity being informed to the 
CMPFO.  Salient Features of the Exit Policy are as under: - 
 Fund managers shall report to the Commissioner about the downgrading 
of credit quality in 2 days of trigger event. 
 A detailed report shall be shared in 4 days. 
 Convening of the Investment Committee meeting for recommendation for 
exit or otherwise. 
 On receipt of recommendation of committee to exit, the Fund Managers 
shall prepare a detailed exit plan within 3 days. 
 The Committee shall deliberate and decide to exit within a day of receipt 
of such recommendation.” 
53. On being asked about the salient features of Exit Policy, the Secretary, during 
oral evidence of the Ministry  stated as under: 
“More importantly and significantly, an exit policy has been adopted by the 
CMPFO, which is in force with a similar exit policy which exists in the EPFO. 
The salient features of this exit policy and the objective of this exit policy is to 
ensure a set of objective triggers to be identified, which would be able to act 
as a guideline for any decision-making which would be followed by the 
portfolio manager and consequently approved by the competent authority. 
Some of these trigger points basically are that if the annual profitability of a 
corporate turns into a loss, if the reduction in net worth is about 20 per cent, if 

 
 
 
31 
 
 
the equity is delisted from the stock exchange, if the promoter holding falls 
below 26 per cent or if the credit rating is downgraded to AA and below by 
various credit rating agencies or any adverse decision on the issuer by either 
SEBI, RBI or any other regulatory or judicial body or change in ownership from 
PSU to private. These are the identified trigger points which provide a safety 
net for any market-related risk that may arise at any point of time to be quickly 
identified in terms of the exit policy.” 
 
54. Further, in this regard, during the oral evidence the Secretary informed the 
Committee as under: 
“In terms of the more systemic measures, which have been taken based on 
the learning from this experience as to what are the kind of systemic 
safeguards that should be put in place for averting any such eventuality in 
future and ensuring timely decision-making in a fast changing and evolving 
situation, a slew of such measures based on the discussions in the earlier 
Board of Trustees meeting, the deliberations in the predecessor PAC and 
various other inputs.  
 
Primarily, the investment in government securities have been enhanced 
further, beyond the limit recommended by Ministry of Finance also as a 
precautionary measure and as a conservative measure from 50 per cent to 60 
per cent and correspondingly the investment bracket in corporate bonds have 
been reduced from 35 per cent to 20 per cent. This has been in vogue since 
August, 2022. No fresh investments are being made in private sector bonds. In 
addition, the fund managers or the portfolio managers are both PSUs, the SBI 
FML and the UTI AMC since January, 2020.” 
 
55. As regards the Standard Operating Procedures which have been defined as 
part of the operationalizing of the Exit Policy, the Secretary informed the Committee 
during the oral evidence as under: 
 
“In addition, more importantly, the Standard Operating Procedures which have 
been defined as part of operationalizing this exit policy have ensured that the 
responsibilities and obligations of the individual stakeholders which are the 
portfolio managers, the Commissioner CMPFO and the Investment sub-

 
 
 
32 
 
 
Committee, which is headed by the Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor -- 
my colleague in the Ministry -- who is essentially a representative of the 
Ministry ofFinance to take timely decisions on the trigger points in terms of 
whatever is required to be taken. 
 
The end-to-end decision-making process should a situation arise in future is 
limited to a total time period of only 11 days from identifying the risk till the 
time a decision is taken to exit the investment. So, the primary focus of the exit 
policy is to decentralize the decision-making process to a point where quick 
and expeditious decision-making, depending on the exigency of the situation, 
is made possible through this mechanism.” 
 
56. When asked about the role of a concurrent external auditor, the Secretary 
during the oral evidence stated as under: 
 
“In addition, there is a system of a concurrent external auditor who is 
associated with monitoring the investments on a daily basis in terms of the 
responsibilities assigned to the portfolio managers and to ensure that any 
inaction on the part of the portfolio manager in doing what they are supposed 
to do for handling these investments is promptly brought to the notice of the 
CMPFO Commissioner and then to the Investment Subcommittee. So, I am 
glad to inform the Committee that the Investment Subcommittee has been 
meeting regularly every quarter under the Chairmanship of the Joint Secretary 
and Financial Advisor, has been monitoring the investments made, the 
performance of the portfolios and the systemic measures are now largely in 
place.  
 
In addition, as an added measure to these two layers of the external 
concurrent auditor and the Investment Subcommittee, there is a process which 
is already underway for status for engagement of a third-party evaluation 
agency to monitor the health of the investments, similar to what the EPFO 
hasin place. The processes have already been initiated. The bids have been 
floated. The last date for receipt of the bids is in first week of December and 
we are confident that we will be able to appoint a third-party agency in addition 

 
 
 
33 
 
 
to the existing mechanisms which are already enforced to safeguard 
investments and to continuously monitor the market dynamics.” 
57. When asked to share the status of the action being contemplated against the 
Commissioner, CMPFO and the reasons for delay in initiating action and the status of 
the investigation against Commissioner, CMPFO, the Ministry in their post-evidence 
reply stated as under: 
“With the approval of Hon'ble Minister of Coal, matter was referred to the CVC 
for seeking First Stage Advise on 03.11.2023. CVC vide its OM dated 
22.12.2023 has advised for initiation of Major Penalty Proceedings against the 
Commissioner, CMPFO. The then Commissioner, CMPFO belongs to Indian 
Economic Service and had been released on15th June,2022 for his fresh 
posting decided by his Cadre Controlling Authority. Since the Disciplinary 
Authority in his case is his Cadre Controlling Organization i.e Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance, with the approval of Hon'ble 
Minister of Coal, the matter was sent to the Department of Economic Affairs 
(DEA), Ministry of Finance on 15.01.2024 for initiation of Major Penalty 
Proceedings. The DEA has since issued the memorandum/charge-sheet to 
the Charged Officer on 17.05.2024. As informed by the DEA, Inquiry Officer 
and Presenting Officer have been appointed on 22.11.2024with the approval 
of Disciplinary Authority. 
On receipt of a complaint alleging certain irregularities, the Chief Vigilance 
Officer (CVO) CMPFO was asked to look into the matter and submit a report. 
The matter remained under examination at various levels in the Vigilance 
Divisions of CMPFO and Ministry of Coal (MoC). As the matter required 
examination in detail and several documents were to be examined, the report 
was submitted to the CVC for their First Stage Advice in October, 2023. 
The CVC recommended Major Penalty proceedings against the then 
Commissioner, CMPFO in December 2023. Ministry of Coal with the 
approval of Hon’ble Minister of Coal, had referred the matter to the Cadre 
Controlling Authority i.e. Department of Economic Aﬀairs (DEA), Ministry of 
Finance to initiate Major Penalty proceedings against the then 
Commissioner. The DEA has issued the memorandum/charge-sheet to the 
Charged Officer on 17.05.2024. As informed by DEA, Inquiry Officer and 
Presenting Officer have been appointed on 22.11.2024with the approval of 
Disciplinary Authority.” 

 
 
 
34 
 
 
58. When the Committee sought the information as to was the investment made 
after the approval of the BoT to invest in the Dewan Housing Finance Corporation 
Limited (DHFL) or did it happen at the behest ofthe Commissioner andwhy the 
decision to redeem debentures was not taken in anticipation of the Board meeting, 
the Ministry stated as under: 
“CMPFO invests its fund through the Portfolio Managers selected by 
following the laid down procedure. Investment of funds, being a highly 
specialized function, an Agreement was signed on 12th Jan, 2012 between 
the CMPFO and Portfolio Managerswith, inter-alia the following stipulations:  
The Portfolio Manager shall assume day-to-day investment management of 
the Investible fund allocated to it and act as the investment manager with full 
discretionary authority and, in that capacity, make investment decisions and 
manage the investible fund in accordance with the Regulations and 
Restrictions stated herein and as amended from time to time. 
 
 Accordingly, this agreement entrusted the Portfolio Managers with the task 
of making the investment decisions depending on their professional 
understanding and advice to take the best and prudent decisions. It is 
pertinent to mention that the Portfolio Managers are also bound to follow the 
category-wise investment pattern as defined by the Government of India 
(GoI) and choose from the available instruments. This investment in DHFL 
was made in strict adherence to the notifications issued by the Ministry of 
Finance, GoI under the Investment Pattern for Non-Government Provident 
Funds etc. 
 As per the Clause 5 of the signed agreement, approval of the BOT was 
mandatory for taking any decision on redemption of debentures.” 
59. Suspecting that in a case involving investment of provident fund of ₹ 4,122 
crore by the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (UPPCL) into the Dewan 
Housing Finance CorporationLimitedaninvestigation revealedthat the 
DHFLsiphonedoff ₹2,267 crore from the provident fund investments, the Committee 
desired to know as towhy the Ministry was not aware of such fraudulent affairs of 
DHFL and alsowhat kind of check and balance including punitive action was taken, 
the Ministry in its response stated that: 

 
 
 
35 
 
 
The Joint Secretary (JS) in-charge of CMPFO in the Ministry of Coal 
was made aware of the downgrading of the rating of DHFL by the 
Commissioner CMPFO on 24th June 2019. The CMPFO 
Commissioner was immediately advised to take necessary steps as 
mentioned above.  
To prevent recurrence of such issues in future, the BOT has adopted 
various Systemic Safeguards which have since been implemented in 
the CMPFO. The details are as under:   
i. Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to the CMPFO has 
been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its meeting held on 20th 
December 2019 to the Investment Sub-Committee of the (BOT) of the CMPFO. This 
Committee comprises of the following members: 
(a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), MOC  
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  
(d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
ii. Further, investmentinGovernmentsecuritieshasbeenenhancedfrom50%to60% as 
an added conservative measure. This is even higher than the stipulated norms 
prescribed by the Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the 
investmentbracketforcorporatebonds has beenreducedfrom 35% to 20%. This has 
been done to reduce the investment in Debt 
relatedinstrumentsespeciallyprivatesectorbonds. 
iii. NofreshinvestmentsarebeingmadeinPrivateSectorbonds. 
 
iv. The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ inlinewithEPFOwhichwouldenable the 
CMPFOtotakedecisionswithregardtoexit from 
downgradedportfolioinatimeboundmanner acting on defined trigger points such as 
reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting from Stock Exchange, promoter 
holding falling below 26%, credit rating of private sector companies and PSUs 
downgrading to AA and   AA-, respectively.  
v. Investment related matters arebeing monitored at various levels in the Ministry. 
Firstly, the External ConcurrentAuditors monitor day-to-day activities of the Fund 

 
 
 
36 
 
 
Managers. The Fund Managers in turn flag any unusual movement in investment to 
the Commissioner, CMPFO. In addition, the InvestmentSub-
Committeereviewstheperformanceof investmentin detail on quarterly basis wherein 
Fund Managers, External Concurrent Auditorand the custodian bank also 
participate. Further, the Secretary, MoC reviews the overall performance of the 
CMPFO every month. The Portfolio Managers are also called in such meetings to 
present the status of Investment on quarterly basis. 
vi. Inadditionto the above,to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism the 
CMPFOisin the processofappointinga credible Third-
PartyAgencyforoverallmonitoringofinvestmentsandsuggestingintervention 
measuresaccordingto the marketscenario. 
 
vii. As indicated earlier, the then Commissioner, CMPFO was advised by the 
Ministry to put the matter before BOT. It is a case of a failure on the part of the then 
Commissioner, CMPFO rather than a Systemic failure. The Major Penalty 
proceedings have already been initiated against the then Commissioner, CMPFO 
for the lapses on his part.  
 
60.But when the Committee, not being satisfied with this explanation, sought a reply 
as to what is the action taken or proposed to be taken by the Ministry to completely 
revamp the practice and procedures of the working of CMPFO, the Ministry 
responded as under: 
“To prevent recurrence of such issues in future, the BOT has adopted various 
Systemic Safeguards which have since been implemented in CMPFO. The 
details are as under:   
i)Powers to take prompt decision on investment matters related to the 
CMPFO has been delegated by the Board of Trustees (BOT) in its meeting 
held on 20th December 2019 to the Investment Sub-Committee of the (BOT) 
of CMPFO. This Committee comprises of the following members: 
(a) The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (JS&FA), MOC  
(b) Commissioner, CMPFO  
(c) Director (Finance), Coal India Limited and  

 
 
 
37 
 
 
(d) a Representative of the Employees Union. 
ii) Further, investment in Government securities has been enhanced from 
50% to 60% as an added conservative measure. This is even higher than the 
stipulated norms prescribed by the Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the 
investment bracket for corporate bonds has been reduced from 35% to 20%. 
This has been done to reduce the investment in Debt related instruments 
especially private sector bonds. 
 iii) No fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
iv) The CMPFO has adopted an ‘Exit policy’ in line with EPFO which would 
enable CMPFO to take decisions with regard to exit from downgraded 
portfolio in a time bound manner acting on defined trigger points such as 
reduction in net-worth by 20%, equity delisting from stock exchange, promoter 
holding falling below 26%, credit rating of private sector companies and PSUs 
downgrading to AA and   AA-, respectively.  
v) Investment related matters are being monitored at various levels in the 
Ministry. Firstly, the External Concurrent Auditors monitor the day-to-day 
activities of the Fund Managers. The Fund Managers in turn flag any unusual 
movement in the investments to the Commissioner, CMPFO. In addition, the 
Investment Sub-committee reviews the performance of investment in detail on 
quarterly basis wherein Fund Managers, External Concurrent Auditor and the 
custodian bank also participate. Further, the Secretary Coal reviews the 
overall performance of CMPFO every month. The Portfolio Managers are also 
called in such meetings to present the status of Investment on quarterly basis.   
  

 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
vi) In addition to the above, to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism 
CMPFO is in the process of appointing a credible Third-Party Agency for 
overall monitoring of investments and suggestion on intervention measures 
according to the market scenario. 
vii) A dedicated Finance Cadre is also in placed in CMPFO for strengthening 
of internal finance procedures.” 
 
  

 
 
 
39 
 
 
PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Committee note that the Audit pointed out that CMPFO, as on March 2020, 
had an investment of ₹ 1,390.25 crore (Investment was made during the period 
May 2015 to February 2018) in Non-Convertible Debentures of Dewan Housing 
Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL). The investment included Non-Convertible 
Debentures amounting to ₹ 864 crore having an early redemption clause, 
which provided the investors right to dispose of the investments before 
maturity at par along with accrued interest in case any credit rating agency 
assign credit ratings of AA- or below. Balance Non-Convertible Debentures 
amounting to ₹ 526.25 crore did not carry such clause of early redemption. In 
this regard, Audit observed that CMPFO failed to take timely action for 
redemption of DHFL debentures despite adverse credit ratings resulting in 
avoidable loss of ₹ 315.35 crore. 
The Committees examination revealed discrepancies like the approval of 
Board of Trustees being taken belatedly in December, 2019, though the right to 
redeem had already been lapsed after commencement of moratorium.  It is 
very difficult for the Committee to fathom the lackadaisical attitude of non-
inclusion of provision for exercising early redemption as merely a procedural 
lapse, which resulted in loss of crores of rupees. 
Recommendation No.1 
The Committee note that Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO) 
had the option to exercise early redemption in respect of Non-Convertible 
Debentures amounting to ₹ 864 crore. CMPFO could have taken prompt/timely 
action on the recommendations of Portfolio Managers for early redemption of 
Non-Convertible Debentures when its rating became AA-, to safeguard the 
funds of ₹ 864 crore at that juncture.The Committee also note that the Dewan 
Housing Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL) was already involved in 
misappropriation of funds with other States also right from 2015. The 
Committee are distressed to note that despite ill knowing the status of Dewan 

 
 
 
40 
 
 
Housing Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL), the Ministry of Coal did not have 
processes and procedure to gauge the gravity of the situation so as to prevent 
investment of pensioner’s money in such bond.  
In the given scenario, the Committee recommend that by continuously 
monitoring the creditworthiness of issuers, timely decisions could have been 
made regarding early redemptions or adjustments in the portfolio. Observing 
the above facts, the Committee infer that the failure to act promptly when the 
rating dropped to AA- led to significant risks. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that investment in Government securities has been enhanced from 
50% to 60% as an added conservative measure. This is even higher than the 
stipulated norms prescribed by the Ministry of Finance. Additionally, the 
Committee also note that investment bracket for corporate bonds has been 
reduced from 35% to 20%. This has been done to reduce the investment in 
Debt related instruments especially private sector bonds. Further in order to 
mitigate loss, no fresh investments are being made in Private Sector bonds. 
The Committee observe that the Ministry/CMPFO has merely explained the 
procedure of investment in CMPFO and its silent about why the Ministry did 
not have any process/ procedure to gauge the gravity of risk involved in 
investing pensioners’ money in DHFL as well as the criteria for selection of 
DHFL.The Committee strongly recommend that by diversifying constant vigil 
across different asset classes and issuers, the risk of substantial loss due to 
the underperformance or misappropriation of funds by a single issuer (like 
DHFL) could have been minimized. The Committee are of the opinion that 
ensuring adequate due diligence before investing in NCDs could have helped 
in identifying potential risks early, thus preventing loss from investments in 
companies like DHFL, which had a history of financial instability.  
The Committee, therefore,in no uncertain terms recommend that Portfolio 
managers need to be well-equipped with the knowledge and tools to identify 
risks early so that they are capable enough to recognize red flags, like the 
situation with DHFL, and take prompt corrective action so as to obviate any 
such situation in the future. 
  

 
 
 
41 
 
 
Recommendation No.2 
The Committee note that out of a total investment of ₹ 1390 crore, the NCLT 
has given ₹ 662 crore, and there is loss of ₹ 315 crore along with balance Non-
Convertible Debentures amounting to ₹ 526.25 crore.The Committee express 
concern on the total amount invested by CMPFO and the fate of total money 
recovered yet and total loss incurred by the CMPFO due to wrongful parking 
of funds in the DHFL. The Committee are dismayed to note from the reply of 
the Ministry that the NCLT approved the DHFL resolution plan making total 
realization of Rs.662.58 crores out of total investment of Rs.1390.25crores.Out 
of the realized amount of Rs. 662.58 crores, Rs. 300.98 crore (113.93 cr 
+187.05 cr ) was credited in cash in CMPFO account on 30.09.2021 and Rs. 
361.60 crores in the form of Piramal Securities. Out of cash receipt of Rs. 
300.98 crores, Rs. 187.05 crores were against the NCD having early 
redemption clause. Thus, total avoidable loss was Rs.315.35 crores [Rs.864-
(187.05cash+361.60 Piramal security) due to non-invoking of early redemption 
clause by the CMPFO. 
From the replies furnished by the Ministry in response to audit findings 
the Committee observe that there has been a critical irregularity on the part of 
the Ministry to oversee the functioning of CMFPO which led to the failure to 
ensure the safety of its investments due to lackadaisical approach in 
redeeming debentures of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited 
despite adverse credit ratings. The Committee underscores the significance 
of transparency particularly in the context of fact that the remaining ₹526.25 
crore from the NCDs is still unrecovered. The Ministry need to explore 
avenues like asset recovery, additional claims, or even working with the 
current management or bidders for further resolution. The Committee, 
therefore, are of the opinion that in light of the avoidable loss, CMPFO should 
evaluate its future investment strategies. This could include diversifying 
investments to reduce the concentration risk in a single company or sector 
and establishing more stringent risk assessment criteria before making such 
large investments. 
  

 
 
 
42 
 
 
The Committee also feel that since part of the investment is still being 
recovered through NCLT, it would be beneficial for CMPFO to stay actively 
involved and engaged in these proceedings to ensure they are receiving the 
maximum possible recovery. The Committee would like to impress upon the 
Ministry to reassess their future bond investments by CMPFO, especially in 
high-risk sectors like housing finance, and perhaps move towards less risky 
debt instruments. The Ministry ought to ensure that a clear risk profile for 
debt securities should be in place moving forward. 
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee note from audit observation that though the 
Commissioner of CMPFO approved the proposal for exercising early 
redemption option as an agenda item for Board of Trustees (BoT) meeting of 
March 2019, the same could not be implemented due to non-inclusion of the 
same as agenda item in the Board Meeting.  The Committee further note that 
approval of BoT was taken belatedly in December 2019, after a delay of eight 
months when the right of early redemption had already lapsed due to 
commencement of moratorium in November 2019. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that delayed decision by CMPFO resulted in the loss of 
opportunity to avail timely redemption option and safeguarding its funds and 
minimizing potential losses. 
The Committee are alarmed at such a grim scenario wherein the 
Ministry failed to establishclear timelines and deadlines for key decision-
making processes, especially those involving financial transactions or 
investment-related actions, to ensure that any critical decisions are made 
promptly.The Committee note that their ought to be some kind of monitoring 
and implementation of a system where key investment milestones, like 
redemption rights, are tracked on monthly basis. This will not only provide an 
early warning system for any upcoming critical actions but will also ensure 
that they are executed in time. 
  

 
 
 
43 
 
 
The Committee therefore, desire that CMPFO should implement regular 
monitoring and reporting on the status of significant investments and their 
associated risks. The Committee further suggest that Ministry ought to 
conduct performance reviews of the decision-making process and hold 
accountable any delays or failures in execution. If delays are found to be 
systemic, take corrective action by re-evaluating internal policies and 
efficiency improvement mechanism. 
The Committee would urge the Ministry of Coalto prevent further 
financial setbacks and safeguard future investments, CMPFO must improve 
internal decision-making, strengthen governance structures, and ensure 
timely and efficient execution of critical actions like early redemption options. 
The Committee observe that this failure also speaks volumes of the 
inefficiency on the part of the Ministry and by addressing the delays, 
enhancing communication, and creating contingencies for missed 
opportunities, the Ministry can ensure better management of its funds and 
avoid further loss of potential gains. 
Recommendation No.4 
 The Committee are astonished to note that the reason, cited by Ministry 
in its response, for non-placement of agenda in the Board of Directors (BoT) 
meeting of 26 March 2019 as ‘agenda for the meeting was already circulated 
seven days before the meeting’ is not convincing in view of the fact that 
Commissioner, CMPFO, who was also the ex-officio member of BoT could 
have taken up the issue in the meeting considering the importance and 
urgency of the matter in the agenda item number XI - ‘any other issue with the 
permission of Chair’.  From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee 
note that as per the agenda and Minutes of BoT meeting held on 26th March 
2019, the matter was neither placed on the agenda nor deliberated upon in the 
BoT meeting. 
  
  

 
 
 
44 
 
 
 The Committee recommend that The Ministry should consider revising 
its current practice of circulating the agenda only seven days in advance. The 
Committee feel that in cases of urgent matters, it could be useful to allow a 
provision for adding late or unforeseen items to the agenda, provided there is 
a justified reason. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should 
develop better communication strategies to ensure that any member, 
including the ex-officio members, can flag important matters ahead of time, 
even if the formal agenda has already been circulated.  
 The Committee desire that if an urgent matter arises after the agenda is 
circulated, the Ministry could also consider the option of scheduling an 
Extraordinary BoT meeting if the matter is of significant importance and could 
not wait until the next scheduled meeting. This alacrity on the part of the 
Ministry /CMPFO could have obviated the avoidable loss of Rs. 315.35 crore to 
the exchequer.  
Recommendation No.5 
The Committee note that despite approval of the Commissioner of 
CMPFO for inclusion of the proposal for exercising early redemption option as 
an agenda item for the upcoming Board of Trustees (BoT) meeting (March 
2019), non-inclusion of the same in the meeting and delay in taking prompt 
action on the issue, points out serious lapses in the management. 
The Committee would therefore like to caution the Ministry of Coal to refrain 
from indulging in such terminological ambivalence causing confusion to 
prevent such oversights and consider incorporating a flexible framework 
within the BoT meeting structure that allows the addition of urgent or time-
sensitive items at short notice. The Committee feel that this flexibility should 
be clearly communicated to all members of BoT, ensuring that essential 
matters are always addressed promptly. 
  

 
 
 
45 
 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 Gleaning through all the information and facts available on record, the 
Committee note that in yet another case in 2018-19 involving investment of 
provident fund of ₹ 4,122 crore by the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation 
Limited (UPPCL) into the Dewan Housing Finance 
CorporationLimitedaninvestigation revealedthat the DHFLsiphonedoff ₹2,267 
crore from the provident fund investments. The Committee further note that 
the Joint Secretary (JS) in-charge of CMPFO in the Ministry of Coal was made 
aware of the downgrading of the rating of DHFL by the Commissioner CMPFO 
on 24th June 2019. The CMPFO Commissioner was immediately advised to 
take necessary steps in this regard. 
The Committee, however, feel that the reply of the Ministry / CMPFO is 
silent about whether they were aware of the fraudulent affairs of DHFL. The 
Committee further note that the Ministry/ CMPFO has also not specified the 
check and balances put in place at the time the investigation revealed that the 
DHFL siphoned off Rs. 2,267 crore from the provident fund investments of 
UPPCL. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry ought to ensure that the 
ongoing investigation is expedited and all parties involved in the siphoning 
off funds are held accountable. This includes examining the role of DHFL 
executives, UPPCL officials, and any intermediaries who may have facilitated 
the fraud. The Committee strongly depreciate the action on the part of the 
Ministry and urge them to ensure that the investigation findings should lead 
to criminal prosecution against those responsible for the mismanagement or 
fraudulent activity. This should be pursued under relevant sections of 
financial and criminal law, including fraud and embezzlement charges by the 
Ministry of Coal. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to recover the 
embezzled funds through process including asset seizures, lawsuits, or other 
legal remedies. 
  

 
 
 
46 
 
 
Given the enormity and severity of fraud, the Committee recommend that a 
comprehensive forensic audit of DHFL should be conducted to determine the 
scale of the fraudulent activities, identify responsible individuals, and trace 
the funds' movement. Any fraudulent activities should be penalized under 
applicable financial laws. The Committee further recommend that 
investigation should be considered for other similar financial institutions, 
which may pose similar risks to public fund management. The Commmittee 
may be apprised as whether Ministry/ Management has come across with any 
other instance of similar nature in default in investments. 
Recommendation No.7 
The Committee observe that  the Investment Sub-Committee was  empowered 
to decide  the bonds to invest and curious to knowtheir recommendations.  
The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that the 
agreement entrusted the Portfolio Managers with the task of making the 
investment decisions depending on their professional competence and advice 
to take the best and most prudent decisions.  
The Committee also note that the Portfolio Managers are also bound to 
follow the category-wise investment pattern as defined by the Government of 
India and choose from the available instruments.  
To the amazement of the Committee,the Commissioner, CMPFO neither 
informed the Investment Sub-Committee nor took any action to convene any 
meeting. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry / CMPFO has not 
specified the role of Investment sub- committee in deciding which bonds to 
invest.  The Committee maynot only be apprised of the present status in the 
matter, but also about the periodicity of the concurrent Audit and meetings of 
Investment committee and whether the same are being held as per the 
periodicity.  
  

 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.8 
The Committee are distressed to note that considering that the money lost 
belonged to Pension Funds of Coal Mine workers, the Committee be apprised 
of the remedial measures are being taken by the Ministry to recover the money 
lost. Noting from replies furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find that as 
per the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 2016, the recovery for the 
financial creditors is as per the approved resolution plan. As per the NCLT 
Resolution Order in the case of DHFL, the Resolution for CMPFO dues has 
been a combination of the cash plus the bonds issued by the Piramal Capital & 
Housing Finance Ltd (Successful resolution applicant).  
The Committee further note that the liability of the successful resolution 
applicant is limited to the consideration as per the approved resolution plan 
and there is no provision in the IBC for the creditor to seek recovery higher 
than what is envisaged under the approved resolution plan.  The audit scrutiny 
further revealed that the resolution process under IBC 2016 aims to resolve 
insolvency in time bound manner along with the moratorium wherein fresh 
litigation during the resolution period is prohibited. 
Considering that the Ministry/ CMPFO only mentioned about the process 
regarding the consideration received after NCLT decision under resolution 
plan, the Committee recommend as to what steps are being taken by Ministry/ 
CMPFO to recoup the loss of pension fund of the coal mines workers were not 
provided. The Committee may be apprised of the same. 
***** 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)    
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
  

 
 
 
48 
 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 19th NOVEMBER 2024 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, the 19th of November 2024, 
from 1100 hrs to 1252 hrs in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri Jai Parkash 
5. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
6. Prof. Sougata Ray 
7. Dr. Amar Singh 
8. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
13. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Mehta  - Deputy Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Shri Samar Kant Thakur  - Director General 
3. Shri Deepak Kapoor - Director General 
4. Shri Anindya Das Gupta - Principal Director 
 

 
 
 
49 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF COAL & CMPFO 
1. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt  -  Secretary 
2. Shri Bhabani Prasad Pati -  JS (Coal) 
3. Smt. Nirupama Kotru - JS & FA 
4. Smt. Rupinder Brar - Addl. Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Mishra - Commissioner, CMPFO 
6. Smt. Santosh  - DDG 
7. Shri Bijay Samanta - DS (Coal) 
8. Shri Sudheer Babu Motana -  DS (Coal) 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Officers from 
the Office of Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) to the sitting, which had been 
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Coal and Coal 
Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO) on the subject ‘Failure of the 
Management to take timely decision to redeem debentures of Dewan Housing 
Finance Corporation Limited resulted in avoidable loss of ₹ 315.35 crore’ based on 
the Audit observations contained in the Para 2.1 of C&AG Report 1 of 2023. 
2. The Officers of the C&AG, through a presentation briefed the Committee on 
key findings of the Audit report, highlighting various inefficiencies within the 
framework of CMPFO viz. non-inclusion of proposal for early redemption of Non-
Convertible Debentures in the Meeting of Board of Trustees (BoT) by the 
Commissioner, CMPFO, despite downgrading of rating of Non-Convertible 
Debentures of Dewan Housing Finance Corporation Limited in march 2019 and later 
in May 2019; failure of CMPFO to utilize the available option of going for early 
redemption for Non-Convertible Debentures; shortcomings in the monitoring 
mechanism for investments and periodicity of the meetings of the Investment Sub-
Committee. 
3. Then the Chairperson welcomed representatives of the Ministry of Coal and 
the Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO) to the sitting and asked them 
to introduce themselves. 
4. After introduction of witnesses, the Secretary (Coal) apprised the Committee 
of action taken by the Ministry on the audit observations viz. vigilance inquiry 
instituted by the Ministry, findings of the said inquiry, consultation with the Central 
Vigilance Commission for taking against the then CMPFO Commissioner, through 
his cadre controlling authority - the Ministry of Finance issue of charge-sheet for 
major penalty etc. He also apprised the Committee of the systemic measures, being 
taken based on the lessons learned from the instant issue which include further 
enhancement of investment in government securities; adoption of an exit policy by 
CMPFO which limits time period of end-to-end decision-making process to eleven 
days and defining new Standard Operating Procedures ensuring the responsibilities 
and obligations of portfolio managers, the Commissioner CMPFO and the 
Investment sub-Committee.  
5. During the discussion, Members raised numerous points concerning key 
issues highlighted in the audit report like procedural lapse which resulted in failure of 
early redemption of Non-Convertible Debentures, delay in meetings of the 
Investment Sub-Committee, role of the Ministry of Coal in monitoring the activities of 

 
 
 
50 
 
 
CMPFO, inadequacies of action taken against the then CMPFO, delay in 
Departmental enquiry, laxity in filing criminal complaint against all responsible 
officers, action taken to retrieve the money lost, lack of exit policy, preventive 
measures etc.  
6. Taking note of the concerns raised by the Committee, the representative of 
the Ministry of Coal and the Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO), 
apprised the Committee of the steps taken to address the key issues, efforts made to 
revive the management in CMPFO apart from the ones highlighted earlier such as a 
system of a concurrent external auditor who is associated with monitoring the 
investments on a daily basis and initiating process for engagement of a third-party 
evaluation agency to monitor the health of the investments, similar to what the EPFO 
has in place. The Committee were assured that the steps being taken to strengthen 
the system would prove decisive in prevention of such lapses in future. 
7. Thereafter, the Chairperson asked the representatives of the Ministry of Coal 
and the Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO) to furnish the information 
that was not readily available with them along with the replies to the List of Points 
being sent to them by the Committee Secretariat within fifteen days.  
8. The Committee, further, regarding the second agenda item which was 
Consideration and adoption of six Draft Reports of the Committee on Public 
Accounts, decided to consider and the draft Reports in their next Sitting. 
  A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept 
on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
51 
 
 
Appendix-II 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 29 APRIL, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, 29 April, 2025 from 
1303 hrs to 1425 hrs in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11. Shri Jai Parkash 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
14. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
15. Dr. Amar Singh 
16. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
17. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
RAJYA SABHA 
18. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
19. Dr. K. Laxman 
20. Shri Praful Patel 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
52 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Atreyee Das Deputy C&AG 
2.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri  Deputy C&AG 
3.  Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj Deputy C&AG 
4.  Ms. Yashodhara Ray 
Chaudhuri 
Addl. Deputy C&AG 
5.  Shri Samar Thakur  Director General 
6.  Shri Anadi Mishra Director General 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the office 
of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee.He invited suggestions 
of the Members on the following four Draft Reports:-  
i. Draft Report on the subject “Failure of the Management to take 
timely decision to redeem debentures of Dewan Housing Finance 
Corporation Limited (DHFL) resulted in avoidable loss of 
Rs.315.35 crores”. 
ii. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
iii. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
iv. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
7. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid 
Draft Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson 
to finalise the Reports in the light of factual verification done by Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 