 
 
 
02 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO IRREGULAR 
TAX EXEMPTION-SOUTH ASIAN 
UNIVERSITY (SAU) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 80th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
PAC No. 2385 
 
S E C O N D  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
     
                       
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 80th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
                                                                                          
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  12.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   12.12.2024 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka)  
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO 
IRREGULAR TAX EXEMPTION-SOUTH 
ASIAN UNIVERSITY (SAU) 
           

i 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 25) held on 
     03.12.2024 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Eightieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr. Faiz Ahmad                  -                  Under Secretary 
 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Eightieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Loss of 
Revenue due to irregular tax exemption-South Asian University (SAU)" relating 
to the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
2. The Eightieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 18.12.2023. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report on 
the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 03.12.2024. Minutes of the 
Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 80th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
03 December, 2024              Chairperson, 
12 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                  Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eightieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Loss of Revenue due to irregular tax 
exemption-South Asian University (SAU)".  
 
2. The Eightieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on -
18.12.2023.  It contained seven Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of External Affairs, and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7      
      
      Total:       7       
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total: 0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No.  NIL      
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V 

2 
 
 
3.  The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of External Affairs, which inter-alia 
included absence of foolproof standards of procedure for extending privileges to the officials 
concerned; lack of consultation and coordination; ineffective internal audit mechanism etc. 
The Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Eightieth 
Report. 
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs, on each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eightieth Report have 
been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The Committee will now deal with 
the action taken by the Government, on some of their Observations/Recommendations 
which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of External Affairs to furnish Action Taken Notes 
in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
Need for a standard operating procedure 
Paragraph 2 of PAC Report No. 80 (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
6.  Noting from audit observation, the Committee found that the privileges were wrongly 
extended to the Registrar of the University for grant of income tax exemption vide issuance 
of the gazette notification in 2009. The Committee also noted that the reasons for inclusion 
of the post of Registrar in the Gazette notification were not on record. The Committee 
understand that the Government of India is required to make a gazette notification under the 
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 for extending the privileges to the 
University, the President and the members of the academic staff as envisaged under Article 

3 
 
14 of the SAU Act. The notification was issued on 15 January, 2009 after the due process 
followed by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) wherein the draft texts were vetted by both 
the Legal & Treaty (L&T) Division of MEA and the Ministry of Law and Justice before 
issuance as asserted by the MEA. The Committee note that the MEA first became aware of 
the error of introducing the office of Registrar amongst the offices enjoying the privileges in 
the gazette notification in 2011 when the SAU approached MEA for a diplomatic identity 
card and tax exemption certificate for its first Registrar appointed in 2011 which 
demonstrates laxity and administrative negligence on part of the MEA. The Committee were 
of the view that the procedure followed for the issuance of gazette notification by the 
Ministry needs careful review and supervision. The notifications issued by the MEA may 
have consequences on international relations and impact sensitive foreign affairs. The 
Committee recommended that the Ministry should create a ‘Procedural Standards Cell’ 
which would examine all aspects of vetting before publishing any such document 
particularly in the Gazette of India and take necessary steps to guarantee that the 
necessary internal oversight is carried out in order to prevent such aberrations in the future. 
 
7. The MEA in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
 “As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has established a separate 
‘Procedural Standards Cell’ under L&T division of the Ministry for examining all 
aspects related to provisions being notified and published through a gazette 
notification so as to prevent such aberrations in the future.” 
 
8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 
“Status of establishment of a separate ‘Procedural Standards Cell’ may be apprised 
to PAC.” 
 
 
 

4 
 
9. The Committee in their original report had pointed out that the South Asian 
University had wrongly extended the privilege of tax exemption certificate to its first 
Registrar by including the post of Registrar in the Gazette Notification, issued in year 
2009, as per requirements under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 
1947, and in concurrence with Article 14 of the SAU Act.  They also expressed their 
surprise that his wrong inclusion of the post of Registrar went unchecked despite the 
gazette notification draft texts being vetted by various departments of Government of 
India. 
  The MEA became aware of this error in 2011 when the SAU approached the 
Ministry for a diplomatic identity card and tax exemption certificate for its first 
Registrar, appointed in 2011.  This, according to the Committee, reflects a lapse of 
administrative negligence on the part of the Ministry.  In their Action Takes Replies, 
the Ministry indicated that a separate ‘Procedural Standard Cell’ has been 
established under the L&T Division of the MEA to scrutinize all provisions being 
notified and published through a Gazette Notification to prevent such anomalies in 
future.  
 However, the Committee note that due to this erroneous inclusion of income 
tax exemption granted to the Registrar of the South Asian University, not only was 
there a loss to the exchequer amounting to Rs.90.06 lakhs, but it is also perceived 
that there was an apprehension of an adverse affect on the country’s reputation, if 
this fact was disclosed.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the details of the 
reasons for the inclusion of the Registrar’s post or any other beneficiary in the 
Gazette Notification should be clearly documented and apprised to the Committee. 
Scrutiny by Income Tax Department 
 
Paragraph 6 of PAC Report No. 80 (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
10.   The Committee observed that as per the Article VI (5) of the Headquarters’ Agreement, 
the persons enjoying the privileges and immunities enshrined in the Agreement shall be 
provided a special identity card by the protocol division of MEA which shall identify the 
holder in relation to appropriate authorities and certify that the holder enjoys the privileges 
and immunities in the agreement. The Committee felt that in case of non-issuance of any 
such special Identity Card, the tax exemption certificates issued by the SAU should have 
been considered void. The Committee note that there has been lack of vigilant scrutiny by 
the Income Tax Department in verifying the eligibility of individuals for tax exemptions and 

5 
 
acceptance of such tax certificates without consultation with MEA. The Committee also 
found that the MEA lagged in providing timely information to the Income Tax Department 
despite being aware of the status of the wrongly extended tax exemption. The Committee 
emphasized the need for more vigilant and thorough approach in scrutinizing tax exemption 
certificate applications, more so in case of international organizations. Consequent to 
issuance of the amended notification in 2021 by MEA removing the post of Registrar from 
enjoying the wrongly extended privileges and immunities, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the status of the recovery carried out by the Income Tax Department in this 
case. 
 
11. The MEA in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
“Ministry has taken up this matter with the Income Tax Department 
emphasizing the need for more vigilant and thorough approach in scrutinizing 
tax exemption certificate applications in case of international organizations. 
As regards the status of the recovery carried out by the Income Tax 
Department in this particular case, former Registrar has filed a Writ Petition 
on 30 April 2022 in the Delhi High Court against the Ministry’s amended 
notification of 13 May 2021. The Ministry has submitted its counter affidavit on 
15 October 2022. The matter was last listed on 21st May 2024 wherein the 
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has taken adjournment for filing rejoinder 
in the matter in response to the counter affidavits and now has been fixed for 
completion of pleadings in next hearing on 5th September 2024.” 
12. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 
“Ministry may apprise about the latest status to PAC.” 
 
13. The MEA in their Action Taken Notes have emphasized upon the need for more 
vigilant and thorough approach in scrutinizing tax exemption certificate applications 
in case of international organizations.  Regarding recovery of the due tax, the Action 
Taken Notes stated that the former Registrar has filed a Writ Petition on 30 April 2022 
in the Delhi High Court against the Ministry’s amended notification of 13 May 2021. 
The Ministry has submitted its counter affidavit on 15 October 2022.  The Committee 
were apprised that the matter was last listed on 21st May 2024 wherein the Learned 
Counsel for the petitioner has taken adjournment for filing rejoinder in the matter in 

6 
 
response to the counter affidavits and now has been fixed for completion of 
pleadings in next hearing on 5th September 2024. The latest status in the matter 
including the details of a foolproof mechanism developed so far should also be 
communicated to the Committee. 
Internal Audit Mechanism 
 
Paragraph 7 of PAC Report No. 80 (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
14. The Committee found that though there was a system of Internal Audit being 
conducted via independent auditor in the South Asian University, the University issued tax 
exemption certificates regularly while being aware of the ineligibility of the Registrar to 
receive such exemption from 2011-2020 i.e. even after audit made its observations. The 
Committee observed that a prudent attitude of the South Asian University towards the 
advice from MEA regarding the issuance of tax exemption certificates could have prevented 
substantial revenue loss to Government of India. The Committee strongly advised the MEA 
to liaise with SAU authorities and India’s representatives in their Board of Governors to 
pursue for strengthening of the existent Internal Audit Mechanism by extending its scope to 
cover critical financial and operational areas that affect the interests of the Host country. 
The Committee desire to be kept informed about the concrete actions taken by the Ministry 
and SAU in response to this recommendation. 
 
 
15. The MEA in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has emphasized on the University the need for strengthening its 
mechanism to check for irregularities in its functioning. The matter of undue Income 
Tax exemption by the former Registrar of South Asian University was investigated by 
the University. A Fact Finding Committee was constituted in January 2021 which 
submitted its report in March 2021. Based on the Committee report, the University 
stopped giving tax exemption certificates to former Registrar from the financial year 
2020-21 onwards. The University found the responsibility of former Registrar Dr. A.K. 
Malik (Retd. In July 2021), Mr. Wasim Ahmed (Official from Pakistan moved back to 
Pakistan in February 2018), Mr. KAD Pushpakeerthi (official from Sri Lanka moved 
back to Sri Lanka in March 2019) and Mr. Keshav Datt (under suspension since 04 

7 
 
August 2023). As all the responsible officials had left University thus SAU could not 
take any action on the responsible officials. The Ministry through the Governing 
Board has taken up the need to strengthen the existing internal audit mechanism of 
the University. Accordingly, the recent Governing Board meeting of SAU held on 18-
19 December 2023 in Kathmandu decided that a due process shall be initiated to 
engage an internationally reputed auditing firm for carrying out the audit of the 
University.” 
 
16. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 
“No further comments” 
 
17. The Ministry in their ATN have stated that the recent Governing Board meeting 
of SAU held on 18-19 December 2023 in Kathmandu decided that a due process shall 
be initiated to engage an internationally reputed auditing firm for carrying out the 
audit of the University. However, the ATN has not furnished details of the due 
process/mechanism for undertaking the audit of the University to make it foolproof. 
The Committee, therefore in no uncertain words recommend that the details of the 
new mechanism should be mentioned and the name of the new auditing firm should 
also be communicated to the Committee along with the mandate and ambit of 
activities carried out by it so far in terms of the purpose for which it has been 
established. 
 
******* 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee observe from the audit findings that in pursuance of 
the proposal to establish the South Asian University (SAU), a 
Headquarters’ Agreement was signed by the member nations of the South 
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) for providing world-
class facilities with a professional faculty to students and researchers 
drawn from the SAARC countries. To give effect to the Headquarters’ 
Agreement, South Asian University Act of 2008 was introduced by the 
Government of India vide which the President and other faculty members 
were to enjoy such privileges as the Central Government may notify under 
section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Communities) Act, 1947, 
which essentially pertain to the privilege of exemption from paying taxes on 
their salary. Audit observed that there was a violation of the SAU Act of 
2008 that was traced to the notification issued by the Ministry of External 
Affairs on January 15, 2009 for granting privileges i.e. exempting 
individuals holding notified offices from paying taxes on their salary, by 
erroneously including therein, the office of Registrar amongst the offices 
enjoying the privileges. As a result of the erroneous income tax amongst 
the offices enjoying the privileges. As a result of the erroneous income tax 
exemption granted to the Registrar, the exchequer suffered a lot of Rs. 
90.06 lakh as reported by the Audit. The issues contained in the Report 
have been examined by the Committee and commented upon suitably in 
the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 1 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action taken 
 

9 
 
Since the PAC Para No.1 is introductory, no comments of the Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments. 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 From the audit observation, the Committee find that the privileges 
were wrongly extended to the Registrar of the University vide the gazette 
notification issued in 2009.  The Committee also note that the reasons for 
inclusion of the post of Registrar in the Gazette notification were not on 
record. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that Government 
of India was required to make a gazette notification under the United 
Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 for extending the privileges 
to the University, the President and the members of the academic staff as 
envisaged under Article 14 of the SAU Act. As per the Ministry, the 
notification was issued on 15 January, 2009 after the due process followed 
by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) whereby the draft texts were 
vetted both by the L&T Division of MEA and the Ministry of Law and Justice 
before issuing the notification. The Committee note that the MEA first 
became aware of the error of including the office of Registrar amongst the 
offices enjoying the privileges in the gazette notification in 2011 when the 
MEA was approached for a diplomatic identity card and tax exemption 
certificate for its first Registrar who was appointed in 2011. The Committee 
are perplexed to note that an error crept in despite the notification being 
vetted by various departments of Government of India. The Committee are, 
therefore, of the view that the procedure followed for the issuance of 
gazette notification by the Ministry needs to be reviewed and strengthened, 

10 
 
more so for the notifications issued by the Ministry of External Affairs that 
may have International ramifications. The Committee in this regard feel it to 
be preferable to have a separate ‘Procedural Standards Cell’ for examining 
all aspects related to provisions being notified and published through a 
gazette notification so as to prevent such aberrations in the future. 
 
  
[Observations/Recommendation No. 2 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
  
Action Taken 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is establishing a separate 
‘Procedural Standards Cell’ for examining all aspects related to provisions 
being notified and published through a gazette notification so as to prevent 
such aberrations in the future. 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
Status of establishment of a separate ‘Procedural Standards Cell' may be 
apprised to PAC. 
 
Updated Action Taken 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has established a 
separate ‘Procedural Standards Cell’ under L&T division of the Ministry for 
examining all aspects related to provisions being notified and published 
through a gazette notification so as to prevent such aberrations in the 
future.  
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
  
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 

11 
 
 
. Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that the Inter-Governmental Agreement signed 
for the establishment of the South Asian University by the member nations 
of the SAARC states that the Taxation and social protection of the citizens 
of the Founding States employed by the University is regulated in 
accordance with the national legislation of the respective States. The 
Committee note from the audit observations that the incumbents to the post 
of Registrar were Indian nationals who are subject to the taxation laws of 
the Government of India. However, the submission made by the MEA that 
the anomaly in the Gazette Notification was a genuine error which occurred 
at the time of printing and that there is no mala fide intention on the part of 
any officer of the Ministry is neither convincing nor sufficient to completely 
rule out the possibility of complicity. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry investigate the matter in detail and take appropriate action on 
the officials who may be found responsible for the lapse. 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry investigated the matter 
once again in detail. However, it found that it was an error at the time of 
printing and there was no malafide intent on the part of any MEA official. In 
view of that, the Ministry could not find any of its officials who may be 
responsible for the lapse. 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments 
 

12 
 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The agreement for establishment of South Asian University envisaged 
that the Taxation of the citizens of the Founding states employed by the 
University shall be regulated in accordance with the national legislation of the 
respective states. Accordingly, the Registrar, being an Indian citizen, should 
have been subject to taxation in accordance with the rules of the home 
country. The Committee also understand that the Headquarters’ Agreement 
between the South Asian University (SAU) and Government of India requires 
that the University shall cooperate with the appropriate authorities of the host 
Government to prevent the occurrence of any abuse in connection with the 
privileges mentioned in the agreement. Consequent to appointment of the first 
Registrar by the South Asian University in 2011, the Committee note that the 
individual appointed to the post approached the MEA’s Protocol Division for a 
diplomatic identity card and tax exemption certificate which was denied. 
Further, the Committee find that the MEA informed the University of the 
anomaly and advised them to not to grant tax exemption to the Registrar and 
reiterated the same in 2012. However, notwithstanding MEA’s clear advice in 
2011 and 2012, the University kept issuing tax exempt certificates to the 
“Registrar” between 2011-20. According to the submission made by the 
Ministry, it had proceeded with the assumption that as a responsible 
international organization, the University would comply with the formal advice 
given to it by the host country (i.e. India). The Committee are surprised by that 
the South Asian University overlooked the advice of the Ministry of External 
Affairs and granted tax exemption certificate to the Registrar. This disregard 
led to a substantial loss of revenue to the Government of India amounting to 
Rs.90.06 lakhs from July 2011 to December, 2017. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry of External Affairs instead of merely 
assuming compliance should have followed up the matter appropriately. The 
Committee further opine that there should be constant consultation and 
coordination between international organizations and the host Government to 

13 
 
ensure effective management of situations involving international agreements 
and regulations thereby fostering a harmonious and mutually beneficial 
relationship for both sides. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 4 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry recognizes the need to have constant consultation and 
coordination with the South Asian University on various aspects of the 
functioning of the University in general and those involving the international 
agreements and regulations, in particular. Accordingly, the Ministry remains in 
touch with the South Asian University directly and through the Governing 
Board so that a harmonious and mutually beneficial relationship could be 
fostered. 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee observe that the Governing Board of the South Asian 
University resolved that the President of the University should approach the 
SAARC SG to seek an amendment of the HQ Agreement for extending the 
privilege to the Registrar of the University in 2012, subsequent to which 
SAARC Secretariat sought the view of the Member States but no follow up 
action was taken by the Ministry. While considering the complexities of 
international relations and the University’s reputation, it is essential that 

14 
 
matters of this nature are approached with appropriate seriousness and 
sensitivity, particularly by the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee 
acknowledge the right of the University to seek extension of privileges but 
nevertheless the University should have, in the interim suspended the 
issuance of tax exemption certificates and pursued the matter further 
through the Governing Body (GB) and SAARC Secretary General. The 
Committee, also note that the representatives of Government of India 
chose to remain silent when the GB in its third meeting resolved to 
recommend amendments in HQ agreement to include the Registrar for 
being given the benefits also when SAARC Secretariat sought comments 
on the issue. The Committee, in this regard, would emphasize on the 
aspect of shared responsibility of both the University and the Ministry, and 
urge for more effective coordination and proactive measures to prevent 
such irregularities in the future. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 5 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Recognizing its shared responsibility along with the University to prevent 
such irregularities in future, the Ministry instituted regular coordination 
meetings with the University for necessary effective coordination and 
preventive measures.  
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/202 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 

15 
 
The Committee observe that as per the Article VI (5) of the 
Headquarters’ Agreement, the persons enjoying the privileges and 
immunities enshrined in the Agreement shall be provided a special identity 
card by the protocol division of MEA which shall identify the holder in 
relation to appropriate authorities and certify that the holder enjoys the 
privileges and immunities in the agreement. The Committee feel that in 
case of non-issuance of any such special Identity Card, the tax exemption 
certificates issued by the SAU, should have been considered void. The 
Committee note that there has been lack of vigilant scrutiny by the Income 
Tax Department in verifying the eligibility of individuals for tax exemptions 
and acceptance of such tax certificates without consultation with MEA. The 
Committee also find that the Ministry of External Affairs lagged in providing 
timely information to the Income Tax Department despite being aware of 
the status of the wrongly extended tax exemption. The Committee 
emphasize the need for more vigilant and thorough approach in scrutinizing 
tax exemption certificate applications, more so in case of international 
organizations. Consequent to issuance of the amended notification in 2021 
by MEA removing the post of Registrar from enjoying the wrongly extended 
privileges and immunities, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
status of the recovery carried out by the Income Tax Department in this 
case. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 6 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken 
 
Ministry has taken up this matter with the Income Tax Department 
emphasizing the need for more vigilant and thorough approach in 
scrutinizing tax exemption certificate applications in case of international 
organizations. As regards the status of the recovery carried out by the 
Income Tax Department in this particular case, former Registrar has filed a 
Writ Petition on 30 April 2022 in the Delhi High Court against the Ministry’s 
amended notification of 13 May 2021. The Ministry has submitted its 

16 
 
counter affidavit on 15 October 2022. The matter was last listed on 4 March 
2024 and has been fixed for completion of pleadings in next hearing on 21 
May 2024. 
     
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may apprise about the latest status to PAC. 
 
Updated Action Taken 
 
As regards the status of the recovery carried out by the Income Tax 
Department in this particular case, former Registrar has filed a Writ Petition 
on 30 April 2022 in the Delhi High Court against the Ministry’s amended 
notification of 13 May 2021. The Ministry has submitted its counter affidavit 
on 15 October 2022. The matter was last listed on 21st May 2024 wherein 
the Learned Counsel for the petitioner has taken adjournment for filing 
rejoinder in the matter in response to the counter affidavits and now has 
been fixed for completion of pleadings in next hearing on 5th September 
2024. 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee find that the though there is a system of Internal Audit 
being conducted via independent auditor in the South Asian University, the 
University issued tax exemption certificates regularly while being aware of 
the ineligibility of the Registrar to receive such exemption from 2011-2020 

17 
 
i.e. even after audit made its observations. The Committee observe that a 
prudent attitude of the South Asian University towards the advice from MEA 
regarding the issuance of tax exemption certificates could have prevented 
substantial revenue loss to Government of India. The Committee strongly 
advise the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to liaise with SAU authorities 
and India’s representatives in their Board of Governors to pursue for 
strengthening of the existent Internal Audit Mechanism by extending its 
scope to cover critical financial and operational areas that affect the 
interests of the Host country. The Committee desire to be kept informed 
about the concrete actions taken by the Ministry and SAU in response to 
this recommendation. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 7 of 80th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Action taken 
 
The Ministry has emphasized on the University the need for 
strengthening its mechanism to check for irregularities in its functioning. 
The matter of undue Income Tax exemption by the former Registrar of 
South Asian University was investigated by the University. A Fact Finding 
Committee was constituted in January 2021 which submitted its report in 
March 2021. Based on the Committee report, the University stopped giving 
tax exemption certificates to former Registrar from the financial year 2020-
21 onwards. The University found the responsibility of former Registrar Dr. 
A.K. Malik (Retd. In July 2021), Mr. Wasim Ahmed (Official from Pakistan 
moved back to Pakistan in February 2018), Mr. KAD Pushpakeerthi (official 
from Sri Lanka moved back to Sri Lanka in March 2019) and Mr. Keshav 
Datt (under suspension since 04 August 2023). As all the responsible 
officials had left University thus SAU could not take any action on the 
responsible officials.  
 

18 
 
The Ministry through the Governing Board has taken up the need to 
strengthen the existing internal audit mechanism of the University. 
Accordingly, the recent Governing Board meeting of SAU held on 18-19 
December 2023 in Kathmandu decided that a due process shall be initiated 
to engage an internationally reputed auditing firm for carrying out the audit 
of the University. 
 
(Ministry of External Affairs OM.No. BI-732/02/2022 dated 13/06/2024) 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
No further comments 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide No. R.R./15-10/2023-24/62 dt. 
22.05.2024 
 
 
******************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED 
FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
NIL 
  
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
03 December, 2024              Chairperson, 
12 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                       Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 03rd DECEMBER 2024 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, the 3rd of December 2024, from 
1600 hrs to 1745 hrs in Committee Room '3', Block A, First Floor, Extension to 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri Jai Parkash 
5. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
6. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
8. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
11. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
15. Dr. K. Laxman 
16. Shri Praful Patel 
17. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
18. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
19. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
 

23 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following six draft reports may be 
taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
b) Action Taken by the Government on the  Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 80th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Loss of Revenue due to irregular tax exemption - South Asian 
University”; 
c) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
d) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
e) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; and 
f) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX. 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has 
been kept on record. 

24 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTIETH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
7 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 
Total: 7 
Percentage: 
100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which the Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
Para No. –  6 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 