 
 
31 
INDO-NEPAL BORDER ROAD PROJECT 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 89th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
 
PAC NO. 2425 
 
 
T H I R T Y  F I R S T  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their 89th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
                             
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  5  August, 2025 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   5 August, 2025 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
INDO-NEPAL BORDER ROAD 
PROJECT 

i 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                   
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................      
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................        
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) held 
on 25 July, 2025 
II   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Eighty-ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025-26) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. B aalu 
3. Dr.  Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai P arkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof . Sougat a Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr.  Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Si ngh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr.  K. Laxm an 
19. Shri Praf ul Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash                        -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania                       -                  Director 
3. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma              -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. 
 
Smt. Rinku Awasthi                           -                   Executive Officer 
  
 
  
 
 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty-first  Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in 
their 89th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Indo-Nepal Border Road Project”.  
 
2. The 89 th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  7 
February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The 
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
Sitting held on 25 July, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.   An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 89th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
                    
  
    25     July , 2025       
    03  Shravana,  1947 (Saka)  
                         
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
 
Chairperson, 
 Public Accounts Committee 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eighty-Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Indo-Nepal Border 
Road Project".  
 
2. The Eighty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 7 February, 2024.  It contained thirteen Observations/Recommendations. The 
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of Home Affairs, and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,10,13      
      
      Total:       9       
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 Para No. 11, 12      
         Total: 2 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para  No.  8, 9     
           
         Total:         2   
       Chapter -  V 
 

2 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The 
Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their 
Eighty-ninth Report. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs, on each 
of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-
Ninth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration and/or merit 
comments. 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish Action 
Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of the Report, positively within three months of the presentation of 
the Report to the Parliament. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2  
Status and Physical Progress of INBRP 
6. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
  
“The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that out of the estimated 
length of 1299.80 km , Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for encumbrance 
free length of 844.65 km  had been approved by High Level Empowered 
Committee and DPRs for length with encumbrance for a total of 455.15 km , 
which included 377.15km  in Uttar Pradesh and 118 Km  in Uttarakhand, 
were still awaited. The Committee also note that work had been completed 
for only 431.34 Km  and was under progress (Formation completed) for 
244.81 km  under the Project. While noting that for around 50 percent of 
encumbrance free length, either  the  work was in progress or was not taken 
up even after more than 10 years of the inception of the project, the 
Committee while expressing disappointment at the slow pace of the project 
recommend the Ministry to take proactive measures to expedite the 

3 
 
completion of works on these encumbrance free segments on priority basis 
with a view to achieving faster mobility of troops to dominate the sensitive 
border more effectively.” 
 
Action taken reply of Ministry 
7. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“The recommendation of the committee has been considered by the 
MHA and timely review of the remaining stretches in Indo border road 
project are being done to expedite its completion at the earliest.  
The executing agencies and the BGF are also directed to project the 
hindrances, if any, in achieving the targeted progress, so that, early solution 
for the same may be initiated by the MHA.  
Further, in MHA the border infrastructure projects are monitored 
through HLEC, headed by the Home Secretary and Border wise quarterly 
meeting of Steering Committee headed by the Secretary (Department of 
Border Management) besides monthly reviews at the level of Joint 
Secretary (BM-I). Hon’ble Home Minister also reviews the border-wise 
projects from time to time. The projects are also monitored through 
Fortnightly/Weekly progress reports received from the concerned 
stakeholders. The concerned Border Guarding Forces (User Department) 
are also be responsible for constantly monitoring and facilitating the projects 
through respective field formations. They also provide feedbacks on monthly 
basis and attend monitoring meetings.” 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
8. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
“PAC may be intimated about the following : 
(i) Status of Detailed Project Reports for length with encumbrance in 
 Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand 

4 
 
(ii) Status of work on encumbrance free segments; and 
(iii) Proactive measures taken by the Ministry to expedite the 
 completion of works” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
9. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
“With regard to the DPRs for the length with encumbrance in UP which is 
falling in the forest & wildlife areas, the preliminary estimates for the 325.09 
km  road length have been received from PWD Uttar Pradesh in MHA. 
Further, in the various meetings held with all stakeholders, it has been 
decided to construct a total of 07 bridges in areas falling under forest and 
wildlife, out of which the cost of 02 bridges would be borne by the State 
Govt. of UP and the cost of 05 bridges would be borne by the Govt. of India. 
The preliminary estimates of these 05 bridges have also been received from 
PWD, Uttar Pradesh. 
These preliminary estimates were forwarded to BFR cell, CPWD for its 
technical scrutiny. After their scrutiny, the matter will be placed before the 
competent authority for consideration and approval.  
With regard to the DPRs for the length with encumbrance in Uttarakhand, 
the stretches with encumbrance in Uttarakhand are falling in the 
submergence area of Pancheshwar Dam which is yet to be finalized. 
Regular meetings are being conducted in MHA with all stakeholders to 
finalize these stretches. In the meeting held in MHA on 30.04.2024, SSB 
was directed to submit a comprehensive proposal exploring different 
possibilities of the area. After the proposal containing the DPRs with 
multiple options was received, a meeting was held on 14.08.2024 in MHA 
under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (BM-I), MHA to deliberate on the 
said DPRs. In the meeting, it was decided that PWD Uttarakhand would 
assess the options in DPRs and provide their views from financial and 

5 
 
technical feasibility view to MHA and thereafter, an inspection of these 
stretches led by MHA with SSB and PWD Uttarakhand will be planned. 
 
The status of work in encumbrance free segments in Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar is as under : 
 
State Total nos. of 
approved 
encumbrance 
free stretches 
No. of 
completed 
encumbrance 
free 
stretches 
 
No. of 
Ongoing 
encumbrance 
free stretches 
Bihar  06 Nos. 04 Nos 02 Nos. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
12 Nos  09 Nos. 03 Nos. 
Uttarakhand   02 Nos. 02 Nos -- 
 
MHA holds various meetings with stakeholders to resolve the hindrances in 
completing the INBR project. The progress of ongoing stretches is regularly 
monitored in MHA through meetings and inspections at times. On the other 
hand, continuous attempts are being made in MHA for finalizing the length 
with encumbrance too in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.” 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that out of the 
estimated length of 1299.80 km , Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for 
encumbrance free length of 844.65 km  had been approved by High Level 
Empowered Committee and DPRs for length with encumbrance for a total of 
455.15 km , which included 377.15 km  in Uttar Pradesh and 118 Km  in 
Uttarakhand, were still awaited. It was also apparent to the Committee that 
work had been completed for only 431.34 Km  and was under progress 
(Formation completed) for 244.81 km  under the Project. The Committee 
while expressing disappointment at the slow pace of the project had 
recommended the Ministry to take proactive measures to expedite the 

6 
 
completion of works on these encumbrance free segments on priority basis 
with a view to achieving faster mobility of troops to dominate the sensitive 
border more effectively. 
 The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes had replied that the border 
infrastructure projects are monitored through HLEC (High Level Empowered 
Committee), headed by the Home Secretary and Border wise quarterly 
meeting of Steering Committee headed by the Secretary (Department of 
Border Management) besides monthly reviews at the level of Joint Secretary 
(BM-I). The Ministry also submitted that Hon’ble Home Minister also reviews 
the border-wise projects from time to time. The projects are also monitored 
through Fortnightly/Weekly progress reports received from the concerned 
stakeholders. The concerned Border Guarding Forces (User Department) are 
also responsible for constantly monitoring and facilitating the projects 
through respective field formations and provide feedbacks on monthly basis 
and attend monitoring meetings. 
Further, Audit had directed the Ministry to update the Committee about the 
status of length with encumbrances and encumbrance free segments and 
about the measures taken to expedite the completion of works.   
Accordingly, the Ministry further submitted that with regard to the DPRs for 
the length with encumbrance in UP which is falling in the forest & wildlife 
areas, the preliminary estimates for the 325.09 km  road length have been 
received from PWD Uttar Pradesh in MHA. Further, in the various meetings 
held with all stakeholders, it has been decided to construct a total of 07 
bridges in areas falling under forest and wildlife, out of which the cost of 02 
bridges would be borne by the State Govt. of UP and the cost of 05 bridges 
would be borne by the Govt. of India. The preliminary estimates of these 05 
bridges have also been received from PWD, Uttar Pradesh. These 
preliminary estimates were forwarded to BFR cell, CPWD for its technical 
scrutiny. After their scrutiny, the matter will be placed before the competent 
authority for consideration and approval. With regard to the DPRs for the 
length with encumbrance in Uttarakhand, the stretches with encumbrance in 

7 
 
Uttarakhand are falling in the submergence area of Pancheshwar Dam which 
is yet to be finalized. Regular meetings are being conducted in MHA with all 
stakeholders to finalize these stretches. In the meeting held in MHA on 
30.04.2024, SSB was directed to submit a comprehensive proposal exploring 
different possibilities of the area. After the proposal containing the DPRs 
with multiple options was received, a meeting was held on 14.08.2024 in 
MHA under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (BM-I), MHA to deliberate on 
the said DPRs. In the meeting, it was decided that PWD Uttarakhand would 
assess the options in DPRs and provide their views from financial and 
technical feasibility view to MHA and thereafter, an inspection of these 
stretches led by MHA with SSB and PWD Uttarakhand will be planned.  
 The Committee are satisfied with the reply provided by the Ministry 
and appreciate the fact that the Ministry had decided to construct bridges in 
forest areas. Further, the DPR for stretches of roads in the submergence 
area of the Pancheshwar Dam in Uttarakhand are also being looked into by 
PWD Uttarakhand. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
in this regard and expect the Ministry would set definite timelines for the 
completion of the project in these areas. 
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 8  
Special mechanism for strategic projects 
11. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note that under the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project, 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) were awaited for lengths with 
encumbrance for a total of 455.15 km , which includes 377.15km  in Uttar 
Pradesh and 118 Km  in Uttarakhand.  In Uttar Pradesh, road alignment is 
affected by Forest & Wildlife areas while in case of Uttarakhand, it is 
affected by Pancheshwar Dam on river Kali, which involves interest of both 
India and Nepal. Recognizing the strategic importance of projects ensuring 
national security with the development of border areas, the Committee 
strongly believe that a specialized approach is obligatory to ensure swift 
coordination and resolution of challenges, particularly in States, where road 

8 
 
alignments are intricately tied to Forest & Wildlife areas. With a view to 
streamline the decision-making process and accelerate the progress of 
these projects of vital nature, aligning with the broader objectives of national 
security and border development, the Committee opine and recommend 
that the Ministry may pursue the State Governments to use the single 
window clearance system invariably so that the statutory clearances and 
road alignments affected by Forest & Wildlife areas for the strategic projects 
such as the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project are not hindered and related 
issues are effectively addressed.” 
 
Action taken reply of Ministry  
12. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“MHA has a system of monthly meetings at the level of Joint Secretary (BM-
I) and Border wise quarterly Steering Committee meetings headed by 
Secretary (Department of Border Management) to discuss all pending 
issues including Land Acquisition, Forest Clearances (FC), Wildlife 
Clearances (WLC) etc. The Status of FC/WLC on Parivesh Portal of Ministry 
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change is regularly monitored.  
This Ministry has also recently taken up a few cases with Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change after their notification dated 
29.11.2023 regarding exemption as strategic linear project of national 
importance.” 
Vetting comments of Audit 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
“Although, this Ministry has informed about the existing system/procedure 
followed for the supervision of projects, however, the recommendation of 
the PAC to pursue the State Governments to use the single window 
clearance system invariably to address the related issues has not been 
addressed. The same may be furnished to the PAC.” 

9 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
14. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
“This Ministry is following the existing procedures as stipulated for land 
acquisition, forest & wildlife clearances. However, the recommendation of 
the committee has been noted for compliance.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report , while recognizing the 
strategic importance of projects ensuring national security with the 
development of border areas, recommended that the Ministry may pursue 
the State Governments to invariably use the single window clearance system 
so that the the statutory clearances and road alignments affected by Forest 
& Wildlife areas for the strategic projects such as the Indo-Nepal Border 
Road Project are not hindered. 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply said that MHA 
has a system of monthly meetings at the level of Joint Secretary (BM-I) and 
Border wise quarterly Steering Committee meetings headed by Secretary 
(Department of Border Management) to discuss all pending issues including 
Land Acquisition, Forest Clearances (FC), Wildlife Clearances (WLC) etc. The 
Status of FC/WLC on Parivesh Portal of Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change is regularly monitored. They also informed the Committee 
that they had taken up a few cases with Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change after their notification dated 29.11.2023 regarding exemption 
as strategic linear project of national importance. The Audit, in their vetting 
comments, asked the Ministry to furnish the status of the implementation of 
the single window clearance system.  
 The Ministry, in their updated Action Taken Reply said that they are 
following the existing procedures as stipulated for land acquisition, forest & 

10 
 
wildlife clearances and the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted for compliance.  
 The Committee are disappointed with the reply of the Ministry as it 
does not mention anything about the implementation of the single window 
clearance system. Despite being pointed out by Audit, the Ministry have not 
made any effort towards the streamlining of the system which may 
contribute to delays in the decision making process of the Indo-Nepal Border 
Road Project. The Committee desire that the Ministry may impress upon the 
State Government of UP and Uttarakhand to develop a single window 
clearance system. The Committee, therefore, emphasise and reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the single window clearance system may be 
implemented for statutory clearances like Land Acquisition, Forest 
Clearances, Wildlife Clearances etc. so that the strategic projects such as 
the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project are not hindered.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9  
Non-connectivity to Border Out Posts (BOPs) from the main alignment of 
proposed roads 
16. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note that out of 471 Border Out Posts (BOPs) established 
by SSB, 355 are connected by roads and on completion of Indo Nepal 
Border Project, 81 more BOPs will be connected. Out of 355 BOPs, 247 
BOPs are on the alignment of the main border road and the remaining 108 
BOPs are connected with the main Indo Nepal Border Road through other 
roads constructed under various schemes by Rural Engineering 
Organisation (REO) such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), 
Border Area Development Programme (BADP) etc. According to the 
Ministry, the original plan was not per se to connect the BOPs but to have a 
road close to the border. The Ministry added that the intent was to have a 
road close to BOPs where link roads and feeder roads can be planned later 

11 
 
on.  Further, a separate scheme was under process to provide link roads, 
foot tracks to remaining SSB BOPs and important patrolling routes. Taking 
note of the fact that SSB is performing its operational needs through BOPs 
on INB road and through connectivity of other roads for these BOPs, the 
Committee in no uncertain words recommend that the Ministry may 
undertake immediate action to finalize and execute the Scheme for 
providing link roads and foot tracks to remaining SSB Border Out Posts 
(BOPs), and important patrolling routes in a time-bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee.” 
 
Action taken reply of Ministry  
17. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
“At present, out of the total 734 BOPs of SSB on Indo-Nepal and Indo-
Bhutan Border, road connectivity exists in 426 BOPs. A fresh proposal 
containing link roads, foot tracks and staging camps along Indo-Nepal and 
Indo-Bhutan border is under consideration which aims at providing road 
connectivity to the remaining non-connected BOPs of SSB.” 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
18. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
“PAC may be apprised with the tentative timelines for finalization of the 
scheme for providing link roads and foot tracks to remaining 308 BOPs.” 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
19. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
“A consolidated proposal containing lateral & axial roads, foot tracks 
and staging camps along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders is under 
consideration in Ministry. As the proposal contains various components 
along both borders and projects large financial implications, thus it may take 

12 
 
reasonable time for its technical scrutiny and final approval by the 
competent authority.”  
Comments of the Committee 
 
20. The Committee, in their original Report, noted that out of 471 Border 
Out Posts (BOPs) established by SSB, 355 are connected by roads and on 
completion of Indo Nepal Border Project, 81 more BOPs will be connected. 
Out of 355 BOPs, 247 BOPs are on the alignment of the main border road 
and the remaining 108 BOPs are connected with the main Indo Nepal Border 
Road through other roads constructed under various schemes by Rural 
Engineering Organisation (REO) such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY), Border Area Development Programme (BADP) etc. The Committee, 
while taking note of the fact that SSB is performing its operational needs 
through BOPs on INB road and through connectivity of other roads for these 
BOPs, had recommended that the Ministry may undertake immediate action 
to finalize and execute the Scheme for providing link roads and foot tracks to 
remaining SSB Border Out Posts (BOPs) and important patrolling routes in a 
time-bound manner under intimation to the Committee.  
 The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, informed that out of the total 
734 BOPs of SSB on Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Border, road connectivity 
exists in 426 BOPs. A fresh proposal containing link roads, foot tracks and 
staging camps along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan border is under 
consideration which aims at providing road connectivity to the remaining 
non-connected BOPs of SSB. The Audit had observed that the tentative 
timelines for finalization of the Scheme for providing link roads and foot 
tracks to remaining 308 BOPs may be apprised to the Committee on Public 
Accounts.  
 Subsequently, the Ministry, in their updated Action Taken Notes, had 
submitted that, a consolidated proposal containing lateral & axial roads, foot 
tracks and staging camps along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders is 
under consideration in Ministry. As the proposal contains various 

13 
 
components along both borders and projects large financial implications, 
thus it may take reasonable time for its technical scrutiny and final approval 
by the competent authority.  
 The Committee note that the proposal has various components having 
large financial implications due to which its scrutiny and final approval will 
take time. The Committee regard this project as significant for the Seema 
Suraksha Bal and emphasise upon its timebound implementation. The 
Committee further impress upon the Ministry to make all out efforts for the 
prompt implementation of the project along the Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan 
borders. Therefore, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
done in the matter on a regular basis and would like to see the culmination of 
the project with road connectivity for all Border Out Posts which are crucial 
for national security. 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 11 
Irregular Release of Rs. 2.34 crores by MHA 
21. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note from the audit findings that as per the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU), the expenditure on shifting of utility services and 
forestation charges were to be borne by the State Governments. Scrutiny of 
records in MHA revealed that HLEC in its 45th meeting approved the revised 
estimates of three DPRs aggregating Rs. 195.81 crore and two DPRs 
aggregating Rs. 147.23 crore respectively, which included the charges of 
Utility Shifting and forestation aggregating Rs. 2.34 crore sent by UP 
Government. The approval of utilities shifting charges aggregating Rs. 2.34 
crore by MHA was thus, irregular. In this regard, the Ministry stated that the 
matter was deliberated in the Steering Committee meeting and PWD, UP 
requested that the extra sanction of Rs. 2.34 Crore be adjusted in the grant 
for next financial year. The Committee, in this regard, desire that an enquiry 
be instituted by the Ministry to ascertain the reasons for irregular release of 
Rs. 2.34 Crore. The Committee also desire that the Ministry issue necessary 

14 
 
instructions to strengthen the internal checks in the Ministry to avoid 
recurrence of such lapses in future.” 
 
Action Taken reply of the Ministry  
 
22. The Ministry  in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
“PWD UP has informed that there is a practice of making provision of utility 
shifting, land acquisition, afforestation etc. in DPRs of construction of road 
work in UP. The utility shifting was carried out on new 
construction/upgradation of old existing roads. The expenditure under utility 
shifting was incurred on the following departments: 
 
(i) UPPCL (Electric Pole shifting) 
 
(ii) UP Jal Nigam (Shifting of Handpumps) 
 
(iii) Forest Department (Afforestation) 
 
However, as per the MoU signed between Govt. of UP and MHA (Govt. of 
India), “PWD UP being the owner of the roads constructed under the 
project, will acquire the land, if necessary, required for the 
construction/upgradation/widening of roads and bear the cost thereof. PWD 
UP will also obtain the necessary clearances including forest/wildlife 
clearances on behalf of SSB/MHA, GoI, wherever required and make 
payment for the charges on account of Net Present Value (NPV) of land, 
compensatory afforestation etc. This also includes obtaining clearances, if 
any, from utility authorities related to telephone, water supply, electricity etc. 
PWD UP will also bear the cost of any regarding shifting of such utilities.” 
 
MHA vide its letter dated 11.01.2023 has already drawn attention of the then 
Chief Secretary, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh about the specific observation of the 
C & AG as contained in its Report no.  23 of 2021 on Performance Audit of 
Indo-Nepal Border Road Project concerning State of UP, to look into the 
matter personally and take appropriate corrective measures as suggested in 
the audit report as well as if required, disciplinary/administrative action 
against the officials/contractors responsible for the time and cost overrun of 
the project be taken.    
 
 It is mentioned here that PWD, UP vide letter no. 41INB/21INB/2013 dated 
20.05.2022 had informed that Rs. 22.13 Cr. was pending for payment for 
construction of Indo-Nepal Border Road project in District Maharajganj (UP). 
Accordingly, the said amount was adjusted in FY 2022-23 by deducting Rs. 
2.34 Cr and finally after the adjustment, Rs. 19.79 Cr. was released to PWD 

15 
 
UP vide this Ministry’s sanction order no. 11012/30/2022-BM-V dated 
06.09.2023.” 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
23. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“Ministry’s reply is silent on the following recommendations of the committee 
– 
(i) That an enquiry be instituted by the Ministry to ascertain the reasons 
for irregular release of Rs. 2.34 Crores 
(ii) To issue necessary instructions to strengthen the internal checks in 
the Ministry to avoid recurrence of such lapses in future” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 
24. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
 “The revised DPRs of the concerned stretches having the provision 
of Utility shifting were received in this Ministry in 2018 and technically 
scrutinized by BFR Cell, CPWD thereafter. The RDPRs were appraised by 
Technical Committee and 45th High Level Empowered Committee in 2018 
itself. The Administrative approval & Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) of the 
said stretches was also issued in 2018 with the provision of utility shifting 
contained in them.  
 Notably, after issuance of AA&ES of said stretches with revised estimates, 
the MoU between MHA and PWD, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh was finalized. The 
MoU was signed in the year 2021 which contained that charges for utility 
shifting would be borne by the State Govt.  MHA had also drawn 
attention of the then Chief Secretary, Uttar Pradesh with the request to take 
appropriate corrective measures and if required, disciplinary/administrative 
action against the officials responsible for cost overrun and delay in project.  
 It may also be noted that the irregularity of Rs. 2.34 Cr. has also been 
resolved and adjusted by this Ministry in the following manner : 

16 
 
 
“PWD, UP vide letter no. 41INB/21INB/2013 dated 20.05.2022 had 
informed that Rs. 22.13 Cr. was pending for payment for construction of 
Indo-Nepal Border Road project in District Maharajganj (UP). The 
irregularity amounting to Rs. 2.34 was adjusted in FY 2022-23 by deducting 
Rs. 2.34 Cr and finally after the adjustment, Rs. 19.79 Cr. was released to 
PWD UP vide this Ministry’s sanction order no. 11012/30/2022-BM-V dated 
06.09.2023”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee in their original Report had pointed out the irregular 
release of Rs. 2.34 crores by Ministry of Home Affairs. It was revealed that 
High Level Empowered Committee had approved the revised estimates of 
three Detailed Project Reports aggregating Rs. 195.81 crore and two DPRs 
aggregating Rs. 147.23 crore respectively which included the charges of 
Utility shifting and afforestation. The Committee observed that a separate 
sanction of Rs. 2.34 crore was therefore irregular. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that an enquiry be instituted by the Ministry to 
ascertain the reasons for irregular sanction of Rs. 2.34 crore and also to 
initiate measures to strengthen the internal control mechanism to avoid 
recurrence of such lapses in future.   
The Ministry in their ATN has explained that according to the MoU signed 
between Govt. of Uttar Pradesh and Ministry of Home Affairs (Govt. of India) , 
PWD UP would obtain clearances from utility authorities related to 
telephone, water supply, electricity etc. and will bear the cost of shifting of 
such utilities. Attention of the then Chief Secretary, Govt. of UP has already 
been drawn to  the observation of the C & AG as contained in its Report No. 
23 of 2021 on Performance Audit of Indo- Nepal Border Road Project. PWD, 
UP clarified that an amount of Rs. 22.13 crore was pending for payment for 
construction of Indo- Nepal Border Road Project in Maharajganj (UP) and Rs. 
2.34 crore got adjusted in that. Consequently, Rs. 19.79 crore was released 
to them. 

17 
 
  The Committee find that the reply of the Ministry is evasive and does 
not justify wrongful release of public funds. The mere fact that the funds 
have been deducted/adjusted from the payment due to the UP PWD does not 
absolve them of their responsibilities. The Committee recommended for 
institution of an enquiry to find out the reason behind irregular release of 
funds. Therefore, Committee would reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
institute an enquiry into the matter and issue necessary instructions to 
strengthen the internal checks in the Ministry to avoid recurrence of such 
lapses in future.  
 RECOMMENDATION  NO. 12  
Works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo-Nepal 
Border Road Project 
26. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee learn from the replies furnished by the Ministry that after the 
selection of this subject for detailed examination by the Committee, several 
pending works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo-
Nepal Border Road Project have since been completed or taken off in Uttar 
Pradesh. The works completed inter-alia include road in the district of 
Siddarthnagar from Aligarhwa to Ganwaria and Khunwa-Banganga-
Bhusaula, construction from Latahawa Ghat to Pakarhiwa via Karamaini, 
Ramnagar, Kakarahwa and Bajha, and pending work relating to the bridge on 
the Banganga river. Besides the work of channelization to bring the stream of 
the river, which has shifted, under the bridge is in progress. The Committee, 
while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministry pursuant to the 
constant push of the Committee, recommend that channelization work in 
areas where river streams have shifted may be completed in a time bound 
manner so as to expedite the overall completion of the Indo-Nepal Border 
Road Project.” 
 
 
 

18 
 
Action taken reply of Ministry 
 
27. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“The matter was taken up with PWD, UP and they have informed that the 
construction work of Banganga river bridge has already been completed. 
Due to meandering of river, it has been shifted westward 40-50 m from its 
normal course of flow. Approach road on east side of bridge has been 
completed upon surfacing (Black top). Approach road construction on west 
side is under progress. It is informed that remaining approach work will be 
completed in coming months.” 
Vetting comments of Audit 
28. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
 “PAC may be apprised with the current status along with the timelines for 
completion of the work.” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 
29. Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry is as under: - 
 “PWD UP was requested to furnish the current status in this matter and they 
have informed that the inspection of the Banganga river bridge was done in 
April 2024 by UP PWD and Project Manager of Bridge Corporation and it 
was decided that the span of bridge in westward side needs to be extended. 
The bridge corporation has framed and submitted the estimates of extended 
span of bridge to UP PWD which is under check by Bridge Wing of UP 
PWD.” 
 
 

19 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
30. The Committee in their Original Report had pointed out that several 
pending works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the 
Indo- Nepal Border Road Project had been completed in Uttar Pradesh. The 
works completed include the bridge on the Banganga river. The work of 
channelization to bring the stream of river, which has shifted, under the 
bridge was under progress. The Committee, while appreciating the initiatives 
taken by the Ministry pursuant to the constant push of the Committee, had 
recommended that channelization work in areas where river streams have 
shifted may be completed in a time bound manner so as to expedite the 
overall completion of the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project.  
 The Ministry had submitted in their Action Taken Reply that the 
construction work of Banganga river bridge had already been completed. 
Due to meandering of river, it has been shifted westward 40-50 m from its 
normal course of flow. They also informed the Committee that the approach 
road on east side of bridge has been completed and approach road 
construction on west side is under progress. They also updated the 
Committee that the remaining approach work will be completed in coming 
months. The Audit have observed that the Committee on Public Accounts 
may be apprised with the current status along with the timelines for 
completion of the work.  
 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in the updated Action Taken Notes have 
submitted that Public Works Department, Uttar Pradesh have informed that 
the inspection of the Banganga river bridge was done in April, 2024 by UP 
PWD and Project Manager of Bridge Corporation and it was decided that the 
span of bridge in westward side needs to be extended.  The Bridge 
Corporation has framed and submitted the estimates of extended span of 
bridge to UP PWD which is under check by Bridge Wing of UP PWD. 
 The Committee are dissatisfied with the reply submitted by the 
Ministry as it does not provide specific answer to the Observations of the 

20 
 
Committee. The Ministry have not replied about the progress in 
channelization of the river stream and have not provided any timeline about 
the completion of the same. Further, the estimates of the extended span of 
the bridge has been submitted by Bridge Corporation which is being 
checked by the Bridge Wing of UP PWD. The Committee reiterate their 
recommendation and would like to be apprised of the current status of the 
channelisation as well as the construction of the extended span of the 
bridge. The Committee also press upon the Ministry to speed up the work 
and complete it in a time bound manner so as to expedite the overall 
completion of the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project. 
 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
Indo-Nepal Border Road Project  
The Committee note that Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) approved in 
November, 2010, the proposal of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for construction 
/ upgradation of 1377 km  of strategic border roads along Indo-Nepal Border 
(INB), to enable the SSB to dominate the sensitive border effectively, in the 
States of Bihar (564km ), Uttar Pradesh (640 km ) and Uttarakhand (173 km ) at a 
total estimated cost of Rs. 3853 Crore with a timeframe of five years i.e., by 
March 2016. Public Works Department (PWD) /Road Construction Department 
(RCD) of State Govts of Bihar, UP and Uttarakhand were the executing agencies. 
While the cost of construction was to be borne by Central Government, State 
Governments had to bear the cost of land, ensure wildlife and forest clearances, 
other statutory clearances and look after maintenance of roads. The Committee 
also note from the Audit observation that the project could not be completed by 
March 2016 due to delays in acquisition of land and obtaining of environment, 
forest and wildlife clearances by the three States. Therefore, extension of time 
was given by the CCS in February, 2018 up to 31.12.2019 for completion of those 
ongoing works which were free from encumbrance and up to 31.12.2022 for 
completion of balance work involving land with encumbrance. High Level 
Empowered Committee (HLEC) of MHA which is headed by Union Home 
Secretary empowered by CCS to consider any change in the projects in the time 
and cost estimates within overall ceilings sanctioned by CCS in December, 2019, 
further extended the timeline up to 31.12.2022 for the whole project i.e., 
encumbrance free stretches and stretches with encumbrance.  
 

22 
 
The Committee, while noting from the submission of the Ministry that based 
on the recommendation of Technical Committee, the timelines, as approved by 
HLEC in December, 2019/ January, 2021, have been further extended for 
encumbrance free and encumbered stretches separately are constrained to 
observe that a strategically important project has been delayed due to lack of 
proper survey and planning at the initial stages. In light of strategic significance of 
the project, aimed at enhancing troop mobility, controlling anti-national activities, 
and facilitating border area development, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that swift resolution of issues involved and timely completion of this 
project is imperative for bolstering national security and ensuring effective border 
management. The Committee while hoping that the work on the encumbrance 
free stretches would have been completed within the timelines desire to be 
apprised of the details of the completed and the ongoing projects and therefore, 
recommend that earnest efforts should be taken to ensure completion of the other 
stretches within the revised timelines. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the concrete steps taken in this regard mentioning inter alia the details of 
strategic initiatives taken till now to avert any potential impact on law and order in 
border areas due to delays in the execution of the Indo Nepal Border Road 
Project. 
 
(SI. No. 01; Para 01 of the 89th Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
         The Indo-Nepal Border Road project was conceptualized in the year 2006 
and in-principle approval of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) was obtained in 
the year 2010. Powers were given to High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC), 
under the chairmanship of Union Home Secretary to consider and approve the 
variation in length, cost estimates, alignment, inter-se change in time schedule.  
The stretch-wise DPRs were approved by various HLECs. However, in the 
meantime, the New Land Acquisition Act, 2013 came in force w.e.f. 01.01.2014, 

23 
 
which hampered the project to a large extent and also necessitated to approach 
CCS and accordingly, CCS in 2018 empowered HLEC to consider any change in 
the projects in the time and cost estimates within overall ceiling sanction by CCS.  
The state-wise status of completed & undergoing projects is as under : 
 
State Total approved 
stretches 
Completed 
stretches 
Ongoing stretches 
Bihar 17 Nos 07 Nos 10 Nos. 
Uttar Pradesh 12 Nos  09 Nos. 03 Nos. 
Uttarakhand   02 Nos. 02 Nos -- 
 
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) is the dedicated Border Guarding Force 
deployed along Indo-Nepal Border. It safeguards the security of the border area 
and promote sense of security among the people living in border area. SSB on an 
average conducts 1100 nakas& 1150 patrolling on daily basis. Through Integrated 
check posts, Border Interaction teams, Anti-Human Trafficking Unions, Rescue & 
Relief Team, Small Action Teams and with the help of technical surveillance 
through CCTVs, Face Recognition system (FRS), Automatic number plate reader 
(ANPR), X-Ray Baggage Inspection System (X-BIS), the SSB ensures effective 
domination at Indo-Nepal Border. To keep a check on trans-border crimes, 
smuggling and other illegal activities on those areas where border roads are in 
progress / yet to be completed, SSB conducts patrolling on foot.  
 
Vetting comments of Audit  
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 
 PAC may be intimated about the following : 
(i) Revised timelines set for completion of the ongoing stretches; 
(ii) Expected timeline of completion of the ongoing stretches; and 

24 
 
(iii) Efforts taken by Ministry to complete the stretches within the revised 
timeline 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 As per the inputs provided by the concerned executing agencies on the 
expected timelines and the revised timelines as approved by HLECs from time to 
time, the timelines as on date are as under: 
 
Uttarakhand 
Timelines Encumbrance free stretches 
(Only a bridge of length 690 
meters) 
 
Stretches with 
encumbrance 
Revised timelines 
approved 
30.06.2024 NA 
Expected timelines 31.10.2025 NA 
Uttar Pradesh 
Timelines Encumbrance free stretches 
(03 nos. of stretches ongoing) 
 
Stretches with 
encumbrance 
Revised timelines 
approved 
31.03.2024 NA 
Expected timelines 31.10.2024 NA 
Bihar 
Timelines Encumbrance free stretches 
(02nos. of stretches ongoing) 
Stretches with 
encumbrance 
(10nos. of stretches 
ongoing) 
 
Revised timelines 
approved 
30.06.2024 31.12.2024 
Expected timelines 
 
31.01.2025 30.06.2025 
 

25 
 
The timely review of the ongoing stretches under the Indo-Nepal Border 
Road project is being done at the level of Joint Secretary (BM-I), MHA in monthly 
review meetings and at the level of Secretary (BM), MHA in Border-wise quarterly 
meetings of Steering Committee. The status of necessary clearances to be 
obtained and the progress report of each ongoing stretch provided by the 
executing agencies are assessed during the review meetings. The executing 
agencies are also requested to project their hindrance, if any, in completing the 
project within the approved timelines by HLEC. 
The inspections of the stretches are also being undertaken by Project 
monitoring unit of MHA as well as senior officials of MHA & CPWD on time to time 
basis.  
 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER 2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
Status and Physical progress of INBRP : 
 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that out of the estimated 
length of 1299.80 km , Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for encumbrance free 
length of 844.65 km  had been approved by High Level Empowered Committee 
and DPRs for length with encumbrance for a total of 455.15 km , which included 
377.15km  in Uttar Pradesh and 118 Km  in Uttarakhand, were still awaited. The 
Committee also note that work had been completed for only 431.34 Km  and was 
under progress (Formation completed) for 244.81 km  under the Project. While 
noting that for around 50 percent of encumbrance free length, either  the  work 
was in progress or was not taken up even after more than 10 years of the 
inception of the project, the Committee while expressing disappointment at the 
slow pace of the project recommend the Ministry to take proactive measures to 
expedite the completion of works on these encumbrance free segments on 

26 
 
priority basis with a view to achieving faster mobility of troops to dominate the 
sensitive border more effectively. 
 
(SI. No. 02; Para 02 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The recommendation of the committee has been considered by the MHA 
and timely review of the remaining stretches in Indo border road project are being 
done to expedite its completion at the earliest.  
The executing agencies and the BGF are also directed to project the 
hindrances, if any, in achieving the targeted progress, so that, early solution for the 
same may be initiated by the MHA.  
 
Further, in MHA the border infrastructure projects are monitored through 
HLEC, headed by the Home Secretary and Border wise quarterly meeting of 
Steering Committee headed by the Secretary (Department of Border Management) 
besides monthly reviews at the level of Joint Secretary (BM-I). Hon’ble Home 
Minister also reviews the border-wise projects from time to time. The projects are 
also monitored through Fortnightly/Weekly progress reports received from the 
concerned stakeholders. The concerned Border Guarding Forces (User 
Department) are also be responsible for constantly monitoring and facilitating the 
projects through respective field formations. They also provide feedbacks on 
monthly basis and attend monitoring meetings. 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 
 PAC may be intimated about the following : 

27 
 
(i) Status of detailed project report for length with encumbrance in Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
(ii) Status of work on encumbrance free segments; and 
(iii) Proactive measures taken by the Ministry to expedite the completion of 
works 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
  
 With regard to the DPRs for the length with encumbrance in UP which is 
falling in the forest & wildlife areas, the preliminary estimates for the 325.09 km  
road length have been received from PWD Uttar Pradesh in MHA. Further, in the 
various meetings held with all stakeholders, it has been decided to construct a total 
of 07 bridges in areas falling under forest and wildlife, out of which the cost of 02 
bridges would be borne by the State Govt. of UP and the cost of 05 bridges would 
be borne by the Govt. of India. The preliminary estimates of these 05 bridges have 
also been received from PWD, Uttar Pradesh. 
 
These preliminary estimates were forwarded to BFR cell, CPWD for its 
technical scrutiny. After their scrutiny, the matter will be placed before the 
competent authority for consideration and approval.  
 
With regard to the DPRs for the length with encumbrance in Uttarakhand, 
the stretches with encumbrance in Uttarakhand are falling in the submergence 
area of Pancheshwar Dam which is yet to be finalized. Regular meetings are being 
conducted in MHA with all stakeholders to finalize these stretches. In the meeting 
held in MHA on 30.04.2024, SSB was directed to submit a comprehensive 
proposal exploring different possibilities of the area. After the proposal containing 
the DPRs with multiple options was received, a meeting was held on 14.08.2024 in 
MHA under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (BM-I), MHA to deliberate on the 
said DPRs. In the meeting, it was decided that PWD Uttarakhand would assess 
the options in DPRs and provide their views from financial and technical feasibility 

28 
 
view to MHA and thereafter, an inspection of these stretches led by MHA with SSB 
and PWD Uttarakhand will be planned. 
 
The status of work in encumbrance free segments in Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar is as under : 
 
State Total nos. of 
approved 
encumbrancefree 
stretches 
No. of completed 
encumbrance 
free stretches 
 
No. of Ongoing 
encumbrance free 
stretches 
Bihar  06 Nos. 04 Nos 02 Nos. 
Uttar Pradesh 12 Nos  09 Nos. 03 Nos. 
Uttarakhand   02 Nos. 02 Nos -- 
 
MHA holds various meetings with stakeholders to resolve the hindrances in 
completing the INBR project. The progress of ongoing stretches is regularly 
monitored in MHA through meetings and inspections at times. On the other hand, 
continuous attempts are being made in MHA for finalizing the length with 
encumbrance too in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.  
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER 2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
Approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)  
The Committee also note from the audit observation that the approval of 26 
DPRs costing Rs. 2634.91 crore by High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) 
without ensuring availability of land and requisite clearances resulted in time and 
cost overruns. In view of the inordinate delay in the completion of the INB Project 

29 
 
due to various factors like land acquisition and other statutory clearances, the 
Committee are constrained to observe that these delays could have been 
avoided had the HLEC taken into consideration the land acquisition and 
clearances issues that might crop up in the execution process, prior to giving 
approval to this Project. The Committee, therefore, hope that learning from the 
past, necessary approvals shall be obtained in advance before approving the 
DPRs. 
(SI. No. 03; Para 03 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The observation of the Committee has been taken care of while approving 
further DPRs and for remaining length in CCS approved Indo Nepal Border Road 
Project in Uttar Pradesh, the land acquisition work is in progress and obtaining 
NOC for stretches falling in forest & Wildlife areas is also under progress.  
MHA has formulated the guidelines on creating infrastructure under  
“Border Infrastructure and Management” (BIM) scheme in October 2022, under 
which, it has directed executing agencies to take up the construction work, 
preferably in EPC mode as far as possible and award construction contracts after 
90% of the land acquisition/possession as per GFR, 2017 and instructions as 
updated from time to time. 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 
The status of land acquisition and obtaining NOC for stretches falling in 
forest & wildlife areas may be furnished to the Committee. 
 

30 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 The land acquisition in all the approved stretches has been achieved except 
for 03 km  in Uttar Pradesh and 2.5 Km  in Bihar. Further, none of the approved 
stretches were falling in the forest and wildlife areas and thus, there was no 
requirement to obtain NOC for construction in forest & wildlife areas. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER 2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
Delay in Acquisition of land 
The Committee learnt during the course of their examination that under the 
Indo Nepal Border Road Project, the State Governments were responsible for 
acquisition of land. Audit highlighted that the process of acquisition of land was 
very slow and the delays in acquiring land led to cost and time over run and 
litigation with contractors. Audit pointed out that while the project was conceived 
in 2006 in the Ministry, the change in Land Acquisition Act was under 
consideration in Parliament since 2007. After the conceptualization of the project 
in the year 2006, in- principle approval of Cabinet was obtained for the same in 
the year 2010 only and no mitigation measures were taken up by the Ministry in 
anticipation of passing of New Land Act. In this regard, the Ministry submitted that 
although the Act was under consideration in the Parliament since the year 2007, 
it came in force w.e.f. 01.01.2014 only and without final shaping, passing and 
publication of any Act, its impact could not be assessed and therefore, while 
taking the approval of Cabinet in year 2010, no mitigation measures were taken 
up by the Ministry in anticipation of passing of New Land Act. The Committee do 
not find the reply of the Ministry plausible as before conceptualisation of any 
project, a detailed feasibility study and due diligence must be undertaken 
encompassing all prevailing and foreseeable scenarios, with a view to bringing 
forth an action plan for the project.   

31 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that a detailed note on the feasibility study 
conducted before mooting the proposal for INBR project be furnished to the 
Committee at the earliest.    
 
(SI. No. 04; Para 04 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
 
              The Department of Border Management of MHA called for a 
comprehensive proposal regarding the development of roads, which are of 
operational and strategic significance to the SSB in the Indo-Nepal and Indo-
Bhutan borders in the year 2006. 
          The proposal of SSB was deliberated at in several meetings at various 
levels with all stakeholders. After deliberation, the proposal was modified at 
different stages. The modifications in alignments were discussed & finalized in 
consultations with all stakeholders. Finally, it was decided to obtain in-principle 
approval of CCS for preparation of DPR in the year 2010.  It was also submitted 
before CCS that the physical components and the financial projections are 
preliminary & indicative in nature and are likely to change after finalization of DPR.  
 After in-principal approval of CCS in the year 2010, DPRs based on the 
actual site verification, alignment etc. were finalized and submitted by the 
concerned executing agencies i.e., PWD / Road Construction Department of the 
concerned State Govts for Border Roads falling in the respective State. The DPRs 
submitted were technically examined and placed before the empowered HLEC for 
consideration / approval.   
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  

32 
 
Ministry’s reply is silent on the detailed note on the feasibility study 
conducted before mooting the proposal on Indo-Nepal Border Road Project. The 
same may be furnished to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 After the conceptualization of project in 2006, various meetings were held to 
refine and make modifications in the proposal as per the requirements projected by 
all stakeholders. Finalization of alignment of the stretches in all concerned states 
was also done in consultation with all stakeholders.  
After the grant of in-principal approval by CCS in 2010, the DPRs were 
submitted by executing agencies and were technically examined by the Technical 
Committee (TC) headed by DG, CPWD. Thereafter, the DPRs were placed before 
High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) for consideration. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
Delay in Acquisition of land  
 
As regards the action being taken for land acquisition by State 
Governments, the Committee have been informed that while UP Government 
was to complete the acquisition of remaining 05 Km  upto March 2023, the Bihar 
Government was holding meetings to acquire the remaining stretch of 11.5 Km s. 
The Committee while hoping that State Government of Uttar Pradesh has 
completed the land acquisition expect to be apprised of the details thereof. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress made by the Bihar 
Government in acquiring the remaining stretches.The Committee wish to point 
out that substantial time has already lapsed in the matter and therefore further 
delays should be avoided to obviate fresh litigations by the stakeholders. The 
Committee also desire that all pending issues with the stakeholders may be 

33 
 
resolved amicably and expeditiously to ensure completion of the Project as per 
schedule and they be informed of the outcome of the concrete measures taken in 
the regard. 
 
(SI. No. 05; Para 05 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action taken by Ministry 
The pending land acquisition case and progress of the INBR project are 
regularly monitored in the monthly review meeting in MHA for its expeditious and 
amicable disposal. 
The matter was taken up with the PWD, UP and they have informed that 
under the Indo Nepal Border Road Project in district Siddharthnagar, land 
acquisition of 02 Km  out of total remaining 05 Km  has been done with mutual 
consent and the rest 3.0 Km  land is being acquired through Land Acquisition Act, 
2013 by special land acquisition officers, Siddharthanagar.  
It is also informed by PWD UP that the Notification-II have been published 
for Naugarh Tahsil (0.70 km ) for the package of MalghaiyaHarbanspur Road of 
length 28.90 Km  and for Shohratgarh tahsil (2.30 Km ) for the package of 
construction of Malghaiya Harbanspur Road of length 31.35 Km , the Notification II 
will be published soon. After completion of the land acquisition work which is 
expected to be completed by July 2024, the remaining work will be expedited at 
the earliest possible.  
In the case of Bihar, it is informed by the RCD, Bihar that the Indo-Nepal 
Border Road project passes through seven districts in the state of Bihar, i.e., West 
Champaran, East Champaran, Sitamarhi, Madhubani, Supaul, Araria& Kishanganj. 
Out of seven districts, land acquisition (LA) is completed in 06 districts except in 
East Champaran where LA for 2.5 Km  length is under progress. 
 

34 
 
Vetting comments of Audit  
 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
PAC may be apprised with the current status of acquisition of land of 03 km  
in Uttar Pradesh and 2.5 Km  in Bihar.  
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 
 As informed by PWD UP, the work on acquiring 03 km  of land is under 
progress in district Siddharthanagar which is expected to be completed soon.  
 Further, the RCD, Bihar has informed that the work of land acquisition (LA) 
on 2.5 km  land in District East Champaranhas been held up due to public protest. 
The work of LA has been taken up with the district administration which is in the 
process of resolution. 
 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER 2024) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
 
Issues related to Forest Clearance 
 
The Committee note that as of March 2021, forest/wildlife clearances were 
still awaited in respect of Uttar Pradesh. Uttar Pradesh Public Works Department 
(PWD) submitted several proposals for forest and wildlife clearance to the Forest 
Department during the period from October 2013 to April 2018. The deficiencies 
in these proposals submitted by UP PWD led to further delay in forest/wild life 
clearance. Delays in obtaining forest/wildlife clearance also impacted the 
preparation of DPRs and the eventual construction of roads in a timely manner. 
While apprising the Committee about awaited Forest/Wildlife clearances, the 

35 
 
Ministry informed that on account of non-finalisation of proposed Pancheshwar 
Dam, Uttar Pradesh has 299 km  while Uttarakhand has 118 kilometres of 
Forest/Wildlife clearances pending. Regarding forest clearances in Uttar Pradesh, 
it has been informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has taken up the 
issue and a team comprising of SSB officials, Forest officials (UP), PWD (UP), 
BFR Cell (CPWD) and MHA had visited the stretches and based on the findings, 
a Secretary level meeting was held with Wildlife Institute of India (WII) & other 
stake holders. However, there has been a divergence of views as Wildlife 
Institute of India has proposed for Flyover on 08 places and change in alignment 
at 05 places while MHA has sought minimal requirement of passageway for SSB 
personnel acceptable to both SSB and Wildlife Authorities with required mitigation 
measures. In this regard, while recognizing the paramount significance of Indo-
Nepal Border Road Project, the Committee are of the considered view and in no 
unequivocal terms recommend that the matter be taken up afresh in wake of the 
urgency of the requirement of patrolling along the border and the importance of 
Forest/ wildlife preservation concerns for bringing out an effective and acceptable 
solution. The Committee are also of the view that the existing fire lines near 
border roads in the wildlife areas, wherever roads cannot be built due to Forest/ 
wildlife concerns, may be used to ensure seamless connectivity. In view of the 
fact that statutory clearances will be obtained by the Uttarakhand Government 
only after finalization of proposed Pancheshwar Dam between India and 
Nepal,the Committee would like to be apprised of the updates of action being 
taken by the two Governments in this matter. The Committee would, here, insist 
that efforts should be expedited to prevent undue delay in the completion of the 
strategic Project. 
(SI. No. 06; Para 06 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
(A) Action taken by MHA for forest and wildlife clearances in UP (299 Km ): 

36 
 
It is submitted that in UP, WII had suggested 13 mitigation measures for 
these stretches, however, the same were found to be cost prohibitive. Therefore, a 
team consisting of members from MHA and other stakeholders conducted a field 
inspection on these stretches in January 2023 and it was also decided to use 
existing fire lines/forest road in the wildlife areas, wherever roads cannot be built 
due to Forest/ wildlife concerns and accordingly, PWD UP was requested to 
prepare a modified alignment plan, which after approval of SSB, was to be placed 
before State Forest & Wildlife board.  
To expedite this matter, Secretary, M/o EF&CC was requested to convene a 
meeting with WII (Dehradun), Forest Department (UP) and other stakeholders. In 
the meeting convened on 22.05.2023 in M/o EF&CC, a consensus on the 13 
mitigation measures (MMs) proposed by the WII was arrived, according to which, 
08 MMs of WII were accepted and in 04 MMs, the alternatives proposed by MHA 
were accepted and the remaining 01 MM was decided to be dropped.  
Further, during the meeting under the Secretary (BM), MHA, representative 
of WII expressed reservation regarding requirement of 02 flyovers of length 0.5 Km  
and 0.7 Km  at Basanta Corridor-II at Sohna and Raghunagar BOP respectively 
citing the protection of Elephant & Rhino Corridors. The said request of WII was 
considered and accepted by MHA and State govt. of UP was requested to bear the 
cost of construction of these two flyovers, to which Govt. of UP later agreed. 
It is informed by PWD UP that the proposals for forest/wildlife clearances 
have been uploaded on Parivesh Portal -II of forest department. The joint survey 
work for counting of trees, marking of trees, marking of alignment etc. of road 
alignment under forest/wildlife by team of UP PWD, SSB & Forest Officials has 
been completed in 05 districts. Rest in 01 district i.e., Balrampur, the survey work 
is in progress. After receipt of survey report of Balrampur District, the details of 
these stretches will be uploaded on Parivesh Portal for FC/WL Clearances. 
 

37 
 
(B) Action taken by MHA for finalizing stretches falling in the submergence 
area of Pancheshwar Dam (118 Km ): 
It is informed by Ministry of Jal Shakti that Pancheshwar Multipurpose 
project is a bilateral project between India and Nepal which is still under discussion 
between both the countries however the Full Reservoir Level (FRL) of 
Pancheshwar Dam has been agreed upon as 680 m.  
The matter was reviewed in review meetings held regularly in MHA with 
concerned stakeholders. As per the decision taken in the review meetings held in 
MHA on 14.11.2023 and 09.01.2024, a team constituting members from SSB, 
Uttarakhand PWD and Central Water Commission (CWC) was directed to visit & 
prepare a tentative alignment of road stretches along INB above/beyond the 
submergence region of the Pancheshwar Dam region in Uttarakhand.  
Accordingly, a report containing the said tentative alignment was provided 
to this Ministry by SSB, which was reviewed in the meeting held in MHA on 
30.4.2024 and SSB has been directed to submit a comprehensive proposal 
exploring different possibilities of the area. After receipt of details / cost estimates 
further steps will be taken to expedite this strategic stretch of Pancheshwar dam.  
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 The latest status of the project may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 
(i) Updated Action taken by MHA for forest and wildlife clearances in UP (299 
Km ): 

38 
 
In addition to the above information contained in the point (A) of MHA’s 
Action taken on this observation, as per inputs provided by PWD, UP, the joint 
survey for counting of trees, marking of trees and marking of alignment, etc. of the 
proposed roads have been completed in all districts. The data of survey has been 
uploaded on Parivesh-II portal for obtaining NOC from the forest/wildlife 
department. 
 
(ii) Updated Action taken by MHA for finalizing stretches falling in the submergence 
area of Pancheshwar Dam (118 Km ): 
 In addition to the above information contained in the point (B) of MHA’s 
Action taken on this observation, it is informed that SSB submitted a proposal 
containing 04 DPRs for the three stretches namely Rupaligarh to Pancheshwar (35 
Km ), Pancheshwar to Jauljibi (with two options- 92 Km  & 80 Km ) and 
Pancheshwar to Baltari (30 Km ). A meeting was held on 14.08.2024in MHA under 
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (BM-I), MHA to deliberate on the said DPRs. 
In the meeting, it was decided that PWD Uttarakhand would assess the options in 
DPRs and provide their views from financial and technical feasibility view to MHA 
and thereafter, an inspection of these stretches led by MHA with SSB and PWD 
Uttarakhand will be planned. 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER 2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
Extra Financial Liability 
 
Regarding incurrence of extra financial liability over and above the 
sanctioned cost of the Project, the Committee learn from the submission of the 
Ministry that no cost overrun above the overall cost of the project as approved by 
CCS in the year 2010 was incurred. The Committee however, note that on the 
contrary, the State Government of Bihar has submitted in its written replies that 

39 
 
there has been a cost overrun of Rs 772.69 crore, State Government of 
Uttarakhand stated that there is cost overrun due to extra 18% GST. In view of 
the replies of the State Governments, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the justification of the Ministry with regard to the matter of cost overrun incurred 
by the State Governments vis-à-vis the view taken by the Ministry. 
 
(SI. No. 07; Para 07 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The Indo-Nepal Border Road (INBR) project was accorded in-principle 
approval by CCS in 2010 for a total length of 1377 Km  in the States of Bihar (564 
Km ), UP (640 Km ) and Uttarakhand (173 Km ) with the total cost of Rs. 3,853 
Crores. In 2018, CCS revised the length of INBR project to 1299.80 Km  (Bihar- 
552.27 Km , UP- 574.53 Km  and Uttarakhand- 173 Km ). 
 
However, the actual length of DPRS as approved by various HLECs under 
this INBR project is 844.42 Km  (Bihar- 554.07 Km , UP- 235.35 Km  and 
Uttarakhand- 55 Km ) with the total cost of Rs. 3523.31 Crores. 
Thereafter, due to new Land Acquisition Act, 2013, land acquisition got 
delayed and indexation of price got varied which resulted in increase in original 
cost approved by various HLECs. In between, the rate of GST was also increased 
from 12% to 18% which is another factor that contributed to the increment in the 
original cost approved by various HLECs. Further, in some states due to massive 
rain, heavier cross section / protection work etc. was required to be included.  
In the State of Bihar also, due to delay in land acquisition (LA) after passing 
of New Land Acquisition Act, 2013, change in GST rates, price escalation as per 
contract clause and also due to massive floods, heavier components in the cross 
sections were needed to be included thereby increasing the cost. Moreover, due to 
delay in land acquisition, the contractors of Bettiah, Sitamarhi &Madhubani refused 

40 
 
to work on old rates and requested for foreclosure of the contract. Hence, prior to 
going for re-tender, the estimates were revised on current prevailing rates at that 
time. The revised cost proposals were submitted by RCD, Bihar, which were 
examined technically by BFR Cell, CPWD and wherever needed placed before the 
Revised Cost Committee (RCC) for its consideration as per rule. After considering 
the recommendations of these committees, placed before the empowered HLEC, 
which have considered each individual proposal on merit and approved the same 
from time to time to expedite the strategic INBR Project.  
In the state of Uttarakhand, a total length of 55 Km  has been approved in 
which, the delay occurred in construction of 690 m extension bridge on river 
Chalthi between Km  29.875 to Km  30.565 due to court cases. Apart from this, the 
change of rates of GST from 12% to 18% was also a factor that contributed to the 
increment in cost in stretches in Uttarakhand. As the entire cost of land acquisition 
has been borne by the State Government hence there was no cost overrun in the 
construction work and the additional cost in construction of bridge due to change in 
rates was being borne by the State Govt. 
In the State of UP, no extra financial liability has occurred for completion of 
sanctioned works. 
Further, as on date, the total cost approved by CCS in the year 2010 was 
Rs. 3,853 Cr. However, various HLECs have approved the DPRs & revised costs 
etc. costing Rs. 3523.31 Cr. Hence the cost overrun is well-within the ceiling of 
total cost as approved by CCS. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 
 The in-principle approval of project by CCS in 2010 was for a total length of 
1377 Km  with a total cost of Rs. 3853 Crores which was revised in 2018 for a 
length of 1299.80 Km , however, the actual length of DPRs as approved by various 

41 
 
High Level Empowered Committees is 844.42 Km  with the total cost of Rs. 
3523.31 Crores. 
PAC may take a suitable view of the fact that the actual length of approved 
DPRs is 844.42 Km  which is much less than the revised approved length of 
1299.80 Km . 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 
 The Indo-Nepal border road project was in-principally approved by the CCS 
in 2010. It is submitted that the financial projections contained in the project were 
based on the preliminary estimates in terms of the technical specifications of the 
proposed roads and were indicative in nature. It was decided that after the 
proposal is approved by the CCS, the DPRs would be prepared by the executing 
agencies and will again be technically examined by the Technical Committee (TC) 
and considered by High Level Empowered Committee (HLEC) before 
implementation. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 
 
Construction of bridges without connecting to the main alignment 
 
The Committee note from the Audit Report that in the West Champaran 
District, 34 bridges were sanctioned for Rs. 395.75 crore (March, 2013) and 
majority of these bridges were completed before August, 2016. Further, after the 
bridges were constructed, RCD, Bihar changed the road alignment between the 
chainage 10.60 to 77.36 in Bettiah due to the existence of forest land along the 
old alignment finalized in April, 2011. Audit pointed out that there was no clarity 
on whether 15 bridges constructed in these chainages were linked to the new 

42 
 
alignment and whether the bridges would be utilized in the new alignment in 
future or not. In this context, however, RCD Bihar in its Action Taken Notes 
affirmed following a joint inspection of bridges of West Champaran district by SSB 
and RCD officials in March 2023 that all 34 bridges fall on the proposed 
alignment of Border Road. In this context, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should also conduct an inspection of the bridges in coordination with 
executing authorities concerned at the State level to ascertain that all bridges 
constructed under the Project are connected with the approach roads /main 
alignment of the roads and furnish the findings thereof to the Committee. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of the plan charted out for 
optimum utilisation of the bridges constructed under the Project. 
 
(SI. No. 10; Para 10 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action taken by Ministry 
The RCD Bihar has again affirmed that there is no change in the approved 
alignment and all constructed bridges fall in approved alignment.  
Also, MHA carried out an inspection of the bridges between the Chainage 
10.60 to 77.36 in West Champaran district of Bihar, along with the representatives 
of SSB (the user agency) and RCD Bihar (the executing agency) on 07.06.2024. A 
copy of inspection report is enclosed at ANNEXURE-‘A. 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 Ministry replied that in the approved alignment of INBR project, a total 
number of 17 bridges have been constructed and three bridges are under 
construction.  

43 
 
PAC may be apprised with the expected timelines of the construction of 
three remaining bridges. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
RCD Bihar have informed that work on 01 bridge at Chainage 66.40 has 
been completed. Further, the work on rest 02 bridges has been awarded in March 
2024. The work on these 02 bridges is expected to be completed by December 
2025. The said 03 bridges are being funded by the State Govt. under NABARD 
Scheme and were not the part of approved DPRs by MHA. 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
 
Monitoring of infrastructure projects on the national border  
The Committee note that the Ministry has adopted the revised procedure for 
release of fund under Central Sector Scheme for flow of fund and monitoring / 
utilization of funds released as issued by Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
have been informed that it shall be mandatory to implement such schemes 
through the Treasury Single Account (TSA) model which will ensure that the 
funds of these schemes are released 'Just-In-Time' from the Consolidated Fund 
of India to the beneficiaries/vendors. Further, they learn that MHA has also issued 
detailed guidelines namely “Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM) Scheme” 
for compliance. The Committee have been further apprised that progress of work 
has been accounted for with release of fund after concurrence and vetting of 
Integrated Finance Division (Home) and Utilization certificate and work in 
progress in percentage was taken for each road project. Besides, the Ministry is 
in the process of developing Project Monitoring Portal (PMP) and Project 
Monitoring Unit for smooth and expeditious implementation of border 
infrastructure works. While noting the initiatives taken by the Ministry for 
monitoring the progress of the projects and fund release, the Committee 

44 
 
recommend that development of the Project Monitoring Portal (PMP) and Project 
Monitoring Unit should be completed in a time bound manner. The Committee 
also recommend that mechanism within a specific timeline   be devised to ensure 
real time updation of the entries in the portal for effective monitoring of the 
projects and fund utilization by the State Governments in this regard. The 
Committee further desire that mechanism should also put in place to ensure strict 
adherence to the provisions of the "Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM) 
Scheme" for the successful implementation of the Indo-Nepal Border Road 
Project. 
 
(SI. No. 13; Para 13 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
(A) Project Monitoring Portal : 
 
Decision has been taken in MHA to create Project Monitoring Portal (PMP) 
as a single common integrated portal for all executing agencies / Border Guarding 
Forces for efficient monitoring of all border Infrastructure projects for which, a 
committee was formed under Chairmanship of Deputy Secretary (MC) including 
members from CPWD, NIC and respective BGFs. So far 11 meetings have been 
conducted to fine tune the PMP portal. Basic structure of the PMP has already 
been prepared by NIC.  
(B) Project Monitoring Unit : 
The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), in its meeting held on 
21.09.2020, approved the ICBR-II project which contained the constitution of 
Project Monitoring Unit (PMU). Later, IFD (Home) also concurred to the 
establishment of PMU with some observations which were duly incorporated. 
Thereafter, with the approval of Union Home Secretary, CPWD was directed to 
establish the PMU.  
 

45 
 
Initially, PMU was established only for monitoring of projects being carried 
out on Indo-China Border. Later on, it was decided that the services of PMU would 
be considered to be utilized for monitoring of construction activities on all borders, 
i.e., Indo-Pakistan, Indo-Bangladesh, Indo-Myanmar, Indo-China, Indo-Nepal and 
Indo-Bhutan borders.  
As on date, the PMU has been put in place in MHA and it is headed by the 
Chief Consultant who works as the Chairman of PMU and reports to Joint 
Secretary (BM-I), MHA.   
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 PAC may be apprised of the expected timelines for the completion of work 
related to Project Monitoring Portal. 
 Further, Ministry’s reply is silent in respect of the specific timelines set to 
update the entries in portal and mechanism to be put in place to ensure adherence 
to the provisions of the “Border Infrastructure & Management (BIM) Scheme”. The 
same may be intimated to the PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 Efforts are being made for fine tuning of the Project Monitoring Portal 
(PMP). Various meetings have also been held in this regard with the stakeholders. 
 As soon as the Project Monitoring Portal comes into force, the work of 
updating the entries in the portal will commence. 
 The provisions of BIM scheme are already being adhered to by this Ministry 
in respect of the INBR Project. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
 
Irregular release of Rs. 2.34 Crores by MHA 
 
The Committee note from the audit findings that as per the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU), the expenditure on shifting of utility services and 
forestation charges were to be borne by the State Governments. Scrutiny of 
records in MHA revealed that HLEC in its 45th meeting approved the revised 
estimates of three DPRs aggregating Rs. 195.81 crore and two DPRs 
aggregating Rs. 147.23 crore respectively, which included the charges of Utility 
Shifting and forestation aggregating Rs. 2.34 crore sent by UP Government. The 
approval of utilities shifting charges aggregating Rs. 2.34 crore by MHA was thus, 
irregular. In this regard, the Ministry stated that the matter was deliberated in the 
Steering Committee meeting and PWD, UP requested that the extra sanction of 
Rs. 2.34 Crore be adjusted in the grant for next financial year. The Committee, in 
this regard, desire that an enquiry be instituted by the Ministry to ascertain the 
reasons for irregular release of Rs. 2.34 Crore. The Committee also desire that 
the Ministry issue necessary instructions to strengthen the internal checks in the 
Ministry to avoid recurrence of such lapses in future.  
(SI. No. 11; Para 11 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
PWD UP has informed that there is a practice of making provision of utility 
shifting, land acquisition, afforestation etc. in DPRs of construction of road work in 
UP. The utility shifting was carried out on new construction/upgradation of old 

48 
 
existing roads. The expenditure under utility shifting was incurred on the following 
departments: 
(i) UPPCL (Electric Pole shifting) 
(ii) UP Jal Nigam (Shifting of Handpumps) 
 
(iii) Forest Department (Afforestation) 
However, as per the MoU signed between Govt. of UP and MHA (Govt. of 
India), “PWD UP being the owner of the roads constructed under the project, will 
acquire the land, if necessary, required for the construction/upgradation/widening 
of roads and bear the cost thereof. PWD UP will also obtain the necessary 
clearances including forest/wildlife clearances on behalf of SSB/MHA, GoI, 
wherever required and make payment for the charges on account of Net Present 
Value (NPV) of land, compensatory afforestation etc. This also includes obtaining 
clearances, if any, from utility authorities related to telephone, water supply, 
electricity etc. PWD UP will also bear the cost of any regarding shifting of such 
utilities.” 
MHA vide its letter dated 11.01.2023 has already drawn attention of the 
then Chief Secretary, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh about the specific observation of the 
C & AG as contained in its report no.  23 of 2021 on performance audit of Indo-
Nepal Border Road Project concerning State of UP, to look into the matter 
personally and take appropriate corrective measures as suggested in the audit 
report as well as if required, disciplinary/administrative action against the 
officials/contractors responsible for the time and cost overrun of the project be 
taken.    
 It is mentioned here that PWD, UP vide letter no. 41INB/21INB/2013 dated 
20.05.2022 had informed that Rs. 22.13 Cr. was pending for payment for 
construction of Indo-Nepal Border Road project in District Maharajganj (UP). 
Accordingly, the said amount was adjusted in FY 2022-23 by deducting Rs. 2.34 
Cr and finally after the adjustment, Rs. 19.79 Cr. was released to PWD UP vide 
this Ministry’s sanction order no. 11012/30/2022-BM-V dated 06.09.2023. 

49 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 Ministry’s reply is silent on the following recommendations of the committee 
– 
(i) That an enquiry be instituted by the Ministry to ascertain the reasons for 
irregular release of Rs. 2.34 Crores 
(ii) To issue necessary instructions to strengthen the internal checks in the 
Ministry to avoid recurrence of such lapses in future 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 The revised DPRs of the concerned stretches having the provision of Utility 
shifting were received in this Ministry in 2018 and technically scrutinized by BFR 
Cell, CPWD thereafter. The RDPRs were appraised by Technical Committee and 
45th High Level Empowered Committee in 2018 itself. The Administrative approval 
& Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) of the said stretches was also issued in 2018 
with the provision of utility shifting contained in them.  
 Notably, after issuance of AA&ES of said stretches with revised estimates, 
the MoU between MHA and PWD, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh was finalized. The MoU 
was signed in the year 2021 which contained that charges for utility shifting would 
be borne by the State Govt.  
 MHA had also drawn attention of the then Chief Secretary, Uttar Pradesh 
with the request to take appropriate corrective measures and if required, 
disciplinary/administrative action against the officials responsible for cost overrun 
and delay in project.  
 It may also be noted that the irregularity of Rs. 2.34 Cr. has also been 
resolved and adjusted by this Ministry in the following manner : 
“PWD, UP vide letter no. 41INB/21INB/2013 dated 20.05.2022 had informed 
that Rs. 22.13 Cr. was pending for payment for construction of Indo-Nepal Border 
Road project in District Maharajganj (UP). The irregularity amounting to Rs. 2.34 

50 
 
was adjusted in FY 2022-23 by deducting Rs. 2.34 Cr and finally after the 
adjustment, Rs. 19.79 Cr. was released to PWD UP vide this Ministry’s sanction 
order no. 11012/30/2022-BM-V dated 06.09.2023”. 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 12 
Works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo Nepal 
Border Road Project  
 
The Committee learn from the replies furnished by the Ministry that after the 
selection of this subject for detailed examination by the Committee, several 
pending works pertaining to construction of road and bridges under the Indo-
Nepal Border Road Project have since been completed or taken off in Uttar 
Pradesh. The works completed inter-alia include road in the district of 
Siddarthnagar from Aligarhwa to Ganwaria and Khunwa-Banganga-Bhusaula, 
construction from Latahawa Ghat to Pakarhiwa via Karamaini, Ramnagar, 
Kakarahwa and Bajha, and pending work relating to the bridge on the Banganga 
river. Besides the work of channelization to bring the stream of the river, which 
has shifted, under the bridge is in progress. The Committee, while appreciating 
the initiatives taken by the Ministry pursuant to the constant push of the 
Committee, recommend that channelization work in areas where river streams 
have shifted may be completed in a time bound manner so as to expedite the 
overall completion of the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project. 
 
(SI. No. 12; Para 12 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 

51 
 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The matter was taken up with PWD, UP and they have informed that the 
construction work of Banganga river bridge has already been completed. Due to 
meandering of river, it has been shifted westward 40-50 m from its normal course 
of flow. Approach road on east side of bridge has been completed upon surfacing 
(Black top). Approach road construction on west side is under progress. It is 
informed that remaining approach work will be completed in coming months.  
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 PAC may be apprised with the current status along with the timelines for 
completion of the work. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 PWD UP was requested to furnish the current status in this matter and they 
have informed that the inspection of the Banganga river bridge was done in April 
2024 by UP PWD and Project Manager of Bridge Corporation and it was decided 
that the span of bridge in westward side needs to be extended. The bridge 
corporation has framed and submitted the estimates of extended span of bridge to 
UP PWD which is under check by Bridge Wing of UP PWD. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter I. 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
 
Special mechanism for strategic projects 
The Committee note that under the Indo-Nepal Border Road Project, 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) were awaited for lengths with encumbrance for 
a total of 455.15 km , which includes 377.15km  in Uttar Pradesh and 118 Km  in 
Uttarakhand.  In Uttar Pradesh, road alignment is affected by Forest & Wildlife 
areas while in case of Uttarakhand, it is affected by Pancheshwar Dam on river 
Kali, which involves interest of both India and Nepal. Recognizing the strategic 
importance of projects ensuring national security with the development of border 
areas, the Committee strongly believe that a specialized approach is obligatory to 
ensure swift coordination and resolution of challenges, particularly in States, 
where road alignments are intricately tied to Forest & Wildlife areas. With a view 
to streamline the decision-making process and accelerate the progress of these 
projects of vital nature, aligning with the broader objectives of national security 
and border development, the Committee opine and recommend that the Ministry 
may pursue the State Governments to use the single window clearance system 
invariably so that the statutory clearances and road alignments affected by Forest 
& Wildlife areas for the strategic projects such as the Indo-Nepal Border Road 
Project are not hindered and related issues are effectively addressed. 
 
(SI. No. 08; Para 08 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action taken by Ministry 
MHA has a system of monthly meetings at the level of Joint Secretary (BM-
I) and Border wise quarterly Steering Committee meetings headed by Secretary 
(Department of Border Management) to discuss all pending issues including Land 
Acquisition, Forest Clearances (FC), Wildlife Clearances (WLC) etc. The Status of 

53 
 
FC/WLC on Parivesh Portal of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
is regularly monitored.  
This Ministry has also recently taken up a few cases with Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change after their notification dated 29.11.2023 
regarding exemption as strategic linear project of national importance. 
Vetting comments of Audit  
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  
 Although, this Ministry has informed about the existing system/procedure 
followed for the supervision of projects, however, the recommendation of the PAC 
to pursue the State Governments to use the single window clearance system 
invariably to address the related issues has not been addressed. The same may 
be furnished to the PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 This Ministry is following the existing procedures as stipulated for land 
acquisition, forest & wildlife clearances. However, the recommendation of the 
committee has been noted for compliance. 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
Non-connectivity to Border Out Posts (BOPs) from the main alignment of 
proposed roads  
The Committee note that out of 471 Border Out Posts (BOPs) established 
by SSB, 355 are connected by roads and on completion of Indo Nepal Border 
Project, 81 more BOPs will be connected. Out of 355 BOPs, 247 BOPs are on 

54 
 
the alignment of the main border road and the remaining 108 BOPs are 
connected with the main Indo Nepal Border Road through other roads 
constructed under various schemes by Rural Engineering Organisation (REO) 
such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), Border Area 
Development Programme (BADP) etc. According to the Ministry, the original plan 
was not per se to connect the BOPs but to have a road close to the border. The 
Ministry added that the intent was to have a road close to BOPs where link roads 
and feeder roads can be planned later on.  Further, a separate scheme is under 
process to provide link roads, foot tracks to remaining SSB BOPs and important 
patrolling routes. Taking note of the fact that SSB is performing its operational 
needs through BOPs on INB road and through connectivity of other roads for 
these BOPs, the Committee in no uncertain words recommend that the Ministry 
may undertake immediate action to finalize and execute the Scheme for providing 
link roads and foot tracks to remaining SSB Border Out Posts (BOPs), and 
important patrolling routes in a time-bound manner under intimation to the 
Committee.  
 
(SI. No. 09; Para 09 of the 89th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee)  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
At present, out of the total 734 BOPs of SSB on Indo-Nepal and Indo-
Bhutan Border, road connectivity exists in 426 BOPs. A fresh proposal containing 
link roads, foot tracks and staging camps along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan 
border is under consideration which aims at providing road connectivity to the 
remaining non-connected BOPs of SSB. 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
Audit vide their UO No. R.R./15-7/2024-25/ 165 dated 8.8.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:  

55 
 
 PAC may be apprised with the tentative timelines for finalization of the 
scheme for providing link roads and foot tracks to remaining 308 BOPs. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
A consolidated proposal containing lateral & axial roads, foot tracks and 
staging camps along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders is under consideration 
in Ministry. As the proposal contains various components along both borders and 
projects large financial implications, thus it may take reasonable time for its 
technical scrutiny and final approval by the competent authority.  
 
 
 
(MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS/ DEPARTMENT OF BORDER MANAGEMENT 
O.M. NO. 11014/1/2024-BM-V, DATED 9 OCTOBER  2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                  (K.C. VENUGOPAL) 
25 July , 2025                                                       Chairperson, 
 03 Shravana, 1947 (saka)         Public Accounts Committee 
  

56 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) HELD ON 25 JULY, 2025 
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, 25 July, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 
1515 hrs in Committee Room No. 53, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey-Acting Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jai Prakash 
3. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
4. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
5. Dr. Amar Singh 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
9. Dr. K. Laxman 
10. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
6. Dr. Faiz Ahmad   -  Deputy Secretary 
 

57 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
2.  Ms. Gurveen Sidhu Director General 
3.  Ms. Ritu Dhillon Director General 
4.  Shri Deen Dayal Verma Principal Director of Audit (Navy) 
 
 The Hon’ble Chairperson could not attend the Sitting. As per Rule 258 
(3), the Members present elected Dr. Nishikant Dubey as the Acting 
Chairperson. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
the officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
(C&AG) to the Sitting of the Committee. Then, the following four draft 
Reports were taken up for consideration:- 
i. Action Taken Report on the 84th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts”; 
ii. Action Taken Report on the 86th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Establishment and Operationalisation of Sagar Prahari Bal”; 
iii. Action Taken Report on the 89th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Indo-Nepal Border Road Project”; and 
iv. Action Taken Report on the 140th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Manpower and Logistics Management in Delhi Police”. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted all the aforesaid 
Draft Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize the Reports and present the same to the House. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

58 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 13 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 , 7, 10, 13 
Total: 9 
Percentage:69.2 % 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – 11, 12 
 
Total: 2 
Percentage:15.4 % 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –   8, 9  
Total: 2 
Percentage:15.4 % 
 
 
 
 