24 
 
 
GRANT OF CONCESSION WITHOUT THE SUPPORT OF 
DECLARATION IN FORM ‘F’ 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 136th Report (17th 
Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


PAC NO. 2418 
 
 
T W E N T Y  F O U R T H  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 136thReport  
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
(CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  25.07.2025 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   25.07.2025 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July 2025 / Shravana 1947 (Saka)  
GRANT OF CONCESSION WITHOUT THE 
SUPPORT OFDECLARATION IN FORM  ‘F’ 

CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THEPUBLIC ACCOUNTS   (iii) 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................     (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................       1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
              replies of the Government have not been accepted  
    by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) 
held on 29thApril, 2025.  
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their 136thReport (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P - Director 
3. Shri  Atul Bhave    - Deputy Secretary 
  
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -             Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri AshokraoShankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee(2025-26) having been authorised 
by theCommittee, do present this Twenty-fourthReport (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by theGovernment on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee on Public Accounts contained in their One Hundred and Thirty-sixthReport 
(17thLok Sabha) on “Grant of Concession Without the Support of Declaration on 
Form – F” pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh Administration). 
 
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-sixthReport was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 
23rd February, 2024 and to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2024. Replies of 
the Government to all the Observations/Recommendationscontained in the Report were 
received. The Committee on Public Accounts considered andadopted the draft Report 
at their Sitting held on 29thApril, 2025.  Minutes of the Sitting aregiven at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations ofthe Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty-sixthReport 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)    
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
                                          Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER 1 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accounts deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Grant Of Concession Without The Support Of Declaration In Form – F based on Para 
3.7 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022.”  
 
2. The 136 th Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 23rd February, 2024 and 
to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 th July, 2024, contained 01 
Observation/Recommendation. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observation/Recommendation have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Para No. 01 
          Total:01 
              Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No.: NIL 
     Total: Nil 
            Chapter: III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para No.: NIL 
     Total: Nil 
            Chapter: IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
 
3. The Committee have learnt that the Audit noted from the assessment records of 
one Firm for the year 2011- 12, that the Designated Officer assessed the case with a 
Gross Turn Over (GTO) of ₹ 1.54 crore, as against ₹ 2.58 crore shown in Trading 
Account. This was due to fact that movement of goods worth ₹ 1.04 crore was treated 
as branch transfer of store & not sales by the Designated Officer. However, Audit noted 
that the amount stated to pertain to branch transfer of stock was without the production 
of prescribed declaration in Form ‘F’, which is mandatory for grant of concession. The 
Designated Officer granted concession without support of declaration, resulting in non-
levy of tax of ₹ 32.338 lakh, including interest and penalty under relevant section of the 
VAT Act. 
 

4.  The Committee also learnt that on being pointed out that the Department, while 
admitting the objection, stated (September 2021 & January 2022) that a notice under 
Section 29(7)9 of the Punjab VAT Act, 2005 was issued to the assesse. However, Audit 
noted that despite agreeing to the audit contention, the designated officer, only added 
the amount of branch transfer of store of ₹ 103.96 lakh to the GTO without assessing 
any tax on the same, thus resulting in short levy of tax. Further, the Department stated 
that the notice could not be delivered due to non-availability of the firm at the last known 
premises and even after due efforts the dealer was not traceable. The case was 
decided ex-parte after approval of Excise and Taxation Commissioner, UT Chandigarh. 
The Committee further learnt that Audit noted that grant of concession without support 
of declaration resulted in non-levy of tax of ₹ 32.33 lakh, (including interest and penalty). 
 
5. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh 
Administration) may furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report within 3 months of its 
presentation to the House. 
 
Recommendation (Para no.1) 
6.  The Committee in their 136th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:-  
“After sifting all the documents and information available, the Committeenote that 
the Designated Officer, assessed a case for the year 2011-12, with a Gross Turn 
Over (GTO) of ₹ 1.54 crore, as against ₹ 2.58 crore shown in Trading Account by 
allowing movement of goods worth ₹ 1.04 crore as branch transfer of store 
without production of prescribed declaration in Form ‘F’, which is mandatory for 
grant of concession, resulting in non-levy of tax of ₹ 32.33 lakh, including interest 
and penalty under relevant section of the Punjab VAT Act, 2005. The Committee 
also note from the reply of the Ministry that there was mistake apparent on the 
record that F forms were not taken while framing the assessment. However, on 
the application of the dealer, the F forms produced by the taxpayer were taken 
on record and the order was rectified and a conclusive determination had been 
made that no outstanding tax was due or recoverable from the dealer. The 
Committee further note that charge-sheet has been issued against the officer 
concerned and for future corrective action, a standard operating procedure has 
been established. The Committee are disappointed to note that due diligence 
was not followed by the assessing officer and desire to be apprised whether the 
internal audit in the Department had pointed out any such lapses. Further, noting 
that CAG Audit is only a test check, the Committee recommend that all such 
records in the department may be checked to ensure that due diligence was 
exercised by other assessing officers. The Committee while noting that SOPs 
have since been issued, recommend that robust monitoring mechanism may also 
be simultaneously established to ensure that SOPs are followed in letter and 
spirit. The Committee further recommend thatinternal controls, internal checks 
and internal audit in the departmentmay be strengthened to avoid recurrence of 
such lapses. TheCommittee also desire to be apprised of the action taken 
against thecharge-sheeted official.” 

7. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
“The Chandigarh Administration has taken note of the recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Committee. To ensure the efficiency and integrity and to uphold statutory 
requirements and foster a culture of compliance and accountability of tax 
administration, Excise and Taxation Department, Chandigarh Administration has 
taken following actions: 
Regular reviews of assessed cases to ensure accuracy and compliance.  
Necessary revisions are made to address discrepancies and maintain the 
integrity of the tax evaluation process.  Specific guidelines and instructions are 
issued from time to time to prevent irregularities.  Further, regular training 
programs are also conducted about the latest regulations to enable effective 
performance of their duties. 
Robust system has been developed to adhere Statutory Requirements, ensure 
checks & balances and strengthen tax evaluation mechanisms which helps 
preventing future discrepancies and enhancing assessment accuracy. 
In order to streamline the system and avoid any procedural lapses in the future, 
the department has framed a detailed SOP for the framing of VAT assessments 
dated 30.08.2022, so that such errors, omissions and mistakes do not occur 
again.  
With respect to the action taken against the charge-sheeted official, it is 
respectfully clarified that a Show Cause Notice (SCN) dated 18.04.2023 was 
issued to the said officer.  Further, it is informed that the officer had retired on 
31.03.2020 and four years have passed since the said VAT Assessment Order, 
therefore, based on the legal opinion tendered by the Law Officer and the 
provision as per Rule 2.2 (b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, no 
proceedings can be initiated against the said officer. 
 
8. The Audit in this regard stated as under: 
 “Details of such reviews and the training programme may be provided to the 
Committee. Further copies of specific guidelines/ instructions issued in compliance to 
the PAC recommendations may also be communicated to the Committee. 
 Committee had recommended to develop a robust monitoring mechanism and to 
strengthen the internal controls, inter audit in the Department.  Steps taken in this 
direction may be communicated to PAC.” 
9. The Ministry in their updated Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the officers of Excise and Taxation 
Department, Chandigarh receive regular training on updates on latest regulations and 
compliance requirements which enables them to perform their duties effectively.   

 A copy of SOP/directions has been issued vide memo no. 3279-81 dated 
18.04.2023 so that such irregularities do not occur in future.  Earlier also, a guidelines 
was issued vide memo no. 10385 dated 30.08.2022. 
 Further, the Excise & Taxation Department, Chandigarh has constituted an 
internal audit committee to ensure a comprehensive examination and evaluation of the 
adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls as well as to assess the quality of 
performance in fulfilling assigned responsibilities. 
 The Finance Department (Accounts Branch), Chandigarh Administration has also 
constituted a Committee to conduct special audit of the Excise and Taxation 
Department from the financial year 2010-11 to 2023-24.” 
10.  While the Ministry has acknowledged the observations for compliance, the 
Committee emphasize the need for a comprehensive policy framework to ensure 
effectiveness of the review mechanism and periodic evaluations, particularly 
concerning primary assessments. The Committee take a serious view of such 
negligent practices and underscore the urgent necessity for the Ministry to put in 
place a strong procedural framework for accurate evaluation of taxes due and its 
collection on time. The Committee express deep concern over the lackadaisical 
approach of the Excise and Taxation Department,which gives rise to further 
doubt that there might be  more such irregularities in the Department.  Therefore, 
the Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that the officers handling 
public funds are above board and punitive action should be taken against those 
officials, who commit irregularition  in collusion  with assesses, before they retire 
from service to avoid recurrence of such incidents in future.  The Committee may 
be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry within 3 months of presentation of 
this report. 
  

CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
After sifting all the documents and information available, the Committee note that the 
Designated Officer, assessed a case for the year 2011-12, with a Gross Turn Over 
(GTO) of ₹ 1.54 crore, as against ₹ 2.58 crore shown in Trading Account by allowing 
movement of goods worth ₹ 1.04 crore as branch transfer of store without production of 
prescribed declaration in Form ‘F’, which is mandatory for grant of concession, resulting 
in non-levy of tax of ₹ 32.33 lakh, including interest and penalty under relevant section 
of the Punjab VAT Act, 2005. The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry 
that there was mistake apparent on the record that F forms were not taken while 
framing the assessment. However, on the application of the dealer, the F forms 
produced by the taxpayer were taken on record and the order was rectified and a 
conclusive determination had been made that no outstanding tax was due or 
recoverable from the dealer. The Committee further note that charge-sheet has been 
issued against the officer concerned and for future corrective action, a standard 
operating procedure has been established. The Committee are disappointed to note 
that due diligence was not followed by the assessing officer and desire to be apprised 
whether the internal audit in the Department had pointed out any such lapses. Further, 
noting that CAG Audit is only a test check, the Committee recommend that all such 
records in the department may be checked to ensure that due diligence was exercised 
by other assessing officers. The Committee while noting that SOPs have since been 
issued, recommend that robust monitoring mechanism may also be simultaneously 
established to ensure that SOPs are followed in letter and spirit. The Committee further 
recommend that internal controls, internal checks and internal audit in the department 
may be strengthened to avoid recurrence of such lapses. The Committee also desire to 
be apprised of the action taken against the charge-sheeted official. 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 136th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Chandigarh Administration has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Committee. To ensure the efficiency and integrity and to uphold statutory requirements 
and foster a culture of compliance and accountability of tax administration, Excise and 
Taxation Department, Chandigarh Administration has taken following actions: 
Regular reviews of assessed cases to ensure accuracy and compliance.  Necessary 
revisions are made to address discrepancies and maintain the integrity of the tax 
evaluation process.  Specific guidelines and instructions are issued from time to time to 
prevent irregularities.  Further, regular training programs are also conducted about the 
latest regulations to enable effective performance of their duties. 

Robust system has been developed to adhere Statutory Requirements, ensure checks 
& balances and strengthen tax evaluation mechanisms which helps preventing future 
discrepancies and enhancing assessment accuracy. 
In order to streamline the system and avoid any procedural lapses in the future, the 
department has framed a detailed SOP for the framing of VAT assessments dated 
30.08.2022, so that such errors, omissions and mistakes do not occur again.  
With respect to the action taken against the charge-sheeted official, it is respectfully 
clarified that a Show Cause Notice (SCN) dated 18.04.2023 was issued to the said 
officer.  Further, it is informed that the officer had retired on 31.03.2020 and four years 
have passed since the said VAT Assessment Order, therefore, based on the legal 
opinion tendered by the Law Officer and the provision as per Rule 2.2 (b) of the Punjab 
Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, no proceedings can be initiated against the said officer. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
Details of such reviews and the training programme may be provided to the Committee. 
Further copies of specific guidelines/ instructions issued in compliance to the PAC 
recommendations may also be communicated to the Committee. 
Committee had recommended to develop a robust monitoring mechanism and to 
strengthen the internal controls, inter audit in the Department.  Steps taken in this 
direction may be communicated to PAC. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the officers of Excise and Taxation 
Department, Chandigarh receive regular training on updates on latest regulations and 
compliance requirements which enables them to perform their duties effectively.   
A copy of SOP/directions has been issued vide memo no. 3279-81 dated 18.04.2023 so 
that such irregularities do not occur in future.  Earlier also, a guidelines was issued vide 
memo no. 10385 dated 30.08.2022. 
Further, the Excise & Taxation Department, Chandigarh has constituted an internal 
audit committee to ensure a comprehensive examination and evaluation of the 
adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls as well as to assess the quality of 
performance in fulfilling assigned responsibilities. 
The Finance Department (Accounts Branch), Chandigarh Administration has also 
constituted a Committee to conduct special audit of the Excise and Taxation 
Department from the financial year 2010-11 to 2023-24. 
 
[Please see Para no.10 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)    
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
                                          Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 29 APRIL, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, 29 April, 2025 from 1303 hrs to 
1425 hrs in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
3. Shri Jai Parkash 
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
5. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
6. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
7. Dr. Amar Singh 
8. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri Praful Patel 
13. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
14. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Atreyee Das Deputy C&AG 
2.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri  Deputy C&AG 
3.  Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj Deputy C&AG 
4.  Ms. Yashodhara Ray Chaudhuri Addl. Deputy C&AG 
5.  Shri Samar Thakur  Director General 
6.  Shri Anadi Mishra Director General 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the office of C&AG of 
India to the sitting of the Committee. He invited suggestions of the Members on the 
following four Draft Reports:-  
i. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
ii. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
iii. Draft Action Taken Report on the 136th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Grant Of Concession Without The Support Of Declaration In Form – F” based 
on Para 3.7 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2022 pertaining to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (Chandigarh Administration). 
iv. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
7. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of factual verification done by Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
  

APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SIXTHREPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 01 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para No. 1 
 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage:  
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 