46 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF 5TH AND 6TH LINE 
BETWEEN CHHATRAPATI SHIVAJI MAHARAJ 
TERMINUS (CSMT)-KURLA STATION 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


PAC NO. - 2466  
 
F O R T Y  S I X T H R E P O R T 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025 -26)  
( EIG HTEENT H LO K SA BHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.04.2026 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   17.04.2026 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
APRIL, 2026 /CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF 5TH AND 
6TH LINE BETWEEN 
CHHATRAPATI SHIVAJI 
MAHARAJ TERMINUS (CSMT)-
KURLA STATION 
 

 
*Not appended
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II Construction of 5th and 6th line between Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus (CSMT)-Kurla Station 
1 
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  16-27 
APPENDICES 
I.* Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) held 
on 15.05.2025. 
 
II.  Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) held 
on 16.04.2026. 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
                              Shri K. C. Venugopal
        
-    Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri T. R. Baalu   
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey   
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal   
5. Shri Jai Parkash   
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad   
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh   
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy   
9. Prof. Sougata Ray   
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi   
11. Dr. Amar Singh   
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya   
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur   
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni   
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav    
 RAJYA SABHA   
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan    
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil   
18. Dr. K. Laxman   
19. Shri Praful Patel   
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray   
21. Vacant*   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi     
  
*Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2 nd April, 2026 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania - Director 
2. Dr. Faiz Ahmad                          - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand  - Committee Officer 
 
INTRODUCTION 

 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025 -26), 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present this  Forty-sixth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Construction of 5th and 6th line 
between Chhatrapati  Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) -Kurla 
Station” based on Chapter II of C&AG Report number 2 of 2025 
relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid 
in the Parliament on 1 April 2025. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) selected the subject 
for detailed examination and report during their current term i.e. 2025-
26. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways at their  sitting held on 15.05.2025. The Public 
Accounts Committee (2025-26) considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 16.04.2026.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and 
form Part-II of the Report.   
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways for tendering evidence 
before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee 
in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Committee 
Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI:                                K.C. VENUGOPAL 
 16 April 2026                        Chairperson, 
26 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)                Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
PART - I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1. The Public Accounts Committee (2025 -26) selected the subject “Construction of 
5th and 6th line between Chhatrapati  Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) -Kurla Station” 
based on Chapter II of Comptroller and Auditor General Report No 02 of 2025 relating to 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in view of issues of delays in land acquisition, 
contractual mismanagement and delayed benefits to commuters. 
2. In Chapter II of the said C&AG Report, Audit has highlighted that Ministry of 
Railways, in partnership with the Government of Maharashtra, undertook the construction 
of the 5th and 6th lines between Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) and Kurla 
Station as part of the Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) to alleviate the congestion 
and enhance the capacity of Mumbai’s suburban rail network. The project, managed by 
the Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation Limited (MRVC), aim s to improve operational 
efficiency and passenger services along this critical corridor. However, Audit has revealed 
significant lapses in the project’s execution such as delays in land acquisition, inadequate 
planning, contractual mismanagement, and poor coordination between Central Railway 
(CR), Western Railway (WR), and other stakeholders. These deficiencies have resulted 
in substantial time and cost overruns, idle resources, and delayed benefits to commuters. 
         
3. The Committee considered the subject for detailed examination and took oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on 15thMay 2025 and obtained 
written replies on the same. Based on the oral evidence and written  
replies, the comprehensive examination of the subject is discussed in the succeeding  
paragraphs. 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
4. The construction of the 5th and 6th lines between CSMT and Kurla Station, 
undertaken by the MRVC, has been affected by significant deficiencies in planning and 
execution. The audit highlighted that the initial land assessment in November 2014 was 
inadequate, leading to delays in land acquisition, particularly due to unresolved issues 
with Western Railway, which failed to transfer required land to Cen tral Railway as of 
January 2024. Many contracts were awarded without ensuring clear site availability, 
resulting in idling of material resources worth ₹7.06 crore and multiple contract extensions 
from August 2019 to August 2023. These extensions were neces sitated by factors such 
as non-issuance of drawings, site inaccessibility, and pandemic -related restrictions. The 
audit further noted a lack of coordination between CR, WR, and the Government of 
Maharashtra, which contributed to only 26% of the work being completed by January 
2024, despite the project’s initiation in 2009. These lapses led to significant time and cost 

2 
 
overruns, undermining the project’s objective of easing congestion in Mumbai’s suburban 
rail network. 
5. The audit findings underscore critical lapses in project planning, inter -agency 
coordination, and contract management, which have significantly delayed the CSMT -
Kurla 5th and 6th line project and resulted in substantial financial and operational 
inefficiencies. The failure to secure clear sites before awarding contracts, coupled with 
inadequate initial assessments and poor coordination between zonal railways and other 
stakeholders, raises serious concerns about the project oversight and accountability. 
These issues warrant a thorough review to establish responsibility for the delays and cost 
overruns, alongside robust corrective measures to ensure timely completion and prevent 
similar failures in future railway infrastructure projects. 
6. The Ministry in its background note has submitted in this regard as under: 
“Mumbai Suburban section of CR from Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus Mumbai (now 
renamed as Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) to North of Kurla has 
two corridors, each corridor having two lines for UP and DN directions. West side 
corridor consists of two local lines for stopping local trains at all stations. East side 
corridor consists of two through lines and is known as a fast corridor where suburban 
trains stop at selected stations. The west corridor is also being utilized for running 
long distance non-suburban passenger and freight trains. The CSMT Dadar -Kurla 
section is a highly saturated section and the traffic demand in this section has been 
increasing steadily. It is, therefore, necessary to segregate non-suburban traffic from 
suburban traffic to increase the peak hour capacity of the suburban section.  
The work of construction of the 5th and 6th line between CSMT -Kurla section was 
sanctioned in 2008-09 under Mumbai Urban Transport Project –II (MUTP) project of 
MRVC at a total abstract cost of Rs. 659 crores on a cost sharing basis between 
Ministry of Rai lways and Government of Maharashtra in the ratio of 50:50. The 
Detailed Estimate of the project amounting to Rs. 890.89 crore was sanctioned by 
Railway Board (RB) in September 2014.  
MRVC awarded the consultancy service contract to M/s. RITES in June 2009 for 
survey, preparation of site plans, yard plans, General Arrangement Drawings, 
Detailed Estimate, Bill of Quantity, detailed design/drawings, land acquisition plans, 
computation of additional land width required, etc. for Civil, Electrical and S&T works 
in connection with Detailed Engineering work. The execution of the work was 
entrusted to Central Railway. 
Considering the complexities of the work, the project was divided into two phases, 
viz., 
i) Phase- I consist of section from Kurla station to Parel station and  
ii) Phase- II from Parel station to CSMT station 

3 
 
It was decided to complete the Phase- I work first. 
Present status of work of Phase-I is as given below: 
Works Completed 
1. Commissioning of Parel suburban terminus with double discharge platform. 
2. Construction of 12m wide FOB at Parel, 02 nos. of FOB at Sion and 01 FOB between 
Sion-Kurla. 
3. Construction of 03 nos. (G+2) Buildings at Matunga workshop to relocate existing 
service buildings. 
4. Construction of New Goods RRI building, New Tower Wagon shed, PWI office and  
CCTV room at Kurla. 
Work in progress 
1. Construction of Rail flyover at Kurla (1.30 km length) for Harbour line. 
2. Construction of a new station and other enabling building, dismantling & re -
construction work of ROB at Sion Station. 
3. Construction of (G+8) service building at Dadar. 
4. Construction of OHE Workshop and other offices at Kurla. 
5. Construction of enabling building works at Matunga. 
6. Construction of G+17 Building at Mahalaxmi by WR in c/w transfer of 8554.721 Sqm 
of Western Rly. land to Central Rly. 
Critical Issues 
1. Shifting of 714 PAPs (Project Affected Peoples) between Sion & Dadar Station. 
(Pending with MMRDA). 
2. Dismantling & reconstruction of Dharavi ROB. 
3. Modification of King Circle-Mahim Harbor line Rail Flyover. 
4. Relocation of CRMS HQ office and Dadar Rly Institute. 
5. Land Acquisition at Swadeshi Mill land between Kurla to Sion stations. 
6. Harbor line temporary diversion from Tilak Nagar to Kurla station. 
 
 

4 
 
 
7. To seek further clarification on several highlighted issues with the construction of 
the 5th and 6th lines between CSMT and Kurla station  like the lack of coordination, 
improper detailed estimates etc. which led to significant delays, with the completion date 
being extended from March 2021 to March 2024, the Committee asked the Ministry about 
the factors to which the delay can be attributed and whether any accountability was fixed 
for the said delay along with steps which have been contemplated/initiated to address the 
challenges. The Ministry, in this regard furnished the following reply: 
“Land acquisition and rehabilitation of PAPs in the densely populated Mumbai city 
area is one of the major factors that delayed the construction work of 5th & 6th lines 
between CSMT-Kurla stations. The Land Award for land acquisition proposals is 
already declared by the District Collector, but Physical Possession of land is held 
up due to non-shifting of PAPs that are coming in the alignment of project at Dharavi 
and Dadar. Land acquisition is difficult considering the heavy built -up area and 
numerous utilit ies. It has associated social issues as well as rehabilitation and 
resettlement of PAPs, which is a major challenge in the current context. Due to the 
many multi-storied private buildings on land to be acquired, the acquisition is very 
difficult. Many impediments have come up after the project was conceived. There 
are other complexities as well e.g. Dismantling and reconstruction of ROBs, FOBs, 
service buildings, utilities etc. Further, for completion of Phase -II, acquisition of 11 
multi storied buildings, MbPT land having encroachments, dismantling of Byculla 
station building (Heritage), acquisition of land having encroachment, one multi 
storey building at Chinchpokli near S-Bridge are involved.     
Issues involved in Phase-I (Kurla-Parel): 
For Phase-I, total land to be acquired is 10139.6 sqm. Request for the same was 
made to State Govt. in Jan-2018. With concerted efforts, only NTC land (2656 sqm) 
could be acquired and possession received by Railway in Sept-2022. 
The balance includes 4391.01 sqm land of Swadeshi Mill between Kurla and Sion 
stations. Initially, 02 no. proposals for acquiring this land were proposed by Private 
Negotiation and submitted to Dist. Collector, Bandra office on 31.01.2018. However, 
on facing the difficulties with Land Acquisition under Private Negotiation, two no. 
Revised Proposals of Swadeshi Mill were submitted under Right  to Fair 
Compensation &Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
(RFCTLARR) Act -2013 on 09.03 .2020. During the course of land acquisition 
proceedings, it is known as per revenue records that this land belongs to M/s. 
Swadeshi Mills Ltd., which is under Liquidation Process & the Official Liquidator of 
High Court is in charge of the affairs of the c ompany. Railway then obtained 
permission from the Hon’ble High Court under section 446 of the Companies Act. 
Honourable High Court passed order on interim application no. 122 of 202 Dtd. 

5 
 
05.01.2022 & allowed land acquisition proceedings in order to complete the Railway 
Project.  Acquisition of this land is in progress and pending with the State Gov. of 
Maharashtra. 
For balance 3092.59 sqm, the details are as under: 
This involves 714 PAPs and Rehabilitation & Resettlement of these PAPs is being 
done by Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority i.e. MMRDA (GoM). 
After regular follow up, allotment of alternative accommodation has now been 
started by MMRDA in Jan- 2025 and is in progress. 
Another important constraint was closure of Sion ROB. NOC permission was not 
granted for the closing of Sion ROB from Mumbai Traffic Police Department which 
delayed the dismantling & reconstruction work of Sion ROB at Sion station. These 
ROBs are main arterial connections in city roads and their closure puts a lot of stress 
on existing traffic. This issue could be resolved only in Oct-2024. 
Steps taken to address the challenges: 
To address the challenges related to Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (R&R) of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), the Railway has 
proactively and consistently pursued the matters with the concerned authorities at 
various levels. 
Frequent coordination meetings were conducted with State Government officials, 
Municipal authorities, and concerned departments to expedite the acquisition 
process and resolve matters related to R&R. 
1. Relief and Rehabilitation (R&R) of 714 Project Affected Families (PAFs) [out of 
total 744 PAFs] pending with MMRDA (Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development 
Authority) in Mumbai City District. 
-The issue is still pending with the State Government of Maharashtra. 
2. Land Acquisition of Swadeshi Mill land (4391.01 Sq.m) between Kurla - Sion 
Stations of Central Railway for proposed Construction of 5th & 6th line project 
between Mumbai CSMT- Kurla (MUTP-IIB Project).: 
The issue is pending with the State Government of Maharashtra. 
3. NOC Pending with Traffic Police Department for Dismantling and Reconstruction 
of Sion ROB:  
Central Railway Vide Letter No. DR/DRG/CSTM -CLA 5th & 6th line dated 
12.11.2018 submitted a proposal for obtaining NOC from the Traffic Police 

6 
 
Department for closure of SION ROB & Dharavi ROB. Many meetings were held 
with the Traffic Police Department, MCGM. but even after so much efforts taken by 
Railway, permission was not granted for closure of ROB. This issue was resolved 
on 11.10.2024 after receiving Sion ROB Closure NOC from Traffic Police 
department, Mumbai. 
4. Pending private land acquisition of 0.2Ha in Mumbai City district: 
-Issue resolved on 16.12.2022 after receiving land award from Dist. Collector. 
5. Pending transfer of government land of 983.34 square metres (0.09 Ha) belonging 
to Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) in Mumbai City district: - the 
land acquisition proposal was submitted in January -2018. But the land acquisition 
procedure was not showing any remarkable progress in 02 years with the State gov. 
of Maharashtra. 
MCGM gave permission to transfer 723 sqm of land to Railways after receiving full 
payment as cost of land subject to Rehabilitation and Resettlement of PAPs residing 
on this land. For 260.34 sqm of land given on lease, the award had been declared 
by the Co llector, Mumbai city on 30.08.2022 after receiving full payment for land 
value and Issue resolved on 16.12.2022. 
Issues involved in Phase-II (Parel-CSMT): 
This involves acquisition and demolition of 11 nos. of multi-story buildings between 
Masjid and Sandhurst Rd. and their resettlement, MbPT land having 
encroachments, dismantling of Byculla station building (Heritage), acquisition of 
land having encroachment, one multi storey building at Chinchpokli near S -Bridge. 
In order to avoid this, Railway, based on detail discussion with State government, 
had proposed alternate alignment. In June 2021, IRSDC has included this matter of 
principal approval from Govt. of  Maharashtra for Harbour line diversion along P 
D’Mello Road as agenda item in the High-Level Committee for CSMT World Class 
Station Development Project. In the HLC meeting, it was directed to do the 
comprehensive mobility planning over P D’Mello Road with all the stakeholders like 
MbPT, MCGM, MMRDA, Traffic dept. Many deliberations done in Feb 2022, March 
2022, April 2022, May 2022 and this proposal of New alignment over P D’Mello 
Road had been dropped by committee on 20.01.2023. Therefore, original alignment 
along with existing Railway line at East side was reconsidered, which involves 
acquisition of MbPT land and other Private land as indicated above. 
Therefore, for completion of this phase, acquisition of 11 multi storied buildings, 
MbPT land having encroachments, dismantling of Byculla station building 
(Heritage), acquisition of land having encroachment, one multi storey building at 
Chinchpokli near S-Bridge are still involved.    Considering the challenges in such 

7 
 
heavily built area particularly in CSMT-Parel section, further ground level survey and 
studies exploring all possible alternatives is required to access the project viability 
before the project is taken further.” 
 
8. When t he Committee further asked about the estimated cost and operational 
phases of the CSMT-Kurla project, the Ministry, in reply, stated as under: 
“The estimated cost of the CSMT-Kurla Project is ₹890.89 crore. The work is being 
executed in two phases viz. Phase-I from Kurla to Parel and Phase-II from Parel to 
CSMT stations. Currently phase-I works between Kurla and Parel stations are in 
progress. 
 Phase-II could not be initiated due to land acquisition issues.” 
9. On being asked by the Committee about the timeline fixed for completion of the 
remaining phases of the project and the kinds of benefits those are expected to accrue to 
the local population from the same, the Ministry stated as under: 
“TDC for Phase-I: Dec-2026, and 
TDC for Phase-II: 02 years after land acquisition. 
Benefits of 5th & 6th line project: 
 
At present, 04 lines (02 slow and 02 fast Corridor lines) are operated in Central 
Railway from Kurla to CSMT. Beyond Kurla up to Kalyan, already 06 lines are in 
operation to segregate the non-suburban traffic from suburban traffic. 
Construction of additional 02 lines will segregate the non -suburban traffic from 
suburban traffic to increase the peak hour capacity of the suburban sections.” 
A. Planning for Detailed Estimate: 
10. The Committee have observed  from the Audit report  that non-adherence of 
Railway Board’s instructions of June 2008 for provision of housing to be kept to a bare 
minimum level and submission of estimate with incomplete justification led to avoidable 
delay in sanctioning of the Detailed Estimate. 
11. The Committee then enquired the Ministry about the deviation of RITES' Detailed 
Estimate from the Railway Board's directive to limit housing provisions to a bare minimum 
and how does the Ministry plan to utilize additionally acquired land parcels in future. The 
Committee further enquired w hether there is any plan to auction them to recover idle 
funds. The Ministry in its reply stated as under: 
“RITES has submitted the detailed estimate in Feb-2012 to CR. After Scrutiny of CR 
and MRVC, Detailed estimate amounting Rs. 923.78 Cr. has been submitted to Rly. 
Board on 19.06.2013 with provision of 134 nos. of Railway Quarters (Amounting Rs. 
20.94 Cr) as per the departmental requirement with consultation with CR HQ office. 

8 
 
 
Further, the Railway Board conveyed observations regarding quarters to be kept as 
bare minimum in 11.04.2014 and accordingly the requirement has been curtailed to 
72 quarters and included in the Estimate. 
 
Subsequently, Railway Board sanctioned the detailed estimate amounting Rs. 
890.89 Cr. on 11.09.2014. 
 
Land is acquired as per the bare minimum requirement for the project alignment. In 
lieu of the land acquisition, the Suburban section & Rail users in Mumbai will benefit 
as it will provide 04 exclusive tracks for suburban trains whereas 02 number through 
lines (proposed lines) will be available for long distance trains.  
Further, as the land acquired is bare minimum which will be used for construction of 
Railway lines and ancillary facilities, at present there is no plan to auction the land 
parcels to recover funds from these acquired lands.” 
 
12. The Committee then sought further details about the objectives of the Ministry 
behind the planning of the construction of the 5th and 6th lines between CSTM and Kurla 
and w hether feasibility studies were conducted in this regard . The Ministry replied as 
below: 
“In order to cater to substantial increase in numbers of suburban as well as long 
distance passengers, segregation of non - suburban traffic from suburban traffic to 
increase the peak hour capacity of the suburban section was aimed by this project. 
Feasibility studies of 5th & 6th Line have been carried out by RITES in Dec 2004. 
Railway Objectives of the study to take necessary steps to segregate the long -
distance traffic from suburban traffic between Thane and CSTM as well as to 
improve the suburban services on Central Railway. In Thane to Kurla section, 5th 
and 6th line is already operational. The feasibility study for providing 5th and 6th line 
for Kurla- CSTM section had been entrusted to RITES. 
In their study, RITES have concluded that the construction of 5th & 6th line was 
feasible subject to land acquisition indicated therein. 
Now, Project is planned to be completed in two phases. Phase-I will be from Kurla-
Parel (10.10Km) & Phase-II will be from Parel-CSMT (07.40 Km).” 
 
B. Planning for land acquisition and its implementation: 
13. The Committee have learnt that non -adherence of the codal provisions and 
Railway Board’s instructions of minimum acquisition of land resulted in excess 
assessment of land requirement proposed in the Detailed Estimate. Further, the 
Committee have also noted instances of lapses on the part of M/s. RITES which 
contributed to delay in land acquisition. 
14. On being asked by t he Committee as to what kind of challenges were faced in 
acquiring land for the CSMT-Kurla Project, the Ministry stated as under: 

9 
 
“The proposed land to be acquired in Dharavi had PAPs. As per extant policy of 
State Gov. of Maharashtra, it was necessary that those who occupy hutments/slums 
are to be given alternate accommodation before getting them vacated and then only 
physical possession of land could have been done. Hence, after getting an award 
of land from the Land Acquisition Authority, R&R of these PAPs was needed to be 
done. 
 Allotment for alternate accommodation is taking time for the R&R procedures as 
the proposed building being constructed by MMRDA is not yet ready for occupation. 
 After the alternate tenement allotment process has been started by MMRDA in 
January-2025, some PAPs had received alternate tenement allotment but they are 
not ready for shifting and demanding in -situ rehabilitation. Also, some PAPs also 
have not received tenement allotment issued by MMRDA and showed willingness 
for rehabilitation by Dharavi Rehabilitation Project (DRP). These issues are causing 
delay in R&R of PAPs of 5th & 6th line project. 
Swadeshi Mill land is a disputed land and under the custody of the Official Liquidator 
of High Court. Court case is going on this disputed land matter. Court has only 
allowed permission for land acquisition proceedings in order to complete the 
Railway Project so far. Also, initially Residents of Swadeshi Mill land opposed survey 
works for land acquisition procedures and did not allow Railways to carry out BSE 
surveys at land site. After long deliberations, BSES survey finally got done on 
25.04.2025 with Police Protection and further process is in progress with Revenue 
authorities (GoM). 
Phase-II involves acquisition and demolition of 11 nos. of multi -story buildings and 
their resettlement. In order to avoid this, Railway, based on detail discussion with 
State government, had proposed alternate alignment which has been finally 
dropped on 20.01.2023. Therefore, original alignment along with existing Rail way 
line at East side was reconsidered, which involves acquisition of MbPT land and 
other Private land. 
Moreover, dismantling of Byculla station building (Heritage), acquisition of land 
having encroachment, one multi storey building at Chinchpokli near S -Bridge are 
also involved. Considering the challenges in such heavily built area particularly in 
CSMT-Parel section, further ground level survey and studies exploring all possible 
alternatives is required to access the project viability before the project is taken 
further.” 
 
15. When the Committee asked about the details of land parcels  acquisition those 
were pending for construction of the 5th and 6th lines, the Ministry stated as below: 
“5th & 6th line project is planned to be executed in two phases. 
 For Phase-I works (Kurla -Parel) 
Total land required is 10139.60 Sq.m area. (Private Land – 6500.26 Sqm., and 
Government Land – 3639.34 Sqm.) 

10 
 
Land possession obtained in PH-I=2656Sq.m (NTC land at Parel). 
Land possession still pending for PH-I= 7483.6 Sq. m 
 Physical possession of land bearing CTS nos. 3/496,671,1/678 and 495 of Dharavi 
division is pending due to shifting of PAPs which is being done by MMRDA. 
For Swadeshi Mill land, the procedure of land acquisition is under process and 
pending with Government of Maharashtra. 
For Phase-II Works, 
This involves acquisition and demolition of 11 nos. of multistorey buildings between 
Masjid and Sandhurst Rd. and their resettlement, MbPT land having 
encroachments, one multi storey building at Chinchpokli near S-Bridge.” 
 
16. When t he Committee  enquired about the  timeline, if any,  prescribed for 
preparation, submission and approval of drawings and design  and the present status of 
transfer of land, the Ministry stated as under: 
“Preparation, submission and approval of drawings and designs, in practice due to 
complexities involved in the work necessitating regular changes, proceeds with the 
execution of the project. 
Transfer or Physical Possession of land bearing CTSnos.3/496,671,1/678 and 495 
of Dharavi division is held up due to non-shifting of PAPs.” 
 
17. The Committee questioned the Ministry about the reasons for delayed preparation 
of the Land Plans and non -assessment of actual land requirement which ultimately 
contributed to abnormal delay in land acquisition . The Ministry mentioned in its reply as 
below: 
“Due to complexities involved in the work necessitating regular changes, the 
process of preparation of the Land Plans proceeds the execution of the project and 
this process cannot be attributed to the delay in the land acquisition. The delay has 
been caused due to complex and cumbersome land acquisition issues as has been 
highlighted in different paras.” 
 
18. Further questioning the Ministry, when the C ommittee asked about  the present 
status of the five land acquisition proposals, they stated as under: 
“These five land parcels belong to Sion-Dadar Section of Phase-I.  
Possession of 2656 Square meter land bearing CTS no.8 from NTC Mill received 
in Sep-2022.  
For other 04 no. proposals of land bearing CTS nos. 3/496, 671, 1/678 and 495 of 
Dharavi division (total area 3092.59 Sq.m), 100% Payment has been made to 

11 
 
State Govt. in 2022. Physical possession of land is held up due to non-shifting of 
PAPs at land. R&R of PAPs is being done by MMRDA (Govt. of Maharashtra).” 
19. The Committee then asked the Ministry about the present status of land acquisition 
for Phase II (Parel to CSMT). The Ministry replied as below: 
“Phase-II involves acquisition and demolition of 11 nos. of multistory buildings 
and their resettlement, acquisition of MbPT land having encroachments, one 
multi storey building at Chinchpokli near S-Bridge and other Private land.  So far, 
no land has been acquired.  
Considering the challenges in such heavily built area particularly in CSMT -Parel 
section, further ground level survey and studies exploring all possible alternatives 
is required to access the project viability before the project is taken further.” 
 
20. The Committee then sought clarification as to why the Western Railway has not 
affected the land transfer requested by Central Railway since December 2015 and asked 
the Ministry to furnish a summary of Railway Board intervention and status updates from 
the audit years till date. The Ministry stated as under: 
“Central Railway and Western Railway are in constant coordination in this matter. 
As per western Railway, one G+15 Multi storied building is being built at 
Mahalaxmi for shifting of structures affected in central Railways 5th and 6th Lines 
Projects. (57 Quarters) located at Dadar and target for completion is June-2026. 
Also, this parcel of land will be required in later part of Phase-I of the project. 
The question of intervention by Railway Board does not arise.” 
 
C. Planning for Rehabilitation and Resettlement of Project Affected Persons (PAP) 
 
21. The Committee further desired to know w hether around 200 slum structures in 
Vidyavihar were demolished to facilitate platform extensions  and what were the 
rehabilitation efforts to provide relief to project -affected persons . The Ministry in reply 
mentioned as under: 
“It is not related to the CSMT-Kurla 5th & 6th line project.” 
 
22. The Committee further desired the Ministry to provide details of the present status 
of the rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The Ministry replied as under: 
“R&R of PAPs coming in the 5th & 6th line project is being done by MMRDA i.e. 
Gov. of Maharashtra. 
  
Presently, out of 714 PAPs, allotment for 656 is completed and status is as under: 
  

12 
 
Tenement 
Status 
Present Status 
656 Allotments has been done, further status as given below: 
532 Possession of key completed, but not shifted yet. 
98 
Not ready to accept allotment and demanding change in location in 
Dharavi. 
19 Possession of key will be completed by 30th June 2025. 
06 Cases are in Private Devkaran Trust which is under litigation. 
01 Structure is not found on site. 
  
Position of Balance 58 are as under: 
Tenement 
Status 
Status 
58 Allotment has been done, further status as given below: 
21 Under review by Floor Level Grievance Redressal Committee 
(FLGRC) of MMRDA. Allotment will be made after redressal. 
37 Other structures/ Public utilities will be constructed by Railways 
in Coordination with State authorities. 
 
23. When the Committee enquired  about the coordination mechanisms among the 
agencies involved in Rehabilitation and Resettlement of Project Affected Persons , the 
Ministry, in reply, stated that: 
“R&R responsibilities of this project were assigned to MMRDA (the state Gov. of 
Maharashtra) in coordination with M/s. SPARC, Central Railway and MRVC. 
 Land acquisition proposals were submitted to the concerned District Collector 
office. District Collector appoints a Special Land Acquisition Officer for taking up the 
further procedures of land acquisition proposals submitted to their office. City land 
Surveying officials conduct Joint Measurement survey for the land acquisition 
proposal. M/s. SPARC was the survey agency appointed through MRVC to conduct 
Baseline Socio Economic Survey (BSES) of PAPs. Further, BSES report was 
submitted to MMRDA ie. Mumbai M etropolitan Region Development Authority 
(Govt. of Maharashtra). 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement of Project Affected Persons is done by MMRDA 
(State Govt. Authority) as per the MUTP policy.  MMRDA prepares R&R schemes 

13 
 
for identified PAPs of concerned land parcels. After Shifting of these PAPs by 
MMRDA, the land possession is handed over by Revenue authorities to Railway.” 
 
24. Further questioning about the PAPs, when the Committee  asked how far the 
shifting or otherwise of the PAPs is going to affect the commencement/completion of the 
project, the Ministry in reply, stated as under:  
 
“Though, land Award letter and compensation formalities had been completed with 
Dist. Collector, Physical possession of land is held up due to non- shifting of PAPs. 
R&R of PAPs is being done by MMRDA (GoM). Project work can be started on site 
only after the physical possession of Land received from revenue authority which 
needs the land to be vacated. Therefore, the commencement/Completion of work 
was delayed due to delay in shifting of Project Affected Persons (PAPs). 
The details of land affecting the project is as under: 
 
Sr. 
No. Location/ Km Details of Hindrances or 
Obstructions 
Affected 
length 
(Approx. m) 
Phase-I 
1 Between 11.110 Km 
to 12.910 km 
Length affected due to 
shifting of PAPs between 
Sion & Matunga station. 
800 m 
2 Between 13.710 Km 
to 15.110 km 
Length affected due to 
acquisition of Swadeshi Mills 
land between Sion-Kurla. 
1035 m 
Total Length affected due to various hindrances 4335 m 
Phase-II 
1 1.3110 Km to 2.25 
Km 
Land acquisition at Masjid -
Sandhurst Rd. 
939m 
2 3.00 km to 3.93 km Land acquisition at Byculla - 
Sandhurst Rd. 
930m 
Total Length affected 1839m 
 
Since the project is a laying of continuous Railway lines, the project cannot be 
initiated unless complete continuous land is available.” 

14 
 
25. The Co mmittee further desired the Ministry to  furnish the details of the project 
affected persons (PAPs) who have received the possession of the alternative residences 
built for them and those who have not received as yet . The Ministry, in reply, stated as 
follows: 
 
Out of 714 PAPs, allotment for 656 is completed. Present position of this 656 Tenement 
is as under: - 
Tenement Status Present Status 
656 Allotments has been done, further status as given below: 
532 Possession of key completed, but not shifted yet. 
19 Possession of key will be completed by 30th June 2025. 
98 Not ready to accept allotment and demanding change in location 
in Dharavi. 
06 Cases are in Private Devkaran Trust which is under litigation. 
01 Structure is not found on site. 
 
Balance 58 tenements position are as under: - 
Tenement 
Status 
Present Status 
58 Allotment has been done, further status as given below: 
21 
Under review by Floor Level Grievance Redressal Committee (FLGRC) of 
MMRDA. Allotment will be made after redressal. 
37 
Other structures/ Public utilities will be constructed by Railways in 
Coordination with State authorities as per their requirement. These 
structures pertain to State Government and Local bodies like public toilets 
and police chowkis. 
 
26. When a sked by the Committee about how many times alignment has been 
changed in the process of 5th and 6th line construction from CSTM to Kurla station , the 
Ministry replied as below: 
“For Phase-I (Kurla-Parel), no changes in alignment have been made after 
finalization of plans. 
For Phase-II (CSMT-Parel), as has been indicated in general issues, the matter is 
proposed to be reviewed.” 
 

15 
 
27. Upon further enquiring, when the Committee asked whether the Ministry has failed 
to protect its lands from encroachments and any accountability has been fixed and action 
taken by the Ministry to ensure that no such encroachments occur in future , the Ministry 
replied as under: 
“Mapping of the area under encroachment is being carried on a continuous basis 
and the details of the same is being filled and monitored through an online portal 
i.e., IRLAMs developed by CRIS. Further, new encroachment is being removed as 
per the provision s of Para 147 of Railway Act 1989 and action against hard 
encroachment is being taken as per the provision of PPE Act 1971.” 
 
28. The Committee then asked the Ministry whether the Railway Board has considered 
the feasibility of the second phase of the project in view of prevailing challenges . In this 
regard, the Ministry informed as below: 
“Considering the challenges in Phase -II in heavily built -up areas, further ground 
level survey and studies are being considered to assess the project viability before 
the project is taken further.” 
 
29. Further when the Committee asked whether other possible alternatives have been 
worked out by them for the second phase of the project, the Ministry, in reply, stated  as 
under: 
“Further ground level survey and studies are being considered to assess the project 
viability before the project is taken further. Other alternatives will be explored 
thereafter.” 
 
30. In light of the above provided information, the Committee further enquired whether 
or not efforts have been made to align the planning with the Mumbai Metro/Suburban 
Rail. The Ministry furnished their reply as under: 
“The main objectives of this project were to segregate non-suburban traffic from 
suburban traffic to increase the peak hour capacity of the suburban section.  
The Metro Rail network is being planned by Govt. of Maharashtra considering the 
capacity of existing transport networks (Railways and Roads) and future growth.” 
31. The Committee further discussed about the right of the way while taking oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry . The Committee then asked whether the 
Ministry has adequate legal framework and substantiating rules providing for a right of 
way similar to that exercised by NHAI  and whether there is any compensation policy for 
land acquisition from the NHAI. The Ministry responded as below: - 
“This project is an MUTP Project where rehabilitation of PAPs rest with Govt. of 
Maharashtra as per the MoU between Railway & Govt of Maharashtra (GoM) and is 
governed by GoM Rules. 
The Land Acquisition is being done under RFCTLARR Act, 2013.  

16 
 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) of PAPs in the acquired land is being done 
as per Policy of MMRDA, State Govt. of Maharashtra.  
There is no compensation policy for land acquisition similar to NHAI for this project.” 
32. On land transfer, the Committee asked the Ministry why the same has not been 
done by Northern Railway (Western) to Central Railway till January 2024 even though 
sanction of R ailway Board (RB) was received in September 2014 and why the RB has 
not followed up on  it. The Committee further asked the Ministry w hether the R B has 
reviewed the reasons for delays in this project and whether any remedial action has been 
taken in this regard. The Ministry in its reply stated as below: 
“Central Railway and Western Railway are in constant coordination in this matter. 
One G+15 Multi storeyed building is being built by Western Railway at Mahalaxmi 
for shifting of structures affected in central Railways 5th and 6th Lines Projects (57 
Quarters) located at Dadar and target for completion is June-2026. 
Also, this parcel of land will be required in later part of Phase-I of the project.” 
33. The Committee further asked the Ministry to furnish its legal opinion and reports 
on whether any internal audit or legal review has been conducted to examine compliance 
with codal provisions, Railway Board's 2009 directives, and statutory land acquisition 
norms during project execution. The Ministry stated as below: 
“Detailed Estimate was vetted and concurred by finance for a cost of 923.78 Cr.  
initially. 
Railway Board sanctioned the Detailed Estimate on 11.09.2014 at a total cost of 
890.89 Cr. in accordance with the Railway Board Guidelines. 
Further, audit is being done as per extent guidelines. The present observations 
under deliberations are part of audit report only.” 
34. Further questioning about the expenditure, the Committee asked the Ministry why 
₹500.93 crore (56.22% of the sanctioned estimate) was  expended by January 2024 
despite only 26% physical progress and asked to furnish details of the dates of the phase-
wise utilization certificates, bills submitted and cleared, and site progress reports.  The 
Ministry replied as under: - 
“Major expenditure incurred on land acquisition as 168.46 Cr. which does not get 
reflected in physical progress. Hence, there is a difference between physical 
progress and financial progress. 
  
Details of expenditure as per Accounts data till Jan-2024 are as follows:  
 

17 
 
S.N Cstm Kurla 5th & 6th Line Expenditure Since 
commencement up to january 2024 
(Figs. in Thousand) 
1 Expenditure Civil 2063337 
   Elect 144890 
   S&T 394614 
   Total   (in Thds) 2602841 
2 Land Payment Civil 1684617 
3 Stores  179354 
4 D&G Civil 305143 
   Elect 178309 
   S&T 37925 
   Total   (in Thds) 521377 
5 Contingencies Civil 15492 
   Elect 2127 
   S&T 1002 
   Total 
(in Thds) 
18621 
   Grand Total 
(in Thds) 
5006810 
   Total in CR. 500.68 
      
35. The Ministry was asked by the Committee to explain why contracts for civil works, 
including Foot Over Bridges and platforms, were awarded without finalised plans and land 
possession, in violation of Railway Board's 2009 codal instructions and to provide the list 
of relevant contracts entered into, vetting notes, and legal opinion sought and given if any. 
The Committee also asked whether  any enquiry was made regarding this. The Ministry 
stated as below: 
 
“The contracts were called in anticipation that final plans and land possession will 
be available before the start of execution. However, the same could not be 
materialized due to encroachment on land to be acquired and related complexities.” 

18 
 
 
36. Audit highlighted that the primary goal to segregate the long-distance line from the 
suburban was to make it faster and to improve the overall suburban services in CR 
(Central Railways) which was entrusted with implementing this project. How far have your 
Ministry succeeded in achieving the goal and what is the present status thereof? How 
long do you think it will take to complete the project in realistic terms? 
 
“Segregation work has been completed from Kurla to Kalyan. 
Present Status of Kurla to CSMT (17.50 km) (MUTP Phase-II) Project  
For execution the work is divided in two phases i.e. Phase-I and Phase-II 
 
Phase I: Kurla to Parel (10.10 km) 
• Work Status: In progress (29%) 
• Target Date of Completion (TDC) Phase - I: December 2026. 
 • Key Constraints:    
• Land acquisition  
• Relocation of Project -Affected Persons (Rehabilitation of 714 PAPs at Sion -
Matunga section and land acquisition at Swadeshi Mill under progress. It is being 
done in coordination with Govt. of Maharashtra)  
• Extensive shifting of Signalling & Telecommunication (S&T) cables and Overhead 
Equipment (OHE) cables  
• Closure of Dharavi ROB  
• Dismantling and reconstruction of Harbor line ROR between King Circle and 
Mahim Stations. 
 
Phase II: Parel to CSMT 
• Key Constraint:  
• Land acquisition involving demolition of multi-storied buildings.  
Target Date of Completion (TDC): 2 years from the date of land acquisition.” 
 
  

19 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTORY 
The Mumbai Suburban Railway System, serving nearly three million daily 
commuters, is one of the busiest urban rail networks globally, yet suffers from 
severe overcrowding, with peak -hour passenger load often exceeding rated 
capacity by more than approximat ely 2.5 times, resulting in critical safety 
concerns. To enhance capacity and segregate suburban railways from long -
distance and freight railway traffic on the heavily saturated Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) to Kurla corridor, the Ministry of Railways, in partnership 
with the Government of Maharashtra through the Mumbai Railway Vikas 
Corporation Limited (MRVL), sanctioned the construction of 5th and 6th railway 
lines under the Mumbai Urban Transport Project-II. 
 
LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT FOR PHASE-I 
1.The Committee note that the acquisition of the required 10,139.6 sqm of land for 
Phase-I (Kurla to Parel), comprising 6,500.26 sqm of private land and 3,639.34 sqm 
of government land, has been significantly delayed, with only 2,656 sqm acquired 
and possession received as of January 2024. The Committee also note that the said 
delay is primarily on account of the slow progress in land acquisition processes 
initiated in January 2018, complex legal disputes such as those involving the 
Swadeshi Mill land, and the protracted rehabilitation and resettlement of 714 
Project Affected Persons (PAPs) in the Dharavi and Dadar areas, where physical 
possession of 3,092.59 sqm remains pending despite full payment to the State 
Government in 2022. The Committee are aware that as per the latest updates, out 
of these 714 PAPs, allotment for 656 has been completed by  the Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA), with 532 having received 
possession keys but not yet shifted, 98 demanding changes in location to Dharavi. 
These delays, exacerbated by social issues in densely populated areas, non -
shifting of PAPs despite allotments starting in January 2025, and opposition to 
surveys (e.g., at Swadeshi Mill, requiring police protection for the Baseline Socio -
Economic Survey), are hindering the timely completion of a project essential for 
alleviating congestion on Mumbai’s suburban rail network.  

20 
 
Since resettlement of PAPS is a sensitive issue and requires proper 
handling, t he Committee, recommend that the Ministry of Railways establish a 
dedicated land acquisition and resettlement cell, comprising representatives from 
MMRDA, local authorities including the District Collector and Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) , and the Government of Maharashtra, to 
expedite land acquisition procedures under the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resett lement Act, 2013 
(RFCTLARR Act), and ensure timely resettlement of PAPs through coordinated 
efforts. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should develop a 
comprehensive, time-bound plan for the rehabilitation and resettlement of all PAPs, 
addressing those who have not shifted despite receiving allotment keys, those 
demanding in-situ rehabilitation, and those whose cases are under re view, with 
milestones aligned to the revised target date of December 2026 for Phase -I 
completion.  
Need for early resolution issues impacting the project timelines 
2. The Committee observe that there has been poor coordination among 
stakeholders, including Central Railway (CR), Western Railway (WR), the 
Government of Maharashtra, MMRDA, Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT), Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM), and traffic police departments, which has 
led to significant delays in obtaining necessary permissions, such as the No 
Objection Certificate (NOC) for closing the Sion Road Over Bridge (ROB)  (The 
permission was sought via letter dated 12 November 2018 and only resolved on 11 
October 2024 after multiple meetings ) and similar issues with the Dharavi ROB, 
alongside unresolved land transfers from WR to CR requested since December 
2015. These lapses, compounded by the lack of timely issuance of drawings 
(revised between July 2019 and September 2023), site inaccessibility, and external 
factors like the COVID -19 pandemic, have contributed to only 29% progress in 
Phase-I as of the latest status, with extensions in contracts fro m November 2016 
to August 2023 and idle materials worth ₹7.06 crore. The Committee are of the 
opinion that such coordination failures have adversely impacted the project 
timelines, undermining the objective of segregating non -suburban traffic from 
suburban services as envisioned in the feasibility study by RITES in December 
2004.  

21 
 
The Committee are of the view that issues like delays in NOC or transfer of 
land could have been resolved earlier with the timely interventions at appropriate 
level and proper coordination amongst the different agencies involved. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to review all such issues 
responsible for delay in timely completion of project and take up the matter with 
the concerned authorities for their early resolution . The Committee feel that for 
timely completion of such kind of projects,  prompt approvals/NOCs etc. are pre -
requisite and therefore, desire the Ministry to explore the feasibility of forming of 
Coordination Committee(s) at the start of each project comprising of 
representatives of different agencies involved in various kind of  
formalities/approvals to resolve inter-agency disputes at the first stage itself. 
 
INQUIRY AND ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONTRACT IRREGULARITIES 
3. The Committee note from audit findings that contracts were awarded without 
approved designs, drawings, and clear sites, in violation of Railway Board's 2009 
codal instructions, resulting in idle resources worth ₹7.06 crore, multiple 
extensions from November 2016 to August 2023 due to non-issuance of drawings, 
site inaccessibility, and pandemic restrictions, and short closures of contracts to 
avoid further losses. These practices, including the awarding of civil works 
contracts for Foot Over Bridges (FOBs ), platforms, and other infrastructure in 
anticipation of land availability that did not materialize due to encroachments and 
PAP resettlement delays, have led to financial losses and eroded public trust in 
management of the project by the Government, with no specific accountability 
fixed despite the project's initiation in 2009 and extensions pushing the completion 
beyond the original target of March 2021.  
The Committee observe that such irregularities stem from inadequate 
planning, as noted in the initial land assessment of November 2014 and deviations 
from Railway Board's June 2008 instructions to limit housing provisions to a bare 
minimum, initially proposed at 134 quarters (₹20.94 crore) in the February 2012 
detailed estimate by RITES, later reduced to 72 following Board observations in 
April 2014, leading to the sanctioned estimate of ₹890.89 crore in September 2014. 
The Committee, therefo re, recommend t hat the Ministry initiate an independent 
inquiry to investigate the premature awarding of contracts, fix accountability for 

22 
 
these lapses, including any deviations from codal provisions and failure to adhere 
to the 2009 directives , and apprise  the Committee of  its findings within a fixed 
timeframe. The Committee further recommend that stricter guidelines should be 
implemented to ensure that future contracts are awarded only when all 
prerequisites, such as approved designs, finalized land plans, and clear sites free 
of encroachments, are in  place, with mandatory vetting notes and legal opinions 
documented prior to tendering. 
 
FEASIBILITY STUDY AND MUMBAI METRO INTEGRATION 
4. The Committee note that Phase -II of the project, from Parel to CSMT (7.40 km), 
faces significant challenges, including land acquisition involving the demolition of 
11 multi-story buildings between Masjid and Sandhurst Road, acquisition of MbPT 
land with encroachments, dismantling of the heritage Byculla station building, 
acquisition of encroached land, and one multi-storey building at Chinchpokli near 
S-Bridge, all of which raise doubts about its feasibility in Mumbai’s complex urban 
environment, as evidenced by the dropping of an alternative alignment along P 
D’Mello Road on 20 January 2023 after deliberations in February to May 2022 by 
the High-Level Committee for CSMT World Class Station Development.  
The Ministry has also informed the Committee that considering the 
challenges in such heavily built area particularly in CSMT -Parel section, further 
ground level survey and studies exploring all possible alternatives is required to 
access the project viability  before the project is taken further. Additionally, the 
Committee recognize the importance of integrating these railway lines with other 
transport modes, particularly the Mumbai Metro and existing suburban networks, 
to ensure a seamless commuting experience and enhance the overall efficiency of 
Mumbai’s transport network, especially given the project's aim to segregate non -
suburban traffic as per the RITES feasibility study of December 2004, which 
concluded viability subject to land acquisition.  The C ommittee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Railways conduct a comprehensive feasibility 
study for Phase-II at the earliest exploring alternative alignments or technologies, 
such as elevated or underground tracks, to minimize disruption and cost, whil e 
assessing whether Phase -II is viable or whether alternative solutions, including 
enhanced integration with the Mumbai Metro, should be prioritized to achieve the 

23 
 
project's objectives of increasing suburban capacity and reducing congestion. 
This study should incorporate ground -level surveys and stakeholder 
consultations, including with MMRDA and Mumbai Metro authorities, to explore 
joint planning for stations, seamless transfer facilities, or shared infrastructure. 
 
PREVENTION OF RAILWAY LAND ENCROACHMENTS 
5. The Committee are concerned about the recurring encroachments on railway 
land, which have complicated land acquisition efforts and delayed the project, as 
seen in Phase -I where delays in PAP shifting  affected 4,335 m of track (800 m 
between Sion and Matunga and 1,035 m at Swadeshi Mill) and Phase-II where 1,839 
m is impacted (939 m at Masjid -Sandhurst Road and 930 m at Byculla -Sandhurst 
Road), posing safety risks to railway operations. The Committee are of the opinion 
that encroachments not only obstruct  progress but also undermine project 
viability, as highlighted by the need for continuous mapping via the Indian Railway 
Land Management System (IRLAMs) portal developed by  Centre for Railway 
Information System (CRIS).  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways  take 
immediate measures to protect its land from encroachments, such as constructing 
compound walls or fences along the  tracks, enhancing monitoring through the 
IRLAMs portal with real -time updates, and conducting regular surveys in 
coordination with local authorities. The Ministry should also  consider taking 
expedited legal actions under the Railway Act 1989 and Public Premises (Eviction 
of Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971 to remove unauthorized structures, while 
fixing accountability for any failures to prevent encroachments. 
 
ADOPTION OF NHAI MODEL FOR EXPEDITING URBAN LAND ACQUISITION 
6. The Committee note that land acquisition in urban areas like Mumbai is often 
delayed due to legal challenges and disputes, as evidenced by the project's 
reliance on the RFCTLARR Act, 2013,), and governed by Mumbai Urban Transport 
Project (MUTP) policies where rehabilitation responsibilities lie with the 
Government of Maharashtra  as per the MoU, leading to protracted processes for 
PAPs and disputed lands like Swadeshi Mill.  

24 
 
To expedite the process, the Committee advise the Ministry to study 
successful models, such as that of the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), 
which allows for smoother land acquisition with minimal legal obstacles by limiting 
challenges primarily to compensation disputes. The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry consider developing a similar legal mandate for 
railway projects in urban  areas, enabling acquisition with restricted litigation 
scopes to ensure that projects are not halted. 
 
IMPROVEMENT OF FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT 
7. The Committee note that the project has disbursed 56.22% (₹500.93 crore) of its 
₹890.89 crore s sanctioned estimate by January 2024 while achieving only 26% 
physical progress (now 29% in Phase -I), indicating a significant misalignment 
between financial expenditure and project milestones, with major outlays on land 
acquisition (₹168.46 crore, not reflected in physical progress), civil works (₹206.33 
crore), electrical (₹14.49 crore), signalling and telecommunication (₹39.46 crore), 
stores (₹17.94 crore), design and general charges (₹52.14 crore), and contingencies 
(₹1.86 crore). This raises questions about the efficiency of financial management, 
particularly given audit findings on idle resources and contract extensions.  
The Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry institute a 
comprehensive project financial management framework that includes monthly 
reviews of expenditure against physical progress, periodic audits by internal and 
external bodies, and prompt correctiv e actions to address discrepancies, with 
routine scrutiny of Utilization Certificates (UCs), bills, and site progress reports at 
senior levels, to ensure efficient use of the budget and alignment with milestones 
of December 2026 for Phase-I. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                        K.C. VENUGOPAL 
16 April 2026                                                Chairperson, 
26 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)                                    Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX - II 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) HELD ON 16th APRIL, 2026. 
 
 The Public Accounts Committee (2025 -26) sat on Thursday, the 16 th April, 2026 
from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT  
 Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
3. Shri Jai Parkash  
4. Dr. C M Ramesh  
5. Dr. Amar Singh  
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
 RAJYA SABHA  
9.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan  
10.    Dr. K Laxman  
11.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania - Director 
3. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
1. Shri Saurav Kumar Jaipuriyar - Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Addl. Dy. C&AG 

26 
 
3. Ms. Ritu Dhillon - Director General 
4. Shri Sanjay Sahu - Director 
 
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee and invited suggestions from the Members on the following Draft Reports 
included in the agenda for consideration and adoption: 
(i) X X X X X 
(ii) “Construction of 5 th and 6 th line between Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) -Kurla Station” based on Chapter – II of 
C&AG Report no. 02 of 2025; and  
(iii) X X X X X 
 
2. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid three Draft Reports 
with slight modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light 
of factual verification done by the Audit.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 