 
 
 
 
 11 
FUNCTIONING OF RAILWAY MAIL 
SERVICE AND ROAD TRANSPORT 
NETWORK IN DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their 92nd Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


  
 
PAC No. 2405   E L E V E N T H  R E P O R T    COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)                                       
  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee on Public Accounts contained in their 92nd Report (17th Lok Sabha)]  MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)                                                                                                                         Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19-03-2025             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19-03-2025   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I    March 2025/ Phalguna 1946 (Saka)   
FUNCTIONING OF RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE AND ROAD TRANSPORT NETWORK IN DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 

 
 
 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
  
 
APPENDIX 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.02.2025 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee on Public 
Accounts contained in their Ninety Second  Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
III. Annexures referred to in the Report  
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma                 -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muralidharan. P                 -   Director 
3. Shri Vijay Mishra                       -   Committee Officer 
4. Shri Prakhar Prakash Anand    -   Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
           
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
"Functioning of Railway Mail Service and Road Transport Network in Department of 
Posts" relating to the Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts). 
  
2.       The Ninety Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2024. The Committee considered the draft Action 
Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th 
February, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
  
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
  
5.       An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 92nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
  
  
  
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
  
  
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Ninety Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Functioning of Railway 
Mail Service and Road Transport Network in Department of Posts".  
 
2. The Ninety Second report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 07.02.2024.  It contained twelve Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Communications, (Department of Posts), and are categorized as 
under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.   
         
      Total:       12        
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL      
           
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V

2 
 
 
 
 
3.  The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
several issues in the management of the Railway Mail Service (RMS) and the Road 
Transport Network (RTN) by the Department of Posts (DoP) for postal conveyance. 
While RMS relied heavily on Indian Railways, including Departmental RMS Vans and 
hired train accommodations, the RTN was added in 2013 to support parcel security, 
particularly for e-commerce. Despite these efforts, mail traffic data from 2017 to 2020 
showed a decline in overall business, with revenue dropping from ₹634.61 crore in 
2017-18 to ₹510.27 crore in 2019-20. Although Mail Services expenditures 
decreased, RMS expenditures rose from ₹116 crore to ₹183 crore, highlighting the 
need for better cost management. The Committee had accordingly given their 
observations/recommendations in their Ninety second Report. 
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communication, 
Department of Posts on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety second Report have been reproduced in the 
relevant Chapters of this Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken 
by the Government, on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Communication, Department of 
Posts to furnish Action Taken Notes duly vetted by Audit, in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to the 
Parliament. 
 
6. The Committee in their Original Report No. 92 (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“Payment for sanctioned berths without verifying actual allotment: 
According to Audit, scrutiny of records revealed that Railways had raised bills 
for berths sanctioned instead of actual berths allotted in three Circles and that 
the payments were made without verification of the claims, resulting in excess 
payment of haulage charges of Rs.12.15 crore. The Committee note from the 
reply of the Ministry that two Circles of Gujarat and Telangana have adjusted 
the extra amount debited from their account and Odisha Circle has submitted, 
after reconciliation, that the actual excess debited amount is Rs. 8.4 Cr against 

3 
 
 
 
reported amount of Rs. 10.61 Cr. The excess debited amount has not been 
sanctioned by the Circle and matter is being pursued with railways for 
adjustment of the same. Explaining reasons for making payments without 
verifying the actual berths allotted, the Ministry stated that in case of Gujarat 
Circle, the excess payment was made due to oversight for the period from 
Apr'18 to Dec'19. The excess paid amount has since been recovered after 
identification of the issue and from Jan'20, and sanctions were issued for actual 
allotment only. To ensure that Postal Units verify the berths actually 
allotted/used before making payments in the future, the Ministry stated that all 
Nodal postal Circles have been directed to share statement of sectional 
accommodation every month with the concerned zonal Railway so that the 
same may be considered before raising bills. The Railway Board has also been 
requested to direct zonal Railways accordingly. While noting that all the three 
circles have either adjusted the extra amount or initiated action for recovery of 
excess amount debited from their account, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details of amounts debited and recoveries made by each of the 
three circles. The Committee desire that appropriate checks may be put in 
place to ensure that before raising bills, statement of sectional accommodation 
is invariably shared every month with the concerned zonal Railway and verified 
scrupulously. The Committee while taking note of instances of claims raised for 
closed/ non-functional sections/trains, have also observed that there have been 
occasions of claims being made by two zonal railways separately to two 
different postal Circles. The Committee recommend that appropriate 
mechanism should also be devised to address such issues by introducing 
inbuilt verification processes to avoid future discrepancies in billing and 
payment.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 1] 
 
7. The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts in their Action Taken 
Notes have stated as under:- 
  “As already reported, excess debited amounts in respect of Gujarat 
and Telangana Postal Circles stand adjusted. Odisha Postal Circle has 
reported after reconciliation that the actual excess debited amount is Rs. 8.32 
cr instead of Rs. 8.4 cr. informed by the Circle previously (Annexure 1.3). The 
difference was due to revision of haulage rates for the period April 2019 to 
February 2020. This has been rectified by the Circle.   

4 
 
 
 
Status of recoveries/adjustments of excess debits in Gujarat, Telangana and 
Odisha Circles is as under:  
Gujarat 
Circle 
The excess debited amount of Rs. 1.09 Cr has been got adjusted 
by the Circle through DA(P) Ahmedabad from RBI (CAS) Nagpur 
vide memo no. 2 dated 06.07.2023, after reconciliation of records. 
(Annexure-1.1) 
Telangana 
Circle 
Based on the reports received, on reconciliation of haulage bills in 
respect of sections L-1 and Z-26 for the period shown in audit 
report, the actual excess payment works out to  Rs. 29,01,240, 
which has been credited to DoP vide credit advice no.3 dated 
21.06.2023 through DA(P) Hyderabad. (Annexure- 1.2) 
Odisha 
Circle 
The actual amount of excess debit in Odisha Circle is Rs. 8.32 cr 
(Annexure 1.3); out of which Rs. 1.26 cr have been adjusted, 
remaining Rs.7.066 cr is under process and is expected to be 
adjusted shortly. Detailed breakup is mentioned in the table1.3 
below**  
  
**Table 1.3 (Detailed breakup of outstanding excess debits in Odisha Circle) 
S.No. Amount 
(Rs.) 
Status of Adjustment Annexure  
1 18,39,600 Adjusted by SER in Feb 2024 bill 1.3a 
2 32,05,710 Adjusted by SER in March 2024 bill 1.3b 
3 31,02,300 Adjusted by SER in April 2024 bill 1.3b1 
4 16,25,400 Adjusted by Odisha Circle 1.3c 
5 28,37,790 Adjusted by Odisha Circle 1.3d 
6 7,06,66,290  Agreed by SER for refund in 
subsequent bills 
1.3e 
Total 8,32,77,090 As above   
  
  It was observed that the major part of excess debits was due to 
incorrect berth calculation in the sectional accommodation provided by the 
Railways. Therefore, the matter was taken up with the Railway Board by DoP. 
Now Railway Board has clarified the guiding principles for berth calculation and 
the Zonal Railways authorised to raise claims for haulage charges to the 

5 
 
 
 
respective Postal Circles. This clarification has helped in expediting adjustment 
of present cases of excess debits and will also ensure non-recurrence of 
excess debits in future. (Annexure 1.4)  
  As regards recommendations of the Committee on devising a 
mechanism to avoid future discrepancies in billing and payment of the actual 
berths allotted, a mechanism has been devised by DoP by introducing a 
statement of sectional accommodation which is sent by the nodal Postal Circles 
to respective Zonal Railways. Railway Board has also been requested to direct 
Zonal Railways to consider the same while raising haulage bills. (Annexure 
1.5). It may be seen that this mechanism involves verification of allotted 
sectional accommodation by DoP and consideration of these statements by the 
concerned Zonal Railways before raising debit advices rules out the possibility 
of discrepancies or excess debits in haulage bills.”. 
 
8.  Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“Ministry may submit final status of amount credited back to Odisha Postal 
Circle. 
 2. Further, Ministry may apprise PAC of the 
 (i) outcome of the request made to Railway Board for validation of 
 statement of sectional accommodation to be provided by the 
 concerned Circles to Railways to ensure accuracy of bills along with 
 supporting documents. 
 (ii) progress made in r/o inbuilt verification process to avoid 
 discrepancies in billing and payment of haulage charges.” 
9. The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts further replied to the 
vetting comments of the Audit as below: 
 
“Final Status of amount adjusted and outstanding is as under: 
 
Total Outstanding (Rs.)  8,32,77,090 
Total Amount Adjusted (Rs.)  1,89,18,810 
Net outstanding (on Part of SER) 6,43,58,280 
 
The amount is being adjusted by South Eastern Railway (SER) @ 50% of 
haulage bill every month. Railway Board has been requested by DoP 
(Annexure1.11) for one-time adjustment of the outstanding amount. A 
reconciliation meeting has also been requested for on 21.08.2024. 
 
The statement of accommodation is regularly being sent by the nodal Postal 
Circles to concerned Zonal Railways. Some examples are mentioned as under: 
 

6 
 
 
 
Postal Circle Zonal Railway Sent for the Month 
of  
Sent on 
Bihar Eastern Railway 
East Central 
railway 
June’24 10.07.2024  
Gujarat North Western 
railway 
Western Railway 
June’24 08.07.2024  
Maharashtra Central Railway June’24 10.07.2024  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
North East Railway 
North Central 
Railway 
June’24 10.07.2024  
  
As a result of the request made to the Railway Board by DoP, the statements of 
sectional accommodations sent by Postal Circles are being considered by the 
concerned Zonal Railways, as apparent from the compliance received from 
Circles. As an example, reply of UP Circle, intimating that the haulage bills are 
being submitted as per statements of Circle, is enclosed as Annexure 1.2(i) for 
reference.” 
 
10. The Committee observed that payments were made for sanctioned 
berths instead of actual berths allotted, resulting in excess payments of 
haulage charges amounting to Rs. 12.15 crore in three Circles. Hence the 
Committee recommended instituting a monthly verification process with zonal 
railways and implementing reconciliation mechanisms to avoid future 
discrepancies. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that excess 
payments of Rs. 1.09 crore and Rs. 29 lacs in Gujarat Circle and Telangana 
Circle, respectively were adjusted following reconciliation. Further in case of 
Odisha Circle, the Committee note that Rs. 1.89 crore out of an excess amount 
of Rs. 8.32 crore was adjusted, with a sum of Rs 6.43 crore is the net 
outstanding amount. Additionally, the Ministry have requested a one-time 
adjustment of the outstanding amount from the Railway Board and a 
reconciliation meeting was scheduled for 21.08.2024. In this regard, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to provide an update on the final reconciliation 
of the outstanding excess payment made by the Odisha Circle.  
 The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that they have 
introduced a system where the nodal Postal Circles share monthly sectional 
accommodation statements with Zonal Railways, ensuring bills are raised 

7 
 
 
 
based on actual berth usage. The Ministry have mentioned compliance from 
Zonal Railways, who are now following the recommended procedure and have 
sought guidance from the Railway Board on standardizing berth calculation. In 
view of the action taken by the Ministry, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to explore integrating an automated system for real-time berth 
allocation and simultaneous usage verification between the DoP and Indian 
Railways which will help in reducing manual errors and streamlining the 
reconciliation process. 
 
11. The Committee in their Original Report No. 92 (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the sanction of berths for RMS by Railways is based 
on the requirements projected by DoP. However, there have been several 
instances of short allotment of berths as against those sanctioned by Railways. 
In three Circles, Audit observed that the short allotment for the period 2017-
2020, adversely affected the quality of service provided due to inadequate 
space. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the cases of short 
accommodation provided have been addressed to the Railways from time to 
time and requests made in this regard to Zonal Railways by the Circles as well 
as by Directorate to Railway Board. Further, the Ministry updated that they are 
provided with the sanctioned accommodation by the Railways in all the circles 
across the country barring occasional exceptions. The mail volume is affected 
by other factors also such as a particular event, season (festival. etc.) and may 
vary from time to time. Hence, it may not always be the case that whenever the 
actual accommodation deviates from sanctioned position, the service is 
affected as the DoP has a well-developed Road Transport Network (RTN). The 
Committee while noting that to overcome the instances of short accommodation 
in RMS sections, the left-over mail, if any, is dispatched through next immediate 
available mode i.e., RTN/Section desire to be apprised of the quantum of the 
left-over mail sent through RTN/ Section in each of the circles during last three 
years and the resultant additional expenditure incurred in each of these circles. 
Further, the Committee also desire to be apprised of the mechanism put in 
place for according priority to the mail to be sent treated as leftover mall in case 
of short accommodation provided by the Railways and delays If any, that may 
have occurred in delivering mall due to Inadequate space.” 

8 
 
 
 
[Recommendation Para No. 2] 
 
12. The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts in their Action Taken Notes 
have stated as under:- 
“As already submitted, the sanctioned accommodation is based on average mail 
volume carried by a particular section. This may be due to a particular event, 
special booking, size of mail articles etc. Hence, it may not always be the case 
that whenever actual accommodation deviates from the sanctioned one, the 
service is adversely affected. Moreover, whenever such short accommodation is 
assigned, priority is to be given accountable mail and second-class mail having 
relaxed delivery norms. Such mail is sent through alternate available transmission 
facility. However, since no such report of adverse effect on service was reported, 
therefore no record of such left-over mail is available. Further, since existing and 
available resources are utilised to convey the mail which may be left over as an 
exception due to short accommodation, no extra expenditure is incurred.” 
13. Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“Audit has no further comments” 
14. The Committee had expressed concerns over instances of short allotment 
of berths, which affected mail service quality in some Circles and had asked 
the Ministry to provide data on mail left over due to short accommodation, the 
additional expenditure incurred when utilizing Road Transport Network (RTN) 
as an alternative, and the mechanism for prioritizing mail in such cases. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Railway's berth 
allotment is based on average mail volume, and deviations from the 
sanctioned position do not consistently impact service quality. The Ministry 
further clarified that, in the rare cases of short accommodation, priority is 
given to accountable and second-class mail, with any remaining mail 
dispatched through RTN without any additional cost. The Committee also note 
from the reply of the Ministry that they have addressed the priority handling of 
mails and confirmed that the alternate arrangements are in place. However, the 
Ministry have not provided the specific data on the volume of left-over mail 
and/or additional expenditure, stating that no records are kept, as the short 
allotment cases are not reported to have affected service quality. In this 
regard, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry 
should consider maintaining records of instances where mail is left over due 
to short accommodation, especially during high-traffic periods (festivals, 

9 
 
 
 
events). This data may provide a clearer picture of the extent of such 
occurrences which will further help in evaluating if the Road Transport 
Network adequately compensates for shortfalls in RMS capacity. While the 
Ministry state that no additional expenditure is incurred, collecting periodic 
data on RTN utilization in cases of short accommodation may reveal any 
hidden costs (fuel, labour, or logistical expenses) associated with this 
alternative. Further, to reduce future instances of short accommodation, the 
Ministry should consider holding quarterly coordination meetings with Zonal 
Railways as well. This proactive communication can help ensure that berth 
allocation aligns more closely with real-time mail volume, particularly during 
peak periods, and provide a channel for immediate issue resolution.  
 
15. The Committee in their Original Report No. 92 (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“Payment made for full sections even after closure of part of the sections 
The Committee find that the scrutiny of records of Bihar Circle, as test checked 
by Audit revealed that in two sections, payments were made for full sections 
even though part of the sections were closed. After abolition of RN-32 Section 
(Nagar Untari-Daltonganj-Gomo 460 KM) a portion of the section viz., 
Daltonganj-Nagar Untari route was abolished with effect from 01 June 2015. 
Consequently, the to and fro distance from Gomo to Daltonganj came down to 
286 KMs. However, Railways continued to prefer haulage charge bills based 
on the length of the earlier route. No action for rectification was taken by the 
Postal Circle resulting in excess payment of Rs.54.82 lakh. Further, Section H-
26 (Sealdah to Sahibganj - 347 Km) was abolished/ discontinued by West 
Bengal Circle, Kolkata with effect from 01 July 2014 under Intimation to Bihar 
Postal Circle. However, Railways continued to claim haulage charges for 
Sealdah to Mughalsarai/ Varanasi and the bills were paid by Bihar Postal Circle 
without taking into consideration the reduction in length of the route resulting in 
excess payment of haulage charges by the Posts to the tune of Rs.43.19 lakh. 
The Ministry in their reply have stated that the payment was made erroneously 
as the zonal railway continued raising the bills for this section. As a remedial 
measure, the Ministry reported that the amount of Rs.54.82 lakh in respect of 

10 
 
 
 
section RN-32 & Rs.43.12 lakh in respect of section H-26 have since been 
adjusted through credit advice. In the light of the fact that the audit observation 
was based on a test check and also to ensure that the excess haulage charges 
are not being paid for discontinued routes, all Circles were directed to keep 
proper record of sections to ensure correctness of haulage payments. In 
addition, instructions have also been issued to all Circles to seek approval of 
Directorate for resumption of RMS sections. Here, the Committee opine that 
due to inadequate internal checks, the significant lapses in the verification and 
payment processes related to haulage charges in Bihar Circle resulted in 
excess payments. Therefore, the Committee in no uncertain words recommend 
that the Ministry should put in place a stronger internal verification mechanism 
within the Department of Posts to ensure accurate and timely identification of 
changes in operational routes, their discontinuation, or closure. The Committee 
also recommend that the internal audit team responsible for regularly reviewing 
and verifying payment records should also be duly sensitized to be more 
careful with a view to ensuring non-recurrence of instances of erroneous 
haulage charge payments in future.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 3] 
  
16. The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts in their Action Taken Notes 
have stated as under:- 
 “All sectional routes were discontinued in 2020 as movement of trains 
was suspended due to Nation-wide lock down imposed on outbreak of 
COVID19 pandemic. When the resumption of sections started 
gradually with unlock 1.0, in order to ensure accurate and timely 
identification of changes in operational routes, all Circles were 
instructed vide letter no. 7-1/2012-D(pt.) dated 17.08.2020 (Annexure-
3.1), to keep proper record of functional RMS sections and ensure 
correctness of haulage payments. All Circles were also instructed vide 
letter no. 7-1/2012-D (Pt) dated 22.03.2021 to seek prior permission of 
this Directorate for resumption of RMS sections (Annexure 3.2). Hence, 
changes such as discontinuation/ closure of any RMS section are 
being regularly monitored, as detailed below: 

11 
 
 
 
(i) Resumption of RMS sections was approved by Postal Directorate as 
per instructions contained in DoP’s letters mentioned above. 
(ii) Discontinuation of Inter Circle RMS sections is decided at the 
Directorate level after due examination and in consultation with 
concerned Postal Circles. 
(iii) Discontinuation of Intra-Circle RMS sections is decided by the 
Circles with an intimation to Postal Directorate. 
(iv) Copies of such orders for discontinuation of RMS sections are sent 
to concerned zonal railways and nodal postal Circle to ensure 
correctness of haulage bills. 
1.1 Copies of some such orders issued by Postal Directorate & 
Rajasthan Circle, for example, are attached as Annexure 3.3 & 3.4.  
2. To ensure accuracy of bills, statement of sectional accommodation 
has been introduced for nodal Postal Circles to be sent to the 
respective Zonal Railways. 
3. As regards sensitisation of the Internal Audit Team, as a default 
procedure, copy of every sanction order is sent to the O/o General 
Manager (Finance) or Director of Accounts (Postal) concerned by the 
Payment Circle, to keep a watch over haulage payment. (Annexure 
1.3c for example)” 
17.  Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
 “Audit has no further comments.” 
18. The Committee highlighted lapses in the verification of haulage charges, 
noting that excess payments were made for discontinued sections due to 
inadequate internal checks and recommended implementing a stronger 
internal verification mechanism and emphasized the need to sensitize the 
internal audit team to prevent similar errors. The Committee note from the 
reply of the Ministry that all Circles were directed to keep records of active 
RMS sections and verify haulage payments. Also, approval from the 
Directorate is now required for resumption of RMS sections, and information 

12 
 
 
 
on discontinued sections is shared with Zonal Railways. The Committee 
further note from the reply of the Ministry that nodal Postal Circles now send 
sectional accommodation statements to Zonal Railways to verify the accuracy 
of haulage bills and the Ministry has established a protocol where copies of 
sanction orders are sent to relevant financial officers to enhance oversight of 
haulage payments. Although the Ministry has taken steps to enhance 
oversight, the Committee opine that the Ministry should develop a centralized 
digital system to log, track, and monitor route changes and closures across all 
Circles. This system will automatically flag any inconsistencies in haulage 
charges based on changes in sectional routes, reducing reliance on manual 
record-keeping. For better coordination, the Committee further recommend the 
Ministry to formalize regular communication channels with Zonal Railways to 
discuss sectional changes, discontinued routes, and verification of haulage 
bills. 
 
 
19. The Committee in their Original Report No. 92 (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“Excess payment of haulage charges. verification/inaction on claims 
raised by Railways: 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that in order to streamline the 
process of haulage payment in future, proposal for procedure of direct payment 
system after validation of haulage bills by Department of Posts was sent to 
Railways on 17.11.2020 and the matter was consistently pursued with Railways 
besides being taken up during Inter Ministerial meeting on 03.02.2022. Further, 
another communication has been sent to Chairman, Railway Board on 
10.07.2023 in this regard. The Committee note from the reply of DoP that the 
Ministry of Railways, in response, has directed zonal railways to settle the 
excess debits and has further requested DoP to advise postal Circles to re-
verify the disputed payments and coordinate with the zonal railways to resolve 
the disputes. The DoP added that instructions in this regard have already been 
issued to Circles and are reiterated from time to time. Nevertheless, the 
Committee find that the instructions issued by DoP are not being adhered to, 
and deficiencies continue to persist. Issues of excess debits by Railways being 
continuing since 2017, the Committee are disappointed that no concrete action 

13 
 
 
 
has been taken in the matter by DoP. The Committee also note that the 
Ministry of Railways has been silent over the proposal on direct payment 
system, sent by the DoP on 17.11.2020. In light of the long pending issues of 
settlement of excess debits of haulage charges between the Ministry of 
Railways and Department of Posts, the Committee are of the considered view 
that the proposed direct payment system should be considered and finalized 
urgently to ensure that the process of haulage payment gets streamlined, The 
Committee, therefore, while seeking a status note on the outcome of the action 
taken by the Railways to resolve the dispute of excess debits, recommend that 
both Departments should take earnest efforts to resolve the issues so that the 
system of charging correct amount of haulage after validation by DOP may be 
ensured. In light of audit revelation that the instructions issued by DoP are not 
being adhered to, and deficiencies persist, the Committee in no unequivocal 
terms recommend that the DoP should conduct a thorough review of its internal 
compliance mechanism with a view to ensuring that instructions issued are 
implemented across all Circles in letter and spirit.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 5] 
20. The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts in their Action Taken Notes 
have stated as under:- 
  
“It is not the fact that the instructions issued by DoP are not being adhered to 
by the circles or not being paid due attention. Some examples of instances as 
mentioned in preceding paras are resubmitted for consideration of the 
Committee as under: 
1.1 Statement of sectional Accommodation: Being sent by the Circles (e.g. 
Gujarat (Annexure 5.1) & Maharashtra (Annexure 5.2))   
1.2. Clarification on Berth calculation by Railway Board: On request of DoP, 
Railway has clarified the guiding principle for berth calculation and zonal 
railways authorised to raise claim for haulage charges to respective postal 
circles. This clarification has helped in expediting adjustment of present cases 
of excess debits and will also ensure non-recurrence of excess debits in future. 
(Annexure 1.4) 
1.3. Permission of Postal Directorate required for resumption/ Discontinuation 
of RMS sections:  

14 
 
 
 
(a)  Resumption of RMS sections is approved by Postal Directorate as per 
instructions contained in DoP’s letters mentioned above. 
(b) Discontinuation of Inter Circle RMS sections is decided at Directorate level 
after due examination and in consultation with concerned Postal Circles. 
(c) Discontinuation of Intra-Circle RMS sections is decided by the Circles with 
an intimation to Postal Directorate. 
(d) Copies of such orders for discontinuation of RMS sections are sent to 
concerned zonal railways and nodal postal Circle to ensure correctness of 
haulage bills. 
1.3.1 Copies of some such orders issued by Postal Directorate & Rajasthan 
Circle, for example, are attached as Annexure 3.3 & 3.4.  
2. It has been due to the consistent monitoring at Directorate, compliance by 
postal Circles and consideration by Railways that the excess debits to the tune 
of 16.33 Cr have been got adjusted out of total Rs. 23.397 Cr in six Circles 
namely Gujarat, Odisha, Telangana, UP, Bihar & Haryana Circles: 
Circle 
Report
ed 
Amoun
t (Cr) 
Actua
l 
Amou
nt 
(Cr) 
Adjust
ed 
Amou
nt (Cr) 
Outstandi
ng 
Amount 
(Cr) 
Concern
ed Zonal 
Railway 
Gujarat 1.14 1.14 1.14 0 NWR 
Odisha 15.89 8.467  1.4 7.067 
SER/EC
oR 
Telanga
na 0.45 0.29 0.29 0 SCR 
Bihar 2.8 2.8 2.8 0 
ER & 
ECR 
Haryan
a 0.19 0.19 0.19 0 NR 
UP 10.51 10.51  10.51 0 
NER/NC
R 
  30.98 
23.39
7 16.33 7.067   
(for outstanding amount of Rs. 7.067 cfr. South-eastern Railway has assured to 
adjust in subsequent bills. (Annexure 1.3e)) 

15 
 
 
 
3. As regards direct payment system, it is submitted that an internal verification 
mechanism of sharing statement of sectional accommodation on monthly basis 
with concerned zonal railway was devised by DoP. This mechanism and 
clarification of Railway Board (Annexure 1.4) have helped in expediting 
adjustment of present cases of excess debits and will also ensure non-
recurrence of excess debits in future. Hence it is felt that this mechanism is as 
good as a direct payment system in terms of ruling out possibilities of excess 
debits, which was the core purpose of proposing Direct Payment System.” 
21.  Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“1. Ministry may furnish outcome of the request made to Railway Board 
for validation of statement of sectional accommodation to be provided 
by the concerned Circles to Railways to ensure accuracy of bills along 
with supporting documents the PAC. 
2. Ministry may also furnish the status of outstanding amount in respect 
of Odisha Postal Circle to the PAC.” 
22.  Response of the Ministry is as under:- 
“1. As a result of request made to railway Board by DoP, the statements of 
sectional accommodations being sent by Postal Circles are being considered 
by the concerned zonal railways as apparent from the compliance received 
from Circle. As an example, reply of UP Circle intimating that the haulage bills 
are being submitted as per statements of Circle is enclosed as Annexure 1.2(i) 
for reference. 
2. Final Status of amount adjusted and outstanding is as under:” 
Total Outstanding (Rs.) 8,32,77,090/- 
Total Amount Adjusted 
(Rs.) 
1,89,18,810/- 
Net outstanding (on Part of 
SER) 
6,43,58,280/- 
 

16 
 
 
 
23.  The Committee while noting persistent issues with excess debits by 
Railways, dating back to 2017, despite efforts of DoP, highlighted the 
importance of a direct payment system validated by DoP to prevent 
unverified charges and sought updates on the adjustments made. The 
Committee also emphasized the urgency of finalizing a direct payment 
system to ensure pre-validation of haulage charges by the DoP. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that excess debits of Rs. 16.33 
crore out of Rs. 23.397 crore have been adjusted for Gujarat, Odisha, 
Telangana, UP, Bihar, and Haryana Circles, leaving Rs. 7.067 crore 
outstanding, primarily under South Eastern Railway (SER), with assurances 
for future adjustments. The Committee also note from the reply of the 
Ministry that a statement-sharing process between DoP and zonal Railways 
for sectional accommodation records was implemented to validate haulage 
bills. The Ministry highlighted its internal mechanism for verification of 
haulage charges with zonal Railways through monthly sectional 
accommodation statements, suggesting this is equivalent to a direct 
payment system. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has shown 
progress in adjusting significant portions of the excess debits and put 
mechanisms in place to ensure accountability moving forward. However the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to continue discussions with the Railway 
Board to establish either a direct payment system or an enforceable pre-
validation framework including key components  such as :  
 (a) defined roles for validating and approving haulage charges. 
 (b) clear guidelines for handling discrepancies to prevent delays in  
 addressing errors. 
 (c) periodic mandatory reconciliation module 
 
24. The Committee in their Original Report No. 92 (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“Excess payment of Rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the DoP issued (May 2010) Instruction for 
calculation/ payment of license fee in respect of RMS buildings constructed 
under deposit scheme @ 6 per cent of market value of land annually to be 

17 
 
 
 
revised every five years. For RMS buildings owned by Railways, the revised 
rates of interest charges were @ 6 per cent on Capital Invested after 01 April 
1964 and @ 4.5 per cent on Capital invested prior to 01 April 1964. Railways, 
while re-iterating the rate of interest stated (January 2018) that the land value, 
as prescribed by the Revenue Department of concerned state, can be taken for 
fixation of rent annually and to be revised every five years. However, audit 
noticed instances of incorrect computation of arrears of rent, untimely revision 
of rent and wrong application of interest rates leading to excess payment of 
21.53 crore. To ensure that all claims are checked before making payment, the 
Ministry in their reply have stated that DoP had issued instructions to all the 
Circles to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways. 
The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that all the Circles 
have been instructed to conduct a comprehensive internal audit of all charges 
billed by Railways and payments made on account of buildings hired for RMS, 
and that the Tamil Nadu Circle has started the same. In respect of Tamil Nadu 
Circle, the Ministry stated that with regard to excess payment of Rs. 1.31 Cr, 
Railways have informed that revision of rent is under review in Railway Board 
and the outcome will be intimated. Concerned RMS Divisions are liasioning 
with the Railway Authorities to update the status of the same for further 
necessary action and to adjust the excess amount paid in future bills. The 
Ministry further stated that Punjab Circle had informed that the excess amount 
would be recovered/ adjusted in the next bills that will be issued by Railway 
authorities! The Committee also note that Punjab Circle is yet to take action for 
recovering/ adjusting the excess amount in the next bills issued by Railway 
authorities. The Committee while expressing their displeasure over the 
injudicious utilization of the public funds by not ensuring that all claims are 
based on correct computation of arrears of rent, timely revisions and application 
of interest rates to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings owned by 
Railways, recommend that the responsibility should be fixed against the 
officials concerned for the lapses. 
Further, the Committee desire that the process of comprehensive internal audit 
of other charges should be expedited and completed within a stipulated 
timeframe and they be apprised thereof accordingly.” 

18 
 
 
 
[Recommendation Para No. 7] 
 
 
25.  The Ministry of Communication, Department of Posts in their Action Taken 
Notes have stated as under:- 
 “Process of fixing of responsibility has been initiated. It is also informed 
that comprehensive internal audit of other charges have also begun. 
Further, in Punjab Circle, Railway authorities have been apprised of all 
the irregularities made in the previous bills and they have been 
requested to issue fresh revised bills after adjustments.” 
26.  Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under: 
“Ministry may submit final compliance to the PAC in respect of  
i. Fixing responsibility against the erring officials 
ii. Comprehensive internal audit of other charges 
iii. Receipt of fresh revised bills after adjustments from Railway 
authorities relating to Punjab Circle” 
27.  The Ministry has responded to the Audit Comments as below: 
“i. In Jharkhand Circle: Official has been identified and action has been 
initiated. 
In Punjab Circle: Inquiry has been initiated.  
ii. Comprehensive Internal Audit is under process. 
iii. W.r.t. revised fresh bills in Punjab Circle, regular meetings and follow 
up are being made with Railway authorities. Revised corrected bills are 
awaited from Railways.” 
28. In their original Report, the Committee expressed their dissatisfaction with 
the oversight by the Ministry resulting in excess rent payments and 
recommended for fixing of responsibility accountability for officials 
responsible for lapses and to prevent future excess payments, the Committee 
further recommended a comprehensive internal audit to review all charges 

19 
 
 
 
billed by Railways and ensure accuracy. The Committee also expressed their 
concerns ensuring that incorrect payments are adjusted and revised bills are 
received from Railways, especially for Punjab Circle. The Committee note from 
the reply of the Ministry that officials responsible for lapses in excess rent 
payments in Jharkhand and Punjab are identified and inquiries have been 
initiated against them. The Committee while appreciating the positive steps 
taken by the Ministry, desire to be apprised about the updates on the 
outcomes of the inquiries in Punjab Circle and other actions taken by them to 
strengthen accountability and reflect progress on the recommendation made 
by the Committee. The Ministry should consider establishing a reporting 
framework for each Circle to keep track of excess payments, accountability 
actions, and audit progress to facilitate ongoing oversight. In this regard, the 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to set up a timeline for completing 
audits across all Circles to ensure timely compliance. Further the Committee 
desire that the Ministry provide a clearer roadmap and concrete updates from 
the Railway authorities for corrected bills and resolution of adjustment of 
incorrect payments, especially for Punjab Circle.  
  

20 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
Payment for sanctioned berths without verifying actual allotment 
According to Audit, scrutiny of records revealed that Railways had raised bills for 
berths sanctioned instead of actual berths allotted in three Circles and that the 
payments were made without verification of the claims, resulting in excess payment 
of haulage charges of Rs.12.15 crore. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that two Circles of Gujarat and Telangana have adjusted the extra amount 
debited from their account and Odisha Circle has submitted, after reconciliation, that 
the actual excess debited amount is Rs. 8.4 Cr against reported amount of Rs. 10.61 
Cr. The excess debited amount has not been sanctioned by the Circle and matter is 
being pursued with railways for adjustment of the same. Explaining reasons for 
making payments without verifying the actual berths allotted, the Ministry stated that 
in case of Gujarat Circle, the excess payment was made due to oversight for the 
period from Apr'18 to Dec'19. The excess paid amount has since been recovered 
after identification of the issue and from Jan'20, and sanctions were issued for actual 
allotment only. To ensure that Postal Units verify the berths actually allotted/used 
before making payments in the future, the Ministry stated that all Nodal postal Circles 
have been directed to share statement of sectional accommodation every month with 
the concerned zonal Railway so that the same may be considered before raising 
bills. The Railway Board has also been requested to direct zonal Railways 
accordingly. While noting that all the three circles have either adjusted the extra 
amount or initiated action for recovery of excess amount debited from their account, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the details of amounts debited and 
recoveries made by each of the three circles. The Committee desire that appropriate 
checks may be put in place to ensure that before raising bills, statement of sectional 
accommodation is invariably shared every month with the concerned zonal Railway 
and verified scrupulously. The Committee while taking note of instances of claims 
raised for closed/ non-functional sections/trains, have also observed that there have 
been occasions of claims being made by two zonal railways separately to two 
different postal Circles. The Committee recommend that appropriate mechanism 
should also be devised to address such issues by introducing inbuilt verification 
processes to avoid future discrepancies in billing and payment. 
 
 (Para 1 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
 

21 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
As already reported, excess debited amounts in respect of Gujarat and Telangana 
Postal Circles stand adjusted. Odisha Postal Circle has reported after reconciliation 
that the actual excess debited amount is Rs. 8.32 cr instead of Rs. 8.4 cr. informed 
by the Circle previously (Annexure 1.3). The difference was due to revision of 
haulage rates for the period April 2019 to February 2020. This has been rectified by 
the Circle.   
Status of recoveries/adjustments of excess debits in Gujarat, Telangana and Odisha 
Circles is as under:  
Gujarat Circle The excess debited amount of Rs. 1.09 Cr has been got adjusted by the 
Circle through DA(P) Ahmedabad from RBI (CAS) Nagpur vide memo 
no. 2 dated 06.07.2023, after reconciliation of records. (Annexure-1.1) 
Telangana Circle Based on the reports received, on reconciliation of haulage bills in 
respect of sections L-1 and Z-26 for the period shown in audit report, 
the actual excess payment works out to  Rs. 29,01,240, which has been 
credited to DoP vide credit advice no.3 dated 21.06.2023 through DA(P) 
Hyderabad. (Annexure- 1.2) 
Odisha Circle The actual amount of excess debit in Odisha Circle is Rs. 8.32 cr 
(Annexure 1.3); out of which Rs. 1.26 cr have been adjusted, remaining 
Rs.7.066 cr is under process and is expected to be adjusted shortly. 
Detailed breakup is mentioned in the table1.3 below**  
  
**Table 1.3 (Detailed breakup of outstanding excess debits in Odisha Circle) 
S.No. Amount (Rs.) Status of Adjustment Annexure 
1 18,39,600 Adjusted by SER in Feb 2024 bill 1.3a 
2 32,05,710 Adjusted by SER in March 2024 bill 1.3b 
3 31,02,300 Adjusted by SER in April 2024 bill 1.3b1 
4 16,25,400 Adjusted by Odisha Circle 1.3c 
5 28,37,790 Adjusted by Odisha Circle 1.3d 
6 7,06,66,290 Agreed by SER for refund in subsequent bills 1.3e 
Total 8,32,77,090 As above   
  

22 
 
 
 
2. It was observed that the major part of excess debits was due to incorrect berth 
calculation in the sectional accommodation provided by the Railways. Therefore, the 
matter was taken up with the Railway Board by DoP. Now Railway Board has 
clarified the guiding principles for berth calculation and the Zonal Railways 
authorised to raise claims for haulage charges to the respective Postal Circles. This 
clarification has helped in expediting adjustment of present cases of excess debits 
and will also ensure non-recurrence of excess debits in future. (Annexure 1.4)  
3. As regards recommendations of the Committee on devising a mechanism to avoid 
future discrepancies in billing and payment of the actual berths allotted, a 
mechanism has been devised by DoP by introducing a statement of sectional 
accommodation which is sent by the nodal Postal Circles to respective Zonal 
Railways. Railway Board has also been requested to direct Zonal Railways to 
consider the same while raising haulage bills. (Annexure 1.5). It may be seen that 
this mechanism involves verification of allotted sectional accommodation by DoP and 
consideration of these statements by the concerned Zonal Railways before raising 
debit advices rules out the possibility of discrepancies or excess debits in haulage 
bills.  
Vetting Remark by Audit 
Ministry may submit final status of amount credited back to Odisha Postal Circle. 
2. Further, Ministry may apprise PAC of the 
(i) outcome of the request made to Railway Board for validation of statement of 
sectional accommodation to be provided by the concerned Circles to Railways to 
ensure accuracy of bills along with supporting documents. 
(ii) progress made in r/o inbuilt verification process to avoid discrepancies in billing 
and payment of haulage charges. 
 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
 Final Status of amount adjusted and outstanding is as under: 
 
Total Outstanding (Rs.) 8,32,77,090 
Total Amount Adjusted (Rs.) 1,89,18,810 
Net outstanding (on Part of SER) 6,43,58,280 
 
The amount is being adjusted by South Eastern Railway (SER) @ 50% of haulage 
bill every month. Railway Board has been requested by DoP (Annexure1.11) for one-

23 
 
 
 
time adjustment of the outstanding amount. A reconciliation meeting has also been 
requested for on 21.08.2024.  
The statement of accommodation is regularly being sent by the nodal Postal Circles 
to concerned Zonal Railways. Some examples are mentioned as under: 
 
Postal Circle Zonal Railway Sent for the Month of  Sent on 
Bihar Eastern Railway 
East Central railway 
June’24 10.07.2024 
Gujarat North Western railway 
Western Railway 
June’24 08.07.2024 
Maharashtra Central Railway June’24 10.07.2024 
Uttar Pradesh North East Railway 
North Central Railway 
June’24 10.07.2024 
  
As a result of the request made to the Railway Board by DoP, the statements of 
sectional accommodations sent by Postal Circles are being considered by the 
concerned Zonal Railways, as apparent from the compliance received from Circles. 
As an example, reply of UP Circle, intimating that the haulage bills are being 
submitted as per statements of Circle, is enclosed as Annexure 1.2(i) for reference. 
  
Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
[Please see Para no. 10 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee]  
  
  
  

24 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Short allotment of berths as against sanctioned position 
The Committee note that the sanction of berths for RMS by Railways is based on the 
requirements projected by DoP. However, there have been several instances of 
short allotment of berths as against those sanctioned by Railways. In three Circles, 
Audit observed that the short allotment for the period 2017-2020, adversely affected 
the quality of service provided due to inadequate space. The Ministry in their reply 
have stated that the cases of short accommodation provided have been addressed 
to the Railways from time to time and requests made in this regard to Zonal Railways 
by the Circles as well as by Directorate to Railway Board. Further, the Ministry 
updated that they are provided with the sanctioned accommodation by the Railways 
in all the circles across the country barring occasional exceptions. The mail volume 
is affected by other factors also such as a particular event, season (festival. etc.) and 
may vary from time to time. Hence, it may not always be the case that whenever the 
actual accommodation deviates from sanctioned position, the service is affected as 
the DoP has a well-developed Road Transport Network (RTN). The Committee while 
noting that to overcome the instances of short accommodation in RMS sections, the 
left-over mail, if any, is dispatched through next immediate available mode i.e., 
RTN/Section desire to be apprised of the quantum of the left-over mail sent through 
RTN/ Section in each of the circles during last three years and the resultant 
additional expenditure incurred in each of these circles. Further, the Committee also 
desire to be apprised of the mechanism put in place for according priority to the mail 
to be sent treated as leftover mall in case of short accommodation provided by the 
Railways and delays If any, that may have occurred in delivering mall due to 
Inadequate space. 
  
(Para 2 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  
  

25 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
As already submitted, the sanctioned accommodation is based on average mail 
volume carried by a particular section. This may be due to a particular event, special 
booking, size of mail articles etc. Hence, it may not always be the case that 
whenever actual accommodation deviates from the sanctioned one, the service is 
adversely affected. Moreover, whenever such short accommodation is assigned, 
priority is to be given accountable mail and second-class mail having relaxed 
delivery norms. Such mail is sent through alternate available transmission facility. 
However, since no such report of adverse effect on service was reported, therefore 
no record of such left-over mail is available. Further, since existing and available 
resources are utilised to convey the mail which may be left over as an exception due 
to short accommodation, no extra expenditure is incurred.  
 
Vetting Remark by Audit 
 
Audit has no further comments 
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
[Please see Para no. 14 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee]  
  

26 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Payment made for full sections even after closure of part of the sections 
The Committee find that the scrutiny of records of Bihar Circle, as test checked by 
Audit revealed that in two sections, payments were made for full sections even 
though part of the sections were closed. After abolition of RN-32 Section (Nagar 
Untari-Daltonganj-Gomo 460 KM) a portion of the section viz., Daltonganj-Nagar 
Untari route was abolished with effect from 01 June 2015. Consequently, the to and 
fro distance from Gomo to Daltonganj came down to 286 KMs. However, Railways 
continued to prefer haulage charge bills based on the length of the earlier route. No 
action for rectification was taken by the Postal Circle resulting in excess payment of 
Rs.54.82 lakh. Further, Section H-26 (Sealdah to Sahibganj - 347 Km) was 
abolished/ discontinued by West Bengal Circle, Kolkata with effect from 01 July 2014 
under Intimation to Bihar Postal Circle. However, Railways continued to claim 
haulage charges for Sealdah to Mughalsarai/ Varanasi and the bills were paid by 
Bihar Postal Circle without taking into consideration the reduction in length of the 
route resulting in excess payment of haulage charges by the Posts to the tune of 
Rs.43.19 lakh. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the payment was made 
erroneously as the zonal railway continued raising the bills for this section. As a 
remedial measure, the Ministry reported that the amount of Rs.54.82 lakh in respect 
of section RN-32 & Rs.43.12 lakh in respect of section H-26 have since been 
adjusted through credit advice. In the light of the fact that the audit observation was 
based on a test check and also to ensure that the excess haulage charges are not 
being paid for discontinued routes, all Circles were directed to keep proper record of 
sections to ensure correctness of haulage payments. In addition, instructions have 
also been issued to all Circles to seek approval of Directorate for resumption of RMS 
sections. Here, the Committee opine that due to inadequate internal checks, the 
significant lapses in the verification and payment processes related to haulage 
charges in Bihar Circle resulted in excess payments. Therefore, the Committee in no 
uncertain words recommend that the Ministry should put in place a stronger internal 
verification mechanism within the Department of Posts to ensure accurate and timely 
identification of changes in operational routes, their discontinuation, or closure. The 
Committee also recommend that the internal audit team responsible for regularly 
reviewing and verifying payment records should also be duly sensitized to be more 
careful with a view to ensuring non-recurrence of instances of erroneous haulage 
charge payments in future. 
 
(Para 3 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
 

27 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
All sectional routes were discontinued in 2020 as movement of trains was 
suspended due to Nation-wide lock down imposed on outbreak of COVID19 
pandemic. When the resumption of sections started gradually with unlock 1.0, in 
order to ensure accurate and timely identification of changes in operational routes, 
all Circles were instructed vide letter no. 7-1/2012-D(pt.) dated 17.08.2020 
(Annexure-3.1), to keep proper record of functional RMS sections and ensure 
correctness of haulage payments. All Circles were also instructed vide letter no. 7-
1/2012-D (Pt) dated 22.03.2021 to seek prior permission of this Directorate for 
resumption of RMS sections (Annexure 3.2). Hence, changes such as 
discontinuation/ closure of any RMS section are being regularly monitored, as 
detailed below: 
(i) Resumption of RMS sections was approved by Postal Directorate as per 
instructions contained in DoP’s letters mentioned above. 
(ii) Discontinuation of Inter Circle RMS sections is decided at the Directorate level 
after due examination and in consultation with concerned Postal Circles. 
(iii) Discontinuation of Intra-Circle RMS sections is decided by the Circles with an 
intimation to Postal Directorate. 
(iv) Copies of such orders for discontinuation of RMS sections are sent to concerned 
zonal railways and nodal postal Circle to ensure correctness of haulage bills. 
1.1 Copies of some such orders issued by Postal Directorate & Rajasthan Circle, for 
example, are attached as Annexure 3.3 & 3.4.  
2. To ensure accuracy of bills, statement of sectional accommodation has been 
introduced for nodal Postal Circles to be sent to the respective Zonal Railways. 
3. As regards sensitisation of the Internal Audit Team, as a default procedure, copy 
of every sanction order is sent to the O/o General Manager (Finance) or Director of 
Accounts (Postal) concerned by the Payment Circle, to keep a watch over haulage 
payment. (Annexure 1.3c for example) 
  
Vetting Remark by Audit 
Audit has no further comments 
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
[Please see Para no. 18 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee]  

28 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Excess Debit of Haulage charges 
                        The Committee note that despite DOP’s specific directions 
(September 2017), the practice of RBI directly debiting DoP for Railway bills 
continued without validation of the bills by DoP resulting in excess debit of Rs.17.85 
crore in five Circles namely Bihar, Haryana, Gujarat, Odisha, and UP alone. In this 
regard, the Ministry stated (June 2021) that in the present system of payment of 
haulage charges, there was no provision of pre-validation from the nodal payment 
circle concerned of the DoP and despite the request made to RBI (CAS) Nagpur, the 
amount mentioned in the haulage bills raised by the Zonal Railways was debited to 
the DoP. The Ministry added that in respect of Bihar, Haryana and Gujarat Circles, 
the excess amount debited by RBI Nagpur has since been credited back to the 
Circle; while in case of Gujarat Circle, though the amount was credited back, it was 
re-debited by Railways. In respect of Odisha Circle, Rs.1.98 lakh has since been 
adjusted and in respect of UP Circle, matter was being pursued with the Zonal 
Railways. The Ministry further stated that in order to avoid such notable 
circumstances and streamline the process of haulage payment in future, a proposal 
for adopting the procedure of direct payment to Railways after validation of haulage 
bills by the Department of Posts has been sent to Railways in November 2020 and 
the matter was being pursued further. The Committee note that despite the request 
made to RBI (CAS) Nagpur, the amount mentioned in the haulage bills raised by the 
Zonal Railways was debited to the DoP. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the further action taken by the DOP to take up the matter of excess debit in respect 
of Gujarat and UP Circle and details of amount credited to each of the circles by the 
RBI. 
 
(Para 4 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  
  

29 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
As already submitted that the amounts of excess debits in case of Gujarat and UP 
Circles have been adjusted by the Circles from RBI(CAS) Nagpur through credit 
advices. Details of adjustments are as under: 
Postal Circle Details of Recovery/adjustment 
Gujarat Circle The excess debited amount of Rs. 1.09 cr has been got adjusted by the 
Circle through DA(P) Ahmedabad from RBI (CAS) Nagpur vide memo 
no. 2 dated 06.07.2023 after reconciliation of records. (Annexure-1.1) 
UP Circle The excess debited amount of Rs. 5.46 cr has been got adjusted by the 
Circle through DA(P) Lucknow from RBI(CAS) Nagpur vide Memo no. 3 
dated 11.01.2024. (Annexure-4.1) 
  
Vetting Remark by Audit 
Ministry may submit final status of amount credited back to Odisha Postal Circle to 
the PAC. 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
Final Status of amount adjusted and outstanding is as under: 
Total Outstanding (Rs.) 8,32,77,090/- 
Total Amount Adjusted (Rs.) 1,89,18,810/- 
Net outstanding (on Part of SER) 6,43,58,280/- 
  
  
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
   
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
  

30 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Excess payment of haulage charges. verification/inaction on claims raised by 
Railways: 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that in order to streamline the 
process of haulage payment in future, proposal for procedure of direct payment 
system after validation of haulage bills by Department of Posts was sent to Railways 
on 17.11.2020 and the matter was consistently pursued with Railways besides being 
taken up during Inter Ministerial meeting on 03.02.2022. Further, another 
communication has been sent to Chairman, Railway Board on 10.07.2023 in this 
regard. The Committee note from the reply of DoP that the Ministry of Railways, in 
response, has directed zonal railways to settle the excess debits and has further 
requested DoP to advise postal Circles to re-verify the disputed payments and 
coordinate with the zonal railways to resolve the disputes. The DoP added that 
instructions in this regard have already been issued to Circles and are reiterated 
from time to time. Nevertheless, the Committee find that the instructions issued by 
DoP are not being adhered to, and deficiencies continue to persist. Issues of excess 
debits by Railways being continuing since 2017, the Committee are disappointed 
that no concrete action has been taken in the matter by DoP. The Committee also 
note that the Ministry of Railways has been silent over the proposal on direct 
payment system, sent by the DoP on 17.11.2020. In light of the long pending issues 
of settlement of excess debits of haulage charges between the Ministry of Railways 
and Department of Posts, the Committee are of the considered view that the 
proposed direct payment system should be considered and finalized urgently to 
ensure that the process of haulage payment gets streamlined, The Committee, 
therefore, while seeking a status note on the outcome of the action taken by the 
Railways to resolve the dispute of excess debits, recommend that both Departments 
should take earnest efforts to resolve the issues so that the system of charging 
correct amount of haulage after validation by DOP may be ensured. In light of audit 
revelation that the instructions issued by DoP are not being adhered to, and 
deficiencies persist, the Committee in no unequivocal terms recommend that the 
DoP should conduct a thorough review of its internal compliance mechanism with a 
view to ensuring that instructions issued are implemented across all Circles in letter 
and spirit. 
  
(Para 5 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  

31 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
It is not the fact that the instructions issued by DoP are not being adhered to by the 
circles or not being paid due attention. Some examples of instances as mentioned in 
preceding paras are resubmitted for consideration of the Committee as under: 
1.1 Statement of sectional Accommodation: Being sent by the Circles (e.g. Gujarat 
(Annexure 5.1) & Maharashtra (Annexure 5.2))   
1.2. Clarification on Berth calculation by Railway Board: On request of DoP, Railway 
has clarified the guiding principle for berth calculation and zonal railways authorised 
to raise claim for haulage charges to respective postal circles. This clarification 
has helped in expediting adjustment of present cases of excess debits and will also 
ensure non-recurrence of excess debits in future. (Annexure 1.4) 
1.3. Permission of Postal Directorate required for resumption/ Discontinuation of 
RMS sections:  
(a)  Resumption of RMS sections is approved by Postal Directorate as per 
instructions contained in DoP’s letters mentioned above. 
(b) Discontinuation of Inter Circle RMS sections is decided at Directorate level after 
due examination and in consultation with concerned Postal Circles. 
(c) Discontinuation of Intra-Circle RMS sections is decided by the Circles with an 
intimation to Postal Directorate. 
(d) Copies of such orders for discontinuation of RMS sections are sent to concerned 
zonal railways and nodal postal Circle to ensure correctness of haulage bills. 
1.3.1 Copies of some such orders issued by Postal Directorate & Rajasthan Circle, 
for example, are attached as Annexure 3.3 & 3.4.  
2. It has been due to the consistent monitoring at Directorate, compliance by postal 
Circles and consideration by Railways that the excess debits to the tune of 16.33 Cr 
have been got adjusted out of total Rs. 23.397 Cr in six Circles namely Gujarat, 
Odisha, Telangana, UP, Bihar & Haryana Circles: 
Circle Reported 
Amount (Cr) 
Actual 
Amount (Cr) 
Adjusted 
Amount 
(Cr) 
Outstanding 
Amount (Cr) 
Concerned 
Zonal Railway 
Gujarat 1.14 1.14 1.14 0 NWR 
Odisha 15.89 8.467 1.4 7.067 SER/ECoR 
Telangana 0.45 0.29 0.29 0 SCR 
Bihar 2.8 2.8 2.8 0 ER & ECR 

32 
 
 
 
Haryana 0.19 0.19 0.19 0 NR 
UP 10.51 10.51 10.51 0 NER/NCR 
  30.98 23.397 16.33 7.067   
(for outstanding amount of Rs. 7.067 cfr. South-eastern Railway has assured to 
adjust in subsequent bills. (Annexure 1.3e)) 
3. As regards direct payment system, it is submitted that an internal verification 
mechanism of sharing statement of sectional accommodation on monthly basis with 
concerned zonal railway was devised by DoP. This mechanism and clarification of 
Railway Board (Annexure 1.4) have helped in expediting adjustment of present 
cases of excess debits and will also ensure non-recurrence of excess debits in 
future. Hence it is felt that this mechanism is as good as a direct payment system in 
terms of ruling out possibilities of excess debits, which was the core purpose of 
proposing Direct Payment System. 
Vetting Remark by Audit 
1. Ministry may furnish outcome of the request made to Railway Board for validation 
of statement of sectional accommodation to be provided by the concerned Circles to 
Railways to ensure accuracy of bills along with supporting documents the PAC. 
 2. Ministry may also furnish the status of outstanding amount in respect of Odisha 
Postal Circle to the PAC.  
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
As a result of request made to railway Board by DoP, the statements of sectional 
accommodations being sent by Postal Circles are being considered by the 
concerned zonal railways as apparent from the compliance received from Circle. As 
an example, reply of UP Circle intimating that the haulage bills are being submitted 
as per statements of Circle is enclosed as Annexure 1.2(i) for reference. 
Final Status of amount adjusted and outstanding is as under: 
Total Outstanding (Rs.) 8,32,77,090/- 
Total Amount Adjusted (Rs.) 1,89,18,810/- 
Net outstanding (on Part of SER) 6,43,58,280/- 
 
 Sd/- 
(Dushyant Mudgal) 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 
07.08.2024)  

33 
 
 
 
[Please see Para no. 23 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee]  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that in Odisha and UP Circle, monthly reconciliation meetings 
are not being held regularly to discuss and reconcile the bills raised by the Railways. 
In this regard, the Ministry have inter alia replied that purpose of reconciliation 
meetings is to rectify the disputes/differences in claimed and actual bills. Circles 
approach respective zonal Railways for reconciliation/adjustments as and when 
required. Some zonal Railways accept the adjustments in subsequent bills/ through 
contra debit to DoP without any reconciliation meeting. However, reconciliation 
meetings could not be held in several zones in spite of the matter being taken up 
with the respective zones. To ensure regular reconciliation of claims made by 
Railways for adjustment of any excess billing, the Ministry have, in reply, stated that 
the Circles have been sensitized to regularly approach Railways to schedule 
reconciliation meetings. The Committee while noting that the reconciliation meetings 
could not be held in several zones in spite of the matter being taken up with the 
respective zones recommend the DOP to be proactive in its approach. The matter of 
reconciling the bills of haulage charges raised by the Railways should be vigorously 
pursued and reconciliation meetings with the Ministry of Railways/ Zonal Railways 
invariably held on monthly basis. The steps initiated in this regard be intimated to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
  
(Para 6 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  

34 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
Reconciliation meetings are required to be held in cases where there is a 
requirement of reconciliation due to discrepancy being noticed by DoP and matter 
with concerned zonal railways is pursued by the Circles for holding of reconciliation 
meetings whenever required. Meanwhile, matter is also followed up for adjustments 
of excess debits. The issues are being monitored at Directorate level and 
instructions are issued to circles from time to time. Some examples of recent 
reconciliation meetings held with the railway authorities are in Haryana, Chhattisgarh 
& Bihar on 21.02.2024,21.02.2024 & 28.12.2023. 
2.  Further, out of 17 zonal railways, no major issues have been reported in case of 
most of the zonal railways such as Northern Railway, North Central Railway, East 
Central Railway, West Central Railway, Central Railway, Western Railway etc. 
3. Further, after introduction of statement of sectional accommodation, clarification 
issued by Railway Board vide FM Circular no. 3 of 2024 dated 01.02.2024 
(Annexure1.4) the haulage bills are expected to be more accurate and haulage 
payments streamlined. 
Vetting Remark by Audit 
Audit has no further comments 
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
  

35 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 Excess payment of Rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the DoP issued (May 2010) Instruction for calculation/ 
payment of license fee in respect of RMS buildings constructed under deposit 
scheme @ 6 per cent of market value of land annually to be revised every five years. 
For RMS buildings owned by Railways, the revised rates of interest charges were @ 
6 per cent on Capital Invested after 01 April 1964 and @ 4.5 per cent on Capital 
invested prior to 01 April 1964. Railways, while re-iterating the rate of interest stated 
(January 2018) that the land value, as prescribed by the Revenue Department of 
concerned state, can be taken for fixation of rent annually and to be revised every 
five years. However, audit noticed instances of incorrect computation of arrears of 
rent, untimely revision of rent and wrong application of interest rates leading to 
excess payment of 21.53 crore. To ensure that all claims are checked before making 
payment, the Ministry in their reply have stated that DoP had issued instructions to 
all the Circles to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings owned by 
Railways. 
The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that all the Circles have 
been instructed to conduct a comprehensive internal audit of all charges billed by 
Railways and payments made on account of buildings hired for RMS, and that the 
Tamil Nadu Circle has started the same. In respect of Tamil Nadu Circle, the Ministry 
stated that with regard to excess payment of Rs. 1.31 Cr, Railways have informed 
that revision of rent is under review in Railway Board and the outcome will be 
intimated. Concerned RMS Divisions are liasioning with the Railway Authorities to 
update the status of the same for further necessary action and to adjust the excess 
amount paid in future bills. The Ministry further stated that Punjab Circle had 
informed that the excess amount would be recovered/ adjusted in the next bills that 
will be issued by Railway authorities! The Committee also note that Punjab Circle is 
yet to take action for recovering/ adjusting the excess amount in the next bills issued 
by Railway authorities. The Committee while expressing their displeasure over the 
injudicious utilization of the public funds by not ensuring that all claims are based on 
correct computation of arrears of rent, timely revisions and application of interest 
rates to avoid excess payment of rent for RMS buildings owned by Railways, 
recommend that the responsibility should be fixed against the officials concerned for 
the lapses. 
Further, the Committee desire that the process of comprehensive internal audit of 
other charges should be expedited and completed within a stipulated timeframe and 
they be apprised thereof accordingly. 
(Para 7 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  

36 
 
 
 
   
Action Taken 
Process of fixing of responsibility has been initiated. It is also informed that 
comprehensive internal audit of other charges have also begun. Further, in Punjab 
Circle, Railway authorities have been apprised of all the irregularities made in the 
previous bills and they have been requested to issue fresh revised bills after 
adjustments. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
Ministry may submit final compliance to the PAC in respect of  
i. Fixing responsibility against the erring officials 
ii. Comprehensive internal audit of other charges 
iii. Receipt of fresh revised bills after adjustments from Railway authorities 
relating to Punjab Circle 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
i. In Jharkhand Circle: Official has been identified and action has been 
initiated. 
In Punjab Circle: Inquiry has been initiated.  
ii. Comprehensive Internal Audit is under process. 
iii. W.r.t. revised fresh bills in Punjab Circle, regular meetings and follow up are 
being made with Railway authorities. Revised corrected bills are awaited from 
Railways. 
  
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024)  
[Please see Para no. 28 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee]  
  

37 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Payment of avoidable rent on vacant/ unutilized building 
Audit scrutiny revealed that instances of delays in surrender of rented building/ 
excess space than justified were noticed resulting in payment of avoidable rent of 
872.17 lakhs for vacant/ unutilized buildings in six Circles namely Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Punjab. The Ministry 
accepted (June 2021) the issues raised by Audit except for UP and Kerala Circles. 
Regarding Uttar Pradesh Circle, the Ministry contended that the old building of 0/o 
Senior Record Officer, Agra was in possession of the Department since the building 
was required for operational purpose. In respect of Kerala Circle, the Ministry have 
stated that the carpet area of Kollam RMS office was 3,314 sqft. and the same area 
was required for the proper functioning of the office. As regard the reasons for delays 
in surrendering the rented buildings/excess space when not in use, the Ministry 
have, in their reply stated that after introduction of IT Modernization Project, the 
nature of mail processing work has changed and more space was required for 
different activities envisaged as part of Parcel Network Optimization Project. In one 
of the Circles, the extra time was taken to shift/utilize the serviceable items and to 
auction the unserviceable items. Notwithstanding the fact, instructions have been 
issued to all the Circles by the Postal Directorate to review space requirement in 
Railway properties occupied by Postal department and ensure timely vacation of 
vacant/extra space to ensure economy in RMS operations. The Committee, while 
emphasizing the need for devising a strict compliance mechanism of the instructions 
issued for conduct of regular reviews of space requirements in Railway properties 
occupied by the Postal department ensuring that space is efficiently utilized, and any 
excess or vacant space is identified and surrendered in a timely manner, desire that 
the Ministry must also periodically review and update guidelines related to the 
surrender of rented buildings and excess space and make sure that guidelines are 
aligned with operational needs and industry best practices. 
  
(Para 8 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  
  
  

38 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
A mechanism of submission of regular statement for review of space requirement 
and its usage in Railway property occupied by Postal Department has been started 
(copy enclosed) and Circles have been directed for timely surrender of excess or 
vacant space. Further Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan Circles 
have informed that presently they don’t have any excess/vacant unutilized space on 
which rent is paid. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
Ministry may apprise PAC of rent on vacant/unutilised buildings in respect of UP and 
Punjab to the PAC 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
Punjab Circle has vacated and shifted to new Postal building and handed over the 
rented buildings to Railways. There is no building pending for vacation in Punjab.  
W.r.t. UP Circle, the building of SRO Agra has been constructed under the Deposit 
Scheme of Railways (cost of construction of building has been paid by Department 
of Posts) and is in the possession of Department for operational purpose and the 
same is being used to keep stores. Hence rent on vacant/unutilized building may be 
treated as NIL in UP Circle. 
 Sd/-  
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
  

39 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Irregular payment of Service Tax/ GST on Rent paid to Ministry of Railways 
Audit noticed that MoF instructions (December 2016) stipulate that the services 
provided by Indian Railways to DoP are not subject to service tax, as both the 
departments are arms of Central Government. Further, MoF instructions (June 2017) 
stipulate that the services provided by the Central Government, State Government, 
Union territory or local authority to another Central Government, State Government, 
Union territory or local authority are exempted from payment of Goods and Service 
Tax (GST). DoP also clarified (March 2019) the position to its Circles that GST is not 
applicable on licence fee to be paid to Ministry of Railways for the properties rented 
for RMS Office. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that in seven Circles, Railways 
billed GST along with rent and DoP paid Rs. 3.46 crores without verification of 
claims. On being pointed out by Audit, Ministry accepted the facts and stated (June 
2021) that the cconcerned Circles had been instructed in May 2021 to take remedial 
steps to ensure that payment of GST/ Service Tax are not made in future. However, 
Audit pointed out that the Ministry remained silent regarding refund/ adjustment of 
GST already paid. To ensure that payment of GST/ Service Tax are not made in 
future without verification of claims, the Ministry in reply, stated that DoP vide D.O. 
dated 21.05.2021 and D.O. dated 14.06.2023 issued Instructions to all the Circles 
informing that they should device a proper procedure to avoid recurrence of cases of 
irregular payment of Service Tax/GST on rent paid to Ministry of Railways. About the 
stance of the Ministry on the refund or adjustment of the GST already paid payment 
of Service Tax/GST on rent paid to Ministry of Railways. About the stance of the 
Ministry on the refund or adjustment of the GST already paid by DoP, the Ministry 
stated that the amount of taxes paid by the DoP should preferably be refunded by 
Railways failing which it should be adjusted in future bills by the Railways. The 
Committee, in this regard recommend that the Ministry should actively pursue the 
matter of the refund of the incorrectly paid GST and settle the same in a time bound 
manner. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in 
this regard. 
  
(Para 9 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  
  

40 
 
 
 
   
Action Taken 
The matter related to the refund of the incorrectly paid GST has been pursued. As 
reported vide ATN dated 19.02.2024, the refund/adjustment of GST remains only 
with Punjab Circle which is under process. Punjab Circle has informed that Railway 
Authorities have been apprised of all the irregularities made in the previous bills and 
Railways have been requested to issue fresh revised bills after adjustments. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
In ATN dated 19.02.2024, adjustment of GST was pending in r/o Jharkhand and 
Punjab Circle. 
The Ministry may submit final compliance in r/o adjustment made for irregular GST 
paid relating to Jharkhand and Punjab Postal Circles, to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
Jharkhand Circle: Irregular payment of GST has been adjusted in the bills for the 
period 01.04.2011 to 31.03.2020. 
Punjab Circle: Matter has been taken up with Railways authorities for sending 
revised bills after adjustments. Revised corrected bills are awaited from Railways. 
  
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
  

41 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Non-Utilization of Dimensional Weighing System (DWS)  
            Audit pointed out that the Dimensional Weighing System (DWS) procured by 
DoP, was not found integrated with the CSI software and hence could not be utilised 
in five Circles resulting in infructuous expenditure of ₹4.44 crore. Similarly, 
procurement of Mail Hardware without assessing the required specifications resulted 
in wasteful expenditure of ₹76.39 lakh. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that Dimensional weight system (OWS) installed at Vijayawada, Hyderabad, 
Lucknow and Jaipur parcel Hub has been integrated with Core Systems lntegration 
(CSl) and DWS instalted at e-Commerce centre, Kolkata has since been repalred 
and integratlon with Core Systems lntegration (CSl) will be completed shortly. 
Further, the Mail Operations Hardware (MOH), a part of IT Modernization Project of 
Department of Posts, assessed the requirement of Tag Printer/Barcode 
Printers/Barcode Scanners according to the requirements for the introduction of 
functionality which got delayed due to delay in the development of software. 
Functionality for generation of redesigned bag labels through system has now been 
made available and all Tag Printer/Barcode Printers/Barcode Scanners procured for 
the purpose are fully utilized by the Circles. While emphasizing the need for prompt 
integration of the Dimensional Weighing System (DWS) with the Core Systems 
Integration (CSI) software in all relevant Circles with a view to ensuring optimum 
utilization and efficient functioning of the DWS, the Committee recommend that the 
integration of DWS installed at e-Commerce centre, Kolkata with Core Systems 
Integration (CSI) should be completed in a time bound manner. Before procuring 
Mail Operations Hardware (MOH) or any other IT equipment, the Committee desire 
the Ministry to conduct a thorough assessment of the required specifications and 
ensure compatibility with existing systems. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should improve coordination between hardware and software development 
teams to align the timelines for the development of software functionalities with the 
availability and utilization of the procured hardware components. 
  
(Para 10 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  
  
  

42 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
All Dimensional Weighment Systems (DWS) procured by the Department catered to 
the growing parcel volumes and prevented the leakage of revenue and increased the 
efficiency in the processing of parcels. While real time integration of data between 
DWS and CSI could not be implemented at the time of installation of the DWS 
machines, these continued to function in the legacy system.  Later, the DWS was 
integrated with the CSI system through a patch developed in the legacy system and 
all DWS machines including the one installed at Kolkata were successfully integrated 
with CSI.  The parcel data is now being exchanged between DWS and CSI on real 
time basis. Besides, IT Modernization project 2.0 is being implemented by the 
Department with a vision to restrengthen the existing network architecture and 
software applications to ensure the real time and seamless integration of data 
between both the systems i.e the DWS and the IT 2.0 applications. Standard Mail 
Operations Hardware (MoH) to be procured will be procured in line with IT 2.0 
applications. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
Ministry may apprise PAC of the steps proposed to be taken for restrengthening the 
existing network structure i.e. DWS with IT 2.0 applications. 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
The IT Modernization Project 2.0 has provision for API based real-time data 
integration with automatic sorters, semi-automatic sorters and DWS operated by the 
Department.  
  
 Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 
  
   

43 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Non-achievement of projected scheme objectives  
            The Committee note that while approving the Road Transport Network scheme in 
June 2013 for carriage of parcels on selected routes, it was expected that the 
implementation of Scheme would lead to additional parcel traffic and revenue for DoP. 
Further, the new parcel traffic would grow at a rate of 25 per cent per annum during the 
period 2012-2017. Audit noticed that DoP approved 54 RTN routes in 18 Circles during 
the period from 2013-14 to 2016-17 and of this, 43 routes in 16 Circles have been made 
operational between 2014-15 and 2016-17. Out of the 43 routes, six routes have been 
closed during the original scheme period (up to March 2017) due to various reasons 
such as non-improvement in service quality by providing time definite delivery of parcels 
and speed post articles and poor growth in e-commerce parcels. Further, 19 new RTN 
routes were approved by DoP, during the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20 (post-12th 
Plan) and out of these, eleven routes have been made operational. However, one route 
has been closed during this period. Audit also pointed out that between 2018-20, the 
traffic of RTN routes has been less than a crore while the expenditure on the same was 
in excess of Rs.10 crore every year. Moreover, Audit scrutiny of parcel traffic handled 
through Express Parcel/ Business Parcel during the years 2014-15 to 2019-20 revealed 
that the expected growth in parcel traffic has not been achieved by the DoP vis-d-vis 
expected growth of 25 per cent per annum and in fact; it reduced considerably in terms 
of volume during the period 2016-17 to 2019-20. As regards the reason for the net outgo 
on approved RTN routes, the Ministry explained that Department is following a 
multimodal approach for transmission of mail and parcels by air, railways and road 
transport depending on the suitability of the connectivity in terms of delivery advantage. 
Further, deployment of RTNs is an operational necessity. Wherever there was shortage 
of space in RMS sections and timings not suitable for expedited delivery of mail and 
parcel at the destination, Road Transport Network has been made operational on such 
routes. As regards the performance of RTNs since 2020-21, the Ministry stated that the 
impact of operationalization of RTNs and infrastructure created can be seen in the parcel 
traffic figures of the last three financial years. An increase of 57% in parcel traffic has 
been noted from 2020-21 to 2022-23. (344.33 lakhs parcels with revenue of Rs 416.52 
crore in 2020-21 to 540.71 lakhs parcels with revenue of Rs. 620.01 crore in 2022-23). 
Presently the RTN comprises 74 routes (to and fro, 37X2=74) which are utilized 
efficiently, to the extent of 80% capacity average load on a daily basis and on certain 
routes it is 100%. Further, for exclusive handling and delivery of Express/ Business 
Parcels since April 2018, with the setting up of Parcel Directorate, 190 Processing hubs 
and 198 Nodal delivery centres have been set up across the country. Considering the 
marked improvement in parcel traffic infrastructure and volume as also revenue and 
capacity utilization on some of the RTN routes in the recent past, the Committee expect 
that the Department will take necessary action for improving service quality by providing 
time specified delivery of parcels and increasing market share in e-commerce parcels 
and thereby improving the revenue earned through RTN routes. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the concrete steps being taken in this regard vis-a-vis the extent of 
expenditure incurred towards market expansion. 
 (Para 11 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 

44 
 
 
 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
In order to provide time specified delivery of parcels, Department has operationalized 
National Road Transport Network (RTN) comprising 78 routes (39x2 forward and 
reverse routes). Department is continuously reviewing these routes and has planned 
to improve transit time by providing direct road connectivity between high parcel 
volume generating metro cities. These measures will help in garnering more share of 
e-Commerce parcels. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
Ministry may apprise PAC of the steps proposed to be taken for improving the 
revenue generation by increasing market share in e-commerce parcels vis-à-vis the 
extent of expenditure incurred towards market expansion. 
 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
1. Parcel traffic has shown consistent growth from 2020-21 to 2023-24, with traffic 
detailed as follows: 2020-2021 – 344.33 lakh, 2021-22 - 368.65 lakh, 2022-23 - 
540.70 lakh, and 2023-24 - 671.84 lakh. The revenue during the period has 
increased as follows: 2020-21 - Rs. 416.52 crore, 2021-22 - Rs. 500.98 crore, 2022-
23 – Rs. 620.01 crore, and 2023-24 – Rs. 752.36 crore. 
2.         Steps taken so far for improvement in parcel business are as under 
2.1       Continuous engagement with industry stakeholders to address operational 
and product-related issues, while also adapting to current market standards through 
policy and technological enhancements. 
2.2. Major initiatives taken by the Department in parcel and e-commerce segment 
include rationalization of value-added services relating to parcel products of the 
Department. Charges for Cash on Delivery and Insurance service of the Department 
have been reduced keeping into view the industry trends. Minimum business 
volumes for National Account Facility have also been reduced to enable startups to 
use this facility. 
3.         Further, steps being taken by this Department for further improvement of 
revenue generation in e-commerce parcel are as under: 
i. To provide reliability in parcel services-Calculation of Expected Date of 
Delivery (EDD), Real time track & trace from Pick-up to delivery, Live tracking 
of RTN vehicles. 
ii. For secure delivery of parcels- OTP based delivery, Delivery authentication 
using KYC documents. 
iii. Digitization of payment services by way of QR based collection of Cash On 
Delivery (COD) amount, e-Proof Of Delivery (e-POD) provision. 

45 
 
 
 
iv. 24x7 delivery of parcels including e-commerce parcels through Delivery 
Kiosks. 
  Sd/- 
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024) 

46 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Setting up of Web-Based Dashboard to monitor RTN network  
            Audit scrutiny of records revealed that DoP did not set up QMC centrally at 
Directorate level and also did not ensure the setting up of these Centres in the Hub 
cities, in the absence of QMC, day-to-day monitoring, development and maintenance 
of new applications where required, development and maintenance of MIS and 
monitoring systems have not been achieved. In this regard, the Ministry stated that 
since there are only few RTN routes in various Circles, the magnitude of monitoring 
did not warrant setting up a dedicated QMC at that stage. But, monitoring of RTNs 
was duly done by mails division of the Postal Directorate, Circle office, Regional 
office and Postal Division. The Ministry further clarified that since 21.06.2023, a Mail 
Monitoring Unit had been set up at the Postal Directorate, Circle, Region and 
Division level by an order. The said unit will monitor among other thing, the efficiency 
of RTN network. A web-based dashboard had also been created to monitor capacity 
utilization, time schedule and discrepancy, if any, on each RTN route. While 
appreciating the initiatives taken for monitoring the efficiency of RTN network, the 
Committee desire that the Department should undertake concerted efforts to evolve 
a mechanism to ensure updation of the entries in the web-based dashboard on real 
time basis so that capacity utilization, time schedule and discrepancy, if any, on each 
RTN route may be judiciously addressed, rationalized and optimized. 
  
(Para 12 of the 92nd Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
  
  
  
  

47 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
The existing RTN dashboard is under process of restructuring with additional reports 
being introduced. These included “No Data Entry Report” for non-updation of entries 
in the dashboard and “Leg-wise Analysis Report” for providing leg-wise capacity 
utilization and help assess requirement of additional capacity on the route. The 
“Arrival Time Difference Report” and “Departure Time Difference Report” will help 
ensuring timely operation of RTN routes. All reports are being regularly scrutinised 
by the Circle level Mail Monitoring Unit (MMU) for timely entry of data. In the IT 
Modernisation Project 2.0, an application for comprehensive monitoring of RTN 
operations is being developed. 
Vetting Remarks by Audit 
Ministry may apprise the steps proposed to be taken under IT Modernisation Project 
2.0 for comprehensive monitoring of RTN operations, including developing of 
dashboard on RTN, to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Reply to Audit Vetting Remarks 
Comprehensive technological requirements of RTN operations have been included 
in the IT Modernization Project 2.0 of the Department. These include; 
a. Dashboard to track vehicles with 3rd party GPS system on GIS maps and 
integration with Department system 
b. Calculation of capacity availability at each touch point of the vehicle. 
c. Maintain a comprehensive rate list of contracted rates for different routes. 
d. Telematics to get real-time data for vehicles. 
e. Assess short-term transportation requirements based on the scheduling 
requests. 
  
Sd/-  
Dushyant Mudgal 
DDG (Mail Operations) 
  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts O.M. No. Mail-30/5/2020-D dated 07.08.2024)  
  
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

49 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
 
  

50 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                            K.C. Venugopal 
12  February, 2025             Chairperson, 
23   Magha 1946 (Saka)     Public Accounts Committee 

51 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 
from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 

52 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft 
reports may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
           a. XXXXXXXXXXX 
b. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their 92nd Report (17th LS) on ‘Functioning of Railway Mail Service 
and Road Transport Network in Department of Posts’ 
          c. XXXXXXXXXXX 
 d. XXXXXXXXXXX 

53 
 
 
 
 
    e. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    f. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    g. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    h. XXXXXXXXXXX 
     i. XXXXXXXXXXX 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise 
the Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

54 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 
Total: 12 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  
  
 
 
***************** 
  

55 
 
 
 
Appendix-III 
List of Annexures referred to in the report. 
  
  
 
Annexure Details 
1.1 Adjustment of Rs.1.09 cr in Gujarat Circle 
1.11 Adjustment of excess debited amount of haulage charges 
1.2 Adjustment of Rs.29.01 lakh in Telangana Circle 
1.2 (i) Regarding statement of sectional accommodation 
1.3 Intimation of Rs.8.32 by Odisha Circle 
1.3a Adjusted by SER in Feb 2024 bill 
1.3b Adjusted by SER in March 2024 bill 
1.3b1 Adjusted by SER in April 2024 bill 
1.3c Adjusted by Odisha Circle 
1.3d Adjusted by Odisha Circle 
1.3e Agreed by SER for refund in subsequent bills 
1.4 Clarification issued by Railway Board (FM Circular 3 of 2024) 
1.5 Dte. letter for Sectional Accommodation 
3.1 Dte letter no. 7-1/2012-D(pt.) dated 17.08.2020 
3.2 Dte letter no. 7-1/2012-D (Pt) dated22.03.2021 
3.3 Discontinuation of Z26B33 
3.4 Discontinuation of ST7 
4.1 Adjustment of Rs.5.46 cr 
5.1 Sectional Accommodation Compliance by Gujarat 
5.2 Sectional Accommodation Compliance by Maharashtra 