30 
ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATIONALISATION OF SAGAR 
PRAHARI BAL 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 86th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
 
PAC NO. 2424 
 
T H I R T I E T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
on Public Accounts contained in their 86th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  5 August, 2025 
 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   5 August, 2025 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August,  2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATIONALISATION 
OF SAGAR PRAHARI BAL 
 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE                                   (iii) 
 PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................     (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................       1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    replies of the Government have not been accepted  
    by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
    the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) held on 
 25 July, 2025 
II   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Eighty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash                       -                 Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania                      -                  Director 
3. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma             -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. 
 
Smt. Rinku Awasthi                          -                  Executive Officer 

v 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirtieth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 86th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Establishment And Operationalisation Of Sagar Prahari Bal”. 
 
2. The 86 th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  7 
February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The 
Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 25-7-
2025. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.   An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 86th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:     
          
        25   July    , 2025                              
         03   Sravana,    1947 (Saka) 
                          
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eighty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Establishment and 
Operationalisation of Sagar Prahari Bal”. 
 
2. The Eighty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 
February, 2024.  It contained eight Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Defence, and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 3(b), 4, 5       
   
      Total: 4             
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL     
         Total: 0  
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para  No.  2, 3(a), 6, 7     
           
    Total:         4   
       Chapter -  V 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Defence. The 

2 
 
Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their 
Eighty-sixth Report. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence, on each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-sixth 
Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration and/or merit 
comments. 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of 
the Report, positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to 
the Parliament. 
Recommendation No. 2  
Procurement of Fast Interception Crafts (FICs) 
 
6. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note from the Audit report that the FICs were contracted with 
M/s Solas Marine, Sri Lanka in August 2011, with a total cost of USD 
64,152,000.00 (equivalent to approximately Rs. 289.4572 crore), under the 
‘Buy-Global’ category of the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2008. The 
DPP provides for conclusion of a contract within 17 months of the date of 
accord of AON. However, there was delay of 13 months in conclusion of the 
contract and the same was concluded after 30 months of accord of Acceptance 
of Necessity (AON). These delays in finalising the contract were linked to 
extended periods for the submission of bids, prolonged technical evaluations, 
and negotiations with the selected shipyard, namely, M/s Solas Marine, Sri 
Lanka. The Committee also note the contention of the Indian Navy that while 
the cases were always initiated on time, delays at various stages of process 
cannot be ruled out as they are incumbent for maintenance of procedural 
transparency and propriety in financial matters. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that while taking up projects related to national security, 
priority must not only be given to procedures, but also to adherence to 
timelines. In this context, the Committee while acknowledging the revision of 
the extant DAP 2020 based on the experience gained over the years, 

3 
 
recommend continuous improvement and updating of procurement guidelines 
to effectively meet evolving needs.” 
 
Action taken Reply of  Ministry 
7. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“In accordance with Para 34, Chapter 1 of DAP 2020, MoD (Acquisition) in 
consultation with MoD (Finance) is authorised to issue clarification/ 
amendments to DAP 20 with the approval of DAC based on proposal of DPB. 
The process of amendment to DAP 2020/ formulation of DAP 2025 has 
already been initiated. 
 
Indian Navy inputs based on experience gained towards refinement of 
procedures of DAP 2020 were presented during the last roundtable conducted 
on 05 Jun 24, with all stakeholders including MoD, Federation of Indian 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Society of Indian Defence 
Manufacturers (SIDM), etctowards amendment in DAP 2020/ formulation of 
DAP 2025. 
 
Additionally, certain amendments have been made time to time in DAP 2020. 
As an example, DAC (04/2023) accorded approval for the Indigenous Content 
requirements in Defence procurement. The provision includes minimum 50% 
of overall IC, to be in the form of material/ components/ software that are 
manufactured in India. This provision is to be enumerated in the draft SoCs 
and subsequently in Shipbuilding RFPs.” 
 
 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
8. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
“No further comments.” 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
9. The Ministry have not provided any Updated Action Taken reply. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that FICs were 
contracted with a total cost of USD 64,152,000.00 (equivalent to approximately 
Rs. 289.45 crore), under the ‘Buy-Global’ category of the Defence Procurement 
Procedure (DPP) 2008. The DPP provides for conclusion of a contract within 17 
months of the date of accord of AON (Acceptance of Necessity). However, 
there was delay of 13 months in conclusion of the contract and the same was 

4 
 
concluded after 30 months of accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AON). These 
delays in finalising the contract were linked to extended periods for the 
submission of bids, prolonged technical evaluations, and negotiations with the 
selected shipyard, namely, M/s Solas Marine, Sri Lanka. The Committee also 
noted the contention of the Indian Navy that while the cases were always 
initiated on time, delays at various stages of process cannot be ruled out as 
they are incumbent for maintenance of procedural transparency and propriety 
in financial matters. The Committee were of the considered opinion that while 
taking up projects related to national security, priority must not only be given 
to procedures, but also to adherence to timelines and recommended 
continuous improvement and updating of procurement guidelines to 
effectively meet evolving needs.  
The Ministry informed in their reply that the process of amendment to DAP 
2020/ formulation of DAP 2025 has already been initiated. Additionally, certain 
amendments have been made time to time in DAP 2020. As an example, DAC 
(Defence Acquisition Council) accorded approval for the Indigenous Content 
requirements in Defence procurement. The provision includes minimum 50% 
of overall IC (Indigenous Content), to be in the form of material/ components/ 
software that are manufactured in India. This provision is to be enumerated in 
the draft SoCs and subsequently in Shipbuilding RFPs.  
 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry is making efforts to increase 
the use of indigenously manufactured equipment in Defence procurement thus 
furthering the initiatives of Atmanirbhar Bharat and Make in India campaigns. 
This would lead to increase in self-reliance in defence equipment and 
strengthen the economy by creating employment and reducing dependency on 
other countries. The Committee also observe that the Ministry is in the 
process of amending the DAP 2020 (Defence Acquisition Procedure) and in 
formulating the DAP 2025. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
deadline fixed for finalization of DAP 2025.  The Committee also expect the 
Ministry to incorporate the provision of indigenous procurement in future 
proposals while keeping focus on speedy conclusion of contracts within the 
timelines.   
 
Recommendation  No. 3(a)  
Operational Availability 
11. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee observe that from 2014 to 2019, several FICs remained non-
operational due to defective engines for extended periods. In this regard the 
Committee noted from the information furnished by Indian Navy that there was 
no support from any OEM/CMC/AMC firms from Oct 2013 to Oct 2015 and 
subsequently from 22 July 2017 to 28 Feb 2018. Also, no routines/ 
maintenance was carried out during these periods, leading to the engines 
becoming defective. The Committee in this context, recommend that the Indian 

5 
 
Navy may adopt a systematic approach to conclude Annual Maintenance 
Contracts (AMC) well in time to ensure timely repairs and maintenance and to 
avoid occurrence of such instances of non-availability of AMCs in future. Also 
steps may be initiated to explore feasibility of establishing repair facility close to 
place of deployment of FICs. A status report regarding the steps taken may be 
furnished to the Committee.” 
 
 
Action Taken Reply of  Ministry  
12. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“Conclusion of CAMC against establishment of maintenance facility is a 
considered decision taken by IN, considering the short life span of FICs (10 years), 
Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) equipment fit and basing at 16 different locations 
all across the coast line. Accordingly, all FICs are covered under Comprehensive 
AMCs and the AMC firm is contractually obliged to maintain a shore support facility 
for SPBs, with adequate stocking of spares and positioning of manpower to ensure 
timely DR and minimum down time of the FICs. The cases for renewal of these 
AMCs are being progressed under the delegated financial powers of Commands well 
in advance to maintain the AMC cover without any hiatus. The Comprehensive AMC 
status of FICs as on Jun 24is as tabulated below:- 
 
Station FICs Status 
Western Naval Command 
Mumbai 15 (French Make) 
Upto 17 Feb 27 
Porbandar 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Okha 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Karwar 11 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Goa 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Eastern Naval Command 
Vishakhapatnam 13 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 12 Aug 24 (Further, 03 
years CAMC contract 
beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion) 
Kolkata 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Chennai 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Kunthakal 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Nagapattinam 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Southern Naval Command 
Kochi 08 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 31 Aug 24 (Further, 02 
years CAMC contract 
beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion) 
Kavaratti 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Minicoy 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Androth 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Andaman & Nicobar Command 
Port Blair 10 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 12 Aug 24 (Further, 03 
years CAMC contract 
beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion)  
Kamorta 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Diglipur 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  

6 
 
“The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the period 
under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched 
in audit.” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
14. The Ministry have not provided any Updated Action Taken reply. 
Comments of the Committee 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that from 2014 to 
2019, several Fast Interception Crafts (FIC) remained non-operational due to 
defective engines for extended periods. In this regard the Committee noted 
from the information furnished by Indian Navy that there was no support from 
any OEM/CMC/AMC firms from Oct 2013 to Oct 2015 and subsequently from 22 
July 2017 to 28 Feb 2018. Also, no routines/ maintenance was carried out 
during these periods, leading to the engines becoming defective. The 
Committee in this context, had recommended that the Indian Navy may adopt a 
systematic approach to conclude Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMC) well in 
time to ensure timely repairs and maintenance and to avoid occurrence of 
such instances of non-availability of AMCs in future. The Committee also 
recommended that steps may be initiated to explore feasibility of establishing 
repair facility close to place of deployment of FICs and status report therefor. 
The Ministry have stated in their reply that the conclusion of Comprehensive 
Annual Maintenance Contract was decided against the establishment of 
maintenance facility for FICs due to their short life span of 10 years. They 
further provided the AMC status of the four Naval Commands in their reply. It 
is apparent to the Committee that for the Eastern, Southern and Andaman and 
Nicobar Command, the dates for the present AMCs have lapsed in August, 
2024. Further, the AMC for the Western Naval Command is expected to last till 
17 February, 2027.  
The Committee are perturbed that the Fast Interception Crafts which are the 
bulwark of the emergency response of the Indian Navy were not supported by 
Maintenance Contracts for a period of two years which points out to a glaring 
laxity in the management of FICs. It is reasonable to conclude that the Fast 
Interception Crafts would not have any technical support in the intermittent 
period between the lapsed contract and the new AMC which would weaken the 
quick response of the Sagar Prahari Bal. The Committee would like to be 

7 
 
apprised of the status of the new AMCs for the three Naval Commands and 
impress it upon the Ministry to take pro-active measures in order to avoid such 
worrisome situations in future by anticipating the lapse of Annual Maintenance 
Contracts for its equipment. 
 
Recommendation No. 6  
Infrastructure for Berthing of the FICs 
16. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note from the Audit revelations that there was delay in 
planning and creation of concomitant infrastructure which continues to impact 
the basing of FICs and operations of the SPB at specific ports. It has been 
informed by Indian Navy that requisite infrastructure for safe berthing is 
available for FICs placed at concerned ports and that Infrastructure is being 
developed at places concerned in consultation with Administration concerned. 
The Committee also note that the requirement of patrolling at certain places 
was met through impromptu hiring of boats to provide security within the 
available resources till the FICs are based to ensure that security cover to the 
extent feasible is provided. The local geographical situation such as depths and 
rocky shoreline are some of the other challenges being encountered by Indian 
Navy regarding lack of a slipway. The Committee while acknowledging the on 
ground actions of Indian Navy for better security recommend the need for better 
planning and on ground coordination by Indian Navy with the authorities 
concerned.” 
 
Action Taken Reply of  Ministry 
 
17. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“Berthing of FICs is being undertaken predominantly within naval premises. 
  
 IN has resorted to dual use berthing/ preferential berthing arrangements 
where such naval facilities do not exist/ or are under development. Berthing 
infrastructure for FICs has been made available through Paradip Port Authority 
on pay-per-use/ dual use basis. Infrastructure for berthing FICs at Kavaratti has 
been made available through liaison with Local Administration. Additionally, 
case for repairing of existing slipway and acquisition of land for construction of 
Boat shed for FICs at Kavaratti is being progressed with UTL Administration 
since 2019. Draft MoU for the same has been submitted to UTLA in Jan 24. 
Also, construction of a dedicated slipway in Minicoy by IN is presently 
underway and is likely to be ready by Nov 2026. 
 
 IN is also actively pursuing cases for berthing infrastructure in other 
envisaged locations through periodic meetings/ interaction with stakeholders at 
multiple levels.”  

8 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
18. Vetting Comments of Audit are as under: -  
“The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the 
period under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be 
further watched in audit.” 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
19. The Ministry have not provided any Updated Action Taken reply. 
Comments of the Committee 
20. The Committee, in their original Report, noted that there was delay in 
planning and creation of concomitant infrastructure which continues to impact 
the basing of Fast Interception Crafts (FICs) and operations of the Sagar 
Prahari Bal (SPB) at specific ports. It has been informed by Indian Navy that 
requisite infrastructure for safe berthing is available for FICs placed at 
concerned ports and that infrastructure is being developed at places 
concerned in consultation with Administration concerned. The Committee also 
noted that the requirement of patrolling at certain places was met through 
impromptu hiring of boats to provide security within the available resources 
till the FICs are based to ensure that security cover to the extent feasible is 
provided. The local geographical situation such as depths and rocky shoreline 
are some of the other challenges being encountered by Indian Navy regarding 
lack of a slipway. The Committee while acknowledging the on ground actions 
of Indian Navy for better security had recommended the need for better 
planning and on ground coordination by Indian Navy with the authorities 
concerned. 
The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes, had informed that berthing of FICs is 
being undertaken predominantly within naval premises and through dual use 
berthing/ preferential berthing arrangements where such naval facilities do not 
exist/ or are under development. Such infrastructure for FICs has been made 
available at Paradip and Kavaratti. Additionally, efforts are being made for 
repairing of existing slipway and acquisition of land for construction of Boat 
shed for FICs at Kavaratti. Draft MoU for the same has been submitted to 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration in January 24. Also, 

9 
 
construction of a dedicated slipway in Minicoy by IN is presently underway 
and is likely to be ready by Nov 2026. IN is also actively pursuing cases for 
berthing infrastructure in other envisaged locations through periodic 
meetings/ interaction with stakeholders at multiple levels. 
 
The Committee are dissatisfied with the lack of planning shown by the Ministry 
while make arrangements for berthing infrastructure. The lack of slipways 
shows that the Ministry could not anticipate the requirements of the FICs 
which are an integral part of the defence mechanism of Sagar Prahari Bal. The 
Committee  desire that proper planning should precede the acquisition of 
assets like the FICs. The present status of the draft MoU with UTLA (Union 
Territory Administration of Lakshadweep) for construction of boat shed at 
Kavaratti and that of the dedicated slipway in Minicoy may also be apprised to 
the Committee.   
 
Recommendation  No. 7 
Manpower 
21. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
“The Committee note that Indian Navy is yet to achieve the complete 
deployment of officers for Sagar Prahari Bal (SPB) despite a significant lapse of 
12 years since the CCS’s sanction in February 2009. The time to attain 
competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander of Captain is stated to be 
12/13 and 18 years respectively. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
roadmap for fulfilling the required number of personnel may be framed and 
executed expeditiously.” 
 
Action Taken Reply of Ministry  
22. The Ministry  in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
“The induction of personnel had commenced after grant of sanction on 01 Jul 
10. Given the time to competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander (12/13 
years) or Captain (18 years), only 61 officers could be positioned till 2021. 
Subsequently, due impetus has been accorded towards positioning of officers 
against Government Sanction (GS) accorded for SPB units and 33 additional 
officers have been appointed since Jun 21. Presently, 94 officers and 966 
sailors are appointed to SPB billets. Currently, IN has a shortage of 10-12% 
officers, which is evenly distributed amongst all billets. Accordingly, out of 
sanctioned strength of 98 officers, IN has provided 94 officers. The balance four 
officers would be appointed in a progressive manner by mid - 2025.” 
 

10 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
23. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit did not make any comment. 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
24. The Ministry have not provided any Updated Action Taken reply. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
25. The Committee in their original Report had pointed out the delay in 
recruitment of personnel in Sagar Prahari Bal despite lapse of significant 
period of time after grant of sanction in July, 2010. Further, the time to attain 
competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander or Captain is stated to be 
12/13 and 18 years respectively. The Committee, therefore, desired that 
roadmap for fulfilling the required number of personnel may be framed and 
executed expeditiously.  
The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated that the induction of 
personnel had commenced after grant of sanction on 01 Jul 10. Given the time 
to competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander (12/13 years) or Captain 
(18 years), only 61 officers could be positioned till 2021. Subsequently, due 
impetus has been accorded towards positioning of officers against 
Government Sanction (GS) accorded for SPB units and 33 additional officers 
have been appointed since Jun 21. Presently, 94 officers and 966 sailors are 
appointed to SPB billets. Currently, Indian Navy (IN) has a shortage of 10-12% 
officers, which is evenly distributed amongst all billets. Accordingly, out of 
sanctioned strength of 98 officers, IN has provided 94 officers. The balance 
four officers would be appointed in a progressive manner by mid - 2025. 
The Committee are disappointed by the delay in recruitment of personnel 
keeping that the this could not be completed even after a lapse of 14 years 
after sanction and would therefore, impress upon the Department to complete 
the recruitment of officers in order to maintain the hierarchical structure. The 
Committee hope that the process would be completed in a time bound manner 
and would like to be apprised of the current status thereof. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
Sagar Prahari Bal – Comprehensive Review 
 
 The Committee notes that Sagar Prahari Bal (SPB) is a maritime force 
envisaged post the 26/11 (i.e. 26 November, 2008) terror attack to provide security 
to all coastal and offshore naval assets by continuous patrolling through Fast 
Interception Crafts (FICs). SPB was sanctioned (February 2009) by the Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CCS) with a complement of 1,000 personnel (comprising of 
120 Officers, 240 Senior Sailors and 640 Junior Sailors) & 80 FICs to be based at 13 
Indian naval ports within a timeline of three years (February 2012) for 
operationalisation of the SPB from the date of sanction. After setting up of 
SagarPrahari Bal, the security scenario has undergone vast changes in the last 12 
years. In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that Indian Navy must 
continuously upgrade security measure to address evolving threats. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in light of experience gained in operating the SPB and the 
evolving security scenario, Indian Navy must carry out a comprehensive review of 
functioning of the SagarPrahari Bal, so as to ensure future preparedness. 
 
 
Action taken by Ministry 
The FICs have been based at all the envisaged locations and continue to operate 
iawthe extant orders to ensure Seaward Security of Naval harbours and protection of 
strategic assets. Towards undertaking a comprehensive review of functioning of 
SagarPrahariBal, the operating procedures, training regimes and maintenance 
philosophy are regularly examined in detail with due regard to the existing security 
situation. Some specific mechanism for undertaking the review are as follows:- 
 
(a) Operational Exercises. FICs are being deployed regularly for various 
coastal security operations and exercises such as Op Trigger, Op Sajag, Ex 
Sea Vigil and Ex SagarKavach. During these operations/ exercises the 
preparedness of the SPB is also assessed wrtthe likely threats encountered at 
sea. The SagarPrahari Bal is also involved in Naval Exercises (Tropex, Ex 
Poorvi Lehar, ex Paschim Lehar) including the Operational Readiness 
Inspections (ORI) of various naval formations. Lessons derived are being 
utilised to progressively evolve and enhance the functioning of the 
SagarPrahari Bal. 
 
(b) Training and Audit. Towards ensuring high level of crew proficiency 
and material readiness, FICs at SPB are being worked up biennially during 
Basic Sea Training (BST) by Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST) and they also 
undergo Operational Level Safety Audit in the intervening year by their Op  

12 
 
Authorities. Regular training of SPB personnel is regularly undertaken in 
activities such as firing at sea, Force Protection Measures (FPM) Drills, Visit 
Board Search and Seizure (VBSS) on fishing boats, survival drills and 
Firefighting/ Damage Control exercises. 
 
 
(c) Operational Deployments. Long Range Deployments are undertaken 
by FICs for exposure to more strenuous sea conditions. Towards ensuring 
self-readiness and longevity of FICs, training of SPB crew on carrying out first 
and second line maintenance is also being undertaken. 
 
 
Vetting comments of Audit  
 
The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the period 
under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched 
in audit.   
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963)dated   30 .09.24) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3(b) 
Operational Availability 
 
The Committee acknowledge that FICs play a unique role in seaward security. 
As indicated in the CCS sanction, they are to be deployed for seaward security on a 
continuous basis to address the vulnerability of ships and submarines. In this 
context, the Committee recommend reviewing and reinforcing this role to ensure the 
seamless operation of FICs. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
FICs are effectively deployed for providing Force Protection Measures (FPM) 
for ships and submarines, whilst entering/ leaving harbours. The operating 
philosophy has been fine-tuned over the period of employment of FICs. Regular 
monitoring of deployment pattern and effective execution of Planned Preventive 
Maintenance (PPM) by timely conclusion of Comprehensive Annual Maintenance 
Contracts (CAMC) has ensured optimum availability of FICs. FICs are regularly 
deployed based on local conditions and security considerations peculiar to an Area 
of Operation. The FICs are being deployed in both day and night depending on 
various factors such as mission geography, weather, prevailing visibility, traffic 
density, threat perception etc. to ensure seaward protection of various naval assets 
and designated Vital Areas (VAs)/ Vital Points (VPs). FICs are also deployed 
regularly for various coastal security operations and exercises such as Op Trigger 
and Op Sajag as well as Ex Sea Vigil and Ex SagarKavach. During enhanced 
Coastal Security states, patrolling by FICs is increased to enhance seaward security. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 

13 
 
 The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the 
period under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further 
watched in audit. 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated 30.09.24) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
Exploitation of FICs 
 
 The Committee note from the information furnished by Indian Navy that the 
Exploitation Index (EI) is generated for performance monitoring and it does not 
reflect operational shortfalls. The Committee also note that various factors govern 
deployment and operations of FICs and different stations would have differing 
patterns based on local conditions and security considerations. The Committee also 
take note that the Navy is working on rebasing FICs to other ports/bases based on 
operational necessity for enhanced exploitation of FICs. It has also been informed 
that FICs are being deployed for night patrolling. Regarding the absence of 
parameters/benchmark for regulating operations and deployment of FICs, the 
Committee note that certain parameters to govern deployments have been defined 
and deployment pattern of the FICs are being monitored regularly to enhance 
exploitation of FICs. In this context, the Committee recommend that dedicated steps 
may be taken to ensure that FICs available with Indian Navy are utilised optimally. 
The Committee also recommend developing a framework that incorporates all 
relevant variables including night patrolling activities while providing clear guidelines 
for optimal deployment of FICs. 
 
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
 The FICs are placed under the operational control of the NOICs at all the 
designated locations. The operational utilisation of the FICs has significantly 
improved post rebasing of FICs at Kolkata, Rambilli, Nagapattinam, Kunthakal, 
Campbell Bay, Diglipurand Kamorta.The AMC cover for the FICs has ensured 
minimum downtime for Planned Preventive Maintenance (PPM) and breakdown 
repairs, further enhancing their operational availability.The FICs at SPB are 
mandated to undertake patrolling at the designated patrol areas towards seaward 
security of Naval harbours iawextant orders viz, TRIDENT and additional local orders 
by NOICs, for their areas of responsibility including night patrolling. 
 
The deployment pattern of FICs isbased on local conditions and security 
considerations peculiar to an Area of Operation. The FICs are being deployed in 
both day and night depending on various factors such as mission geography, 
weather, prevailing visibility, traffic density, threat perception etc. Based on the CCS 
directives, effective patrolling has been ensured through deployment of FICs in most 
optimal manner to derive maximum op-benefits. 

14 
 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 PAC recommended to develop the framework that incorporates all relevant 
variables including night patrolling activities while providing clear guidelines for 
optimal deployment of FICs. 
 
 In this regard, PAC may be apprised whether any guidelines were prepared 
by IN for optimal deployment of FICs. If yes, copy of same may be provided to PAC 
under intimation to audit. 
 
 
Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
 With respect of recommendation of PAC and comments of vetting Audit, it is 
informed that guidelines / SOPs have already been implemented based on local 
conditions and security considerations peculiar to an Area of Operation. These SOPs 
are confidential/ restricted in nature, therefore, cannot be furnished in public 
domain. 
 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated  30.09.24) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
Defective/ Sub-Optimal Optical Surveillance Equipment of FICs 
 
 The Committee observe the issue of defective and sub-optimal Optical 
Surveillance Equipment (OSS) on FICs with certain number of cameras being only 
partially operational as of July 2019. The provision for undertaking OSS repairs was 
not included in the Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) of FICs. In this context, the 
Committee would like to know the reasons for lack of such provisions. The 
Committee also desire a comprehensive assessment of the impact of partially 
operational OSS on the surveillance capabilities of FICs. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry scrutinise the scope of existing AMCs for FICs to 
ensure that they cover the maintenance of OSS comprehensively, including the 
provision of necessary spares.  
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
 The contract for procurement of 80 Auto Tracking Systems ieVigy Observer 
Systems (OSS onboard FICs) alongwith Onboard Spares (OBS), installation 
material, technical documentation, training and services (installation/ commissioning) 
was concluded by NHQ/ Directorate of Weapons Equipment (DWE) with M/s Bharat 
Electronics Limited (BEL), Kotdwara on 15 Mar 23. The systems supplied under the 
contract have a warranty of one year from the date of delivery. 
 

15 
 
 The existing Optical Surveillance Systems are being progressively 
operationalised and upgraded by the OEM M/s Safran, France and M/s BEL, 
Kotdwara. All the OSS would be upgraded and operationalised by Jun 24 iaw DWE 
Contract No. WM/9395/EEC22/VIGY OBSERVER dated 15 Mar 24. This 
upgradation includes warranty of one yearie till mid-2025. On completion of warranty, 
AMC of OSS would be included in the AMCs for FICs.  
 
 In order to develop capability of in-house repairs of OSS cameras, Depot 
Level Repair Facilities (Electro Optic Repair Facility - EORF) was setup at ND (Mbi) 
and ND (Vzg). In addition, a Weapon Repair Facility (WRF) at NSRY, Port Blair, has 
also been commissioned, which has capabilities to repair OSS.  
  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the 
period under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further 
watched in audit. 
 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated     30 .09.24) 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
  

17 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
-NIL- 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
Procurement of Fast Interception Crafts (FICs) 
 
 The Committee notes from the Audit report that the FICs were contracted with 
M/s Solas Marine, Sri Lanka in August 2011, with a total cost of USD 64,152,000.00 
(equivalent to approximately Rs. 289.4572 crore), under the ‘Buy-Global’ category of 
the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2008. The DPP provides for conclusion 
of a contract within 17 months of the date of accord of AON. However, there was 
delay of 13 months in conclusion of the contract and the same was concluded after 
30 months of accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AON). These delays in finalising 
the contract were linked to extended periods for the submission of bids, prolonged 
technical evaluations, and negotiations with the selected shipyard, namely, M/s 
Solas Marine, Sri Lanka. The Committee also notes the contention of the Indian 
Navy that while the cases were always initiated on time, delays at various stages of 
process cannot be ruled out as they are incumbent for maintenance of procedural 
transparency and propriety in financial matters. The committee are of the considered 
opinion that while taking up projects related to national security, priority must not only 
be given to procedures, but also to adherence to timelines. In this context, the 
committee while acknowledging the revision of the extant DAP 2020 based on the 
experience gained over the years, recommends continuous improvement and 
updating of procurement guidelines to effectively meet evolving needs. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
 IawPara 34, Chapter 1 of DAP 2020, MoD (Acquisition) in consultation with 
MoD (Finance) is authorised to issue clarification/ amendments to DAP 20 with the 
approval of DAC based on proposal of DPB. The process of amendment to DAP 
2020/ formulation of DAP 2025 has already been initiated. 
 
IN inputs based on experience gained towards refinement of procedures of 
DAP 2020 were presented during the last roundtable conducted on 05 Jun 24, with 
all stakeholders including MoD, Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI), Society of Indian Defence Manufacturers (SIDM), etc towards 
amendment in DAP 2020/ formulation of DAP 2025. 
 
Additionally, certain amendments have been made time to time in DAP 2020. 
As an example, DAC (04/2023) accorded approval for the Indigenous Content 
requirements in Defence procurement. The provision includes minimum 50% of 
overall IC, to be in the form of material/ components/ software that are manufactured 
in India. This provision is to be enumerated in the draft SoCs and subsequently in 
Shipbuilding RFPs.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 No further comments.   

19 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated 30.09.24) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 (a) 
 
Operational Availability 
 
The Committee observe that from 2014 to 2019, several FICs remained non-
operational due to defective engines for extended periods. In this regard the 
Committee note from the information furnished by Indian Navy that there was no 
support from any OEM/CMC/AMC firms from Oct 2013 to Oct 2015 and 
subsequently from 22 July 2017 to 28 Feb 2018. Also, no routines/ maintenance was 
carried out during these periods, leading to the engines becoming defective. The 
Committee in this context, recommend that the Indian Navy may adopt a systematic 
approach to conclude Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMC) well in time to ensure 
timely repairs and maintenance and to avoid occurrence of such instances of non-
availability of AMCs in future. Also steps may be initiated to explore feasibility of 
establishing repair facility close to place of deployment of FICs. A status report 
regarding the steps taken may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
Conclusion of CAMC against establishment of maintenance facility is a 
considered decision taken by IN, considering the short life span of FICs (10 years), 
Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) equipment fit and basing at 16 different locations 
all across the coast line. Accordingly, all FICs are covered under Comprehensive 
AMCs and theAMC firm is contractually obliged to maintain a shore support facility 
for SPBs, with adequate stocking of spares and positioning of manpower to ensure 
timely DR and minimum down time of the FICs. The cases for renewal of these 
AMCs are being progressed under the delegated financial powers of Commands well 
in advance to maintain the AMC cover without any hiatus.TheComprehensive AMC 
statusof FICs as on Jun 24 is as tabulated below:- 
 
Station FICs Status 
Western Naval Command 
Mumbai 15 (French Make) 
Upto 17 Feb 27 
Porbandar 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Okha 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Karwar 11 (Sri Lankan Make|) 
Goa 04 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Eastern Naval Command 
Vishakhapatnam 13 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 12 Aug 24 (Further, 03 
years CAMC contract Kolkata 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 

20 
 
Station FICs Status 
Chennai 04 (Sri Lankan Make) beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion) Kunthakal 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Nagapattinam 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Southern Naval Command 
Kochi 08 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 31 Aug 24 (Further, 02 
years CAMC contract 
beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion) 
Kavaratti 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Minicoy 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Androth 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Andaman & Nicobar Command 
Port Blair 10 (Sri Lankan Make) Upto 12 Aug 24 (Further, 03 
years CAMC contract 
beyond Aug 24 is in final 
stages of conclusion)  
Kamorta 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
Diglipur 02 (Sri Lankan Make) 
 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the 
period under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further 
watched in audit. 
 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963)dated      30.09.24) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
 
Infrastructure for Berthing of the FICs  
 
 The Committee note from the Audit revelations that there was delay in 
planning and creation of concomitant infrastructure which continues to impact the 
basing of FICs and operations of the SPB at specific ports. It has been informed by 
Indian Navy that requisite infrastructure for safe berthing is available for FICs placed 
at concerned ports and that Infrastructure is being developed at places concerned in 
consultation with Administration concerned. The Committee also note that the 
requirement of patrolling at certain places was met through impromptu hiring of boats 
to provide security within the available resources till the FICs are based to ensure 
that security cover to the extent feasible is provided. The local geographical situation 
such as depths and rocky shoreline are some of the other challenges being 
encountered by Indian Navy regarding lack of a slipway. The Committee while 
acknowledging the on ground actions of Indian Navy for better security recommend 
the need for better planning and on ground coordination by Indian Navy with the 
authorities concerned. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 

21 
 
 
 Berthing of FICs is being undertaken predominantly within naval premises. 
  
 IN has resorted to dual use berthing/ preferential berthing arrangements where 
such naval facilities do not exist/ or are under development. Berthing infrastructure 
for FICs has been made available through Paradip Port Authority on pay-per-use/ 
dual use basis. Infrastructure for berthing FICs at Kavaratti has been made available 
through liaison with Local Administration. Additionally, case for repairing of existing 
slipway and acquisition of land for construction of Boat shed for FICs at Kavaratti is 
being progressed with UTL Administration since 2019. Draft MoU for the same has 
been submitted to UTLA in Jan 24. Also, construction of a dedicated slipway in 
Minicoy byIN is presently underway and is likely to be ready by Nov 2026. 
 
 IN is also actively pursuing cases for berthing infrastructure in other 
envisaged locations through periodic meetings/ interaction with stakeholders at 
multiple levels.  
 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 The action taken by Ministry on PAC recommendations does not cover the 
period under audit, therefore the actions taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further 
watched in audit. 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated      30 .09.24) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
Manpower 
 
The Committee note that Indian Navy is yet to achieve the complete deployment of officers 
for SagarPrahari Bal (SPB) despite a significant lapse of 12 years since the CCS’s sanction 
in February 2009. The time to attain competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander of 
Captain is stated to be 12/13 and 18 years respectively. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that roadmap for fulfilling the required number of personnel may be framed and executed 
expeditiously. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
 
 The induction of personnel had commenced after grant of sanction on 01 Jul 10. 
Given the time to competence/ attainment of the rank of Commander (12/13 years) or 
Captain (18 years), only 61 officers could be positioned till 2021. 
 
 Subsequently, due impetus has been accorded towards positioning of officers 
against Government Sanction (GS) accorded for SPB units and 33 additional officers have 
been appointed since Jun 21. Presently, 94 officers and 966 sailors are appointed to SPB 
billets. 
 

22 
 
 Currently, IN has a shortage of 10-12% officers, which is evenly distributed amongst 
all billets. Accordingly, out of sanctioned strength of 98 officers, IN has provided 94 officers. 
The balance four officers would be appointed in a progressive manner by mid - 2025.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
 No further comments. 
 
(Ministry of Defence F. No. 15(4)/2024-D(N-II/Ops)(963) dated    30.09.24) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                             K.C. Venugopal 
25 July, 2025       Chairperson,   
03 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                  Public Accounts Committee                             
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) HELD ON 25 JULY, 2025 
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, 25 July, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 
1515 hrs in Committee Room No. 53, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey-Acting Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jai Prakash 
3. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
4. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
5. Dr. Amar Singh 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
9. Dr. K. Laxman 
10. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
6. Dr. Faiz Ahmad   -  Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA 

24 
 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
2.  Ms. Gurveen Sidhu Director General 
3.  Ms. Ritu Dhillon Director General 
4.  Shri Deen Dayal Verma Principal Director of Audit (Navy) 
 
 The Hon’ble Chairperson could not attend the Sitting.  As per Rule 258 
(3), the Members present elected Dr. Nishikant Dubey as the Acting 
Chairperson. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) 
to the Sitting of the Committee. Then , the following four draft Reports were 
taken up for consideration:- 
i. Action Taken Report on the 84th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts”; 
ii. Action Taken Report on the 86th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Establishment and Operationalisation of Sagar Prahari Bal”; 
iii. Action Taken Report on the 89th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Indo-Nepal Border Road Project”; and 
iv. Action Taken Report on the 140th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Manpower and Logistics Management in Delhi Police”. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted all the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize 
the Reports and present the same to the House. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/  
Recommendations 
     8 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 3(b), 4, 5 
Total: 4 
Percentage: 50 
% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage:0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –   2, 3(a), 6,7 
Total: 4 
Percentage: 50 
% 
 
 
 