 
 
 48  
 
 
DELAY IN PRODUCTION OF ELECTRONICALLY 
UPGRADED 155MM/ 45 CALIBRE GUN SYSTEM 
“DHANUSH” 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
 
PAC NO. 2468   
 
 
F O R T Y - E I G H T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
(EIG HTEENT H LO K SAB HA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  23.07.2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   22.07.2026 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July, 2026 / Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
DELAY IN PRODUCTION OF 
ELECTRONICALLY UPGRADED 
155MM/ 45 CALIBRE GUN SYSTEM 
“DHANUSH” 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2026-27)                              (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)                              (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – II (DEFENCE) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2025-26)                                               (v) 
INTRODUCTION                   (vi) 
 
                                                                      REPORT 
                                                                       PART- I 
I. Introductory                                                                                                                          1 
II. Audit Findings                                                                                                                       1 
III. Production Plan for Dhanush and Reasons for Delay                                                       4 
IV. Role of OFB & Monitoring Mechanism for the Project                                                    8 
V. Capacity Constraints or Skill Gap                                                                                       10 
VI. Present Status of the Project and Lessons Learnt                                                               11 
                                                                           PART- II 
                                             OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS               13-17 
 
                                                                         APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the First Sitting of the Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts (2025-26) 
held on 03-11-2025*                                                                                                                        
II. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts (2025-
26) held on 07-01-2026*                                                                                                                  
III. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) held on 04.06.2026*      
 
*Minutes not appended.  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2026-27) 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
1.  Smt. Mamta Kemwal                 - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Archna Pathania               - Director 
3.  Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma      - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Pegu - Deputy Secretary 
    
 
 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP from Rajya Sabha with effect from 
08.06.2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Jai Parkash 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Dr. C M Ramesh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Vacant 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
22. Vacant 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2025-26) 
 
  
 
 Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2nd April, 2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Vacant 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-II (DEFENCE) OF 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
i. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi   - Convener 
ii. Dr. C.M. Ramesh     - Alternate Convener 
iii. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  - Member  
iv. Shri Tejasvi Surya    - Member  
v. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy - Member  
vi. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad   - Member  
vii. Shri T.R. Baalu    - Member  
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) having been authorized by 
the Committee, do present this Forty-eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Delay in 
Production of Electronically upgraded 155mm/ 45 Calibre Gun System “DHANUSH” ” based 
on Para 3.4 of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) Report No. 13 of 2018 relating 
to the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production). 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 18 of 2018 was laid on the Table of the House on 07.08.2018. 
3.  The Sub-Committee - II on “Defence” was constituted by the Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) for detailed examination of the subjects related to Ministry of Defence. 
The Sub-Committee worked under the convenorship of Smt. Aparajita Sarangi, Member of 
PAC and Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha. Public Accounts Committee (2025-2026) 
selected the aforesaid subject and allocated the same to Sub-Committee – II (Defence) for 
examination and Report.  
4.  The Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) took 
briefing by Audit on 03.11.2025. Thereafter, Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Defence Production (Ministry of Defence) on the 
aforementioned subject on 07.01. 2026. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the 
Draft Report at their Sitting held on 22.04.2026. Subsequently, the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2026-2027) during their sitting held on 
04.06.2026. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the Report. 
6.      The Committee thank Sub-Committee-II (Defence) of the predecessor Committee (2025-
26) for taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject. 
7.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence (Department of Defence Production) for tendering evidence before the Sub-
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with examination of 
the subject. 
8.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
NEW DELHI;                               K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                       Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
The Public Accounts Committee decided to undertake a detailed examination 
of Para no. 3.4 of Comptroller and Auditor General Report No. 13 of 2018 relating to 
the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production). The paragraph examines 
the subject “Delay in production of electronically upgraded 155mm/45 Calibre Gun 
System Dhanush”. 
2. In Para 3.4 of the C&AG Report, Audit has highlighted that the development of 
electronically upgraded 155mm/45 Calibre Gun System “DHANUSH” undertaken by 
Ordnance Factories (OFs) in the year 2011 was yet to be completely clear the user 
trials. As such, due to the delay in clearing user trials and consequent finalization of 
system configurations, the Bulk Production Clearance (BPC) for the indent of gun 
placed on OFB in March, 2013 was yet to be accorded by the Army. This further 
prolonged the wait of the Indian Army to hold modern artillery guns. 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on the subject at their sitting held on 07th January, 2026 for in-depth 
examination of the issues related to the subject. on the basis of oral evidence and 
written information obtained from the Ministry on various aspects of the Audit Para 
under consideration, the Committee examined the subject as detailed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
II. AUDIT FINDINGS 
4. Artillery units of Indian Army hold 155mm/ 39 Calibre (towed) guns which were 
procured through a contract concluded in 1986 with M/s AB Bofors, Sweden the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). The contract also provide for Transfer of 
Technology (ToT) for upkeep & overhaul of the guns. 
5. According to Audit, since obtaining ToT in 1986-89, the OFB was producing 
certain assemblies/sub-assemblies. However, due to non-induction of any new 
artillery gun, and when deficiency in stock of 39 Calibre gun became sizable in 2009 
and the OEM offered old & used guns, the OFB stated its capability of producing gun 
based on ToT of 1986. Accordingly, Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for procurement 
of a certain number of 155mm 39/45 Calibre gun as ‘Buy (Indian)’ from OFB with 
electronic &mechanical upgrade (to 45 Calibre) was accorded by Defence Acquisition 
Council (DAC) in October, 2011 and accordingly Project “DHANUSH” was started by 

2 
 
OFB. OFB was to produce two electronically upgraded prototypes of guns of 39 and 
45 calibre, respectively.  
6. However, during validation firing of the electronically upgraded gun which was 
carried out in May, 2012, the barrel and muzzle brake of gun was damaged. Based on 
the system validation check of 45 Calibre barrel and electronic sub system, fresh AON 
for another specified number of 45 Calibre guns, subject to successful completion of 
user trials was accorded by DAC in September, 2012 and the indent was placed on 
OFB in March 2013. 
7. Audit observed that evaluation of Automatic Gun Sighting System (AGSS) and 
Digital Intercom System of the gun by quality assurance agency was still in progress 
as of July, 2017. Audit also observed that during firing for user’s exploitation in July, 
2017, muzzle brake and related sub-systems failed and the investigations to identify 
the cause of accident was still being carried out during the month of July, 2017. 
8. Thus, the development undertaken by OFB in 2011 was yet to clear the user 
trials and as such the Audit further observed that the deficiency in holding of modern 
artillery gun continues and the Army is compelled to hold old guns with limited 
operation fire power.  
9. In light of findings of the audit, the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence 
Production) submitted the following in their background note to theCommittee: 
9.1 “Development of ‘DHANUSH’ Artillery Gun System is a mega project of 
national importance involving various stakeholders i.e. govt. agencies and 
many Indian companies. The project is being continuously monitored in MoD. 
This is a weapon system of intricate and critical technologies. 
 
9.2 Dhanush Guns prototypes were ab-initio developed by OFB within 30 
months from the date of accord of the DAC decision on 07.10.2011 and were 
offered to the User for trials. OFB and the stakeholders have jointly worked to 
develop a world class and contemporary weapon system to fulfil the 
requirement of the User. It is worthwhile to mention that Dhanush was the first 
such gun developed in India, paving way for others to emulate. 
 
9.3 Normally similar gun systems are accepted as per the extant procedure 
by firing only 200 rounds and with one gun only as per the General Staff 
Qualitative Requirement (GSQR). Whereas, the weapon system “DHANUSH” 
has undergone most severe evaluations and trials ever conducted in the 
country to attain the best possible system in comparison to the available Gun 
System worldwide.  
 
9.4 Regarding the muzzle brake failure issue during firing for user 
exploitation in July 2017, a comprehensive defect investigation was carried out 

3 
 
which included qualification of sub-system as per international standards and 
STANAGs [Standardization Agreements of NATO]. Examination of affected 
equipment, ammunition and firing drill could not find any deficiency, which could 
cause / lead to incidents involving hitting of Muzzle brake by the exiting 
projectile. No single conclusive factor could be identified for incident / failure. 
This was possibly due to combination of several random factors causing chain 
of events leading to incident. During investigational firing at Proof and 
Experimental Establishment (PXE), Balasore, evidence of chances of 
occurrence of pressure oscillations, possibly, due to inconsistent burning of 
propellant was observed. Such pressure oscillations in a random event of 
differential pressure cyclic loading may lead to cyclic stressing of projectile body 
and may cause rupture / partial breakage of shell body and abnormal exit from 
barrel. Extensive firing was also carried out at PXE, Balasore. It was 
conclusively established in the enquiry report submitted in July 2018 by the 
Board of Officers, with representation from various stakeholders, that the failure 
of Muzzle Brake was not attributed to weapon system.  
 
9.5 The third and final phase of User Exploitation (UE) was successfully 
completed from 31st May 2018 to 7th June 2018 at Pokhran Field Firing Range 
(PFFR).  
 
9.6 After receipt of BPC in Feb 2019, ‘P’ no. of guns were issued in 
Mar’2019. Factory geared up for bulk manufacture of Dhanush Guns and 
manufactured all In-house sub-assemblies and positioned Inter Factory 
Demand (IFD) and Trade inputs for further ‘Q’ Guns. However, final integration 
was delayed due to non-availability of Electronic suite and Electrical System 
ex-BEL, which were made available in the month of Jan 2020. Out of total ‘Q’ 
Guns, ‘R’ Guns were sent for final proof at PXE Balasore by 20th Mar 2020, 
before nationwide lockdown due to COVID-19 pandemic was announced.  
 
9.7 Additional Secretary (DP) held a Review meeting with all the 
stakeholders on 29.07.2021. The various technical issues raised during the 
meeting were later resolved by the concerted efforts of all the stakeholders. 
 
9.8 BPC was granted and individual Guns were Passed in Proof. Further, 
the Induction of the gun was given a go-ahead after successful “Confidence 
Firing” on 8th March 2022 at PFFR Pokharan.  
 
9.9 In a major breakthrough for Indigenisation, the power pack which was 
earlier imported from foreign OEM, has now been replaced with an Indigenous 
power pack. The Guns with new power pack have already been issued to the 
User Units. This has alleviated import dependence and enable higher 
Indigenisation content. 
 

4 
 
9.10 Indent of ‘X’ no. of Guns was converted into Deemed Contract (Post 
Corporatization of OFB) having fixed Delivery schedule. Factory has 
manufactured and issued up to cumulative ‘A’ no of Guns and the remaining 
guns are expected to be delivered to Indian Army by year 2026.” 
 
 
III. Production Plan for Dhanush and Reasons for Delay. 
 
 
10.1  When asked about the original production plan and approved timeline for the 
electronically upgraded 155mm/45 Calibre Gun System Dhanush, the Ministry in their 
written reply submitted that the original production plan and timeline for delivery of the 
electronically upgraded 155mm/45 Calibre Gun System DHANUSH as per the original 
indent dated 4th March 2013placed by MoD(Acquisition wing), was 36 months after 
Bulk Production Clearance (BPC). Further, Post corporatization, the Deemed Contract 
was signed on 28/09/21 further amended on 10/10/2023, with following delivery 
schedule. AWEIL planned to issue all guns (cum-xx Nos) by March 2027.  
 
10.2  When asked to elaborate on the reasons for the delay in production of the Gun 
System, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“It is pertinent to mention that, the first two prototypes were made within 12 
months’ post Defence Acquisitions Council (DAC) clearance and detailed 
evaluation started thereafter. Based on the evaluation results, further 
prototypes were made and offered for evaluation. The evaluation methodology 
also evolved along with the production, as a Gun of this complexity was never 
made Indigenously nor evaluated. The trials underwent by Dhanush as part of 
development and trial phase are enumerated below: 
 

5 
 
 
 
It is pertinent to mention that Dhanush is the only gun to have been evaluated 
in 3 Gun formation [Troop Formation] and 6 Gun formation [Battery Formation] 
as per user’s request to fully conform the performance of the gun system. 
Generally, During the induction process for a gun fielded against RFP, the guns 
are evaluated as a single individual gun trial only, firing around 250 rounds. The 
BPC was accorded thereafter in Feb. 2019, and it was thus preceded by a 
complex development and trials and evaluation phase. It is also pertinent to 
mention that, the Development of Dhanush was the first ever such 
development, and many of the trials were also conceptualized and done for the 
first ever time.” 
 
10.3 When the Committee sought to know as to whether the Ministry made any 
reassessment of the roadmap for acquisition artillery because of the delay in 
production process of Dhanush, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
“Yes, the Indian Artillery has re-assessed the artillery acquisition roadmap from 
time to time based on operational requirement and pace of development of 
indigenous gun systems. The Indian Artillery, as per the revised roadmap has 


6 
 
included ATAGS (Advanced Towed Artillery Gun System), TGS (Towed Gun 
System), MGS (Mounted Gun System) & K9 Vajra-T (additional quantities) in 
its Artillery Profile to ensure that efforts of modernisation and indigenisation 
remain multi - pronged.” 
 
10.4 When the Committee enquired further to know the impact on the operational 
preparedness of the Army due to the delay and the arrangements made to bridge the 
capability gap, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“This gun development has come as a boost to Indigenous artillery 
development, and the project has been fully supported and guided by Artillery 
Dte. Though there had been a delay on account of reasons elaborated above, 
Arty has got a modern gun which can be supported Indigenously, and this is a 
long term and permanent strategic advantage. In fact, development of Dhanush 
has boosted the sustenance of Original Bofors Guns held in the Inventory of 
Arty, due to commonality and Indigenization of almost all the parts of original 
Bofors guns. 
 
Delay in production affected the operational preparedness of Army, particularly, 
Indian Artillery, however certain significant measures listed below ensured that 
voids are addressed and Army remains operationally ready – 
 
a. Upgunning of 130mm guns to 155mm/ 45 Cal Sharang & Soltam guns 
was undertaken. 
b. Induction of 155mm/ 39 Cal M777A2 UI-H guns ex USA. 
c. Indigenous development of 155mm/ 52 Cal ATAGS. 
d. Induction of K9 Vajra-T guns. 
e. Improvement in legacy guns for life extension.” 
 
10.5 To a query by the Committee regarding any cost escalation due to the delay in 
production, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
“The issue price of Dhanush gun has been fixed as per mutually agreed 
Deemed Contract between AWEIL and Indian Army and there has been no cost 
escalation due to delay in production/issue of gun.” 

7 
 
 
10.6 On being further asked as to whether the delay led to idle capacity or unutilised 
funds, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:  
“There was no idle capacity nor any unutilized funds on account of this project.” 
 
IV. Role of OFB & Monitoring Mechanism for the Project 
 
11.1 With regard to the role of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) in meeting production 
targets and their technical & infrastructural preparedness to undertake the project, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) served as the nerve center of this project, 
coordinating seamlessly with diverse stakeholders to ensure its continuous 
advancement. The intricate network of linkages established by OFB with other 
stakeholders is outlined below:
 
 
The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) functioned as the headquarters for all units 
under its jurisdiction. In the development of the Dhanush Gun System, the Gun 
Carriage Factory (GCF) acted as the lead integrator, with support from 
approximately ten OFB units, as detailed below: 
 


8 
 
 
 
Hence, the role of OFB was to steer the project and monitor all those units, as 
above, to keep pace with the schedule and continue individual developmental 
push and production efforts. 
As this was the first such project of such a magnitude, being done through in-
house R&D, the infrastructure was not commensurate with the requirements to 
start-with. The infrastructure slowly augmented as experience was gained.” 
 
11.2 When the Committee sought to know about the monitoring mechanism put in 
place to oversee the  progress of the project, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
“The project was regularly monitored at the APEX level of erstwhile OFB and 
also seeing the importance of the same, Arty Dte/Indian Army organized an 
institutional mechanism by way of Technical oversight group (TOG) consisting 
of all the stakeholders. TOG has been guiding this project immaculately and 
has supported the gun through its long and elaborate journey.” 
 
V. Capacity Constraints or Skill Gaps. 
 
12.1 When asked as to whether any capacity constraints or skill gaps were identified 
during the project, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
“Yes, it is to submit that no Arty Gun of this complexity and technological 
capabilities was ever made in India before this. Neither was there any supply 
chain existing which could have made components of this complexity. Dhanush 


9 
 
has contributed immensely to establishing a supplier and technical base to 
undertake development and production of Arty Guns. 
 
The major capacity constraints/skill gaps identified during the project were as 
under: 
a. Non-availability of Indigenous 155mm Barrel Design. 
b. Requirement of new Muzzle Brake for Dhanush gun. 
c. Non availability of Ballistics and other technical Expertise as it was the 
first gun to be manufactured indigenously. 
d. Non availability of Gun Electronics and expertise to integrate the same 
to the gun. 
e. Non availability of Navigation Systems and expertise to integrate the 
same to the gun. 
f. Non availability of technical expertise for integrating Advanced Sighting 
system with the Ballistic computer of the gun. 
g. Advanced automated systems such as auto-laying technology etc. for 
immediate deployment of the gun. 
h. Requirement of advanced Metallurgy such as indigenisation of micro-
alloy steel and converting standards to Indian equivalent standards. 
i. Indigenisation of other Critical Sub-systems like castings, forgings, and 
electronic relays 
All the above mentioned constraints/skill gaps were overcome by sincere efforts 
of erstwhile OFB and other stakeholders through indigenous sources and skills 
available with OFs and DPSUs. Dhanush has thus emerged as a symbol of 
self-reliance and capability building in India's defence paving the way for 
production of most advanced weapon system indigenously.” 
 
VI. Present Status of the Project and lessons learnt. 
 
13.1 When the Committee sought to know the present status of the Project, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
 

10 
 
“As on date [12/01/2026], total xx guns have been issued to Indian Army, with 
the project expecting to be get completed by March 2027 i.e. the total order of 
xx Nos. of Guns (given by Indian Army) will be supplied by March 2027.” 
 
13.2 On being asked about the lessons learned due to the delay in the project from 
2011 to 2026, the representative of the Ministry, during evidence before the Committee 
on 07thJanuary, 2026, responded as under: 
“...There are two parts to this. One is design and development, and the second 
is production. This product did not exist earlier. It was not designed in 2011. 
The first order was for design itself. At that time, in India, no such gun had been 
designed or manufactured. Even the sub-components had not been designed 
or manufactured. So, an assessment had to be made as to whether such a gun, 
with its sub-components, could be designed to be at par with global standards 
at that time. This was not twenty-year-old technology. Whether we could design 
it within a given time frame was an assumption. In hindsight, that assumption 
did not fully hold true. That criticism is fair.”  
 
13.3 On learnings from the project to ensure that such shortcomings are not repeated 
in future indigenous projects, the Ministry in their written reply further submitted as 
under: 
“The development of the Dhanush gun system has taught Indian Industry 
critical lessons in indigenous defence manufacturing: it gives a good learning 
experience and proved that a complex, modern artillery gun can be built 
domestically and hence created a roadmap for future self-reliance in 
development and manufacturing of advanced weapon systems using 
indigenous resources. 
Key Lessons/learnings from Dhanush Gun Development are elaborated as 
under: 
 
a. Indigenous Barrel Design: Successfully created a 155 mm, 23-litre 
chamber barrel entirely in-house, proving India's ability to independently 
design and manufacture complex artillery components. 
 
b. Muzzle Brake Innovation: Developed new analytical and design 
methods, enhancing recoil management and establishing a foundation 
for future indigenous shock-absorbing systems. 

11 
 
 
c. Ballistics Expertise: Achieved precise in-bore projectile analysis and 
ballistic calculations, strengthening domestic capability in advanced 
computational ballistics.  
 
d. Hydraulic Integration: Validated robust hydraulic systems capable of 
withstanding extreme shock, teaching resilience and reliability in artillery 
design. 
 
e. Gun Electronics: Integrated electronic controls with ballistic functions, 
marking a step toward digitized artillery and improved operational 
efficiency. 
 
f. Navigation Systems: Incorporated inertial navigation for enhanced 
mobility and deployment accuracy, reducing dependence on external 
aids. 
 
g. Advanced Sighting: Linked sighting systems with ballistic computers 
for real-time precision, demonstrating the value of integrated targeting 
solutions with day night capabilities. 
 
h. Automation: Introduced auto-laying technology, improving speed of 
deployment and reducing human error. 
 
i. Metallurgical Advances: Indigenised micro-alloy steel and adapted 
Swedish standards to Indian equivalents, strengthening local 
metallurgical expertise. 
 
j. Critical Sub-systems: Developed indigenous castings, forgings, and 
electronic relays, ensuring self-reliance in core components vital for 
strategic defence manufacturing. 
 

12 
 
The above learnings will prove beneficial in indigenous manufacturing of state 
of the art weapon systems and will greatly reduce the development time in other 
development projects in future.” 3 
  

13 
 
Part II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
            The Committee note from the audit observations that the Artillery units 
of Indian Army hold 155mm/39 Calibre (towed) guns procured through a 
contract concluded in 1986 with AB Bofors, Sweden, the Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (OEM). The contract also provide for Transfer of Technology (ToT) 
which included indigenous production of the guns.  The Committee also note 
that due to a ban imposed by Ministry of Defence (MoD) in 1989 on the OEM for 
corruption charges, the Army pursued the case for procurement of guns of 
higher caliber (45/52) through open global tenders. The Committee observe, that 
however the Army did not manage to procure new artillery guns which were 
initiated in the 1990s due to issues viz. delay in deciding the actual requirement 
of guns, calibre, poor response of vendors, etc. and subsequently, the OFB was 
entrusted to produce two electronically upgraded prototypes of guns of 39 and 
45 calibre respectively, when deficiency in stock of 39 Calibre gun became 
sizeable in 2009. 
              The Committee find that the Ministry took two decades to finalise the 
procurement and induction of new artillery gun system resulting in huge 
deficiency in stock of the guns, which compelled the Army to hold old guns with 
limited fire power. It appears to the Committee that the Ministry do not have a 
proper mechanism or operating procedure to ensure periodical review and 
timely action for technological upgradation of existing gun systems or for 
procurement of new guns. The Committee are of the view that in the present 
geo-political scenario, the Ministry must be proactive to assess the stockpiles 
and efficacy of such critical guns to ensure that the armed forces are not 
deprived of credible equipments and technology. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend identification of capability gaps as per emerging threats at regular 
intervals and also take concrete steps to ensure timely acquisition of critical 
equipments and technology. 

14 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
         The Committee note from the submissions of the Ministry that the 
methodology for production of the Dhanush gun system evolved gradually 
alongwith the production process as such gun system had never been made 
indigenously. The Committee also observe that the existing infrastructure for 
production did not commensurate with the requirements for a project of such 
magnitude and all these factors led to the delay in the production process of 
Dhanush gun system. While the Committee appreciate the initiatives taken for 
indigenization of its defense sector which historically relied upon foreign 
suppliers, the Committee are not convinced by the submission of the Ministry 
attributing the delay in the production process to gradual development of 
evaluation methodology and lack of requisite infrastructure. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to critically and comprehensively assess the domestic 
capabilities vis-à-vis global market and the infrastructure requirements needed 
for undertaking production of indigenous defense systems beforehand, to 
reduce delays and prevent cost overruns. The Committee are of the considered 
view that steps for due assessment of technical and infrastructural 
preparedness for such indigenous ventures would go a long way in meeting the 
requirements of our forces and also help in reducing dependence on foreign 
suppliers. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to provide adequate 
support to domestic manufacturers for research and development (R&D) which 
will ultimately help us in making our defence system self reliant. 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 The Committee note that certain capacity constraints/skill gaps 
including,-(i) non availability of Ballistics & other technical expertise, (ii) non 
availability of gun electronics and (iii) non availability of technical expertise for 
integrating Advance Sighting system with the Ballistic computer of the gun, 
contributed to the delay in the production process. The Committee are also 
happy to note that all such constraints & skill gaps were overcame by sincere 

15 
 
efforts of erstwhile OFB and other stakeholders through indigenous sources 
and skills available with OFs and DPSUs.  
 While the Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to fill the 
capacity & skill gaps through indigenous sources, the Committee are of the 
considered view that the challenges related to skill gaps & capacity constraints 
should have been flagged at the appropriate level during the approval stage, 
which could have led to better streamlining of the production process. The 
Committee therefore recommend that any constraints of capacity & skills 
related to indigenous production of defense weaponry must be taken into 
account and addressed before finalization of budgetary requirements & 
production schedule, as delays in production has the potential to render 
designs obsolete and adversely impacting the country’s quest for self reliance 
in the defense sector. The Committee also recommend for adequate attention to 
meet the gap in skills in the defence sector as apparent from the difficulties 
faced in the production process of Dhanush. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry explore the possibility of introducing specially designed skill 
development courses in various technological institutes including IITs to 
develop a skilled workforce, as per requirements of the country’s indigenous 
military program. The Committee are of the view that such measures can also 
have broader positive ramifications in terms of economic impact on industrial 
growth and creation of jobs.   
 The Committee further recommend the Ministry to work out a mechanism 
for upskilling the existing manpower of Defence Public Sector Undertakings 
(DPSUs) at regular intervals to enable them to upgrade their skills and 
knowledge in line with the country’s efforts to match with major defense 
manufacturing countries of the world in terms of producing cutting edge 
weaponry for our defense forces to tackle emerging threats. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee have noted the submission of the Ministry that the 
Dhanush gun system has boosted the sustenance of Original Bofors Guns held 

16 
 
in the Inventory of the Army, due to commonality and Indigenization of almost 
all the parts of original Bofors guns. However, the Committee are also 
concerned to note the admission of the Ministry that the delay in production 
affected the operational preparedness of the Army, specially the Artillery 
Division. Considering current geopolitical scenario, the Committee are of the 
opinion that the Indian Army cannot function with obsolete artilleries for such a 
long period of time and therefore recommend that the Ministry take concrete 
steps towards structural transformation of the decision making process, so that 
such matters of national security are not marred by unrealistic delays. The 
Committee also urge upon the Ministry to focus on supply chain management 
and formulation of guidelines or SOPs to ensure that suppliers meet the criteria 
as per the operational requirements of the armed forces, and also to ensure that 
such suppliers adhere to timelines as may be specified in the respective 
contracts. 
Recommendation No. 5 
 The Committee note that the Dhanush project was regularly monitored at 
the APEX level of erstwhile OFB and that considering the importance of the 
project, the Artillery Division of the Indian Army created  an institutional 
mechanism called the Technical Oversight Group (TOG) consisting of all the 
stakeholders to guide the project. The Ministry has submitted before the 
Committee that Indian Army re-assesses the artillery acquisition roadmap from 
time to time based on operational requirements and pace of development of 
indigenous gun systems.  
 While the Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry through 
various monitoring mechanisms to oversee the progress of the Dhanush 
project, they have also observe that inspite of the monitoring mechanisms as 
stated by the Ministry, the project has missed several deadlines for its 
completion. Considering the fact that the weapon system is first of its kind being 
produced in the country, the Committee, recommend that the Ministry explore 
the possibility of additional measures that may required to be taken for ensuring 
that the project do not face further hurdles and is completed in a time bound 
manner within the extended timeline i.e, March, 2027. The Committee also 

17 
 
further recommend that the Ministry take necessary steps to ensure that all the 
stakeholders involved in the project, specially the AWEIL which is responsible 
for manufacturing and system integration of the Dhanush system to be 
proactive, and to anticipate possible disruptions specially due to mechanical 
and technological issues, focus on efficient management of the supply chain 
and optimization of the workflows. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                             K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                      Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 
 