       47  
 
 
REVISION OF FINANCIAL LIMITS FOR DETERMINING THE 
CASES RELATING TO  'NEW SERVICE/NEW INSTRUMENT 
OF SERVICE' 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and third Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
  PAC NO.  2467 
 
 
 
F O R T Y- S E V E N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025 -26)  
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and third Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha)] 
 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.04.2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   17.04.2026 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
APRIL, 2026 /CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka)  
 
REVISION OF FINANCIAL LIMITS FOR 
DETERMINING THE CASES RELATING TO  'NEW 
SERVICE/NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE' 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS           (iv) 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  ...........................................................................        (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report...............................................................          1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been         
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the     
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the   
   replies received from the Government....................        
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   replies of the Government have not been accepted 
   by the Committee and which require reiteration.....        
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   the Government have furnished interim replies........        
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I            Minutes of the Twenty fourth sitting of the Public  
             Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 16.04.2026  
       
 
 II            Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government  
            on the Observations/Recommendations of the  
            Public Accounts Committee contained in their 
            One Hundred and third Report (Seventeenth  
          Lok Sabha)            
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
             Shri K. C. Venugopal       -       Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Vacant*   
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 
*Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2 nd April, 2026 
 
Secretariat 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Ms. Malvika Mehta   - Deputy Secretary   
4. Ms. Khyati    - Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 
v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025 -26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their One Hundred and third Report 
on ‘Revision of Financial Limits for determining the cases relating to  'New 
Service/New Instrument of Service'” relating to Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure. 
2. The One Hundred and third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7 th February, 2024. Replies of the Government to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Forty Seventh Report at their 
sitting held on 16 April, 2026. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
  
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and third Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                K C VENUGOPAL 
16 April 2026                                                                                           Chairperson, 
26 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)               Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Hundred and Thir d Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the subject " 
Revision of Financial Limits for determining the cases relating to 'New Service/New 
Instrument of Service ’ relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure).  
 
2. The Hundred and Thir d Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 07.02.2024.  It contained  04 Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4        
    
         Total:        04 
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 NIL 
         Total:        00    
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 NIL        
         Total:       00 
         Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 NIL     
           
           
         Total:    00 
         Chapter -V

 
2 
 
3.  After detailed examination of the subject in their original Report, t he 
Committee had expressed their concurrence with the proposed revision in the 
financial limits for determining cases relating to 'New Service/New Instrument of 
Service', considering the adequacy of the rationale by the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance; extensive consultations with various 
ministries/departments as well as concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry may 
consider the recommendations of Audit i. e. adequate measures for suitable 
incorporation of proposed changes in Annexure -1 to Appendix -3 of the GFR, 
application of other conditions as stipulated in the GFR 2017 and Delegation of 
Financial Powers Rules 1978 in regard to NS/NIS mutatis mutandis. The Committee 
had accordingly given their observations/recom mendations in the 103rd Report on 
the subject. 
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance on the 
Observations/Recommendations of t he Committee contained in their Hundred and 
third Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on their 
Observations/Recommendations and give their comments. 
5.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendation(s) contained in Chapter I (Para 9) of the Report, within three 
months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
Observations/Recommendations - Para Nos 1-4  
 
6. The Committee in their original report had made the following observations 
and recommendations in para nos 1-4: 
 
“1. New Service (NS) refers to expenditure arising out of a new policy 
decision not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new 
activity or a new form of investment. ‘New Instrument of Service’ (NIS) refers 
to relatively large expenditure arising out of important expansion of an existing 
policy. The financial limits for determining the cases relating to ‘New 
Service/New Instrument of Service’ are applied whenever the expenditure 
provisions are augmented through re -appropriation of funds from the savings 
available within the same section of the Grant/Appropriation. Whenever these 
limits are attracted, approval -of/reporting-to Parliament is obtained/made 

 
3 
 
through Supplementary Demand for Grants during the course of the financial 
year. The Committee note that Ministry of Finance has solicited approval of 
the PAC for adoption of a principle -based approach, over the existing rule -
based approach, which applies uniformly to all new services (except new 
Works, exempted and exception categories) for seeking prior approval of 
Parliament and determine the financial limits for considering reporting limit 
and prior approval limit for services for new Works and New Instruments of 
service and exemption of certain services. The Committee further note that 
the proposal is for revision of the financial limits upward on the basis of 
expansion of the budget after the last revision in 2006 and taking into account 
the future expansion of the GDP/budget and other likely  changes. This 
proposal for amendment is fourth of its kind and is being made after a hiatus 
of about 17 years. 
 
2. The Committee understand that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) has currently proposed to amend various provisions of 
Delegation of Financial Power Rules (DFPRs), 1978. As part of this process, 
the Ministry have sought approval of the PAC for revision of financial limits for 
determining the cases relating to 'New Service (NS)/New Instrument of 
Service (NIS)'. The proposed amendments inter-alia include upward revision 
of financial limits for services categorised as new works under the Capital 
section (classified as Land/Building/Machine). The reporting limit is proposed 
to be set above ₹ 50 crores but not exceeding ₹100 crores and prior approval 
of Parliament would be required for amounts exceeding ₹ 100 crores subject 
to saving within same section of the grant. For certain object heads in the 
case of 'New Instrument of Service', the reporting limit would be up to 20% of 
the original appropriation or up to ₹ 100 crores, whichever is higher. Approval 
from Parliament would be mandatory for amounts exceeding 20% of the 
original appropriation or above ₹ 100 crores, whichever is higher, subject to 
savings within same section of the grant. 
 
3. The Committee further note from the submission of the Ministry that the 
endeavor is to minimise the frequency of Supplementary Demands for Grants 
presented to Parliament during a financial year. The proposed amendments 
intend to encourage the Ministries to meticulously estimate their budgetary 
requirements. The necessity for the upward revision arises due to a surge in 
supplementary proposals from the Ministries/Departments seeking prior 
approval from Parliament, causing delays in execution of 
projects/schemes/programmes despite availability of savings. The Committee 
understand from the submission made by the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Expenditure), the Government's expenditure, on net basis, has risen by 
over 700 % from 2005 -06 to 2023 -24. The Ministry of Finance has explained 
that with the expected growth of GDP in the range of 6 -7% YoY basis, the 
size of the Budget is anticipated to grow substantially in the next decade too. 

 
4 
 
The Ministry of Finance has further clarified that substantial growth in budget 
size has diminished the delegated powers of the Ministries/Departments 
leading to voluminous proposal(s) being forwarded, for reporting/approval of 
the Parliament. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) felt that existing NS/NIS limits consist of lots of stipulations and 
complex inter -dependencies which lead to restrictive interpretations, open 
ended conclusions and judgmental errors for the Ministries/Departments. The 
Committee note from the view provided by C&AG and the Ministry that 
following the implementation of the current proposal,  88 to 99 percent of the 
cases for revision would remain in the active scrutiny of the PAC, implying 
thereby that the substantive re -appropriations can only be done with the prior 
approval of Parliament. The Committee observe from the observations of the 
C&AG that defining NS/NIS limits uniformly and consistently at standardised 
Object Heads will enable effective monitoring, scrutiny and oversight by the 
CAG and Parliament of the compliance of the limits by the executive as also 
for ensuing their accountability. 
 
4. Considering that the proposal has been finalized after consultation with 
various Ministries and obtaining the concurrence of the Office of the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India, and there is adequate rationale 
provided by the Ministry of Finance for the need for revision of financial limits 
for determining the cases relating to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’, 
the Committee concur  with the proposed amendments and recommend the 
same to be implemented in due course. The Committee have every reason to 
believe that, as recommended by C&AG, adequate measures for suitable 
incorporation of proposed changes in Annexure -1 to Appendix -3 of the GFR, 
application of other conditions as stipulated in the GFR 2017 and Delegation 
of Financial Powers Rules 1978 in regard to NS/NIS mutatis mutandis have 
been taken into consideration. The Committee while according their approval 
for NS/NIS recommend the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 
should devise an effective monitoring mechanism for proper and continuous 
monitoring of the revised limits in order to ensure strict adherence of the same 
by each and every Ministry/Department. The Committee also expect the 
Financial Advisors of all the Ministries/Departments to ensure that no 
violations occur in implementation of the revised financial limits for 'New 
Service/New Instrument of Service'.   It goes without saying here that any 
slackness in complying with the same may be strictly dealt with. 
 
In summation, the Committee acquiesce with the new proposal of ‘New 
Service/New Instrument of Service’ (NS/NIS) and in sequel accord their 
sanction for the same, as sought by the Ministry of Finance which have come 
before the Committee after almost seventeen years with the expectation that it 
would be implemented by the Ministry within the proposed timelines." 
 

 
5 
 
  
7.  The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)  furnished the following 
action taken replies on the recommendation of the Committee: 
 
"Based on the observation/recommendation of PAC in its One Hundred and 
third report (17th Lok Sabha), Department of Expenditure vide its O.M. No. 
01(14)/2016-EIIA(Vol.III) dated 01.04.2024 & Budget Division, DEA vide its 
O.M. No. F1(22) -B(AC)/2022 dated 23.02.2024 (copy enclosed) issued 
revised guidelines on financial limits to be observed in determining cases 
relating to New Services/New Instrumental Services(NS/NIS). The revised 
guidelines were issued in supersession of Budget's Division's earlier O.M. 
F1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.05.2006 for ensuring uniformity, consistency, 
administrative efficiency and financial discipline by the Ministries/Department. 
 
2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. dated 
27.06.2024.” 
 
8. Audit had no further comment s to offer upon vetting the Ministry's Action 
Taken Note. 
 
9. The Committee had acquiesced with the proposal of the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure for upward revision of financial limits for 
determining cases relating to New Service/New Instrument of Service in their 
original report. While  concurring with the said proposal, the Committee had 
recommended that suitable amendments be made in the GFR 2017 and 
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 1978 etc.; an effective monitoring 
mechanism for proper and continuous monitoring of the revised limits be 
devised by Department of Expenditure and that Financial Advisors of all the 
Ministries/ Departments may ensure that no instances of violations occur in 
implementation of the said revised financial limits.   
 
 The Committee note from the Action taken note of the Ministry that 
revised guidelines have been issued incorporating the recommendations of 
the Committee on financial limits for determining cases relating to ‘New 
Service’ / ‘New Instrument of Service'. Further, the Committee note that based 
on the recommendations of the Committee and suggestions of C&AG, the 
Ministry has also incorporated  the amendments in provisions of Annexure I to 
Appendix 3 of the General Financial Rules 2017 consequent to the extant 

 
6 
 
revision in the financial limits of 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'. The 
Committee also observe that instructions have inter-alia been issued by the 
Ministry of Finance for the Financial Advisors of all Ministries/Departments to 
ensure that no violations occur in the implementation of the revised limits. 
 
In view of the above, the Committee desire that the Ministry may ensure 
strict compliance with procedural requirements when implementing the 
revised financial limits for determining cases relating to 'New Service/New 
Instrument of Service'. The Committee stress upon the importance of timely 
reporting of any  re-appropriations by the Ministries/Departments to 
Parliament, as mandated by the guidelines and desire that the timelines be 
strictly adhered to.  Additionally, the Committee desire that the Ministry may 
prepare and submit a comparative analysis of the number of cases reported to 
Parliament before and after implementation of these limits to assess the 
impact of the revised limits in reducing supplementary proposals.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the mechanism to assess 
instances of violations by Ministries/Departments in implementation of the 
revised financial limits for 'New Service/New Instrument of Service'. The 
Committee also desire to know of any such instances of violations and the 
action taken to deal with the same.  
 
 
   
  

 
7 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
1. New Service (NS) refers to expenditure arising out of a new policy decision 
not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new activity or a new form 
of investment. ‘New Instrument of Service’ (NIS) refers to relatively large expenditure 
arising out of important expansion of an existing policy. The financial limits for 
determining the cases relating to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’ are 
applied whenever the expenditure provisions are augmented through re -
appropriation of funds from the savings available within the same section of the 
Grant/Appropriation. Whenever these limits are attracted, approval -of/reporting-to 
Parliament is obtained/made through Supplementary Demand for Grants during the 
course of the financial year. The Committee note that Ministry of Finance has 
solicited approval of the PAC for adoption of a principle -based approach, over the 
existing rule -based approach, which applies uniformly to all new services (except 
new Works, exempted and exception categories) for seeking prior approval of 
Parliament and determine the financial limits for considering reporting limit and prior 
approval limit for services for new Works and New Instruments of service and 
exemption of certain services. The Committee further note that the proposal is for 
revision of the financial limits upward on the basis of expansion of the budget after 
the last revision in 2006 and taking into account the future expansion of the 
GDP/budget and other likely  changes. This proposal for amendment is fourth of its 
kind and is being made after a hiatus of about 17 years. 
2. The Committee understand that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) has currently proposed to amend various provisions of Delegation of 
Financial Power Rules (DFPRs), 1978. As part of this process, the Ministry have 
sought approval of the PAC for revision of financial limits for determining the cases 
relating to 'New Service (NS)/New Instrument of Service (NIS)'. The proposed 
amendments inter-alia include upward revision of financial limits for services 
categorised as new works under the Capital section (classified as 
Land/Building/Machine). The reporting limit is proposed to be set above ₹ 50 crores 
but not exceeding ₹100 crores and prior approval of Parliament would be required 
for amounts exceeding ₹ 100 crores subject to saving within same section of the 
grant. For certain object heads in the case of 'New Instrument of Service', the 
reporting limit would be up to 20% of the original appropriation or up to ₹ 100 crores, 
whichever is higher. Approval from Parliament would be mandatory for amounts 
exceeding 20% of the original appropriation or above ₹ 100 crores, whichever is 
higher, subject to savings within same section of the grant. 

 
8 
 
3.  The Committee further note from the submission of the Ministry that the 
endeavor is to minimise the frequency of Supplementary Demands for Grants 
presented to Parliament during a financial year. The proposed amendments intend to 
encourage the Ministries to meticulously estimate their budgetary requirements. The 
necessity for the upward revision arises due to a surge in supplementary proposals 
from the Ministries/Departments seeking prior approval from Parliament, causing 
delays in execution of projects/schemes/programmes despite availability of savings. 
The Committee understand from the submission made by the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure), the Government's expenditure, on net basis, has risen 
by over 700 % from 2005 -06 to 2023-24. The Ministry of Finance has explained that 
with the expected growth of GDP in the range of 6 -7% YoY basis, the size of the 
Budget is anticipated to grow substantially in the next decade too. The Ministry of 
Finance has further clarified that substantial growth in budget size has diminished 
the delegated powers of the Ministries/Departments leading to voluminous 
proposal(s) being forwarded, for reporting/approval of the Parliament. Therefore, the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) felt that existing NS/NIS limits 
consist of lots of stipulations and complex inter -dependencies which lead to 
restrictive interpretations, open ended conclusions and judgmental errors for the 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee note from the view provided by C&AG and 
the Ministry that following the implementation of the current proposal,  88 to 99 
percent of the cases for revision would remain in the active scrutiny of the PAC, 
implying thereby that the substantive re -appropriations can only be done with the 
prior approval of Parliament. The Committee observe from the observations of the 
C&AG that defining NS/NIS limits uniformly and consistently at standardised Object 
Heads will enable effective monitoring, scrutiny and oversight by the CAG and 
Parliament of the compliance of the limits by the executive as also for ensuing their 
accountability. 
4. Considering that the proposal has been finalized after consultation with 
various Ministries and obtaining the concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India, and there is adequate rationale provided by the Ministry of 
Finance for the need for revision of financial limits for determining the cases relating 
to ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’, the Committee concur  with the 
proposed amendments and recommend the same to be implemented in due course. 
The Committee have every reason to believe that, as recommended by C&AG, 
adequate measures for suitable incorporation of proposed changes in Annexure -1 to 
Appendix-3 of the GFR, application of other conditions as stipulated in the GFR 2017 
and Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 1978 in regard to NS/NIS mutatis 
mutandis have been taken into consideration. The Committee while according their 
approval for NS/NIS recommend the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) should devise an effective monitoring mechanism for proper and 
continuous monitoring of the revised limits in order to ensure strict adherence of the 
same by each and every Ministry/Department. The Committee also expect the 
Financial Advisors of all the Ministries/Departments to ensure that no violations 
occur in implementation of the revised financial limits for 'New Service/New 
Instrument of Service'.   It goes without saying here that any slackness in complying 
with the same may be strictly dealt with. 

 
9 
 
 In summation, the Committee acquiesce with the new proposal of ‘New  
Service/New Instrument of Service’ (NS/NIS) and in sequel accord their  
sanction for the same, as sought by the Ministry of Finance which have come  
before the Committee after almost seventeen years with the expectation that  
it would be implemented by the Ministry within the proposed timelines. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation Nos. 1-4 of 103rd Report of the Committee on 
Public Accounts (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 Based on the observation/recommendation of PAC in its One Hundred and 
third report (17th Lok Sabha), Department of Expenditure vide its O.M. No. 
01(14)/2016-EIIA(Vol.III) dated 01.04.2024 & Budget Division, DEA vide its O.M. No. 
F1(22)-B(AC)/2022 dated 23.02.2024 (copy enclosed) issued revised guidelines on 
financial limits to be observed in determining cases relating to New Services/New 
Instrumental Services(NS/NIS). The revised guidelines were issued in supersession 
of Budget's Division's earlier O.M. F1(23) -B(AC)/2005 dated 25.05.2006 for ensuring 
uniformity, consistency, administrative efficiency and financial disciplin e by the 
Ministries/Department. 
2.  This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. dated 
27.06.2024. 
 
(Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, F. No. 01(14)/2016-E-II(A) 
Part-III dated 04th July 2024) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 
10 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
  

 
11 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
  

 
12 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
--NIL— 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                        K C VENUGOPAL 
16 April 2026                                                                                                   Chairperson, 
26 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)              Public Accounts Committee 
  

 
13 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) HELD ON 16th APRIL, 2026. 
 
 The Public Accounts Committee (2025 -26) sat on Thursday, the 16 th April, 
2026 from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Extension to Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT  
 Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
3. Shri Jai Parkash  
4. Dr. C M Ramesh  
5. Dr. Amar Singh  
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
 RAJYA SABHA  
9.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan  
10.    Dr. K Laxman  
11.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania - Director 
3. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Malvika Mehta - Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA 
1. Shri Saurav Kumar Jaipuriyar - Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Addl. Dy. C&AG 
3. Ms. Ritu Dhillon - Director General 

 
14 
 
4. Shri Sanjay Sahu - Director 
 
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting 
of the Committee and invited suggestions from the Members on the following Draft 
Reports included in the agenda for consideration and adoption: 
(i) X X X X 
(ii) X X X X  
(iii) Action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Hundred and Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Revision of Financial Limits for determining the 
cases relating to New Services/New Instrument of Service”.  
 
2. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid three Draft 
Reports with slight modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
15 
 
(APPENDIX – II) 
(Vide para 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS CONTAINED IN THEIR HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations - 04 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1 to 4  
- Total: 04 
Percentage – 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
-Nil- 
 
- Total: Nil 
 
Percentage - 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
-Nil- 
- Total: Nil 
 
Percentage– 0% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies: 
             -Nil- 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage –0% 
 
 