43

AVOIDABLE PAYMENT DUE TO NON-CHARGING OF
SERVICE TAX/GST FROM THE PASSENGERS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their 1260 Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

Ministry of Home Affairs
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2025-26)

FORTY THIRD REPORT

EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2449

FORTY THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2025-26)

(EIGHTEENTH LOK S'’ABHA)

AVOIDABLE PAYMENT DUE TO NON-CHARGING
OF SERVICE TAX/GST FROM THE PASSENGERS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their 1267 Report (177 Lok Sabha)]

Ministry of Home Affairs

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 01.04.2026

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 01.04.2026

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2026 /Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2025-26)
IMEROD DG TION... .ssranineutssteeeesvvorttvirsordiaethn Sia ie ere eter
CHAPTER | Report.
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government.
CHAPTER IIlObservations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the 50एश1व0ऑ[....................
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.....
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

the Government have furnished interim replies........

APPENDICES

1 Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2025-26) held on 27.03.2026

॥ Analysis of the Acton T aken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their
One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report (1771 01 Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2025-2026)
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri T. R. Baalu

3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey

4. Shri Jagdambika Pal

5. Shri Jai Parkash

6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
7. Dr.C.M. Ramesh

8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Prof. Sougata Ray

10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi

I1. Dr. Amar Singh

12. Shri Tejasvi Surya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
18. Dr. K. Laxman
19. Shri Praful Patel
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva

22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Archna Pathania - Director

3. Smt. Malvika Mehta 5 Deputy Secretary

4. Sh. Nahar Singh - Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Forty Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report on
‘Avoidable Payment due to Non-Charging of Service Tax/GST from the Passengers”
relating to Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha on 23 February, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
247 July, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 27.03.2026. Minutes of the Sitting are
given at Appendix |.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 126 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; K C VENUGOPAL
27 March, 2026 Chairperson,

06 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report (17" Lok Sabha) on "Avoidable Payment Due
to Non-Charging of Service Tax/GST from the Passengers".

2.

The One Hundred and Twenty Sixth report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok

Sabha on 23.02.2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24" July, 2024

It contained two Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on both the

Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs

(Chandigarh Administration) and are categorized as under:

()

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1 and 2

Total: 2
Chapter - II

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. NIL
Total: 0
Chapter - Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. NIL
Total: 0
Chapter - IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para No. NIL

Total: 0
Chapter - ४


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that the
Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU) under the Chandigarh Administration neither
implemented the enactments nor took any action to collect the Service Tax/GST from the
passengers of Stage Carriage Air-conditioned buses with effect from the dates prescribed
in the respective notifications and belatedly deposited Service Tax/GST amounting to
Rs.5.89 crore using funds from the Government exchequer, as the CTU had not collected
this tax amount from the passengers. This had resulted in avoidable payment of Rs.5.89
crore from Government Exchequer and burden of taxes on the public without any
corresponding service being availed by them. The Committee had accordingly given their
observations/recommendations in their One hundred and Twenty Sixth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh
Administration) on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their One hundred and Twenty Sixth Report have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government, on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need
reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh Administration) to
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained
in Chapter | of the Report, positively within three months of the presentation of the
Report to the Parliament.

Recommendation No. 1

6. The Committee in their 1260 Report made the following recommendation :-

“The Committee note that Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU) was liable to
charge Service Tax @ six percent on transportation of passengers by Stage Carriage
Air-conditioned buses with effect from 01 June 2016 till 30 June 2017 and GST on
such services with effect from 01 July 2017 at the rate of five percent and to pay the
Service Tax/ GST so collected from the passengers to the Government Account. The
Committee while expressing shock that CTU neither implemented the enactments nor
took any action to collect the Service Tax/GST from the passengers of Stage Carriage
Air-conditioned buses with effect from the dates prescribed in the respective
notifications. The Committee while noting that only after an enquiry (July 2018) was
made by the Director General of Goods & Services Tax Intelligence that the CTU
belatedly deposited (January-March 2020) Service Tax/GST amounting to Rs. 5.89
crore using funds from the Government exchequer, as the CTU had not collected this
tax amount from the passengers. In this regard, the Committee opine that failure of the
Chandigarh Transport Undertaking to implement the relevant tax enactments resulted
in avoidable payment of 2 5.89 crore from Government Exchequer and burden of taxes
on the public without any corresponding service being availed by them. The Committee
desire to be apprised of specific measures taken by the Chandigarh administration to
impart awareness about the laws to their employees. Further, The Committee with a
view to identify similar such cases that might be persisting/existing recommend that a
2


i

8

comprehensive review of all the organizations under the Chandigarh Administration
may be undertaken to ensure that such lapses are not prevalent”.

The Ministry of Home Affairs (UT) in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“Observations raised by the Committee have been duly noted by this Ministry and
Chandigarh Administration. Further, in response to the point which says that CTU
had imposed a tax burden even on the public without any corresponding service
being availed by them, it is politely submitted that the revision of fares is a routine
exercise carried out by the Transport Department, Chandigarh Administration from
time to time keeping in view of running cost, cost of spare parts, price index, etc.”

With regard to imparting awareness about the laws to their employees, a training/
awareness session has already been organized by GST Authorities to strengthen the
internal working mechanism. To avoid recurrence of such lapses Standard Operating
Procedure has been notified. A copy of letter dated 02/07/2024 is also enclosed
herewith for ready reference.

In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit in their vetting comments have stated

as under :-

10.

“The Copy of the Standard Operating Procedure prepared for avoiding the recurrence
of similar incidences, which was not shared for vetting of ATR, may be shared with
the PAC. The copy of letter attached does not indicate whether ‘all the organizations
under Chandigarh Administration’ were made part of this awareness event.
Moreover, the Ministry should also provide the action taken against the
recommendation about the "comprehension review of all the organizations under
Chandigarh Administration to be undertaken to ensure that such lapses are not
prevalent".

In further comments to the above Audit observation, the Ministry stated as under:-
“Chandigarh Administration has informed that all the concerned officials/officers (87)
of Accounts Section from all the departments of Chandigarh Administration
Participated in the training/awareness session on GST, being part of a
comprehensive review of all the organization under Chandigarh Administration to
ensure that such lapses are not prevalent (Annexure-l). Further, a copy of the
Standard Operation Procedure dated 03.07.2024 is placed at Annexure-ll for kind
information”.

(Praveen Kumar Rai)
Joint Secretary

Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/7/2022-CPD(CHD) dated __February,2025

In view of the failure of Chandigarh Transport Undertaking to implement

relevant tax enactments resulting in avoidable payment of Rs.5.89 crore from
3


Government exchequer and burden of taxes on public without any corresponding
service being availed by them, the Committee had desired to be apprised of specific
measures taken by the Chandigarh administration to impart awareness about the
laws to employees. The Committee had also desired that a comprehensive review of
all the organisations under the Chandigarh Administration may be undertaken to
ensure that such lapses are not prevalent.

The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the revision of fares is
a routine exercise carried out by the Transport Department, Chandigarh
Administration from time to time keeping in view of running cost, cost of spare parts,
price index etc. The Committee also note that a training/awareness session was
organised by GST Authorities to strengthen the internal work mechanism and that a
Standard Operating Procedure had been notified. The Committee feel that holding
an awareness campaign does not tantamount to carrying out a review of any
organisation. The Committee accordingly reiterate that a comprehensive review be
undertaken by the Chandigarh administration of all organisations under it and
apprise the Committee of the findings thereof.

Recommendation No. 2
11. The Committee in their original report had recommended the following:

“The Committee note that Chandigarh Administration has taken disciplinary action
against official(s) responsible for this gross negligence. However, the Committee are
of the opinion that a thorough inquiry into the lapse may be made to bring out the
systemic issues responsible for the lapse. The Committee further desire that the
internal controls and internal audit in the organization may be strengthened to avoid
recurrence of such instances”.

12. The Ministry of Home Affairs (UT) in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, a training/ awareness session has
already been organized by GST Authorities to strengthen the internal working
mechanism. To avoid recurrence of such lapses Standard Operating Procedure has
been notified”.

13. In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit in their vetting comments have stated as
under :-


“The recommendation of the PAC is after consideration of action already taken by
Chandigarh Administration. The PAC was already aware about the action in terms of
disciplinary proceedings initiated against the concerned accounts officer for the
purpose of fixing of responsibility before finalization of its recommendations. Despite
above information the recommendation of PAC states "a thorough inquiry into the
lapse may be made to bring out the systemic issues responsible for lapse.” In this
case, the responsibility cannot be limited just to "Accounts Officer" especially in the
situation where under the issue was brought to the notice of the Transport
Undertaking in July 2018 by the DG, GST Intelligence but the CTU started charging
of the GST from passengers only from 16th January 2020”.

14. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, in order to comply with the
recommendation of PAC, Chandigarh Administration has ordered a thorough inquiry
to be conducted by the Director, Transport to bring out the systematic issues
responsible for lapse (Annexure-lI|)”.

(Praveen Kumar Rai)

Joint Secretary
Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/7/2022-CPD(CHD) dated _ February,2025

15. The Committee had recommended that a thorough inquiry into the lapse may
be made to bring out the systemic issues responsible for the lapse and that the
internal controls and internal audit in the organization may be strengthened to avoid
recurrence of such instances. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
a training/ awareness session had been organized by GST Authorities to strengthen
the internal working mechanism and that to avoid recurrence of such lapses Standard
Operating Procedure had been notified. The Committee further note that Chandigarh
Administration had ordered a thorough inquiry to be conducted by the Director,
Transport. The Committee desire to be apprised of the status of inquiry being
conducted by Director, Transport to bring out the systemic issues responsible for the
aforesaid lapses. While noting that a training/awareness session has been
organized, the Committee would like to know the specific steps that have been taken
to strengthen the internal working and internal audit in Chandigarh Transport
Undertaking (CTU).


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU) was liable to
charge Service Tax @ six percent on transportation of passengers by Stage Carriage Air-
conditioned buses with effect from 01 June 2016 till 30 June 2017 and GST on such services
with effect from 01 July 2017 at the rate of five percent and to pay the Service Tax/ GST so
collected from the passengers to the Government Account. The Committee while
expressing shock that CTU neither implemented the enactments nor took any action to
collect the Service Tax/GST from the passengers of Stage Carriage Air-conditioned buses
with effect from the dates prescribed in the respective notifications. The Committee while
noting that only after an enquiry (July 2018) was made by the Director General of Goods &
Services Tax Intelligence that the CTU belatedly deposited (January-March 2020) Service
Tax/GST amounting to Rs. 5.89 crore using funds from the Government exchequer, as the
CTU had not collected this tax amount from the passengers. In this regard, the Committee
opine that failure of the Chandigarh Transport Undertaking to implement the relevant tax
enactments resulted in avoidable payment of = 5.89 crore from Government Exchequer and
burden of taxes on the public without any corresponding service being availed by them. The
Committee desire to be apprised of specific measures taken by the Chandigarh
administration to impart awareness about the laws to their employees. Further, The
Committee with a view to identify similar such cases that might be persisting/ exiting
recommend that a comprehensive review of all the organizations under the Chandigarh
Administration may be undertaken to ensure that such lapses are not prevalent.

[Para 1 of the 126" Report of the Public Accounts Committee (177 Lok
Sabha)]

Action Taken

Observations raised by the Committee have been duly noted by this Ministry and
Chandigarh Administration. Further, in response to the point which says that CTU had
imposed a tax burden even on the public without any corresponding service being availed
by them, itis politely submitted that the revision of fares is a routine exercise carried out by
the Transport Department, Chandigarh Administration from time to time keeping in view of
running cost, cost of spare parts, price index, etc.

With regard to imparting awareness about the laws to their employees, a training/
awareness session has already been organized by GST Authorities to strengthen the
internal working mechanism. To avoid recurrence of such lapses Standard Operating

6


Procedure has been notified. A copy of letter dated 02/07/2024 is also enclosed herewith
for ready reference.

Vetting Comments of Audit

The Copy of the Standard Operating Procedure prepared for avoiding the recurrence of
similar incidences, which was not shared for vetting of ATR, may be shared with the PAC.
The copy of letter attached does not indicate whether ‘all the organizations under
Chandigarh Administration’ were made part of this awareness event. Moreover, the Ministry
should also provide the action taken against the recommendation about the "comprehension
review of all the organizations under Chandigarh Administration to be undertaken to ensure
that such lapses are not prevalent".

Ministry’s Comments

Chandigarh Administration has informed that all the concerned officials/officers (87)
of Accounts Section from all the departments of Chandigarh Administration participated in
the training/awareness session on GST, being part of a comprehensive review of all the
organization under Chandigarh Administration to ensure that such lapses are not prevalent
(Annexure-l). Further, a copy of the Standard Operation Procedure dated 03.07.2024 is
placed at Annexure-Il for kind information

(Praveen Kumar Rai)
Joint Secretary

Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/7/2022-CPD(CHD) dated _ February,2025

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee during the course of the examination of the subject learn that The
Committee note that Chandigarh Administration has taken disciplinary action against
official(s) responsible for this gross negligence. However, the Committee are of the opinion
that a thorough inquiry into the lapse may be made to bring out the systemic issues
responsible for the lapse. The Committee further desire that the internal controls and internal
audit in the organization may be strengthened to avoid recurrence of such instances.

[Para 2 of the 126 Report of the Public Accounts Committee (177 Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

As informed by Chandigarh Administration, a training/ awareness session has
already been organized by GST Authorities to strengthen the internal working mechanism.
To avoid recurrence of such lapses Standard Operating Procedure has been notified.

Vetting Comments of Audit

¥


The recommendation of the PAC is after consideration of action already taken by
Chandigarh Administration. The PAC was already aware about the action in terms of
disciplinary proceedings initiated against the concerned accounts officer for the purpose of
fixing of responsibility before finalization of its recommendations. Despite above information
the recommendation of PAC states “a thorough inquiry into the lapse may be made to bring
out the systemic issues responsible for lapse." In this case, the responsibility cannot be
limited just to “Accounts Officer" especially in the situation where under the issue was
brought to the notice of the Transport Undertaking in July 2018 by the DG, GST Intelligence
but the CTU started charging of the GST from passengers only from 16th January 2020.

Ministry’s Comments

As informed by Chandigarh Administration, in order to comply with the recommendation of
PAC, Chandigarh Administration has ordered a thorough inquiry to be conducted by the
Director, Transport to bring out the systematic issues responsible for lapse(Annexure-Ill).

(Praveen Kumar Rai)
Joint Secretary

Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. U-14037/7/2022-CPD(CHD) dated _ February,2025



CHAPTER III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-

10


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI K C VENUGOPAL
27 March, 2026 Chairperson,
06 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

11


APPENDIX - |

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2025-26) HELD ON 27" MARCH, 2026.

The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) sat on Friday, the 277 March, 2026 from

1500 hrs to 1610 hrs in Samanvay-3, Parliament House, New Delhi.

NOARON

छ

10.

11.

oo Ron

PRESENT
Shri K. C. Venugopal
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Jai Parkash

Dr. C M Ramesh

Smt. Aparajita Sarangi

Dr. Amar Singh

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

Dr. K Laxman

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray

Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Smt. Mamta Kemwal

Smt. Archna Pathania

Shri Alok Mani Tripathi
Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma
Ms. Malvika Mehta

Dr. Faiz Ahmad

- Chairperson

Joint Secretary
Director

Deputy Secretary
Deputy Secretary
Deputy Secretary
Deputy Secretary

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF

INDIA

1
2.
3:
4

Shri Anand M. Bajaj
Shri Pravir Pandey
Shri Samar Kant Thakur

Shri Biren Parmar

- Dy. C&AG
- Addl. Dy. C&AG
- Addl. Dy. C&AG

- Director General

12


5. Ms. Reena Saha, - Director General

6... Shri Mukul Jamloki - Dy. Director
PARTA
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXK
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXK
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XKXKXK
PART 8

Thereafter, for the second agenda of the Sitting — consideration and adoption of Draft

Reports, the Hon'ble Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the following Draft
Reports:-

(i) XXXXX XXXKXXK 22222 XXXXX
(ii) = XXXXX XXXXXK XXXKK XXXXX
(ili) = XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXKXK
(iv) = XXXXX 22५0९ XXXXKX XXXXX
(v) 2०००७ XXXXX XXXXX XXXKX

(vi) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their 126th Report (17 LS) on “Avoidable Payment due to Non-
Charging of Service Tax/GST from the Passengers”; and

(vil) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXKX

2. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted six Draft Reports at SI. Nos. i-iii
and SI. Nos. v-vii with slight modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit

The Committee then adjourned.

eI

13


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 02

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Total: 02
Committee which have been accepted by the Percentage: 100
Government:

Para Nos. 1and 2

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Total: 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Percentage: 0
reply of the Government:

Para No. — NIL

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 0
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para No. — NIL

(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 0
which the Government have furnished interim Percentage: 0
replies:

Para No. - NIL

FOI III III IRI

14