       17 
INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON 
CREATION OF MID LIFE REHABILITATION 
FACILITIES AT PAREL WORKSHOP: 
CENTRAL RAILWAYS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 134th Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) (ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.02.2025 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary    

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present this Seventeenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Infructuous Expenditure on Creation of Mid Life Rehabilitation Facilities at Parel 
Workshop: Central Railways” relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).  
  
2.       The One Hundred and Thirty fourth Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha on 23rd February, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken 
Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th February, 2025. 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report. 
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
  
5.        An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Fourth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Infructuous Expenditure on Creation of Mid 
Life Rehabilitation Facilities at Parel Workshop: Central Railways”. 
2. The One Hundredth Thirty Fourth, Report which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2024, 
contained 04 Observations/Recommendations.  The Action Taken Notes 
on all the Observations /Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Railways and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government:  
 Para Nos. 1, 3 & 4 
          Total:03 
              Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 Para No.: NIL 
     Total: Nil 
            Chapter: III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Para No.: 2 
     Total: 01 
            Chapter: IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
 
  

3.  The Committee had learnt that Ministry of Railways (MoR) issued 
instructions (August 1980 and February 1985) to all the Zonal Railways that 
before calling tenders, it may be ensured that the Railway is in a position to 
handover the site of work and supply plan etc. to the contractor. Mid-Life 
Rehabilitation (MLR) is an essential mainstream activity required for 
improvement of quality and reliability of the residual service life including 
rejuvenation of interiors of the coaches. The work for setting up MLR 
facilities of 25 Broad Gauge coaches per month at Parel Workshop/Central 
Railway was sanctioned in 2007-08 at an anticipated cost of ₹ 30.24 crore. 
Detailed Estimate of the Project was sanctioned at a cost of Rs 27.37 crore 
in July 2009. Contract for civil work of the MLR Project was awarded to M/s 
Unity Construction/Mumbai in February 2010 at a cost of Rs 6.89 crore with 
completion period of 18 months. The work could not be completed due to 
reasons attributable to the Railways such as non-availability of funds, non-
providing of site, change in the location of steel yard shed etc. The contract 
was foreclosed in March 2014 after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 4.58 
crore. For the leftover civil work, another contract was awarded (January 
2015) to M/s Pruthivi Construction/Mumbai for Rs. 5.94 crore with 
completion period of 12 months. However, the contractor could not 
complete the work due to non-availability of clear site for truck unloading 
and Grit blasting shed and site change, non-shifting of electrical office, non-
handing over of site etc. The Central Railway Administration granted 
extension on Railway’s accounts to the contractor for completion of the 
work till March 2018. 
The Committee also observed that the detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for the Passenger Terminal facility at Parel Workshop, sent to MoR on 24 
February 2020, was pending for approval. Audit noted that the contracts 
awarded (February 2010 and January 2015) could not be completed on the 
target dates and later foreclosed after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 8.32 
crore.  
Further, MLR activities were being carried out at Parel Workshop 
since 2010-11 with the existing Periodical Overhauling (POH) facility 
available in the Workshop. During 2017-18 and 2018-19, 156 and 150 
coaches respectively (13 Coaches per month as against the target of 25 
Coaches) were turned out. Thus, non-adherence to the Ministry of 
Railways’ instructions for providing clear site of work before calling for 
tenders, rendered the expenditure of Rs. 22.07 crore incurred on the 
creation of MLR, as infructuous. Besides, the proposal of GM/ Central 
Railway for creation of passenger terminal by closing Parel Workshop 

despite incurring expenditure of ₹ 22.07 crore on MLR indicated poor 
planning and imprudence. 
The Committee have found that MoR’s reply untenable. The civil 
works which were to be completed in 18 months, were not completed even 
after eight years of commencement due to non-fulfillment of pre-requisites, 
viz, non- availability of funds, non-providing of site, changes in the location 
of steel yard shed etc., prior to awarding of contracts. Further, the MLR 
activities were already being carried out at Parel Workshop since 2010-11 
with the earlier existing POH facility available there and were continuously 
turning out the coaches with MLR till 2018-19. Also, the Parel Workshop 
was already providing outturn of coaches per month that includes IOH and 
POH etc. of coaches. The creation of additional facilities has not served 
any purpose as the MLR project was abandoned midway and targeted 
outturn of MLR of 25 BG coaches per month was never achieved. 
 4. The Committee have accordingly given their observations / 
Recommendations in the 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha).  The gist of 
important Observations /Recommendations, as contained in the Report, is 
under:- 
 The Committee recommended that the Ministry should 
invariably undertake due diligence to strengthen their 
compliance mechanism to prevent such lapses in future. 
 
 The Committee felt that besides assessment mechanism of 
fund requirements, efforts should also be made to review the 
fund utilisation mechanism, as without exercising financial 
prudence, funds were released and the issue of fund 
requirement was not brought to the notice of the Ministry in 
time, leading to foreclosure of the contract. 
 
 The Committee felt that concerted initiatives will be taken in 
future to duly address the flaws noticed in the planning and 
implementation process. 
5. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry of Railways in 
respect of all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in their One Hundredth Thirty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations /Recommendations made in their One Hundredth 
Thirty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
 

6. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways may furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations / Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report within 3 months of its 
presentation to the House. 
 
Recommendation (Para no.1) 
 
7.  The Committee in their 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:-  
“The Ministry did not adhere to its own instructions issued in August 
1980 and February 1985, which required ensuring the availability of 
the site before calling tenders and awarded the contracts (February 
2010 and January 2015) for setting up MLR facilities of 25 Broad 
Gauge coaches per month at Parel Workshop/Central Railway by 
sanctioning at an anticipated cost of ₹ 30.24 crore in 2007-08 which 
could not be completed on the target dates due to reasons viz, non-
availability of clear site for truck unloading and Grit blasting shed and 
site change, non-shifting of electrical office, non-handing over of site 
etc. The project was later foreclosed after incurring an expenditure of 
₹22.07 crore. In this regard, the Ministry contended that the project 
being a Brownfield project, the maintenance could never be 
completely stopped and hence occasionally the sites could not be 
made available to the contractor for carrying out the work. However, 
even then the subject work was not completely affected and some 
alternate sites were made available to continue the work. Some 
modifications in the site layout were inevitable and actually required 
for the successful outcome of the subject project. The Committee 
further note that MLR activities were being carried out at Parel 
Workshop since 2010-11 with the existing Periodical Overhauling 
(POH) facility available in the Workshop. 
During 2017-18 and 2018-19, 156 and 150 coaches respectively (13 
Coaches per month as against the target of 25 Coaches) were turned 
out.  
In this regard, the Ministry stated that all major requisites before 
starting the work were considered. As already highlighted, the subject 
work was a Brownfield project and all the issues that arose due to the 
execution of such projects were tackled at the appropriate level. In 
the opinion of the Committee, as the work of MLR project was not 
completed and later dropped, target of MLR of 25 Coaches per month 

could not be achieved. The Committee are not convinced with the 
reply of the Ministry that all the issues that arose due to the execution 
of such projects were tackled at the appropriate level as the Ministry 
did not ensure the availability of the site before calling tenders.  
The Committee are of the considered view that had the Ministry 
ensured strict compliance of their own instruction issued in August 
1980 and February 1985, which required ensuring the availability of 
the site before calling tenders, target of MLR of 25 Coaches per 
month could have been achieved as per schedule of the contract 
without incurring foreclosure penalty of the contracts awarded for 
completion of the work of MLR project. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should invariably undertake due 
diligence to strengthen their compliance mechanism to prevent such 
lapses in the future.” 
8. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“It is a fact that the Mid-Life Rehabilitation (MLR) project at Parel 
Workshop / Central Railway being a Brownfield project, the ongoing 
maintenance could never have been completely stopped and hence 
occasionally the sites could not be made available to the contractor 
for carrying out the work.  However, even then the subject work was 
not completely affected and some alternate sites were made 
available to continue the work to the extent possible. 
As recommended by the Committee, due diligence will be taken to 
ensure that the sites are available for carrying out the work before 
calling tender in future.” 
9. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 
10. The Committee observed that had the Ministry adhered to its 
own instructions issued in August 1980 and February 1985, which 
required availability of the site before calling tenders’,  the situation 
could have been averted without foreclosure of the contract awarded 
for completion of the work of MLR project. The Committee while 
noting further that the Ministry was already aware of the fact that 
being a Brownfield project the ongoing maintenance could never have 
been completely stopped and as such, occasionally the sites could 
not possibly be made available to the contractor for carrying out the 
work, desire that the Ministry ought to have taken cognizance of the 

ground reality so as to obviate premature foreclosure of the project. 
The Committee, would reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
Ministry should invariably undertake due diligence to strengthen their 
compliance mechanism to rule out such lapses in the future. 
Recommendation (Para no.2) 
11.  The Committee in their 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:-  
“As regards reasons for the delay in completing the MLR project, 
leading to contract foreclosures and an expenditure of 28.32 crore, 
the Ministry stated that 1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was 
awarded in Feb-2010 for Rs. 6.89 Crore, 60% work was completed 
and it was foreclosed in Mar-2014 due to constraints of funds in the 
succeeding year. For balance work, 2nd Civil contract [M/s. Pruthivi 
Construction] was awarded in Jan-2015 for Rs.5.94 crore on arrival of 
budget grant. The Ministry added that before calling of tenders, funds 
requirements will be assessed in advance and made available during 
the execution of work to avoid delay in projects. Having taken note of 
the fact that while in the first contract, 40% of the work remained to 
be completed, constraints of funds in the succeeding year were 
encountered, the Committee feel that besides assessment 
mechanism of fund requirements, efforts should also be made to 
review the fund utilisation mechanism as without exercising financial 
prudence, funds were released and the issue of fund requirements 
not brought to the notice of the Ministry in time leading to foreclosure 
of the contract.  
The Committee failed to fathom as to why the contract for the 
remaining civil work of the MLR Project was reassigned to a new 
contractor (M/s Pruthivi Construction) in January 2015, considering 
there was no fault on the part of the initial contractor (M/s Unity/ 
Construction), leading to additional expenditure in the process. In 
view of the above, the Committee while emphasizing upon initiatives 
to be taken to tone up their fund requirement assessment and 
utilisation mechanism with a view to manage contracts more 
effectively and to avoid incurring unnecessary costs in future, would 
also like to be apprised of the rationale of awarding of the remaining 
civil work of the MLR Project to a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi 
Construction) in January 2015 leading to additional expenditure in the 
process.” 

12. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Constructions] was awarded in Feb-2010 
for 6.89 crore with Completion period of 18 month, 60% work was 
completed and it was foreclosed in Mar – 2014 due to constraints of 
funds in the succeeding years.  To complete the balance work, new 
tender was floated and M/s Pruthvi Construction being the lowest and 
eligible bidder was awarded the 2nd Civil contract in Jan-2015 for Rs. 
5.94 crores on arrival of budget grant. The remaining civil wok of MLR 
was awarded at that time as the same was required for MLR activity. 
The work was not subsequently completed fully as a need was felt for 
a Passenger Terminal facility by the Railways who acted promptly 
upon this requirement.  Railway has acted judiciously by not pursuing 
the work further.  Fund utilization and requirement will be reviewed 
regularly in future to prevent undue extension of contracts.” 
13. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 
14. While opining that it was essential to have a robust review of the 
fund utilisation mechanism, the Committee felt that the Ministry ought 
to tone up their fund requirement assessment and utilization 
mechanism so as to judiciously manage contracts without incurring 
undesirable costs. The Committee are perturbed to note that the 
Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry failed to explain the 
rationale of awarding of the remaining civil work of the MLR Project to 
a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi Construction) in January 2015 when 
the original contract awarded in February, 2010 with a target period of 
18 months was already running on extended period. The original work 
was awarded for Rs.6.89 crore and 60% of which was completed by 
the contractor.  The Committee are failed to convince the reason 
behind foreclosing the already extended contract and awarding 40% 
of the remaining work to a new contractor for Rs.5.94 crore, which 
constitute 86.21% of the original contract value.  The reason cited by 
the Ministry regarding non-availability of fund for foreclosure of first 
contract is untenable in view of the fact that second  contract was 
awarded in the next financial year itself, for which fund was available. 
The Committee may also be apprised of the terms and conditions of 
the first contract and also compensation, if any, was paid by the 
Ministry to the first contractor [M/s Unity Constructions] since the 
foreclosure was done at the behest of the Ministry. 

Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire the Ministry to explain the reasons for recommitting the 
remaining civil work of the MLR Project to a new contractor (M/s 
Pruthivi Construction), leading to avoidable additional expenditure.   
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
15. The Committee in their 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“As regards the measures being taken to improve planning and 
prudence in the Ministry's project decisions to avoid situations where 
substantial funds are expended with no tangible results and Ministry's 
strategy for aligning future projects with its available resources and 
long-term goals, the Ministry stated that projects are being planned 
with a view to enhance capacity to cater to traffic requirements and 
customer needs. Due diligence and prudence is exercised at the 
various stages from the very inception of the project to its 
implementation.  
Moreover, regular reviews of the projects are undertaken at various 
levels to ensure proper planning and execution. The Committee hope 
that concerted initiatives will be taken in future to duly address the 
flaws noticed in the planning and implementation process. In addition, 
the issue of indecision as learnt by the Ministry from the instant case 
of MRL project should appropriately be addressed to avoid such 
lapses.” 
16. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
“Due diligence and prudence will be exercised at the initial /various 
stages of the project before implementation. Regular reviews of the 
projects will be ensured to duly address the various aspects arising in 
the project during any stage.” 
 
17. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 
18. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Action Taken Note 
furnished by the Ministry fails to mention the regular / periodicity of 
holding of review meetings to monitor the projects. The Committee 
therefore, reiterate that the stakeholders should meet regularly every 
three months to minimize the flaws and ensure that 
remedial/corrective action is taken to achieve the physical progress 

and milestones as stipulated in contract within the timelines so as to 
obviate financial loss. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
19. The Committee in their 134th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that Central 
Railway (CR) had planned to set up its own MLR facilities for 
Coaches at Parel Workshop with the targeted outturn of 25 MLR 
coaches per month to save time and transportation costs enabling 
safe running of trains along with better passenger amenities as 
initially, CR were transporting Coaches to CRWS Bhopal, WCR, 
which involved high transit time and less availability of Coaches for 
traffic. The Committee further note that the Ministry had accordingly 
awarded the contracts for creating the facilities.  
However, the contracts were subsequently foreclosed as MoR 
decided in October 2017 to develop Passenger Terminal Facility 
(PTF) by closing the Parel Workshop. The Committee further note 
that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Passenger Terminal 
facility at Parel Workshop is under consideration at Railway Board for 
sanction of Phase-I. According to the Ministry, once DPR is 
sanctioned by the Railway Board, further planning and execution of 
the work in a phased manner will be planned with least disturbance to 
the existing activities of the Parel workshop. As regards expenditure 
becoming infructuous due to project abandonment or changes in 
direction, the Ministry stated that the total amount of Rs. 22.07 crores 
incurred for the entire project of turning out of MLR of 25 coaches per 
month wasn’t infructuous and the assets created were essential for 
undertaking maintenance of different types of rolling stocks and the 
same is being fully utilized. 
The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that 
expenditure of Rs. 22.07 crores incurred for the MLR project at Parel 
Workshop was not infructuous mainly on account of the fact DPR for 
PTF is still at the consideration stage in the Railway Board even after 
expiry of more than six years since MoR’s decision in October 2017 
for developing Passenger Terminal Facility by closing the Parel 
Workshop and the facility created is being utilised for undertaking 
maintenance of different types of rolling stocks. The Committee, 

therefore, while emphasizing upon expeditious finalization of the DPR 
for developing Passenger Terminal Facility at Parel Workshop would 
also desire that they be apprised of the reasons for inordinate delay 
in the matter. The Committee would like to be intimated of the 
concrete action being taken in this regard for taking the issue to a 
logical conclusion.” 
20. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
“Parel workshop was initially a locomotive POH workshop.  For 
undertaking maintenance of LHB coaches, POH/conversion of ICF 
coaches to NMG coach etc., input of various facilities was essentially 
required. The facilities created under MLR Project at Parel Workshop 
are being gainfully utilized at present.   
The assets created under the subject work are being utilized for 
carrying out SS2/SS3 (Overhaul Schedules) of LHB Coaches and for 
POH/conversion of ICF Coaches to Automobile Carriers (NMG) 
without incurring any additional expenditure inspite of introducing new 
activities.  Till 2023-24, Parel Workshop has already completed 183 
nos. NMG conversion and 889 LHB Coach POH.  The created 
facilities did not require abandoning /replacement consequent to 
discontinuation of MLR. 
Regarding finalizing of the DPR for developing Passenger Terminal 
Facility (PTF), it is submitted that Phase-I work of Parel Terminus is 
under planning stage.  DPR of work of “Development of Coaching 
Complex at Parel” is under preparation by Central Railway.  Further 
decision will be taken once DPR is examined and results thereon are 
firmed up.  The development of PTF will be decided in due course 
considering all aspects of handling trains required for PTF.” 
21. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 
22. The Committee are disappointed to note that despite the fact 
that the Central Railway being fully aware that input of various 
facilities would be required for the Parel Workshop to be fully 
functional, did not make efforts to finalise / shape-up the Detailed 
Project Report for the Passenger Terminal Facility (PTF) and it took 
them six years even though the Ministry had taken a decision in the 
matter in October, 2017.  The Committee would like to be apprised as 
to whether all aspects of handling trains required for the Passenger 

Terminal Facility have been worked out by the Ministry, so that the 
development of PTF can be aligned with it accordingly.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of the Planning 
of the Phase-I work of Parel Terminus.   The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the reasons for inordinate delay in the DPR approval 
process and the efforts made by Railways for drawing up a time-table 
for DPR clearance at various levels. 
  

CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee note from Audit observation that the Ministry did not adhere 
to its own instructions issued in August 1980 and February 1985, which 
required ensuring the availability of the site before calling tenders and 
awarded the contracts (February 2010 and January 2015) for setting up 
MLR facilities of 25 Broad Gauge coaches per month at Parel 
Workshop/Central Railway by sanctioning at an anticipated cost of ₹ 30.24 
crore in 2007-08 which could not be completed on the target dates due to 
reasons viz, non-availability of clear site for truck unloading and Grit 
blasting shed and site change, non-shifting of electrical office, non-handing 
over of site etc. The project was later foreclosed after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹22.07 crore. In this regard, the Ministry contended that the 
project being a Brownfield project, the maintenance could never be 
completely stopped and hence occasionally the sites could not be made 
available to the contractor for carrying out the work. However, even then 
the subject work was not completely affected and some alternate sites 
were made available to continue the work. Some modifications in the site 
layout were inevitable and actually required for the successful outcome of 
the subject project. The Committee further note that MLR activities were 
being carried out at Parel Workshop since 2010-11 with the existing 
Periodical Overhauling (POH) facility available in the Workshop. During 
2017-18 and 2018-19, 156 and 150 coaches respectively (13 Coaches per 
month as against the target of 25 Coaches) were turned out. In this regard, 
the Ministry stated that all major requisites before starting the work were 
considered. As already highlighted, the subject work was a Brownfield 
project and all the issues that arose due to the execution of such projects 
were tackled at the appropriate level. In the opinion of the Committee, as 
the work of MLR project was not completed and later dropped, target of 
MLR of 25 Coaches per month could not be achieved. The Committee are 
not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that all the issues that arose 
due to the execution of such projects were tackled at the appropriate level 
as the Ministry did not ensure the availability of the site before calling 
tenders. The Committee are of the considered view that had the Ministry 
ensured strict compliance of their own instruction issued in August 1980 
and February 1985, which required ensuring the availability of the site 
before calling tenders, target of MLR of 25 Coaches per month could have 
been achieved as per schedule of the contract without incurring foreclosure 
penalty of the contracts awarded for completion of the work of MLR project.  
 
 
 

The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should invariably 
undertake due diligence to strengthen their compliance mechanism to 
prevent such lapses in the future. 
 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 134th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
  
 It is a fact that this Mid-Life Rehabilitation (MLR) project at Parel 
Workshop/Central Railway being a Brownfield project, the ongoing 
maintenance could never have been completely stopped and hence 
occasionally the sites could not be made available to the contractor for 
carrying out the work. However, even then the subject work was not 
completely affected and some alternate sites were made available to 
continue the work to the extent possible. As recommended by the 
committee, due diligence will be taken to ensure that the sites are available 
for carrying out the work before calling tender in future. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
No further Audit comments. 
 
[Please see Para no. 9 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
  As regards the measures being taken to improve planning and prudence 
in the Ministry's project decisions to avoid situations where substantial 
funds are expended with no tangible results and Ministry's strategy for 
aligning future projects with its available resources and long term goals, the 
Ministry stated that projects are being planned with a view to enhance 
capacity to cater to traffic requirements and customer needs. Due diligence 
and prudence is exercised at the various stages from the very inception of 
the project to its implementation. Moreover, regular reviews of the projects 
are undertaken at various levels to ensure proper planning and execution. 
The Committee hope that concerted initiatives will be taken in future to duly 
address the flaws noticed in the planning and implementation process. In 
addition, the issue of indecision as learnt by the Ministry from the instant 
case of MRL project should appropriately be addressed to avoid such 
lapses. 

[Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 134th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
  Due diligence and prudence will be exercised at the initial/various stages 
of the project before implementation. Regular reviews of the projects will be 
ensured to duly address the various aspects arising in the project during 
any stage. 
Audit Comments 
 No further Audit comments. 
 
 [Please see Para no.17 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 The Committee also note from the submission of the Ministry that Central 
Railway (CR) had planned to set up its own MLR facilities for Coaches at 
Parel Workshop with the targeted outturn of 25 MLR coaches per month to 
save time and transportation costs enabling safe running of trains along 
with better passenger amenities as initially, CR were transporting Coaches 
to CRWS Bhopal, WCR, which involved high transit time and less 
availability of Coaches for traffic. The Committee further note that the 
Ministry had accordingly awarded the contracts for creating the facilities. 
However, the contracts were subsequently foreclosed as MoR decided in 
October 2017 to develop Passenger Terminal Facility (PTF) by closing the 
Parel Workshop. The Committee further note that the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) for the Passenger Terminal facility at Parel Workshop is 
under consideration at Railway Board for sanction of Phase-I. According to 
the Ministry, once DPR is sanctioned by the Railway Board, further 
planning and execution of the work in a phased manner will be planned 
with least disturbance to the existing activities of the Parel workshop. As 
regards expenditure becoming infructuous due to project abandonment or 
changes in direction, the Ministry stated that the total amount of Rs. 22.07 
crores incurred for the entire project of turning out of MLR of 25 coaches 
per month wasn’t infructuous and the assets created were essential for 
undertaking maintenance of different types of rolling stocks and the same is 
being fully utilized. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the 
Ministry that expenditure of Rs. 22.07 crores incurred for the MLR project at 
Parel Workshop was not infructuous mainly on account of the fact DPR for 

PTF is still at the consideration stage in the Railway Board even after 
expiry of more than six years since MoR’s decision in October 2017 for 
developing Passenger Terminal Facility by closing the Parel Workshop and 
the facility created is being utilised for undertaking maintenance of different 
types of rolling stocks. The Committee, therefore, while emphasising upon 
expeditious finalisation of the DPR for developing Passenger Terminal 
Facility at Parel Workshop would also desire that they be apprised of the 
reasons for inordinate delay in the matter. The Committee would like to be 
intimated of the concrete action being taken in this regard for taking the 
issue to a logical conclusion. 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 4 of 134th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (17th Lok Sabha)]  
 
Action Taken 
  
 Parel workshop was initially a locomotive POH workshop. For undertaking 
maintenance of LHB coaches, POH/conversion of ICF Coaches to NMG 
coach etc., input of various facilities was essentially required. The facilities 
created under MLR Project at Parel Workshop are being gainfully utilized at 
present. The assets created under the subject work are being utilized for 
carrying out SS2/SS3 (Overhaul Schedules) of LHB Coaches and for 
POH/conversion of ICF Coaches to Automobile Carriers (NMG) without 
incurring any additional expenditure inspite of introducing new activities. Till 
2023-24, Parel Workshop has already completed 183 nos. NMG 
conversion and 889 LHB Coach POH. The created facilities did not require 
abandoning/replacement consequent to discontinuation of MLR. Regarding 
finalization of the DPR for developing Passenger Terminal Facility (PTF), it 
is submitted that Phase-I work of Parel Terminus is under planning stage. 
DPR of work of “Development of Coaching Complex at Parel” is under 
preparation by Central Railway. Further decision will be taken once DPR is 
examined and results thereon are firmed up. The development of PTF will 
be decided in due course considering all aspects of handling trains required 
for PTF. 
Audit Comments 
 
No further Audit comments. 
 
[Please see Para no.21 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED 
FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
  As regards reasons for the delay in completing the MLR project, leading to 
contract foreclosures and an expenditure of 28.32 crore, the Ministry stated 
that 1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was awarded in Feb-2010 for 
Rs. 6.89 Crore, 60% work was completed and it was foreclosed in Mar-
2014 due to constraints of funds in the succeeding year. For balance work, 
2nd Civil contract [M/s. Pruthivi Construction] was awarded in Jan-2015 for 
Rs.5.94 cr on arrival of budget grant. The Ministry added that before calling 
of tenders, funds requirements will be assessed in advance and made 
available during the execution of work to avoid delay in projects. Having 
taken note of the fact that while in the first contract, 40% of the work 
remained to be completed, constraints of funds in the succeeding year 
were encountered, the Committee feel that besides assessment 
mechanism of fund requirements, efforts should also be made to review the 
fund utilisation mechanism as without exercising financial prudence, funds 
were released and the issue of fund requirements not brought to the notice 
of the Ministry in time leading to foreclosure of the contract. The Committee 
fail to fathom as to why the contract for the remaining civil work of the MLR 
Project was reassigned to a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi Construction) in 
January 2015, considering there was no fault on the part of the initial 
contractor (M/s Unity/ Construction), leading to additional expenditure in the 
process. In view of the above, the Committee while emphasising upon 
initiatives to be taken to tone up their fund requirement assessment and 
utilisation mechanism with a view to manage contracts more effectively and 
to avoid incurring unnecessary costs in future, would also like to be 
apprised of the rationale of awarding of the remaining civil work of the MLR 
Project to a new contractor (M/s Pruthivi Construction) in January 2015 
leading to additional expenditure in the process. 
 [Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 134th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 

Action Taken 
 
 1st Civil contract [M/s Unity Construction] was awarded in Feb-2010 for 
6.89 Crore with Completion period of 18 months, 60% work was completed 
and it was foreclosed in Mar-2014 due to constraints of funds in the 
succeeding years. To complete the balance work, new tender was floated 
and M/s. Pruthivi Construction being the lowest and eligible bidder was 
awarded the 2nd civil contract in Jan- 2015 for Rs.5.94 Crs. on arrival of 
budget grant. The remaining civil work of MLR was awarded at that time as 
the same was required for MLR activity. The work was not subsequently 
completed fully as a need was felt for a Passenger Terminal facility by the 
Railways who acted promptly upon this requirement. Railway has acted 
judiciously by not pursuing the work further. Fund utilization and 
requirement will be reviewed regularly in future to prevent undue extension 
of contracts 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
No further Audit comments. 
 
 [Please see Para no.13 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 

APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. XXXXXXXXXXX  
b. XXXXXXXXXXX  
c. XXXXXXXXXXX  
d. XXXXXXXXXXX  
e. XXXXXXXXXXX  
f. XXXXXXXXXXX  
g. XXXXXXXXXXX  
h. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
134th Report (17th LS) on ‘Infructuous Expenditure on Creation of Mid-
Life Rehabilitation Facilities at Parel Workshop: Central Railways’ 
i. XXXXXXXXXXX  
 

 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDREDTH AND THIRTY 
FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
04 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 3 and 4 
 
Total: 03 
Percentage: 
75% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Para No. – 02 
 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 
25% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which the Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 

 
 