 
 
16 
 SHORT CLOSURE OF ELECTRIFICATION 
WORKS DUE TO INCOMPLETE PRE-
REQUISITE WORKS: SOUTH EAST 
CENTRAL RAILWAYS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 133rd Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
     
        
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-
25)  
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Public 
Account (2024-25) held on 12.02.2025. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee on  Public Accounts contained in their 
One Hundred and Thirty third Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary   

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) having been authorized 
by the Committee, do present this Sixteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
One Hundred and Thirty third Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Short closure of electrification 
works due to incomplete pre-requisite works –South East Central Railway” relating to the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).  
  
2.       The One Hundred and Thirty third Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on 23rd February, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 24th July, 2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report on the 
subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th February, 2025. Minutes of the 
Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report. 
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them 
in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
  
5.        An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 133rd Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given at 
Appendix-II 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
  

 
 
CHAPTER 1 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Third Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on “Short Closure of Electrification Works Due to Incomplete Pre-
requisite Works – South East Central Railway”. 
2. The One Hundredth Thirty Third Report, which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2024, contained 04 
Observations/Recommendations.  The Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations /Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of 
Railways and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Para No. 01, 02, 03 & 04 
          Total: 04 
                Chapter: II 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 
 Para No.: NIL  
     Total: nil 
            Chapter: III 
 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para No.: NIL 
     Total: nil 
            Chapter: IV 

 
 
 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
3. The Committee had observed that whenever an action is warranted for 
expeditious completion of the work, the pre-requisite may be completed in time 
to hand over the same to contractor immediately so that the progress of work is 
not hampered. Failure to do so would result in fixing responsibility for any extra 
expenditure incurred. Earthwork and finalization of Engineering Scale Plan 
(ESP)/Signal Interlocking Plan (SIP) etc. are pre-requisites for undertaking 
electrification works. Audit further revealed that the Chief Administrative Officer 
(Construction), South East Central Railway (SECR) instructed in May 2018 that 
as and when formation is ready in stretches of minimum 500 meters, Deputy 
Chief Engineers would advise Deputy Chief Electrical Engineers to execute 
Overhead Equipment (OHE) without any delay. Audit thus noted that two 
similar works having contract value of ₹ 35.36 crore were awarded without 
ensuring the completion of pre-requisite works. The contractors supplied 
materials worth ₹ 9.0 crore during the currency of the contract (2017-18) but 
could not execute works due to non-availability of clear work site. SECR 
Administration could not provide various approved drawings like ESP, SIP to 
the contractor during the currency period of the contracts (i.e. 24 months from 
the date of issue of LOA) for the execution of the project. The site was not 
ready to execute the OHE work.  
This led to short closure of contracts without any progress of execution 
portion. Supplied materials worth ₹ 9.0 crore could not be fully utilised for the 
intended purpose. Out of ₹ 9.0 crore, materials worth ₹ 2.49 crore were 
consumed for other electrification works and the remaining materials worth ₹ 
6.51 crore are still lying idle at Store. It is also noted that the guarantee 
certificate against the supplied material had also expired. A Special Letter was 
issued to the SECR Administration in February 2021 on the subject. In reply 
(June 2021), Railway Administration stated that after award of tender, 
materials were supplied as per condition of contract. Supplied materials 
against these tenders were consumed for other electrification works.  

 
 
The Committee were informed that supplied materials were mainly made of 
iron and steel having very long deterioration period and has been stored in 
safe and secure position. The above reply of Railway Administration was not 
acceptable as procured material worth ₹ 6.51 crore was still lying idle at Store. 
Railway Administration could not ensure availability of clear site to the 
contractors even after lapse of target date of completion (24 months from the 
date of issue of LOA). Thus, award of Railway electrification works without 
ensuring sufficient progress of civil works resulted in short closure of 
electrification works after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 9.0 crore. 
 4. The Committee had accordingly given their observations / 
Recommendations in the 133rd Report (17th Lok Sabha).  The gist of important 
Observations /Recommendations as contained in the Report as given as 
under:- 
 The Committee recommended that the Ministry need to ensure 
strict adherence to comprehensive compliance checklists for 
tendering processes which should include verification steps to 
confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works before awarding 
contracts for electrification projects which will prevent instances of 
short closures and wastage of public funds due to incomplete site 
readiness. 
 
 The Committee recommended that the Ministry need to strengthen 
its monitoring mechanisms to track the utilization of supplied 
materials accurately by implementing robust inventory tracking 
systems and conducting periodic audits which will prevent 
instances of material wastage and ensure optimal utilization of 
resources. 
 
 The Committee desired the Ministry to streamline their 
procurement processes to expedite contract awards which may 
involve conducting timely assessments of project requirements, 
ensuring adequate staffing and resources for procurement 
activities, and implementing measures to address bottlenecks in 
the tendering process. 
 

 
 
 
 
5. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry of Railways in 
respect of all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Third Report (17th Lok Sabha) have 
been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will 
now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations /Recommendations made in their One Hundredth Thirty Third 
Report (17th Lok Sabha), which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry of Railways to furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations /Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report within 6 months of its presentation 
to the House. 
 Recommendation (Para no.2) 
6. The Committee in their 133rd Report (17th Lok Sabha) reviewed the audit 
findings concerning railway electrification works, particularly focusing on the 
oversight and management of contracts awarded by the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board). The Committee noted lacunae in coordination between the 
Civil and Electrical departments within the South East Central Railway (SECR), 
leading to inefficiencies and financial losses. The failure to ensure completion 
of prerequisite civil works before awarding electrification contracts showcases 
a lack of effective oversight and coordination among departments. The 
Committee also noted that despite clear instructions from the Railway Board to 
complete pre-requisite tasks such as site clearance and preparation of plans 
before awarding contracts, several contracts, totaling a value of ₹35.36 crore, 
were awarded without ensuring these essential prerequisites.  
Consequently, contractors faced challenges in executing the works due 
to non-availability of clear work sites and failure to provide approved drawings 
essential for project execution. Furthermore, materials worth ₹9.0 crore, 
supplied by the contractors during the currency of the contracts, could not be 
fully utilized due to the inability to execute the works. The Ministry, in their 
background note, have reflected on the outlining delays encountered in various 
sections, attributing them to site readiness issues, delayed completion of civil 
works, and subsequent short closures of contracts. In the light of these 
observations, the Committee recommended that the Ministry need to ensure 
strict adherence to comprehensive compliance checklists for tendering 

 
 
processes which should include verification steps to confirm the completion of 
pre-requisite civil works before awarding contracts for electrification projects 
which will prevent instances of short closures and wastage of public funds due 
to incomplete site readiness.  
The Committee also recommended improved coordination between civil 
and electrical departments within the railway administration to avoid delays and 
discrepancies in project execution. The Committee are also of the view that 
mechanisms for regular communication and collaboration should be 
established by the Ministry between civil and electrical departments to ensure 
timely completion of prerequisite works and seamless handover between 
different phases of the project which can be facilitated through regular progress 
meetings and the implementation of a comprehensive project management 
system. 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“Railway will ensure strict adherence to comprehensive compliance 
checklist for tendering process.  Railway will ensure in tendering process 
to include verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil 
works before awarding contracts for electrification projects. Railway will 
ensure regular communication and collaboration between Civil and 
Electrical Departments to ensure timely completion of prerequisite 
works.” 
8. The vetting comments of Audit are as follows:- 
“A timeline may be fixed for ensuring that the tendering process includes 
verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works 
before awarding contracts for electrification projects.” 
9. Noticing the lack of proper coordination between civil and electrical 
departments, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry need to 
ensure strict adherence to comprehensive compliance checklists for 
tendering processes which should include verification steps to confirm 
the completion of pre-requisite civil works before awarding contracts for 
electrification projects which will prevent instances of short closures and 
wastage of public funds due to incomplete site readiness.  

 
 
The very fact that tenders were awarded for electrical projects 
without carrying out review of the progress of Civil works on site 
resulting in delays, missed deadlines, and decreased productivity.  
 
 
The Committee feel that when civil and electrical wings are not 
aligned in their goals and activities, which can lead to huge financial 
losses owing to flagrant violation of basic tenets of codal principles. The 
Committee further observe that without proper coordination, both the 
civil and electrical may duplicate efforts, leading to the wastage of 
resources such as time, money, and material.  The Committee regret to 
note the manner in which instructions of Railway Board to complete pre-
requisite tasks such as site clearance and preparations of plans before 
awarding contracts were blatantly overlooked. At this stage, the 
Committee can only recommend that an inquiry be conducted to fix 
responsibility for such lapse.  Resultantly, material worth Rs.9.0 crore 
could not be fully utilized for want of clear site.  In their Action Taken 
Note, the Ministry have merely stated that they will adhere to 
comprehensive checklist and other compliance. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the Ministry has not befittingly responded to the pinpointed 
recommendations of the Committee nor has undertaken any analysis of 
the factors which hindered or delayed the completion of the civil work. 
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations urge the 
Ministry to not only streamline the processes but also leverage 
technology solutions to oversee the progress of civil works, so that a 
robust monitoring mechanism is established which will avoid any 
cascading effect on future planning, tendering, procurement etc.  
To mitigate the financial risks associated with lack of coordination 
between civil and electrical departments, the Committee impress upon 
the Ministry to undertake and devise a mechanism for improving 
communication channels, cross-functional collaboration processes in 
absence of which lapses/shortcomings and palpable delays in 
completion of projects would not recur. They also recommend that in 
case of works involving civil and electrical wings and completion of 

 
 
either civil or electrical work from pre-requisite for the other work, 
Railways evolve a mechanism for obtaining written commitment of 
completion of pre-requisite work at the level of chief engineer before 
inviting bids for the other work. The Committee would, therefore, desire 
to be apprised of the action taken thereon at the earliest. 
  

 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
10.  The Committee note from audit observation that materials valued at 
₹6.51 crores were lying idle due to delays and mismanagement, leading to 
additional financial losses and the inability to utilize supplied materials 
efficiently not only led to financial losses but also reflected poorly on resource 
management practices within the Ministry. Despite concerns raised by audit, 
the Railway Administration's response was inadequate, emphasizing the 
procurement of materials as per contract conditions and storage in secure 
facilities, which does not address the inefficiency in resource utilization.  
The Committee also note that despite efforts to utilize supplied materials 
efficiently, substantial portions remain unused, further highlighting the 
mismanagement of resources. The expiry of guarantee certificates against 
supplied materials, as highlighted in the audit, indicates a lapse in material 
management. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry need to 
strengthen its monitoring mechanisms to track the utilization of supplied 
materials accurately by implementing robust inventory tracking systems and 
conducting periodic audits which will prevent instances of material wastage 
and ensure optimal utilization of resources.  
The Committee further recommended that the Ministry need to conduct a 
thorough review of its material management policies and practices which 
includes implementing stringent inventory management procedures, timely 
disposal of expired materials, and ensuring effective utilization of resources 
across all projects.  
11. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
 “Railway will ensure proper monitoring mechanisms for optimal utilization 
of supplied materials by conducting periodic audits as pre-existing practice and 
as suggested by the Committee.  Railway will ensure thorough review of 
policies and practices of material management.” 
  

 
 
 
12. The vetted comments of Audit are as under: 
“A timeline may be fixed for reviewing of policies and practices of 
material management.” 
13. In para 3 of their 133rd Report (17th Lok Sabha), the Committee had 
expressed concern over delays and mismanagement leading to 
additional financial losses but also reflected poorly on resource 
management practices within the Ministry.  The Committee further 
recommended that the Ministry needs to conduct a thorough review of its 
material management policies and practices which includes 
implementing stringent inventory management procedures followed by 
timely disposal of expired materials, and ensuring effective utilization of 
resources across all projects.  
The Committee note with concern that the Ministry is not making 
requisite efforts to mitigate the financial losses and fixing the 
responsibilities that occurred owing to lack of coordination and resource 
management practices, despite concerns raised by the Audit. Here, the 
Committee would like to highlight their earlier stand that an Apex Body 
with a third party for an independent assessment of resources may be 
formed by the Ministry.  The Committee further exhort that a robust 
policy framework to ensure feasibility of the review mechanism may be 
worked out.  In order to ensure timely execution, the Committee urge that 
there ought to be a provision for recovery of financial loss to the 
exchequer along with penal interest consequent to the fixing of 
responsibility.   
The Committee further reiterate that action may be taken for 
utilization of unused /blocked supplied material at various levels. The 
Committee also impress upon the Ministry to make efforts to ensure 
rectification of lapses in the inventory management, including 
mechanism to match real time progress at regular intervals.  The 
Committee would like to emphasize that urgent steps may be taken to 
make use of various material lying unutilized or have been rendered 
obsolete with passage of time. 

 
 
  
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
14. The Committee noted that delays in awarding contracts indicate systemic 
inefficiencies within the procurement process. These delays not only impede 
project timelines but also contribute to cost escalations and undermine the 
overall efficiency of project delivery. From the Ministry's response, the 
Committee take note of efforts to address shortcomings and ensure project 
completion. The Committee, however, feel that there is a need for enhanced 
monitoring and reporting mechanisms to track progress effectively and mitigate 
risks associated with project delays and cost overruns. Therefore the 
Committee desire the Ministry to streamline their procurement processes to 
expedite contract awards which may involve conducting timely assessments of 
project requirements, ensuring adequate staffing and resources for 
procurement activities, and implementing measures to address bottlenecks in 
the tendering process. The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry 
should implement robust project monitoring and reporting systems to track 
progress, identify bottlenecks, and proactively address issues impacting project 
delivery. 
15. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
 “Streamlining of procurement process is a continuous process and will be 
ensured by Ministry.  The provision regarding robust project monitoring and 
reporting systems to track progress, etc. are already in place in “Indian 
Railways Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPSM) module.  However, 
additional suggestions for data entering in IRPSM module is given the same 
would be done in the module.” 
 
16. The Audit had no further comments to offer in this regard. 

 
 
  

 
 
 
17. The Committee are unhappy to note the perfunctory manner and 
callous disregard with which the Ministry have furnished Action Taken 
replies on such an important observation/recommendations of the 
Committee, which was meant to streamline procurement process and 
award of contract in a time bound manner. The Committee are surprised 
to note that the Ministry has not fathomed the significance and 
considered opinion of the Committee for timely assessment, monitoring 
and reporting mechanism to mitigate risks and expedite contract awards.  
They, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry needs to pay adequate 
attention on operation and maintenance in procurement process so that 
slip-back instances could be minimized. The Committee further urge that 
in order to avoid instances of delay and cost overruns, the Ministry 
needs periodical evaluation of monitoring and reporting mechanisms 
insofar as management of funds is concerned.  The Committee are of 
firm opinion that the Ministry needs to ensure proper mechanism for 
authentication and validation of data entered to streamline the 
procurement process by ensuring timely assessment and resource 
mapping. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
Introductory 
Consequent to the sifting of all the material and information, mainly from the 
written information and depositions made by the Ministry, Committee have 
made certain observations and recommendations which are contained in the 
succeeding paragraphs of this part of the Report. 
 (Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 133rd Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th LokSabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
  
 Introductory. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
No further Audit comments. 
 
 Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/133rdReport) 
  

 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee have reviewed the audit findings concerning railway 
electrification works, particularly focusing on the oversight and management of 
contracts awarded by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). The 
Committee note lacunae in coordination between the Civil and Electrical 
departments within the South East Central Railway (SECR), leading to 
inefficiencies and financial losses. The failure to ensure completion of 
prerequisite civil works before awarding electrification contracts showcases a 
lack of effective oversight and coordination among departments. The 
Committee also note that despite clear instructions from the Railway Board to 
complete pre-requisite tasks such as site clearance and preparation of plans 
before awarding contracts, several contracts, totaling a value of ₹35.36 crore, 
were awarded without ensuring these essential prerequisites. Consequently, 
contractors faced challenges in executing the works due to non-availability of 
clear work sites and failure to provide approved drawings essential for project 
execution. Furthermore, materials worth ₹9.0 crore, supplied by the contractors 
during the currency of the contracts, could not be fully utilized due to the 
inability to execute the works. The Ministry, in their background note, have 
reflected on the outlining delays encountered in various sections, attributing 
them to site readiness issues, delayed completion of civil works, and 
subsequent short closures of contracts. In the light of these observations, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry need to ensure strict adherence to 
comprehensive compliance checklists for tendering processes which should 
include verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works 
before awarding contracts for electrification projects which will prevent 
instances of short closures and wastage of public funds due to incomplete site 
readiness. The Committee also recommend improved coordination between 
civil and electrical departments within the railway administration to avoid delays 
and discrepancies in project execution. The Committee are also of the view 
that mechanisms for regular communication and collaboration should be 
established by the Ministry between civil and electrical departments to ensure 
timely completion of prerequisite works and seamless handover between 
different phases of the project which can be facilitated through regular progress 
meetings and the implementation of a comprehensive project management 
system. 

 
 
  (Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 133rd Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Railway will ensure strict adherence to comprehensive compliance checklist for 
tendering process.  Railway will ensure in tendering process to include 
verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works before 
awarding contracts for electrification projects. Railway will ensure regular 
communication and collaboration between Civil and Electrical Departments to 
ensure timely completion of prerequisite works. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
A timeline may be fixed for ensuring that the tendering process includes 
verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works before 
awarding contracts for electrification projects. 
 
 
Ministry’s comments 
 
Noted. A letter fixing Timeline for ensuring that the tendering process includes 
verification steps to confirm the completion of pre-requisite civil works before 
awarding contracts for electrification projects, has been issued. 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/133rdReport) 
 
  

 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee note from audit observation that materials valued at ₹6.51 
crores were lying idle due to delays and mismanagement, leading to additional 
financial losses and the inability to utilize supplied materials efficiently not only 
led to financial losses but also reflected poorly on resource management 
practices within the ministry. Despite concerns raised by audit, the Railway 
Administration's response was inadequate, emphasizing the procurement of 
materials as per contract conditions and storage in secure facilities, which does 
not address the inefficiency in resource utilization. The Committee also note 
that despite efforts to utilize supplied materials efficiently, substantial portions 
remain unused, further highlighting the mismanagement of resources. The 
expiry of guarantee certificates against supplied materials, as highlighted in the 
audit, indicates a lapse in material management. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry need to strengthen its monitoring mechanisms to 
track the utilization of supplied materials accurately by implementing robust 
inventory tracking systems and conducting periodic audits which will prevent 
instances of material wastage and ensure optimal utilization of resources. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry need to conduct a thorough 
review of its material management policies and practices which includes 
implementing stringent inventory management procedures, timely disposal of 
expired materials, and ensuring effective utilization of resources across all 
projects.  
(Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 133rd Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17thLokSabha) 
 
Action Taken 
  
Railway will ensure proper monitoring mechanisms for optimal utilization of 
supplied materials by conducting periodic audits as pre-existing practice and 
as suggested by the Committee. Railway will ensure thorough review of 
policies and practices of material management. 
 
  

 
 
Audit Comments 
 
A timeline may be fixed for reviewing of policies and practices of material 
management. 
 
Ministry’s comments 
 
Policies and practices of material management are regularly issued by store 
Dte., as and when required or some issue arises. 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/133rdReport) 
  

 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee note that delays in awarding contracts indicate systemic 
inefficiencies within the procurement process. These delays not only impede 
project timelines but also contribute to cost escalations and undermine the 
overall efficiency of project delivery. From the Ministry's response, the 
Committee take note of efforts to address shortcomings and ensure project 
completion. The Committee, however, feel that there is a need for enhanced 
monitoring and reporting mechanisms to track progress effectively and mitigate 
risks associated with project delays and cost overruns. Therefore, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to streamline their procurement processes to 
expedite contract awards which may involve conducting timely assessments of 
project requirements, ensuring adequate staffing and resources for 
procurement activities, and implementing measures to address bottlenecks in 
the tendering process. The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry 
should implement robust project monitoring and reporting systems to track 
progress, identify bottlenecks, and proactively address issues impacting project 
delivery.  
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 4 of 133rd Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17thLokSabha) 
Action Taken 
  
Streamlining of procurement process is a continuous process and will be 
ensured by Ministry. The provision regarding robust project monitoring and 
reporting systems to track progress, etc. are already in place in ‘Indian 
Railways Projects Sanctions & Management’ (IRPSM) module. However, 
additional suggestions for data entering in IRPSM module is given, the same 
would be done in the module.  
Audit Comments 
 
No further Audit comments. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  

 
 
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/133rdReport) 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:       K.C. VENUGOPAL 
 12 February 2025                                  Chairperson, , 
 23 Magha1946 (saka)                   Committee on Public Accounts  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. XXXXXXXXXXX  
b. XXXXXXXXXXX  
c. XXXXXXXXXXX  
d. XXXXXXXXXXX  
e. XXXXXXXXXXX  
f. XXXXXXXXXXX  
g. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 

 
 
133rd Report (17th LS) on ‘Short Closure of Electrification Works due to 
Incomplete Pre-Requisite Works: South East Central Railway’ 
h. XXXXXXXXXXX  
i. XXXXXXXXXXX  
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in 
the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDREDTH THIRTY THIRD 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
04 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 
100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which the Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 