29  
 
 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY IN 
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 84th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS/ DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


   PAC NO.  2423 
 
 
T W E N T Y  N I N T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIG HTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 84th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS/ DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  05.08.2025 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   05.08.2025 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY IN 
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 

 
i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                     (ii) 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  ...................................................................................       (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report.......................................................................          1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the     
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the   
   replies received from the Government.................... 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   replies of the Government have not been accepted 
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I  Minutes of the 8 th sitting of the Public Accounts            36-37
 Committee (2025-26) held on 25.07.2025 
 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government  38 
 on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 
Eighty Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 

 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash           - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania   - Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Nahar Singh   - Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty Fourth Report on 
“Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts”. 
 
2. The Eighty Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
07th February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Twenty Ninth Report at their sitting 
held on 25.07.2025. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I.  
  
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighty Fourth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     K C VENUGOPAL 
25 July, 2025                                                                                    Chairperson, 
03 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)          Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eighty-Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Misappropriation of 
Public Money in Department of Posts".  
 
2. The Eighty-Fourth report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
07.02.2024.  It contained nine Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts), and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.     
       
      Total:       9        
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL     
           
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V 
 

 
 
2 
 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Communication (Department 
of Posts) which inter-alia included failure in implementing internal checks for 
prevention of fraudulent activities, poor monitoring mechanism etc.  The Committee 
had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Eighty Fourth 
Report.   
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communication (Depart 
of Posts) on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eighty Fourth Report have been reproduced in the relevant 
Chapters of this Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government, on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need 
reiteration or merit comments. 
5.  The Committee desire Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) 
to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report, positively within three months of the 
presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Internal Control and Monitoring 
6. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:-    
 “The Committee observe that Post Office Saving Bank Manuals issued by 
Department of Posts (DoP) prescribes the internal checks and clearly defines the 
responsibilities for prevention of frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank 
Operations for various levels of staff in Sub Post Offices, S.O. Group and Saving 
Bank Control Organization in Head Post Offices, Divisional, Regional and Circle 
Offices. However, Audit scrutiny revealed misappropriation of public money 
amounting to ₹95.62 crore in Post Offices spread over fourteen Postal Circles, due 
to failure of the Head Post Offices in implementing internal checks codified for 
prevention of Fraudulent Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) 
Schemes. The DOP added that most of the cases pointed out by Audit relate to 
manual manipulation or alteration of the Sanchay Post database by official/s with 
malafide intent. The Committee are shocked to note that despite having prescribed 
internal checks/inspections at different levels/offices such as Daily Audit by SBCO 
Branch; Checking in Accounts Branch; Checking in Postal Accounts Offices; Internal 

 
 
3 
 
Check Inspection / Internal Audit; Verification  of withdrawals of ₹10,000/- and  
above at the counters of Branch Post Offices (BOs); Quarterly visit to Branch Post 
Offices and visits by various authorities including Chief Post Master Generals 
(CPMGs) etc. instances of misappropriation of money were observed. As regards 
the measures taken for preventing frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank 
Operations at various levels, the Department explained that various technological 
steps have been taken to make the system more secure and avoid any chances of 
fraud. Besides, rollout of Core Banking Solution (CBS) in all post offices, Finacle, a 
highly secure system with proven security features across the banking system has 
been introduced. Also, various other initiatives have reportedly been taken that 
include introduction of e-Passbook; CBS-CSI GL integration, which enables 
automatic accounting of all transaction carried out in Finacle in CSI; Fraud Risk 
Management Unit (FRMU); Online PAN Validation; e-KYC; Aadhaar authenticated 
payment etc. The Committee, while noting the steps being taken by the Department 
to secure customer access, desire that check/inspection done by each of the 
levels/offices may be tracked through an integrated online portal, so that deviations if 
any are brought to the notice of higher ups at an early stage and timely action taken 
thereon to prevent frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank Operations. The 
Committee also recommend stringent punitive action against the officials who failed 
to ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent 
Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes.” 
            
7.   Action taken by Ministry 
 
“Investigation into loss and fraud cases is conducted by field units supervised by the 
investigation Division of Postal Directorate and any gaps/systematic 
loopholes/lacunae in rules/procedure noticed are immediately brought to the notice 
of the concerned Division(s) for timely plugging of the loop holes to prevent the 
frauds. 
Internal consultation is underway for effective implementation of the recommendation 
of the committee for development of an integrated online portal for tracking of the 
checks/inspections. The committee would be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.  
Postal Circles identify the officials who fail to ensure implementation of the internal 
checks codified for prevention of fraudulent Activities in operation of Post Office 
Savings Bank (POSB) Schemes in the Circle Level Investigation (CLI) and stringent 
punitive action is taken as per rules. In case any deviation is noticed in the periodic 
review of any case, specific directions are issued to the Circles by the Postal 
Directorate for action and report. 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
All the concerned 14 Postal Circles have been addressed on 02.05.2024 for 
submitting compiled details of punitive action taken against the officials who failed to 
ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent 
Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes in all the cases 
reviewed in the Audit. Final compliance on this para will be submitted based on 
reports from the Circles.” 
8.      Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
“Ministry may intimate to the PAC regarding progress made in respect of 
development of integrated online portal. 
Further, the Ministry may furnish a report on punitive action taken against officials by 
Circles, to the PAC”. 
 
9. Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
In respect of the 60 fraud cases observed by PAC across 14 Circles, 
details of punitive action taken against the officials are as follows:- 
 
i. Total number of offenders including prime offender (108), co-offenders(46) 
and subsidiary offenders (1018) identified for taking disciplinary action-
1172 
ii. Number of offenders against whom disciplinary Action has been 
completed -718 
iii. Number of offenders against whom disciplinary Action has been/is 
being initiated-267 
iv. Number of offenders (including prime, co and sub offenders) against 
whom disciplinary action could not be taken due to their death and 
retirement -187 
v. A total of 985 offenders who had committed fraud and sub offenders who 
had failed to ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for 
preventing of fraudulent activities in operation of POSB schemes, in the 
60 cases have been punished severely.  The Committee desire that latest 
status of development of integrated online portal for monitoring of loss 
and fraud cases. 
 
    A total of 985 offenders who had committed fraud and sub offenders who 
had failed to ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for preventing 
of fraudulent activities in operation of POSB schemes, in the 60 cases have been 
punished severely.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
10.   The Committee had desired for development of the integrated online 
portal for tracking of the checks/inspections to prevent frauds in Saving Bank 

 
 
5 
 
operations.  The Ministry, in their final ATN, have stated that approval of the 
creation of the integrated online portal for monitoring of Loss and Fraud cases 
has already been accorded. The Functional Requirement Speciﬁcations (FRS) 
are being examined and the portal is under development.  The Committee had 
also desired to know the punitive action taken by the Ministry against the 
remaining offenders who had failed to ensure implementation of the internal 
checks codified for preventing of fraudulent activities in operation of POSB 
schemes.  The Ministry in their ATN have stated that a total of 985 offenders 
who had committed fraud and sub offenders who had failed to ensure 
implementation of the internal checks codified for preventing of fraudulent 
activities in operation of POSB schemes, in the 60 cases have been punished 
severely.  The Committee desire that latest status of development of Integrated 
online portal for monitoring of loss and fraud cases be apprised to the 
Committee. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the nature of punitive 
action taken against each category of offenders, working and retired. 
Recommendation No.2  
11.   The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:-  
 “As regards applicability of the RBI Guidelines with respect to the Post Office 
Saving Bank (POSB) operations, the Committee have been apprised that the 
traditional Post Office Savings Bank was under the purview of Ministry of Finance 
and has been functioning as an agency. However, POSB is now covered under the 
Payment and settlement Systems Act, 2007 and hence RBI guidelines are required 
to be followed in case of all digital modes of transactions. Besides, while defining 
Operating Procedure for POSB operations, RBI guidelines are also taken into 
consideration wherever feasible. The Department also stated that technology 
management of POSB Operations has been handed over to India Post Payment 
Bank (IPPB) from August 2022, which is regulated by the RBI. The Committee, while 
noting the large volume of transactions involved in the POSB desire that DOP should 
also enter into an MOU with RBI for undertaking a review of the Internal 
controls/Internal checks in place at regular intervals to arrest fraudulent activities in 
operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes and ensure safety of the 

 
 
6 
 
hard-earned money of customers and ensure that they do not become vulnerable to 
fraudulent activities.”  
 
12.  Action taken by Ministry 
 “Recommendation of the committee for the Department to enter into an MOU 
with RBI, for undertaking a review of the internal controls/internal checks in place to 
arrest fraudulent activities in operation of Post Office Savings Bank Schemes, has 
been sent to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance for necessary 
guidance/inputs in the matter. The Committee would be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard”. 
13. Vetting Comments of Audit 
  
“Ministry may intimate the PAC on status regarding the review by RBI on the 
efficiency of internal controls in Post Office Savings Bank Schemes and subsequent 
course of action to the PAC”. 
14. Ministry’s Final Reply 
  
“The recommendation of the Committee for the Department to enter into MoU with 
RBI is being examined at the end of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance. The matter is being pursued with DEA”. 
Comments of the Committee 
15. The Committee had desired that the Department of Posts enter  into an 
MoU with RBI, for undertaking a review of the internal controls/internal checks 
in place to arrest fraudulent activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank 
schemes.  The Ministry in their ATN has stated that this matter has been sent 
to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and is being 
pursued with DEA.  The Committee desire that the latest status be 
communicated to it. 
Recommendation No.3  

 
 
7 
 
16. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
 “With respect to the poor monitoring mechanism in the Department Of Posts, 
the committee in their 89th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Non-Compliance 
by Department of Posts” and 15th Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations and Recommendations contained in the 89th Report had inter alia 
highlighted monitoring issues viz. ‘pension disbursement’ and retention of excess 
cash in Post Offices’ and recommended evolving and implementing a more stringent 
system of monitoring and stricter norms of compliance to the Departments own code 
of financial conduct. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the updated 
account of details of action taken in this regard.” 
17.  Action taken by Ministry 
 
“Pension Disbursement w.r.t EPFO and Coal Mines 
1.  The Disbursement of EPFO Pension was being done through Post 
Offices. At the level of PAO after due consolidation of the actual number of 
transactions and the schedules received from Post Offices, the debit/credits to 
the EPFO/CMPF organizations were passed through the settlement accounts 
for claiming reimbursement from the respective Departments. The Major 
recoverable amount as reflected in the PAC Paras pertains to Bihar from the 
period 2002 to 2013 and Jharkhand Circles for the period 2002 to 2014. As on 
31.12.2017 the outstanding amount of ₹ 13.49 crores from EPFO and ₹ 3.079 
crores from CMPF was pending for realization. 
2.  Consequent to the Audit objections raised on the matter and the ibid 
PAC Para, after vigorous pursuance by the Circles, an amount of ₹ 8.10 
crores from EPFO and ₹ 2.71 crores from CMPF was recovered. As on date 
the outstanding balances against these organizations is ₹ 5.07 crores against 
EPFO and ₹ 35 lakhs against CMPF. 
3.  It has come to light that the order dated 14.07.2010 for stoppage of 
pension disbursement through Post Offices was not marked correctly by the 
EPFO Zonal Office Muzaffarpur, Bihar. It was marked to the Postmaster 
General, Postal and Accounts Patna (Bihar). There is no such Post and 
hence, the letter did not reach either the Circle office or PAO. As a result of 

 
 
8 
 
displacement of the communications the EPFO pension continued to be 
disbursed through Post Offices upto 2014. 
4.  Regular correspondences and reminders were issued from the Circle 
level, and the highest levels at DoP Headquarters to Patna & Ranchi EPFO 
and CMPF Zonal Offices as well as to the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner, Commissioner Coal Mines Provident Fund Head-Quarters 
New Delhi, for the reimbursement of Pension and the commission amount 
disbursed by Post Offices. 
5.  In the meantime, due to the New Application Software introduced by 
EPFO In 2011, some of the vouchers already sent by the Circle PAOs were 
not traceable at their end. All efforts are being made to locate supporting 
documents and proof of payments for the reimbursement of the Ibid amount. 
6.  Frequent meetings with the EPFO/CMPF authority at Patna and 
Ranchi are being held. Both the PAOs have been asked to form a Committee 
including the officials/officers of EPFO/CMPF to sort out the issue and remit 
the remaining payment to Department of Posts at the earliest”. 
18.     Vetting Comments of Audit 
  
“Ministry may intimate the final status of outstanding dues and recovery made and 
balance pending from EPFO/CMPF to PAC”. 
19.      Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
1.    As intimated by the Circles concerned, the total outstanding balances due 
for reimbursement, as on date, are ₹4.99 crores & ₹ 33.49 lakhs from EPFO 
and CMPF respectively. [Two cheques amounting to ₹32,97,670/- dated 
14.03.2023 and ₹6,76,711/- dated 10.08.2023 were received from EPFO 
Jamshedpur and encashed by PAO Ranchi but were not taken into account 
as break up details of amount (pension and commission) was not received 
from EPFO] 
2.     Regular meetings with the EPFO/CMPF authorities at Patna and Ranchi 
are being held to sort out the issue of reimbursement of the outstanding dues. 

 
 
9 
 
3.     Amendment of the operating procedure for disbursement of EPFO 
pension through Post Offices is being re-examined by the Department of 
Posts. Further, the concerned Circles have also been asked for updating the 
exact dues outstanding from EPFO as on date.  
4.  As per the amendments in the operating procedure, the payment for 
disbursement of the pension is to be made in advance by the EPFO through 
cheque and this has to be credited into the Government Account by the Head 
Postmaster. The Head Post Offices are required to claim service charge at 
the rate of 2.5% of the undisbursed amount of pension as certified in the 
summary sheet. 
Retention of excess cash in Post Offices 
A consolidated report is available through the Core System Integrator (CSI) to 
the Postal Divisional Heads, pan India, to monitor the opening and closing 
cash balances of all the Post Offices with reference to their maximum & 
minimum cash balances. 
Further, the alert mechanism has also been deployed across the country”. 
20. Final Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit has no further comments. 
Comments of the Committee 
21. The Committee had recommended to evolve and implement a more 
stringent system of monitoring and stricter norms of compliance to the 
Departments own code of financial conduct.  However, the ATN has not 
clarified this position.  The Committee desire to be communicated in this 
regard. The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the updated status 
of the account details of action taken in this regard. The ATN states that total 
outstanding balances due for reimbursement are ₹4.99 crores and  ₹ 33.49 
lakhs from EPFO and CMPF respectively. However, recovery of balance 
outstanding and the result of meetings held with EPFO/CMPF authorities of 
Patna and Ranchi to sort out the issue of reimbursement of the outstanding 
dues were not received.  The Committee desire to be apprised of latest status 

 
 
10 
 
in this regard.  The Committee also desire to know further progress in respect 
of the amendment of the operating procedure for disbursement of EPFO 
pension through post offices which was being re-examined by the Department 
of posts along with the updation of the exact dues outstanding from the 
concerned Circles from EPFO as on date. 
 
Recommendation No.4  
Sanchay Post Data Migration 
22. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee observe that to safeguard the public money and enable 
better customer experience, DoP decided to computerize the banking operations 
through one central platform under IT Modernisation Project 2012. Accordingly, DoP 
started implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS) from December 2013 to 
enable customers to operate their accounts to achieve "Anywhere, Anytime Banking 
by replacing the existing banking platform of “Sanchay Post" software in Post 
Offices. Since data from Sanchay Post software, was migrated to Finacle software 
as live accounts, and to ensure that such data was not tampered and manipulated, 
the Department stated that detailed instructions were issued from the technical team 
to all the Circles/Post Offices in regard to preparation of Go- Live in the form of 
‘Check list for Go-Live’. DoP however, indicated that incorrect migration of closed 
accounts into Finacle might have occurred due to various reasons including 
carelessness by the operating staff at field level. Further, after such errors came to 
notice, corrective action is being taken including identification of such accounts and 
marking such identified accounts for closure. To obviate fraud in wrongly migrated 
accounts, all accounts that matured, but were not seen as closed after 3 years have 
been marked 'FREEZE’. The closure of such frozen accounts is allowed only through 
Head Post Offices and with the approval of two supervisors after obtaining proper 
KYC and other necessary documents. No manipulation/ data entry in the existing 
data base is allowed in Finacle which is a standard banking application used by 
various banks across the banking sector. Observing that the Department is itself not 
confident of accuracy of data migrated from Sanchay Post to Finacle and the 

 
 
11 
 
identification process of tampered and manipulated accounts is still underway, the 
Committee cannot help expressing apprehension over ensuring hassle free delivery 
of services till the last mile. The Committee desire that the process of verification of 
Sanchay data be completed in a time bound manner so that the confidence of both 
urban and rural clientele in the country's oldest banking system is ensured and public 
money safeguarded. The Committee while noting that e-KYC is likely to be 
implemented shortly in POSB which will facilitate biometric authentication of 
customers, strengthening the existing system further, desire that the same be 
completed at the earliest and the Committee be apprised thereof.” 
23.  Action taken by Ministry 
 
The POSB data migration activity was carried out in a phased manner from2013-14 
to 2022-23 due to the vast scale of operations and number of post offices. 
This involved data entry from manual records and migration of the existing Sanchay 
Post software database to the Core Banking Software (CBS) in Finacle. Discrepancy 
was noticed between the legacy Sanchay Post data and Finacle data mainly due to 
legacy issues and inaccuracies in the Sanchay Post and manual data. Efforts to 
reconcile the data began in 2018. In 2022, a time-bound strategy outlining the 
activities involved was formulated. A comprehensive data re-verification exercise 
was undertaken, which included identification of discrepancies in classification of 
accounts and the status of accounts (live/closed/transferred out) for accounts 
matured before migration and seen as live in Finacle etc. The progress made in this 
regard is substantial and the task is being completed in a time bound manner, as 
directed by the Committee. 
` Development of the e-KYC module for POSB is underway. 
24. Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may furnish data and documents that support the substantial progress made 
in reconciliation exercise to the PAC. 
Also, progress made in respect of e-KYC module for POSB may be intimated to the 
PAC. 
25.   Ministry’s Final Reply 
 

 
 
12 
 
The data re-verification exercise is presently being undertaken. POSB data 
discrepancies are being identified through ground level record verification. The 
progress made in this regard is being monitored closely. All efforts are being made to 
complete this entire discrepancy identification process in a time bound manner. 
Aadhaar based eKYC service is expected to be rolled out in Post offices shortly. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
26. The Committee had desired that process of verification of Sanchay data 
be completed in a time bound manner in order to maintain public confidence 
and safe-guard public money.  However, the ATN states that the data re-
verification exercise is presently being undertaken.  The Committee 
recommend that the re-verification exercise be completed and the Committee 
be apprised thereof.  The Committee had also desired to know the progress 
made in respect of Aadhaar based eKYC service which was expected to be 
rolled out in Post Offices.  The ATN states in this regard that Aadhar based 
eKYC is expected to be rolled out in post-offices shortly.  The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the latest status regarding rolling out of eKYC service 
in post offices. 
Recommendation No.5  
Un-authorised withdrawal of funds by postal staff 
27.     The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the S.O. Branch as well as SBCO in Head Post 
Offices failed to carry out the prescribed checks relating to the POSB Operations. 
This coupled with delays in timely validation of data migrated from Sanchay Post to 
CBS led to misappropriation of public money of at least ₹ 95.62 crore in various Post 
Offices of 14 Circles, as test checked by Audit. Further in some cases, inspecting 
authorities of the Department also failed to detect the fraud/misappropriations even 
after a lapse of more than five years and frauds came into light only after customer 
complaints. In response, the Department contended that the frauds committed by 
using the stated modus operandi, are not technology driven and could not be 

 
 
13 
 
detected for long due to failure in supervision on the part of Account Offices or/and 
SBCO. This has happened despite appropriate control mechanism being already 
available. Regarding the product/scheme wise fraud details and the extent of public 
money lost due to this, the Department informed that a fraud case may involve 
misappropriation spread across various products/schemes viz SB, RD, TD, 
PLI/RPLI, fraud associated with remittances etc. and their specific details are not 
maintained at present. The Department of Posts however, maintains consolidated 
data of live cases of loss and fraud, inclusive of cases that are more than 15 years 
old. Similarly, the details of amount recovered is maintained which includes recovery 
in all types of live loss and fraud cases. As regards the action taken against the 
fraudsters, the DOP stated that besides the recoveries being made, disciplinary 
action is taken against the primary/main identified offenders and subsidiary offenders 
with penalties like dismissal, compulsory retirement, withholding of increment, 
reduction to lower stages etc. imposed under the CCS (CCA) Rules 1965, and 
measures such as recovery, reduction/withholding of pensionary benefits taken with 
respect to pensioners under CCS (Pension) Rules 2021 in the case of departmental 
officials and GDS (Conduct and Engagement) Rules 2020 as applicable with respect 
to Gramin Dak Sevaks. DOP also added that cases of imposition of penalties, there 
is indirect recovery as when an employee is dismissed from service, all his 
pensionary benefits are ceased thereby resulting in substantial saving to the 
Government. This indirect recovery to the Government exchequer is not exactly 
quantifiable The Committee desire the Department to take measures for maintaining 
details of frauds and amounts involved under specific products/scheme heads so as 
to enable pointed monitoring; and immediate introduction of preventive measures as 
and where required. The Committee also recommend that major reasons/modus 
operandi of frauds may be studied and besides plugging the loop holes, all branches 
may be directed to introduce checks to avoid a repeat of similar frauds in their areas. 
Also, the general public may also be made aware of the modus operandi of the 
frauds to with a view to ensuring safety of their money.” 
28. Action taken by Ministry 
Internal consultations underway for effective implementation of the 
recommendation of the committee by development of an integrated online portal to 
maintain the details of frauds and amounts involved product/scheme/head wise and 

 
 
14 
 
enable focused monitoring and immediate introduction of preventive measures as 
and when required. 
Preliminary Reports of Frauds and Circle Level Investigation (CLI) Reports 
from Circles, report any new modus operandi and make suggestions for systemic 
improvements. The reports are examined in detail at the Postal Circle and 
Directorate level and action taken for recurrence of such frauds and rectification of 
any systemic lacunae. Postal Circles have been addressed on 02.05.2024 for 
informing the present status in this regard and suggestions for future improvement. 
The existing monitoring system has been strengthened with the setting up of 
dedicated Fraud Risk Monitoring Unit (FRMU). The FRMU monitors the fraud risk in 
POSB and generates systemic alerts on its web portal to check and avert frauds. 
The Postal Divisions verify the alerts and submit reports online. 
29.  Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may intimate progress made in respect of development of integrated online 
portal for monitoring of frauds to the PAC. 
Also, report on action taken by the circles on the basis of FRMU alerts along 
with supporting documents may be furnished  to the PAC. 
30.  Ministry’s Final Reply 
Approval for the creation of the integrated online portal for monitoring of Loss 
and Fraud cases has already been accorded. The Functional Requirement 
Specifications (FRS) are being examined and the portal is under development.  
Comments of the Committee 
31. The Committee had desired to know the status of the creation of the 
integrated online portal for monitoring of loss and fraud cases after getting the 
approval along with the result of Functional Requirement Specifications (FRS) 
and the progress made for the development of portal.  The Ministry in their 
ATN have stated that the approval for creation of ‘Integrated online Portal’ for 
monitoring of loss and fraud cases has already been accorded.  However, it 
further states that the ‘Functional Requirement Specifications’ (FRS) are being 

 
 
15 
 
examined and the portal is under development.  The Committee desire that the 
latest status in this regard be communicated to it. 
Recommendation No.7  
Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU) 
32. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that a separate Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU) 
has been established to scrutinize the alerts generated by the system about various 
transactions, on the basis of certain set of rules. In case of any deviation from the 
specified rules, alerts are generated and the same are verified through Post Offices 
and Inspectors of the Department. In this regard, DOP also stated that the FRMU 
analyses the data of FINACLE Database, studies the frauds/modus operandi and 
develops the scenarios wherever possible in regard to the risk areas in the operation 
of Small Savings Schemes. Based on the scenarios, alerts are generated by FRMU 
and sent to Divisional Office (DO) for verification. DO in turn sends the alerts to Head 
Post Offices for verification. Alerts are thoroughly verified by Head Post Offices and 
reported back to DO for further action. The Circle Office monitors the FRMU alerts 
attended by DOs/HOs. FRMU alerts are generated during the following scenarios: 
Revival of Silent A/c pre-mature closure of RD/TD/MIS/PPF/SCSS accounts, 
NSC/KVP discharged at offices other than the registration office, agent transactions 
like closure of discontinued RD accounts/RD loans/premature closure of  RD 
accounts/Idle RD accounts, closure of all discontinued schemes, operation in idle 
account, online transactions like E-Banking/M-Banking and channel transactions, 
etc. While noting the growing complexities of the frauds, the Committee recommend 
that FRMU should also be aptly augmented  by strong internal controls and regular 
updating/strengthening. To ascertain and maintain the effectiveness of the FRMU, 
the Committee also recommend that a review of the functioning of Unit should be 
conducted at periodic intervals. Concrete steps should also be taken to reduce the 
average time taken for processing and redressal of the fraud cases under the new 
dispensation.” 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
33.  Action taken by Ministry 
 
 “FRMU prepares scenarios for alert generation. Scenarios are prepared based on 
the inputs/ recommendations in Circle Level Investigation (CLI) reports received from 
investigation/vigilance division. 
The present FRMU interface has been developed in-house and is maintained 
by the Department's Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology (CEPT). As per the 
Governance Framework of the IT 2.0 project under implementation in the 
Department of Posts, the Enterprise Fraud Risk Management (EFRM) solution for 
Financial Services is to be managed by the India Post Payments Bank (IPPB). A 
new EFRM Solution for Banking in proposed under IT 2.0. New scenarios required to 
be incorporated and fraud tracking solution as recommended in the report are being 
taken up with IPPB for inclusion in the proposed solution in IT 2.0”. 
34. Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may apprise the PAC about details of the Enterprise Fraud Risk 
Management (EFRM) solution proposed to be implemented under IT 2.0 project. 
35. Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
“Enterprise Fraud Risk Management (EFRM) solution for banking and 
insurance operations is being developed and implemented under lT 2.0 project 
through IPPB. 
IPPB has already identified the new scenarios required to be incorporated and 
the fraud tracking solutions for EFRM under lT 2.0 project. The Scope of work is 
being examined for finalization in the Department”. 
Comments of the Committee 
36. The Committee had recommended for augmentation of Fraud Risk 
Management Unit (FRMU) by strong internal controls and regular 
updating/strengthening and to ascertain and maintain the effectiveness of the 
FRMU.  The Committee had also recommended that a review of the functioning 
of Unit should be conducted at period intervals along with the concrete steps 

 
 
17 
 
to reduce the average time taken process and redressal of the fraud cases 
under the new dispensation.  The Ministry in their final Action Taken reply 
have stated that Enterprise Fraud Risk Management (EFRM) solution for 
banking and insurance operation is being developed and implemented under 
IT 2.0 project through IPPB and has already identified the new scenarios 
required to be incorporated and the fraud tracking solutions are being taken 
up. It further states that the scope of work is being examined for finalization in 
the department. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the latest 
status in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No.9  
Recovery in the cases of fraud 
37. The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that out of the frauds/misappropriation of public 
money amounting to ₹ 95.62 crore, DoP has only been able to recover ₹ 14.39 crore 
(inclusive penalty/interest of ₹ 40.85 lakh) and an amount of ₹ 81.64 crore remains to 
be recovered. Taking exception to the sluggish pace of recoveries from the 
fraudsters, the Committee may be apprised of the reasons for the same and the 
measures being taken to recover the dues with promptitude.”       
 
38. Action taken by Ministry 
 
Instructions for ensuring prompt recovery from the offenders including initiation of 
action under Revenue Recovery Act for freezing movable and immovable properties 
stand issued to the Circles. Reminders in this regard were issued on 02.05.2024. 
The updated recovery figure in these cases is ₹ 20,94,71,395, as per recent 
reports received from the circles. The Committee would be apprised regarding the 
specific reasons for slow pace of recovery/non-recovery in these cases on receipt of 
details reports from the Circles. 
 
 

 
 
18 
 
39. Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Ministry may submit final compliance in respect of recovery of misappropriated 
money and the reasons for sluggish pace of recovery to the PAC. 
40. Ministry’s Final Reply 
 
The updated recovery figure in the case is ₹21,05,27,009/-, as per the recent reports 
from the Circles. 
The reasons for slow pace of recoveries are as under:- 
i. Stay in interim stay orders from the courts on the orders of 
penalties/punishments imposed on the offenders. 
ii. The slow pace of addition by the District Revenue Authorities in 
invoking Revenue Recovery Act against the properties identified in the name 
of main offenders and their family members are reasons for non-recovery. 
Comments of the Committee 
41. The Committee had taken exception to the sluggish pace of recoveries 
from the fraudsters and had desired to be apprised of the reasons thereof 
along with the measures taken to recover the dues promptly.  The Ministry, in 
their ATN have stated that stay in interim stay orders from the courts on the 
orders of penalties/punishments imposed on the offenders and the slow pace 
of action by the District Revenue Authorities in invoking Revenue Recovery 
Act against the properties identified in the name of main offenders and their 
family members are the reasons for non-recovery. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry take adequate steps to vacate the 
stay orders in the courts and expedite the pace of action by the District-
Revenue Authorities against the offenders and the latest status of recovery of 
the remaining amount be communicated to the Committee. 
                      *******************  

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee observe that Post Office Saving Bank Manuals issued by Department of Posts (DoP) prescribes the internal checks and clearly defines the responsibilities for prevention of frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank Operations for various levels of staff in Sub Post Offices, S.O. Group and Saving Bank Control Organization in Head Post Offices, Divisional, Regional and Circle Offices. However, Audit scrutiny revealed misappropriation of public money amounting to ₹95.62 crore in Post Offices spread over fourteen Postal Circles, due to failure of the Head Post Offices in implementing internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes. The DOP added that most of the cases pointed out by Audit relate to manual manipulation or alteration of the Sanchay Post database by official/s with malafide intent. The Committee are shocked to note that despite having prescribed internal checks/inspections at different levels/offices such as Daily Audit by SBCO Branch; Checking in Accounts Branch; Checking in Postal Accounts Offices; Internal Check Inspection / Internal Audit; Verification of withdrawals of ₹10,000/- and  above at the counters of BOs; Quarterly visit to Branch Post Offices and Visits by various authorities including CPMGs etc. instances of misappropriation of money were observed. As regards the measures taken for preventing frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank Operations at various levels, the Department explained that various technological steps have been taken to make the system more secure and avoid any chances of fraud. Besides, rollout of Core Banking Solution (CBS) in all post offices, Finacle, a highly secure system with proven security features across the banking system has been introduced. Also, various other initiatives have reportedly been taken that include introduction of e-Passbook; CBS-CSI GL integration, which enables automatic accounting of all transaction carried out in Finacle in CSI; Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU); Online PAN Validation; e-KYC; Aadhaar authenticated payment etc. The Committee, while noting the steps being taken by the Department to secure customer access, desire that check/inspection done by each of the levels/offices may be tracked through an integrated online portal, so that deviations if any are brought to the notice of higher ups at an early stage and timely action taken thereon to prevent frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank Operations. The Committee also recommend stringent punitive action against the officials who failed to ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes. 

 
 
20 
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Investigation into loss and fraud cases is conducted by field units supervised 
by the investigation Division of Postal Directorate and any gaps/systematic 
loopholes/lacunae in rules/procedure noticed are immediately brought to the notice 
of the concerned Division(s) for timely plugging of the loop holes to prevent the 
frauds. 
Internal consultation is underway for effective implementation of the 
recommendation of the committee for development of an integrated online portal for 
tracking of the checks/inspections. The committee would be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.  
Postal Circles identify the officials who fail to ensure implementation of the 
internal checks codified for prevention of fraudulent Activities in operation of Post 
Office Savings Bank (POSB) Schemes in the Circle Level Investigation (CLI) and 
stringent punitive action is taken as per rules. In case any deviation is noticed in the 
periodic review of any case, specific directions are issued to the Circles by the Postal 
Directorate for action and report. 
All the concerned 14 Postal Circles have been addressed on 02.05.2024 for 
submitting compiled details of punitive action taken against the officials who failed to 
ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent 
Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes in all the cases 
reviewed in the Audit. Final compliance on this para will be submitted based on 
reports from the Circles. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate to the PAC regarding progress made in respect of 
development of integrated online portal. 
Further, the Ministry may furnish a report on punitive action taken against 
officials by Circles, to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
   Approval for the creation of the integrated online portal for monitoring of Loss 
and Fraud cases has already been accorded. The Functional Requirement 
Specifications (FRS) is being examined and the portal is under development. ln 
respect of the 60 fraud cases observed by PAC across 14 Circles, details of punitive 
action taken against the officials are as follows:- 
i. Total number of offenders including prime offender (108), co-offenders (46) 
and subsidiary offenders (1018) identified for taking disciplinary aclion-1172 
ii. Number of offenders against whom disciplinary Action has been completed -
718 

 
 
21 
 
iii. Number of offenders against whom disciplinary Action has been/is being 
initiated-267 
iv. Number of offenders (including prime, co and sub offenders) against whom 
disciplinary action could not be taken due to their death and retirement - 187 
As such, a total of 985 offenders who had committed fraud and sub offenders 
who had failed to ensure implementation of the internal checks codified for 
preventing of fraudulent activities in operation of POSB schemes, in the 60 cases 
have been punished severely. 
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
  Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 10 of Chapter I 
Observations/Recommendations No. 2 
    As regards applicability of the RBI Guidelines with respect to the Post Office 
Saving Bank (POSB) operations, the Committee have been apprised that the 
traditional Post Office Savings Bank was under the purview of Ministry of Finance 
and has been functioning as an agency. However, POSB is now covered under the 
Payment and settlement Systems Act, 2007 and hence RBI guidelines are required 
to be followed in case of all digital modes of transactions. Besides, while defining 
Operating Procedure for POSB operations, RBI guidelines are also taken into 
consideration wherever feasible. The Department also stated that technology 
management of POSB Operations has been handed over to India Post Payment 
Bank (IPPB) from August 2022, which is regulated by the RBI. The Committee, while 
noting the large volume of transactions involved in the POSB desire that DOP should 
also enter into an MOU with RBI for undertaking a review of the Internal 
controls/Internal checks in place at regular intervals to arrest fraudulent activities in 
operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes and ensure safety of the 
hard-earned money of customers and ensure that they do not become vulnerable to 
fraudulent activities.  
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Recommendation of the committee for the Department to enter into an MOU 
with RBI, for undertaking a review of the internal controls/internal checks in place to 
arrest fraudulent activities in operation of Post Office Savings Bank Schemes, has 
been sent to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance for necessary 
guidance/inputs in the matter. The Committee would be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate the PAC on status regarding the review by RBI on the 
efficiency of internal controls in Post Office Savings Bank Schemes and subsequent 
course of action to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
The recommendation of the Committee for the Department to enter into MoU 
with RBI is being examined at the end of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance. The matter is being pursued with DEA. 
 
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
For Comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I 
 
Observations/Recommendations No. 3 
With respect to the poor monitoring mechanism in the Department Of Posts, 
the committee in their 89th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Non-Compliance 
by Department of Posts” and 15th Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations and Recommendations contained in the 89th Report had inter alia 
highlighted monitoring issues viz. ‘pension disbursement’ and retention of excess 
cash in Post Offices’ and recommended evolving and implementing a more stringent 
system of monitoring and stricter norms of compliance to the Departments own code 
of financial conduct. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the updated 
account of details of action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Pension Disbursement w.r.t EPFO and Coal Mines 
1.      The Disbursement of EPFO Pension was being done through Post Offices. At 
the level of PAO after due consolidation of the actual number of transactions and the 
schedules received from Post Offices, the debit/credits to the EPFO/CMPF 
organizations were passed through the settlement accounts for claiming 
reimbursement from the respective Departments. The Major recoverable amount as 
reflected in the PAC Paras pertains to Bihar from the period 2002 to 2013 and 
Jharkhand Circles for the period 2002 to 2014. As on 31.12.2017 the outstanding 
amount of ₹ 13.49 crores from EPFO and 3.079 crores from CMPF was pending for 
realization. 
2.      Consequent to the Audit objections raised on the matter and the ibid PAC 
Para, after vigorous pursuance by the Circles, an amount of ₹ 8.10 crores from 

 
 
23 
 
EPFO and ₹ 2.71 crores from CMPF was recovered. As on date the outstanding 
balances against these organizations is ₹ 5.07 crores against EPFO and ₹ 35 lakhs 
against CMPF. 
3.       It has come to light that the order dated 14.07.2010 for stoppage of pension 
disbursement through Post Offices was not marked correctly by the EPFO Zonal 
Office Muzaffarpur, Bihar. It was marked to the Postmaster General, Postal and 
Accounts Patna (Bihar). There is no such Post and hence, the letter did not reach 
either the Circle office or PAO. As a result of displacement of the communications 
the EPFO pension continued to be disbursed through Post Offices upto 2014. 
4.       Regular correspondences and reminders were issued from the Circle level, 
and the highest levels at DoP Headquarters to Patna & Ranchi EPFO and CMPF 
Zonal Offices as well as to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 
Commissioner Coal Mines Provident Fund Head-Quarters New Delhi, for the 
reimbursement of Pension and the commission amount disbursed by Post Offices. 
5.         In the meantime, due to the New Application Software introduced by EPFO In 
2011, some of the vouchers already sent by the Circle PAOs were not traceable at 
their end. All efforts are being made to locate supporting documents and proof of 
payments for the reimbursement of the Ibid amount. 
6.        Frequent meetings with the EPFO/CMPF authority at Patna and Ranchi are 
being held. Both the PAOs have been asked to form a Committee including the 
officials/officers of EPFO/CMPF to sort out the issue and remit the remaining 
payment to Department of Posts at the earliest. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate the final status of outstanding dues and recovery made 
and balance pending from EPFO/CMPF to PAC 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
1.  As intimated by the Circles concerned, the total outstanding balances due for 
reimbursement, as on date, are ₹4.99 crores & ₹ 33.49 lakhs from EPFO and CMPF 
respectively. [Two cheques amounting to ₹32,97,670/- dated 14.03.2023 and 
₹6,76,711/- dated 10.08.2023 were received from EPFO Jamshedpur and encashed 
by PAO Ranchi but were not taken into account as break up details of amount 
(pension and commission) was not received from EPFO]. 
2.  Regular meetings with the EPFO/CMPF authorities at Patna and Ranchi are 
being held to sort out the issue of reimbursement of the outstanding dues. 
3.   Amendment of the operating procedure for disbursement of EPFO pension 
through Post Offices is being re-examined by the Department of Posts. Further, the 

 
 
24 
 
concerned Circles have also been asked for updating the exact dues outstanding 
from EPFO as on date.  
4.  As per the amendments in the operating procedure, the payment for 
disbursement of the pension is to be made in advance by the EPFO through cheque 
and this has to be credited into the Government Account by the Head Postmaster. 
The Head Post Offices are required to claim service charge at the rate of 2.5% of the 
undisbursed amount of pension as certified in the summary sheet. 
Retention of excess cash in Post Offices 
A consolidated report is available through the Core System Integrator (CSI) to 
the Postal Divisional Heads, pan India, to monitor the opening and closing cash 
balances of all the Post Offices with reference to their maximum & minimum cash 
balances.  Further, the alert mechanism has also been deployed across the country. 
Final Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit has no further comments. 
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
 Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 21 of Chapter I 
 
Observations/Recommendations No. 4 
The Committee observe that to safeguard the public money and enable better 
customer experience. DoP decided to computerize the banking operations through 
one central platform under IT Modernisation Project 2012. Accordingly, DoP started 
implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS) from December 2013 to enable 
customers to operate their accounts to achieve "Anywhere, Anytime Banking by 
replacing the existing banking platform of “Sanchay Post" software in Post Offices. 
Since data from Sanchay Post software, was migrated to Finacle software as live 
accounts, and to ensure that such data was not tampered and manipulated, the 
Department stated that detailed instructions were issued from the technical team to 
all the Circles/Post Offices in regard to preparation of Go- Live in the form of ‘Check 
list for Go-Live’. DoP however, indicated that incorrect migration of closed accounts 
into Finacle might have occurred due to various reasons including carelessness by 
the operating staff at field level. Further, after such errors came to notice, corrective 
action is being taken including identification of such accounts and marking such 
identified accounts for closure. To obviate fraud in wrongly migrated accounts, all 
accounts that matured, but were not seen as closed after 3 years have been marked 
'FREEZE’. The closure of such frozen accounts is allowed only through Head Post 
Offices and with the approval of two supervisors after obtaining proper KYC and 
other necessary documents. No manipulation/ data entry in the existing data base is 

 
 
25 
 
allowed in Finacle which is a standard banking application used by various banks 
across the banking sector. Observing that the Department is itself not confident of 
accuracy of data migrated from Sanchay Post to Finacle and the identification 
process of tampered and manipulated accounts is still underway, the Committee 
cannot help expressing apprehension over ensuring hassle free delivery of services 
till the last mile. The Committee desire that the process of verification of Sanchay 
data be completed in a time bound manner so that the confidence of both urban and 
rural clientele in the country's oldest banking system is ensured and public money 
safeguarded. The Committee while noting that e-KYC is likely to be implemented 
shortly in POSB which will facilitate biometric authentication of customers, 
strengthening the existing system further, desire that the same be completed at the 
earliest and the Committee be apprised thereof. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
The POSB data migration activity was carried out in a phased manner 
from2013-14 to 2022-23 due to the vast scale of operations and number of post 
offices. 
This involved data entry from manual records and migration of the existing 
Sanchay Post software database to the Core Banking Software (CBS) in Finacle. 
Discrepancy was noticed between the legacy Sanchay Post data and Finacle data 
mainly due to legacy issues and inaccuracies in the Sanchay Post and manual data. 
Efforts to reconcile the data began in 2018. In 2022, a time-bound strategy outlining 
the activities involved was formulated. A comprehensive data re-verification exercise 
was undertaken, which included identification of discrepancies in classification of 
accounts and the status of accounts (live/closed/transferred out) for accounts 
matured before migration and seen as live in Finacle etc. The progress made in this 
regard is substantial and the task is being completed in a time bound manner, as 
directed by the Committee. 
Development of the e-KYC module for POSB is underway. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may furnish data and documents that support the substantial progress 
made in reconciliation exercise to the PAC. 
Also, progress made in respect of e-KYC module for POSB may be intimated to 
the PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
The data re-verification exercise is presently being undertaken. POSB data 
discrepancies are being identified through ground level record verification. The 
progress made in this regard is being monitored closely. All efforts are being made to 
complete this entire discrepancy identification process in a time bound manner. 

 
 
26 
 
Aadhaar based eKYC service is expected to be rolled out in Post offices shortly. 
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
 Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 26 of Chapter I 
 
Observations/Recommendations No. 5 
The Committee note that the S.O. Branch as well as SBCO in Head Post 
Offices failed to carry out the prescribed checks relating to the POSB Operations. 
This coupled with delays in timely validation of data migrated from Sanchay Post to 
CBS led to misappropriation of public money of at least ₹ 95.62 crore in various Post 
Offices of 14 Circles, as test checked by Audit. Further in some cases, inspecting 
authorities of the Department also failed to detect the fraud/misappropriations even 
after a lapse of more than five years and frauds came into light only after customer 
complaints. In response, the Department contended that the frauds committed by 
using the stated modus operandi, are not technology driven and could not be 
detected for long due to failure in supervision on the part of Account Offices or/and 
SBCO. This has happened despite appropriate control mechanism being already 
available. Regarding the product/scheme wise fraud details and the extent of public 
money lost due to this, the Department informed that a fraud case may involve 
misappropriation spread across various products/schemes viz SB, RD, TD, 
PLI/RPLI, fraud associated with remittances etc. and their specific details are not 
maintained at present. The Department of Posts however, maintains consolidated 
data of live cases of loss and fraud, inclusive of cases that are more than 15 years 
old. Similarly, the details of amount recovered is maintained which includes recovery 
in all types of live loss and fraud cases. As regards the action taken against the 
fraudsters, the DOP stated that besides the recoveries being made, disciplinary 
action is taken against the primary/main identified offenders and subsidiary offenders 
with penalties like dismissal, compulsory retirement, withholding of increment, 
reduction to lower stages etc. imposed under the CCS (CCA) Rules 1965, and 
measures such as recovery, reduction/withholding of pensionary benefits taken with 
respect to pensioners under CCS (Pension) Rules 2021 in the case of departmental 
officials and GDS (Conduct and Engagement) Rules 2020 as applicable with respect 
to Gramin Dak Sevaks. DOP also added that cases of imposition of penalties, there 
is indirect recovery as when an employee is dismissed from service, all his 
pensionary benefits are ceased thereby resulting in substantial saving to the 
Government. This indirect recovery to the Government exchequer is not exactly 
quantifiable The Committee desire the Department to take measures for maintaining 
details of frauds and amounts involved under specific products/scheme heads so as 
to enable pointed monitoring; and immediate introduction of preventive measures as 
and where required. The Committee also recommend that major reasons/modus 
operandi of frauds may be studied and besides plugging the loop holes, all branches 

 
 
27 
 
may be directed to introduce checks to avoid a repeat of similar frauds in their areas. 
Also, the general public may also be made aware of the modus operandi of the 
frauds to with a view to ensuring safety of their money. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Internal consultations underway for effective implementation of the 
recommendation of the committee by development of an integrated online portal to 
maintain the details of frauds and amounts involved product/scheme/head wise and 
enable focused monitoring and immediate introduction of preventive measures as 
and when required. 
Preliminary Reports of Frauds and Circle Level Investigation (CLI) Reports 
from Circles, report any new modus operandi and make suggestions for systemic 
improvements. The reports are examined in detail at the Postal Circle and 
Directorate level and action taken for recurrence of such frauds and rectification of 
any systemic lacunae. Postal Circles have been addressed on 02.05.2024 for 
informing the present status in this regard and suggestions for future improvement. 
The existing monitoring system has been strengthened with the setting up of 
dedicated Fraud Risk Monitoring Unit (FRMU). The FRMU monitors the fraud risk in 
POSB and generates systemic alerts on its web portal to check and avert frauds. 
The Postal Divisions verify the alerts and submit reports online. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate progress made in respect of development of integrated 
online portal for monitoring of frauds to the PAC. 
Also, report on action taken by the circles on the basis of FRMU alerts along 
with supporting documents may be furnished to the PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
Approval for the creation of the integrated online portal for monitoring of Loss and 
Fraud cases has already been accorded. The Functional Requirement Specifications 
(FRS) are being examined and the portal is under development.  
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
 Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 31 of Chapter I 
 
Observations/Recommendations No. 6 
 
The Committee, while expressing their dissatisfaction over the manner in 
which the Department has claimed that with indirect recovery effected by withholding 

 
 
28 
 
pensionary benefits of a dismissed employee, there is saving to the Government, 
would like to emphasize that concrete steps should be taken to plug the loopholes in 
the existing monitoring system. The Committee are also of the considered opinion 
that not only disciplinary action needs to be taken against the erring employees, but 
appropriate measures taken for recovering the misappropriated amounts urgently. 
Further the Committee desire to be apprised of cases where criminal proceedings 
have been initiated against the employees found involved in misappropriation of 
funds. 
 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Internal consultations underway for effective implementation of the 
recommendation of the committee by development of an integrated online portal to 
maintain the details of frauds and amounts involved product/scheme/head wise and 
enable focused monitoring and immediate introduction of preventive measures as 
and when required. 
Preliminary Reports of Frauds and Circle Level Investigation (CLI) Reports 
from Circles, report any new modus operandi and make suggestions for systemic 
improvements. The reports are examined in detail at the Postal Circle and 
Directorate level and action taken for recurrence of such frauds and rectification of 
any systemic lacunae. Postal Circles have been addressed on 02.05.2024 for 
informing the present status in this regard and suggestions for future improvement. 
The existing monitoring system has been strengthened with the setting up of 
dedicated Fraud Risk Monitoring Unit (FRMU). The FRMU monitors the fraud risk in 
POSB and generates systemic alerts on its web portal to check and avert frauds. 
The Postal Divisions verify the alerts and submit reports online. 
The updated status of the criminal proceedings initiated against the culprits in 
the cases reviewed by Audit is being collated based on reports called from the 
Circles and would be provided to the committee at the earliest. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate progress made in respect of development of integrated 
online portal to the PAC. 
Also, Ministry may furnish report on criminal proceedings initiated against the 
culprits by Circles to the PAC. 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
Approval for the creation of the integrated online portal for monitoring of Loss 
and Fraud cases has already been accorded. The Functional Requirement 
Specifications (FRS) are being examined and the portal is under development. 

 
 
29 
 
As per the latest status obtained from the Circles, FIR against the main 
offenders in 50 out of 60 fraud cases has already been lodged and the matter is 
either under further investigation or under trials before the courts. ln one case, the 
main offender expired before detection of fraud and in another case, the main 
offender committed suicide and thus FIR could not be lodged against the culprits in 
these two cases. However, in respect of remaining 8 cases, all concrete and tangible 
efforts are being made by the Circles/Regions/Divisions to get the FIR lodged in 
close liaison with the police authorities.  
              
Observations/Recommendations No. 7 
The Committee note that a separate Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU) 
has been established to scrutinize the alerts generated by the system about various 
transactions, on the basis of certain set of rules. In case of any deviation from the 
specified rules, alerts are generated and the same are verified through Post Offers 
and Inspectors of the Department. In this regard, DOP also stated that the FRMU 
analyses the data of FINACLE Database, studies the frauds/modus operandi and 
develops the scenarios wherever possible in regard to the risk areas in the operation 
of Small Savings Schemes. Based on the scenarios, alerts are generated by FRMU 
and sent to Divisional Office (DO) for verification. DO in turn sends the alerts to Head 
Post Offices for verification. Alerts are thoroughly verified by Head Post Offices and 
reported back to DO for further action. The Circle Office monitors the FRMU alerts 
attended by DOs/HOs. FRMU alerts are generated during the following scenarios: 
Revival of Silent A/c pre-mature closure of RD/TD/MIS/PPF/SCSS accounts, 
NSC/KVP discharged at offices other than the registration office, agent transactions 
like closure of discontinued RD accounts/RD loans/premature closure of  RD 
accounts/Idle RD accounts, closure of all discontinued schemes, operation in idle 
account, online transactions like E-Banking/M-Banking and channel transactions, 
etc. While noting the growing complexities of the frauds, the Committee recommend 
that FRMU should also be aptly augmented by strong internal controls and regular 
updating/strengthening. To ascertain and maintain the effectiveness of the FRMU, 
the Committee also recommend that a review of the functioning of Unit should be 
conducted at periodic intervals. Concrete steps should also be taken to reduce the 
average time taken for processing and redressal of the fraud cases under the new 
dispensation. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
FRMU prepares scenarios for alert generation. Scenarios are prepared based 
on the inputs/ recommendations in Circle Level Investigation (CLI) reports received 
from investigation/vigilance division. 
The present FRMU interface has been developed in-house and is maintained 
by the Department's Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology (CEPT). As per 

 
 
30 
 
theGovernance Framework of the IT 2.0 project under implementation in the 
Department of Posts, the Enterprise Fraud Risk Management (EFRM) solution for 
Financial Services is to be managed by the India Post Payments Bank (IPPB). A 
new EFRM Solution for Banking in proposed under IT 2.0. New scenarios required to 
be incorporated and fraud tracking solution as recommended in the report are being 
taken up with IPPB for inclusion in the proposed solution in IT 2.0. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may apprise the PAC about details of the Enterprise Fraud Risk 
Management (EFRM) solution proposed to be implemented under IT 2.0 project. 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
Enterprise Fraud Risk Management (EFRM) solution for banking and 
insurance operations is being developed and implemented under lT 2.0 project 
through IPPB. 
IPPB has already identified the new scenarios required to be incorporated and 
the fraud tracking solutions for EFRM under lT 2.0 project. The Scope of work is 
being examined 
for finalization in the Department. 
                  
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 36 of Chapter I 
Observations/Recommendations No. 8 
As regards the action being taken against the offenders fund involved in the 
misappropriation of public money, the Department appraised the Committee that out 
of 98 main offenders, 37 Co-offenders and 782 Subsidiary offenders, action was yet 
to be taken in case of 34 Main Offenders, 25 co-offenders and 342 Subsidiary 
offenders. The Committee note from Department’s response that out of a total of 917 
offenders whose involvement is of varying degrees, action was yet to be initiated in 
as many as 401 cases i.e., about 44 percent of cases. Considering these facts, the 
Committee are of the considered view that the approach of Department while dealing 
with the serious offences of misappropriation of public money has been 
lackadaisical. The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that based on 
the amount of misappropriation involved, loss and fraud cases are periodically 
reviewed at the Directorate and similar action is taken across field establishments. 
Further, necessary instructions for completion of pending aspects of the cases are 
issued on case-to-case basis. Status of action taken against offenders is also 
reviewed and Circles and Regional offices are instructed to take timely action as per 
CVC guidelines. The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken by the 

 
 
31 
 
Department to monitor and expedite these cases with immediate effect and complete 
the proceedings and book the culprits in a time bound manner. Further, on account 
of slow process of action being taken, the Committee would also lie to be appraised 
of the reasons for the delay in the manner. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
A proposal to create a special cell for this purpose in the Investigation Division 
of the Postal Directorate is under process. 
The concerned Circles have been addressed for review of the cases and 
intimating the reasons for slow progress. The Committee would be apprised about 
the progress based on reports from the Circles. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may intimate the progress made in respect of special cell proposed to 
be created at Postal Directorate to the PAC. 
Also, Ministry may apprise the PAC about the status of criminal proceedings in 
respect of the remaining 401 cases and the reasons for the slow progress in 
completion of proceedings against the fraudsters. 
 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
Approval for constitution of 'special cell' and resource/work allocation in this 
regard has been accorded. Two officials are being posted to this Special Cell in the 
initial stage and the Cell will commence its functioning soon. 
This para is related to status of disciplinary proceedings being conducted 
against the offenders by the Circles and not Criminal Proceedings. The status of 
departmental action against the offenders has been presented in reply to para 1 
above. 
Out of 60 cases taken across 14 Circles for audit, the total number of 
offenders is 1172 and disciplinary action has been completed against 718 of them. 
The disciplinary action is yet to complete against 267 offenders instead of 401 
reported at the time of actual audit. However, following are the reasons for slow 
progress in finalization or in initiation of disciplinary proceedings. 
Non completion of Past Work Verification in many cases due to complex 
modus operandi and large number of POSB accounts standing in the PO of fraud. 
Stay/interim stay orders against the recovery /punishment, obtained by the 
offenders from the competent court leading to disciplinary action becoming sub-
judice & remaining incomplete. 
 

 
 
32 
 
Observations/Recommendations No. 9 
The Committee observe that out of the frauds/misappropriation of public 
money amounting to ₹ 95.62 crore, DoP has only been able to recover ₹ 14.39 crore 
(inclusive penalty/interest of ₹ 40.85 lakh) and an amount of ₹ 81.64 crore remains to 
be recovered. Taking exception to the sluggish pace of recoveries from the 
fraudsters, the Committee may be apprised of the reasons for the same and the 
measures being taken to recover the dues with promptitude. 
Action Taken by Ministry 
Instructions for ensuring prompt recovery from the offenders including 
initiation of action under Revenue Recovery Act for freezing movable and immovable 
properties stand issued to the Circles. Reminders in this regard were issued on 
02.05.2024. 
The updated recovery figure in these cases is ₹ 20,94,71,395, as per recent 
reports received from the circles. The Committee would be apprised regarding the 
specific reasons for slow pace of recovery/non-recovery in these cases on receipt of 
details reports from the Circles. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Ministry may submit final compliance in respect of recovery of misappropriated 
money and the reasons for sluggish pace of recovery to the PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Final Comments 
The updated recovery figure in the case is ₹21,05,27,009/-, as per the recent 
reports from the Circles. 
The reasons for slow pace of recoveries are as under:- 
i Stay in interim stay orders from the courts on the orders of 
penalties/punishments imposed on the offenders.  
 
ii The slow pace of action by the District Revenue Authorities in invoking 
Revenue Recovery Act against the properties identified in the name of main 
offenders and their family members is another reason for non-recovery. 
 
Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts’ case No. 22-4/2024-PA 
(IA)/542-54/84th Report 
 Comments of the Committee, see Para No. 41 of Chapter I 
  

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     K C VENUGOPAL 
25 July, 2025                                                                                    Chairperson, 
03 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)          Public Accounts Committee 
 

 
 
36 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) HELD ON 25 JULY, 2025 
 
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, 25 July, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1515 
hrs in Committee Room No. 53, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey-Acting Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jai Prakash 
3. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
4. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
5. Dr. Amar Singh 
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
9. Dr. K. Laxman 
10. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
6. Dr. Faiz Ahmad   -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
2.  Ms. Gurveen Sidhu Director General 
3.  Ms. Ritu Dhillon Director General 
4.  Shri Deen Dayal Verma Principal Director of Audit (Navy) 
 

 
 
37 
 
 The Hon’ble Chairperson could not attend the Sitting.  As per Rule 258 (3), 
the Members present elected Dr. Nishikant Dubey as the Acting Chairperson. 
Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officials of the 
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the following four draft Reports were taken up for consideration:- 
 
i. Action Taken Report on the 84th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts”; 
ii. Action Taken Report on the 86th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Establishment and Operationalisation of Sagar Prahari Bal”; 
iii. Action Taken Report on the 89th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Indo-Nepal Border Road Project”; and 
iv. Action Taken Report on the 140th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Manpower and Logistics Management in Delhi Police”. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted all the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
Reports and present the same to the House. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

 
 
38 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 09 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 
 
Total: 09 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  
  
***************** 