 
  53  
 
IMPROPER EXEMPTION OF IGST ON IMPORT OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS 
  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 79th Report (17th 
Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
FIFTY- THIRD   REPORT  
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


PAC NO. 2487 
 
 
F I F T Y  T H I R D  R E P O R T  
 
 
 PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 79th Report (17th 
Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 04.08.2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 04.08.2026   
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
 August, 2026/ Sravana,1948 (Saka) 
    
  
IMPROPER EXEMPTION OF IGST ON IMPORT OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS 

CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                    (iii) 
COMMITTEE (2026-27) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................    (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................      1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I* Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) 
held on 30.07.2026.  
                 
II Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their Seventy-ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 * Not appended 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Smt. Malvika Mehta   -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Suspended under Rule 374 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22.07.2026. 
2 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP, Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 08.06.2026. 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee1  
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
6. Shri Jai Parkash  
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad  
8. Shri C M Ramesh  
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Dr. K Laxman  
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
21. Vacant 2 
22. Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 79th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
" Improper Exemption of IGST on import of Pharmaceutical Products” relating to 
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue. 
 
2. The Seventy-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18th December, 2023. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 
30th July, 2026. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventy-ninth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
NEW DELHI              K. C. Venugopal 
02 August, 2026              Chairperson, 
11 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

 
Chapter I 
Report 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government i.e. the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue on the 
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventy-ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Improper Exemption of IGST on 
Import of Pharmaceutical Products”. 
2. The Seventy-ninth Report which was presented to the Lok Sabha/ laid on 
the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2023 contained 04 
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the Observations 
/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Revenue and are broadly categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Para No. 1-4 
             Total : 04 
             Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No.: Nil 
     Total : NIL 
            Chapter: III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para No.: Nil  
     Total : Nil 
            Chapter : IV 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: Nil 
Total : Nil 
        Chapter: V 
 
3. The Committee’s examination of the aforesaid subject had revealed that 
two importers had claimed irregular IGST exemption on various drugs and 
pharmaceutical products imported from different countries.  

4. The Committee had recommended the following:- 
 a thorough check of the assessments made by other Commissionerates 
may be made with a view to ensuring that the instant notification and rates 
had been applied correctly by all of them. 
 TRU (Tax Research Unit)/ CBIC may ensure that all the notifications are 
invariably supplemented by an exemplar wherein the notifications are 
explained with the help of examples of different scenarios. The relevant 
court cases/ precedents and all related notifications may also be made 
searchable with keywords to enable easy access whenever required. 
Further, TRU may also develop an interface to enable quick resolution of 
the doubts/ queries of the assessing officers. 
 Ministry may place the matter before the GST Council for exempting 
imports of pharmaceutical products to those organizations that are 
carrying out serious research in scientific fields. Hospitals carrying out 
research on life saving medicines and treatment may also be considered 
for being extended the benefit of exemption. 
 A more transparent and forthcoming approach may be followed by the 
Ministry in furnishing updated and complete information.  
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Revenue in respect of all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in their Seventy-ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the 
relevant chapters of this Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by 
the Government on some of their Observations /Recommendations made in the original 
report which merit comments. 
6.      The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue 
(henceforth referred to as ‘the Ministry’) to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect 
of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I within three months of 
the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
7. The Committee in their original report no. 79 had recommended as under: - 
  
“The Committee while noting the explanation given by the Ministry are of the view 
that issuing frequent notifications and then clarifications thereon pertaining to 
certain imports made by Public funded research institutions is indicative of lack of 
clarity and coordination amongst the different wings of the same department. The 
Committee are surprised to note from the Ministry’s submission that all the work 
relating to rate of duties or exemptions in respect of both GST and Customs are 
handled only by the Tax Research Unit (TRU) in CBIC. The Committee are 
perplexed as to how, despite there being only one Unit handling all notifications, 
confusing scenarios continue to arise. The Committee desire that the TRU/ CBIC 
should ensure that all the notifications are invariably supplemented by an 
exemplar wherein the notifications are explained with the help of examples of 
different scenarios. The relevant court cases/ precedents and all related 

notifications may also be made searchable with keywords to enable easy access 
whenever required. Further, TRU may also develop an interface to enable quick 
resolution of the doubts/ queries of the assessing officers.” 
 
8.  The Ministry in their Action taken notes (ATNs) submitted the following 
reply:- 
“GST as well as Customs related rate notifications including exemption 
notifications are issued by TRU in CBIC. However, it may be pertinent to 
highlight that in respect of GST, all such rate/ exemption notifications are 
issued by TRU only to implement the recommendations of the GST 
Council. The GST Council, comprising of representatives from the Union 
and States Governments, is the decision-making authority in respect of all 
matters pertaining to GST. Further, the recommendations of the Hon'ble 
PAC are noted for strict compliance. 
Further, all the Acts, Rules, Notifications, Circulars, Instructions/ 
Guidelines, and Orders related to GST, Customs, Central Excise, and 
Service Tax issued by CBIC are available on the Tax Information Portal 
(https://taxinformation.cbic.gov.in/) of CBIC that are searchable using 
keywords.”  
 
9. Audit gave the following comments on the ATNs:- 
“The ATN does not address the observations of PAC i.e. despite being 
only one unit handling all notification confusing scenario continue to arise.” 
 
10. The Ministry submitted the following reply on the comments of Audit:- 
“All the work relating to rate of duties or exemptions in respect of both GST 
and Customs are handled by the Tax Research Unit (TRU) in CBIC. As 
such, all rate notifications including exemption notifications are issued by 
TRU. However, the GST Council, comprising of representatives from the 
Union and States Governments, is the decision-making authority in respect 
of all matters pertaining to GST. 
For clarity in the matter, the chronology in case of Imports and Domestic 
Interstate supplies of Scientific and technical instruments, apparatus, 
accessories and consumables, specified in notification no. 51/96-Customs, 
dated the 23.07.1996 is as below: 
 
Imports 
1. Prior to GST, under Notification no 51/96-Customs, the imports under 
question were exempt from additional duty leviable under Section 3 of 
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 [eg. countervailing duty (CVD) in lieu of 
Central Excise Duty and Special Additional Duty (SAD)]. 
2. Upon introduction of GST, on the Customs side, Notification no. 
43/2017-Customs dated 30th June 2017 was issued to substitute, 
among others, the reference to "additional duty leviable thereon under 
Section 3" with "Integrated Tax leviable thereon under sub- Section (7) 
of Section 3 of the said Tariff Act" in Notification no 51/96-Customs as 
also was done in many other Customs notifications. 

3. Thereafter vide Customs notification no 42/2022 dated 13th July, 2022, 
the exemption from IGST hitherto available on imports of specified 
equipment by Public Funded Research Institutions was withdrawn 
based on recommendations of the GST Council in its 47th meeting held 
in June 2022. 
 
Domestic interstate supplies: 
1. Vide Notification No.47/2017- Integrated Tax (Rate), the IGST rate on 
domestic interstate supplies was reduced from 28%/18% to 5% to 
provide some level playing field to domestic industry. 
2. Thereafter, Notification no 10/2018 - Integrated Tax (Rate), dated 25th 
January, 2018 was issued to rectify some anomalies in nomenclature 
which are in the nature of technical amendments. For instance, 
"Department of Scientific and Research" was substituted by 
"Department of Scientific and Industrial Research". 
3. The words "Public Funded Research Institution or a University or Indian 
Institute of Technology or Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore or 
Regional Engineering college" was substituted by" Public Funded 
Research Institution or a University or Indian Institute of Technology or 
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore or Regional Engineering College 
other than a Hospital". 
 
To ascertain whether any confusion arose due to the lack of clarity in the 
implementation of the notification in the field offices, assessment practices 
of the Commissionerates during the subject period were examined and it 
was found that the instant notification and rates were applied correctly by 
the field formations of CBIC. In this regard, a reference may be made to 
Ministry's Action Taken Report w.r.t Recommendation 01 of the subject 
Report submitted on 04.9.2024. 
 
 
11. Observing lack of clarity and coordination amongst the different 
wings of the same department, the Committee had recommended that TRU 
(Tax Research Unit)/ CBIC may ensure that all the notifications are 
invariably supplemented by an exemplar wherein the notifications are 
explained with the help of examples of different scenarios. The Committee 
had recommended that the relevant court cases/ precedents and all related 
notifications may also be made searchable with keywords to enable easy 
access whenever required. The Committee had further recommended that 
TRU may also develop an interface to enable quick resolution of the 
doubts/ queries of the assessing officers. The Committee note from the 
reply of the Ministry that in respect of GST, all rate/ exemption notifications 
are issued by TRU only to implement the recommendations of the GST 
Council-comprising of representatives from the Union and States 
Governments. The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that 
all the Acts, Rules, Notifications, Circulars, Instructions/ Guidelines, and 
Orders related to GST, Customs, Central Excise, and Service Tax issued by 

CBIC are available on the Tax Information Portal 
(https://taxinformation.cbic.gov.in/) of CBIC that are searchable using 
keywords.  
The Committee find, however, that the reply of the Ministry is silent on 
development of an interface by the TRU for quick resolution of the 
doubts/queries of assessing officers as well as supplementation by an 
exemplar. While acknowledging that the TRU issues notifications to 
implement the recommendations of the GST Council, the Committee feel 
that it is imperative to resolve any doubts arising on such notifications as 
in the instant case pointed out by Audit. The Committee therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation that an interface for resolution of queries be 
developed by TRU or CBIC and that notifications are supplemented by an 
exemplar necessarily.   
 
 
  

CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note from the Audit observation that two importers claimed 
irregular IGST exemption on various drugs and pharmaceutical products imported from 
different countries through (i) Commissionerate of Customs (ACC) Mumbai and (ii) 
Airport Special Cargo, Courier Cell, Mumbai between 15 November, 2017 to 31 March, 
2018 under Customs Notification no. 51/96. The Committee note that when the matter 
was pointed out by Audit in one case, the Deputy Commissioner of Customs, ACC, 
Mumbai accepted the observation and intimated that ‘Less Charge Cum Demand 
Notice’ had been issued to the importer. However, in the other case, the Dy. 
Commissioner- Mumbai III, while not accepting the audit observation, seconded the 
Importer’s reply and stated that IGST Act, 2017 vide Section 5, contains provisions for 
levy of IGST on the specified goods on inter-state supplies of goods and services and it 
is not an Act which provides for levy of IGST on imported goods. The Committee note 
from the submission made by the Ministry that on imports, the IGST is levied under the 
provisions of Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, and the Section also provides for 
exemption of Customs duty, and accordingly, the Government had amended the 
Customs Duty exemption notification for additional duties of Customs, that became 
effective from 1st July, 2017 when the GST was introduced. Thus, the goods imported 
by some of the research institutes remained exempted as per that notification. The rates 
for both IGST and CGST on the inter-State supply and within the domestic supply were 
actually revised from 18 per cent to 5 per cent from 15th November, 2017. However, the 
import duty which is levied under the Customs Act, treating this also as an inter-State 
supply of goods and services, was already exempt at nil. Later on also, it was clarified 
when this notification was issued on 25th January, 2018. In the explanation, it was 
provided that the notification which was earlier issued under the Customs Act will be 
applicable with effect from 15.11.2017 itself. Thus, apparently the intention for import 
purposes was always that there should be a differential of 5 per cent for the period, 
November to March, 2018 and that was maintained. The Committee while observing 
that Audit only carried out a test check desire that a thorough check of the assessments 
made by other Commissionerates may be made with a view to ensuring that the instant 
notification and rates have been applied correctly by all of them.  
[Recommendation No. 1 of 79th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action taken 
The assessment practices of the Commissionerates was examined. It was found 
that the Bills of Entry were cleared by allowing the IGST exemption benefit to the 
eligible importers as provided in Notification No. 51/96 dated 23.07.1996, subject to the 
fulfillment of the conditions specified. Thus it is to reiterate that the instant notification 
and rates have been applied correctly by the field offices of CBIC. 
 
 
 

Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit vide letter no. 240/RA-INDT/CUS/160-2023 dated 12.08.2024 has 1/96516/2024 
307/137/2023-PAC-Cus 1/96516/2024 vetted the para subject to final acceptance of 
PAC. 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee while noting the explanation given by the Ministry are of the view 
that issuing frequent notifications and then clarifications thereon pertaining to certain 
imports made by Public funded research institutions is indicative of lack of clarity and 
coordination amongst the different wings of the same department. The Committee are 
surprised to note from the Ministry’s submission that all the work relating to rate of 
duties or exemptions in respect of both GST and Customs are handled only by the Tax 
Research Unit (TRU) in CBIC. The Committee are perplexed as to how, despite there 
being only one Unit handling all notifications, confusing scenarios continue to arise. The 
Committee desire that the TRU/ CBIC should ensure that all the notifications are 
invariably supplemented by an exemplar wherein the notifications are explained with the 
help of examples of different scenarios. The relevant court cases/ precedents and all 
related notifications may also be made searchable with keywords to enable easy access 
whenever required. Further, TRU may also develop an interface to enable quick 
resolution of the doubts/ queries of the assessing officers. 
[Recommendation No. 2 of 79th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action taken 
“GST as well as Customs related rate notifications including exemption 
notifications are issued by TRU in CBIC. However, it may be pertinent to highlight 
that in respect of GST, all such rate/ exemption notifications are issued by TRU 
only to implement the recommendations of the GST Council. The GST Council, 
comprising of representatives from the Union and States Governments, is the 
decision-making authority in respect of all matters pertaining to GST. Further, the 
recommendations of the Hon'ble PAC are noted for strict compliance. 
 
Further, all the Acts, Rules, Notifications, Circulars, Instructions/ Guidelines, and 
Orders related to GST, Customs, Central Excise, and Service Tax issued by 
CBIC are available on the Tax Information Portal 
(https://taxinformation.cbic.gov.in/) of CBIC that are searchable using keywords.”  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
“The ATN does not address the observations of PAC i.e. despite being only one 
unit handling all notification confusing scenario continue to arise.” 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
“All the work relating to rate of duties or exemptions in respect of both GST and 
Customs are handled by the Tax Research Unit (TRU) in CBIC. As such, all rate 
notifications including exemption notifications are issued by TRU. However, the 
GST Council, comprising of representatives from the Union and States 
Governments, is the decision-making authority in respect of all matters pertaining 
to GST. 

For clarity in the matter, the chronology in case of Imports and Domestic 
Interstate supplies of Scientific and technical instruments, apparatus, accessories 
and consumables, specified in notification no. 51/96-Customs, dated the 
23.07.1996 is as below: 
 
Imports 
1. Prior to GST, under Notification no 51/96-Customs, the imports under 
question were exempt from additional duty leviable under Section 3 of the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 [eg. countervailing duty (CVD) in lieu of Central 
Excise Duty and Special Additional Duty (SAD)]. 
2. Upon introduction of GST, on the Customs side, Notification no. 43/2017-
Customs dated 30th June 2017 was issued to substitute, among others, the 
reference to "additional duty leviable thereon under Section 3" with 
"Integrated Tax leviable thereon under sub- Section (7) of Section 3 of the 
said Tariff Act" in Notification no 51/96-Customs as also was done in many 
other Customs notifications. 
3. Thereafter vide Customs notification no 42/2022 dated 13th July, 2022, the 
exemption from IGST hitherto available on imports of specified equipment by 
Public Funded Research Institutions was withdrawn based on 
recommendations of the GST Council in its 47th meeting held in June 2022. 
 
Domestic interstate supplies: 
1. Vide Notification No.47/2017- Integrated Tax (Rate), the IGST rate on 
domestic interstate supplies was reduced from 28%/18% to 5% to provide 
some level playing field to domestic industry. 
2. Thereafter, Notification no 10/2018 - Integrated Tax (Rate), dated 25th 
January, 2018 was issued to rectify some anomalies in nomenclature which 
are in the nature of technical amendments. For instance, "Department of 
Scientific and Research" was substituted by "Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research". 
3. The words "Public Funded Research Institution or a University or Indian 
Institute of Technology or Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore or Regional 
Engineering college" was substituted by" Public Funded Research Institution 
or a University or Indian Institute of Technology or Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore or Regional Engineering College other than a Hospital". 
 
To ascertain whether any confusion arose due to the lack of clarity in the 
implementation of the notification in the field offices, assessment practices of the 
Commissionerates during the subject period were examined and it was found 
that the instant notification and rates were applied correctly by the field 
formations of CBIC. In this regard, a reference may be made to Ministry's Action 
Taken Report w.r.t Recommendation 01 of the subject Report submitted on 
04.9.2024. 
 
Further Comments of Audit 
 
Audit vide letter No. 84/ RA-INDT/CUS/160-2023 dated 28.03.2025 has vetted 
the para subject to final acceptance by PAC. 
[Please see comments of the Committee in Chapter- I ] 

 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that the exemption that was available vide notification  
51/96 on research equipment imported by public funded research institutions or a 
university or an Indian Institute of Technology or Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 
or Regional Engineering College, Departments and laboratories of Central or State 
Government, Regional Cancer Centre other than a hospital has now been withdrawn 
vide Customs notification no. 42/2022 dated 13th July, 2022. The Committee are of the 
view that such an exemption may be conducive for organizations carrying out research 
and development in various scientific fields including space, technology and health. 
Providing incentives to organizations such as Cancer Institutes would greatly aid in 
developing medicines to treat serious and life threatening ailments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may place the matter before the GST Council for 
exempting imports of pharmaceutical products to those organizations that are carrying 
out serious research in scientific fields. The Committee are also of the view that 
hospitals carrying out research on life saving medicines and treatment may also be 
considered for being extended the benefit of exemption. 
[Recommendation No. 3 of 79th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action taken 
The recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on 
'Improper exemption of Pharmaceutical products' regarding exemption for imports of 
pharmaceutical products to those organizations that are carrying out serious research in 
science fields are noted for compliance. The feasibility of implementing the same shall 
be examined by the department. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
PAC would like to see further action in this regard. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
In compliance of the recommendation of the Hon'ble PAC, the issue of granting 
exemption to research equipment for public-funded research institutions/IITs etc, was 
placed before the GST Council in its 53rd Meeting held on 22nd June, 2024. The 
Fitment Committee of the Council recommended no change as it would be detrimental 
to domestic manufacturers of such goods and also entail end use based exemption. 
The Council approved the recommendation of the Fitment Committee to maintain status 
quo.  
 
Further Comments of Audit 
 
Audit vide letter No. 86/ RA-INDT/CU5/160-2023 dated 28.03.2025 has vetted 
the para subject to final acceptance by PAC. 
 
 
 

Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee observe that the Ministry have not made any mention of 
Notification No. 42/2022 issued in July 2022 on revoking of the exemptions in their 
background note. The Committee note from the response of the Ministry in this regard 
that the Background Note was submitted on 21.06.2022, while the notification No. 
42/2022-Customs was issued on 13.07.2022. The Committee, however, are constrained 
to note that the Ministry neither revised its Background note nor submitted any updated 
information to them in this regard even after being asked for the same prior to taking 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry. The Committee take serious exception 
to the attitude of the Ministry in furnishing updated and complete information and desire 
that a more transparent and forthcoming approach may be followed henceforth. 
[Recommendation No. 4 of 79th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action taken 
The Audit observation pertained to a particular period only. Accordingly, 
information pertaining to that period was provided in the Background Note. The 
notification No. 42/2022-Customs issued subsequently on 13.07.2022 did not have any 
bearing on the observation of Audit with respect to that particular period (15.11.2017 to 
25.01.2018) as it was prospective in effect. However, Ministry volunteered the said 
information during the oral evidence in order to present a complete picture before the 
Hon'ble PAC. Further, the observations of PAC are noted for future compliances. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
The stated Background note referred to in the PAC recommendation and 
Ministry's response was not shared with Audit. Previously, background notes for all 
ATRs were being shared with the Audit. 
Further, PAC would like to know the reasons for non-updation of background 
notes dated 21.06.2022 before the sitting of Subcommittee on 03.04.2023 and 
mentioning of the fact of revoking of notification no. 42/2022 in the revised background 
note. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
The Audit observation pertained to a particular period only (15.11.2017 to 
25.01.2018). Accordingly, information pertaining to that period was provided in the 
Background Note. The notification No. 42/2022- Customs issued subsequently on 
13.07.2022 did not have any bearing on the observation of Audit. 
 
Further Comments of Audit 
 
Audit vide letter No. 85/ RA-INDT/CU5/160-2023 dated 28.03.2025 has vetted 
the para subject to final acceptance by PAC. 
  

CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
  

 CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI              K. C. Venugopal 
02 August, 2026              Chairperson, 
11 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide para 5 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations - 04 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.1-4  
 
- Total: 04 
Percentage – 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
  
-Nil- 
 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage - 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
-Nil- 
                        
 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage– 0% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies: 
-Nil- 
 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage –0% 
 
 