 
 
      49  
 
 
LOSS OF RS. 62.10 CRORE ON REPLACEMENT 
OF DEFECTIVE AMMUNITION TO ARMY BY 
ORDNANCE FACTORY, BADMAL 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  


 
 
PAC NO. 2469   
 
 
F O R T Y - N I N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2026-27) 
 
 
(EIG HTEENT H LO K SAB HA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  23.07.2026 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   22.07.2026 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July, 2026 / Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
  
 
LOSS OF RS. 62.10 CRORE ON 
REPLACEMENT OF DEFECTIVE 
AMMUNITION TO ARMY BY ORDNANCE 
FACTORY, BADMAL 
 

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2026-27)                             (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)                             (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – II (DEFENCE) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2025-26)                                              (iv) 
INTRODUCTION                  (v) 
 
                                                                      REPORT 
                                                                       PART- I 
I. Introductory                                                                                                                              1 
II. Audit Findings                                                                                                                         1 
III. Quality Assurance and Inspection Mechanism for the Ammunition                               3 
IV. Guidelines or Policy on Defective Ammunition                                                                  6 
V. Ordnance Factory, Badmal and DGQA                                                                               8 
 
                                                                           PART- II 
                                                 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS               9-13 
 
                                                                         APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the First Sitting of the Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts (2025-26) 
held on 03.11.2025*                                                                                                                         
II. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts (2025-
26) held on 07.01.2026*                                                                                                                    
III. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts (2025-26) 
held on 22.04.2026*                    
IV. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) held on 04.06.2026*            
         
*Minutes not appended. 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2026-27) 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
1.  Smt. Mamta Kemwal                 - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Archna Pathania                - Director 
3.  Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma       - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Pegu - Deputy Secretary 
    
 
 Consequent upon resignation of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP from Rajya Sabha with effect from 
08.06.2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri Jai Parkash 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Dr. C M Ramesh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Dr. K Laxman 
18. Shri Praful Patel 
19. Vacant 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21.    Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
22. Vacant 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2025-26) 
 
  
 
 Consequent upon retirement of Shri Tiruchi Siva, MP, RS w.e.f.2nd April, 2026 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3.    Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17.    Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Vacant 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-II (DEFENCE) OF 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
i. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi   - Convener 
ii. Dr. C.M. Ramesh     - Alternate Convener 
iii. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  - Member  
iv. Shri Tejasvi Surya    - Member  
v. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy - Member  
vi. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad   - Member  
vii. Shri T.R. Baalu    - Member  
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2026-27) having been authorized by 
the Committee, do present this Forty-ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Loss of Rs. 
62.10 crore on replacement of defective ammunition to Army by Ordnance Factory, Badmal” 
based on Para 3.5 of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) Report No. 15 of 2019 
relating to the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production). 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 15 of 2019 was laid on the Table of the House on 06.12.2019. 
3.  The Sub-Committee - II on “Defence” was constituted by the Public Accounts 
Committee (2025-26) for detailed examination of the subjects related to Ministry of Defence. 
The Sub-Committee worked under the convenorship of Smt. Aparajita Sarangi, Member of 
PAC and Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha. Public Accounts Committee (2025-2026) 
selected the aforesaid subject and allocated the same to Sub-Committee – II (Defence) for 
examination and Report.  
4.  The Sub-Committee- II (Defence) of Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) took 
briefing by Audit on 03.11.2025. Thereafter, Sub-Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Defence Production (Ministry of Defence) on the 
aforementioned subject on 07.01. 2026. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the 
Draft Report at their sitting held on 22.04.2026. Subsequently, the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2026-2027) during their sitting held on 
04.06.2026. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the Report. 
6.      The Committee thank Sub-Committee-II (Defence) of the predecessor Committee (2025-
26) for taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject 
7.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence (Department of Defence Production) for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Sub-Committee in connection with examination of 
the subject. 
8.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
NEW DELHI;                             K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                                    Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
The Public Accounts Committee decided to undertake detailed examination of 
Para no. 3.5 of Comptroller and Auditor General Report No. 15 of 2019 relating to the 
Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production). The paragraph examines 
the subject “Loss of Rs. 62.10 crore on replacement of defective ammunition to Army 
by Ordnance Factory, Badmal”. 
2. In Para 3.5 of the C&AG Report, Audit has highlighted that the Ordnance 
Factory, Badmal (OFBL) supplied to Army two types of 155 mm ammunition in March, 
2009 & March, 2010, respectively. However, Army reported exudation of TNT mix 
explosives from the shells of ammunition within their shelf life. This was on account of 
lower set point (melting point) of TNT than the specified range, and that requisite test 
of set point value of TNT in TNT mix were not carried out at OFBL before filling in shell 
due to the absence of provision for such testing in the specification of Controllerate of 
Quality Assurance (CQA). Consequently, it led to a loss of Rs.62.10 crore on account 
of replacement of defective ammunition by the OFB.  
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on the subject at their sitting held on 07th January, 2026 for in-depth 
examination of the issues related to the subject. On the basis of oral evidence and 
written information obtained from the Ministry on various aspects of the Audit Para 
under consideration, the Committee examined the subject as detailed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
II. AUDIT FINDINGS 
4. Ordnance Factory, Badmal (OFBL) is a filling factory of 155 mm artillery 
ammunition. In manufacturing of the ammunition, Tri Nitro Toluene(TNT) is used as 
explosive. OFBL receives TNT (special grade) as input from High Explosives Factory 
(HEF), Kirkee. TNT (special grade) is mixed with other additives at OFBL before filling 
shells of the ammunition. 
5. According to the Audit, OFBL had issued (March 2009 and March 2010) 155 
mm ammunition to Army at a cost of Rs. 43.62 crore and Rs. 16.53 crore respectively. 
The ammunitions were issued after quality check by Quality Control Cell of OFBL and 
quality audit & surveillance check by Senior Quality Assurance Officer (Ammunition) 
Badmal under DGQA. 
6. However, in April, 2014, exudation from shells of the ammunition was reported 
by Field Ammunition Depot (FAD), Jodhpur. Consequently, chemical analysis of 
exudative shells by Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Military Explosives) (CQA), 

2 
 
Khadki (Pune) revealed (June, 2017) that exudation was due to low purity of TNT with 
set point (melting point) below 80.6 degree centigrade and higher vacuum stability 
than the prescribed range. CQA (A), Khadki, therefore, sentenced a total of 21,259 
quantity of both types of ammunition as unserviceable. 
7. Audit has also highlighted that the indent issued by Army in October, 2008 
contained a condition that in case the ammunition failed to perform as per the 
specification during the shelf life (15 years) or reported defective, the supplier (OFB) 
would either rectify or replace the same free of cost. Accordingly, 14,159 ammunition 
were replaced free of cost by OFBL. The Audit has estimated the total financial 
involvement for replacement of the ammunition at about Rs. 62.10 crore at the issue 
price of 2018-19. 
8. Audit has noted that specification for TNT mix did not stipulate any provision to 
measure set point TNT mix. However, CQA had stated that by not mentioning set point 
clause in the specification does not mean to refrain from set point testing. 
9.        Audit has also noted that TNT is a highly inflammable chemical and that its 
exudation had primarily caused major fire accidents at CAD, Pulgaon in 2016. Thus, 
the  Audit has recommended the Factory and the DGQA to resolve the testing methods 
for such highly inflammable materials. 
10. In light of findings of the audit, the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence 
Production) submitted the following in their background note to theCommittee: 
10.1 “OFBL manufacture 155mm ammunition since 1998 having Tri Nitro 
Toluene (TNT) mix as explosive filling. TNT has been manufactured by High 
Explosive Factory (HEF) Pune since 1944-45. TNT, manufactured at HEF has 
been despatched to OFBL where the specific grade of TNT is mixed with other 
ingredients to manufacture High Explosive (HE) mix. During pre-corporatization 
of OFB, the quality assurance was being done by Controllerate of Quality 
Assurance (Ammunition) to ensure the quality of TNT manufactured at HEF 
strictly as per relevant specification.  
 
10.2 It is submitted that DGQA, the quality assurance establishment, 
confirmed that the Set point of TNT will not be altered by addition of additives. 
Hence, once the Set point is determined at HEF, its further determination at 
OFBL is technically unwarranted. Therefore, there was absence of any 
stipulation in the governing specification as well as test facility to check the Set 
point of TNT mix again at OFBL. 
 
10.3 Since there was no ambiguity regarding testing methods of TNT and no 
deviation from standard specification took place, the question of fixing of 
responsibility does not arise. However, after receipt of customer feedback in 
instant case, OFBL had introduced additional tests to measure Set point value 

3 
 
of TNT mix of all the Lots and grades, since December 2016, as a corrective 
action.  
 
10.4 Presently, rigorous testing of all the lots of TNT is being done at HEF 
Pune and lots cleared in testing being issued to OFBL for further processing 
and filling of ammunition. At OFBL, the Set point of TNT mix of all the lots are 
again checked before filling the mix in the ammunition. In addition, crimping 
operation was added for the Aluminium Liner during assembly of Shell. SQAE 
further ensures the quality of TNT mix and the ammunition during FAI of end 
product at OFBL as per relevant specification and no case of lowering of set 
point or exudation of TNT has been observed during FAI of the ammunition at 
OFBL. Further, after implementing the said preventive measures, no complaint 
of occurrence of TNT Exudation has been received from the lots manufactured 
by OFBL.” 
 
III. Quality Assurance and Inspection Mechanism for the Ammunition. 
 
11.1 In the light of Audit findings, the Committee asked about the mechanism for 
inspection and quality assurance at OF, Badmal. The Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
 
a. “A well-defined Quality assurance and inspection mechanisms were in 
place at Ordnance Factory, Badmal at the time of manufacturing.In this 
regard, the various control points and surveillance points were identified 
in the manufacturing process wherein the inspections were being carried 
out by factory Quality Control (QC) and Director General Quality 
Assurance (DGQA). 
b. The inspection and testing of raw materials were carried out by Quality 
Assurance Materials Group of the factory. 
c. During manufacturing of the ammunition,the inter stage inspection were 
carried out by factory QC and DGQA at various predefined critical control 
points and surveillance points. 
 
d. After completion of manufacturing, the Final Acceptance Inspection (FAI) 
was carried out by DGQA. The samples were drawn as per predefined 
sampling plan under IS 2500 and the samples were subjected to proof 
firing at proof ranges and other Qualifying Tests were carried out. 
e. Quality assurance activities were performed by DGQA representatives 
stationed at Ordnance Factory Badmal (OFBL).” 
 
 

4 
 
11.2 When the Committee sought to know the role played by DGQA in the instant 
case and as to whether any inspection protocols were diluted, bypassed or 
inadequately implemented, the Ministry in their written reply responded as under: 
 
“DGQA, the independent authorized department under MOD ensured Quality 
Assurance on behalf of Indian Army for all the products supplied to Indian 
Army.The role of DGQA was to provide Quality Audit and Surveillance(QA&S) 
on sampling basis as per Quality Assurance Plans (QAP), relevant technical 
specifications and proof schedule. None of the QA&S procedures/ Inspection 
protocol was diluted/ by passed or inadequately implemented.” 
 
 
11.3 Elaborating further on the inspection protocols followed, the representative of 
the Ministry during the evidence held on 7th January informed the Committee as under: 
“Coming to this point of exudation which has been observed in the ammunition, 
the cause of this exudation is basically and fundamentally the explosive, which 
is TNT. This TNT is produced in one factory and it is transported to another 
factory where it is filled. In ordnance factory, Badmal, it is filled inside the 
ammunition. This ammunition, when it went to the army depot, they found this 
exudation phenomenon after four years. As far as the quality control and quality 
assurance is concerned, we have a dual responsibility. There are certain areas 
which are looked into by the manufacturer himself. When he buys the materials, 
the purity of the material what he buys and all those aspects are ensured. They 
give the report to us. Then when they make a final product, DGQA tests it. It is 
an important and critical test and we find that these critical tests are okay or 
not. In the instant cases of problem which has been observed, we re-verified all 
the cases with all the data which was available. We found that there were no 
aberration and everything was alright.” 
 
11.4 When the Committee enquired as to how the defective ammunition managed 
to clear internal quality checks, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
a. “TNT was manufactured at HEF Khadki and 100% checks were carried out 
by QC Ordnance Factory. The resident Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance (DGQA) establishment carried out quality Audit and 
Surveillance (QA&S) at selected and mutually agreed control point stages. 
The TNT set point (80.6°C) test was carried out by the resident DGQA 
establishment on the samples drawn from 1000kg of TNT(50 boxes@ 20 
kg for box) and found acceptable. 
b. The TNT was supplied by HEF, Khadki to OFBL. Later, OFBL had mixed 
the TNT with additives before filling in the Shell. Set point of TNT will not be 

5 
 
altered by addition of additives. Hence, once the Set point is determined at 
HEF, its further determination at OFBL is technically not required.  
c. The TNT mix was then filled into 155mm shell at OFBL. The Ammunition 
Lotswere cleared after 100% QC checks by OFBL QC department and 
QA&S checks at selected points as per Quality Assurance Plans (QAP) by 
resident DGQA Establishment on sampling basis. 
d. As explained above, the ammunition which has cleared multiple levels of 
Inspection at various stages of manufacture and finally after successfully 
passing of proof firing, I-Note (Inspection Note) has been issued by the 
independent Quality Assurance agency, DGQA, before acceptance and 
dispatch of the ammunition to the Indian Army.” 
 
 
11.5 With regard to a query on whether any systemic deficiencies in manufacturing, 
testing or oversight have been identified in OF, Badmal, the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under: 
 
“....the ammunition was manufactured strictly as per approved specifications, 
process schedules, and QAP. Quality control and quality assurance checks 
were carried out at every stage of manufacturing, testing, and inspection. No 
systemic deficiencies were Identified..... after receipt of customer feedback in 
instant case, OFBL had introduced additional tests to measure Set point value 
of TNT mix of all the Lots and grades, since December 2016, as a corrective 
action. In addition, crimping operation was also added for the Aluminium Liner 
during assembly of Shell at OFBL to eliminate any possibility of such incidence 
in future.” 
 
 
11.6 To a specific query of the Committee regarding fixing of responsibility in the 
case, the Ministry in their written reply responded as under: 
“The concerned ammunition was supplied to Indian Army after clearing of 
multiple levels of inspection at various stages of manufacture and after 
successful proof firing. The ammunition was supplied to Indian Army after all 
the quality tests/trials were passed and cleared by the independent Quality 
Assurance agency, DGQA. In view of the fact that the ammunition supplied to 
the Indian Army complied with all the prescribed quality standards, the issue of 
fixing responsibility did not arise in the case. Further, after receipt of customer 
feedback in instant case, OFBL had introduced additional tests to measure Set 
point value of TNT for all the Lots and grades, since December 2016, as a 
corrective action. In addition, crimping operation was also added for the 
Aluminium Liner during assembly of Shell at OFBL to eliminate any possibility 
of such incidence in future.” 

6 
 
 
IV. Guidelines or Policy on Defective Ammunition. 
 
12.1 When the Committee sought to know of the provisions in the contract to deal 
with such cases of supply of defective ammunition and as to whether the provision 
was invoked, the Ministry in their written reply submitted the following information: 
 
“As per the conditions in the Indent that in case of Ammunition fails to perform 
as per the specification during shelf life (15 years) or reported defective, the 
supplier (erstwhile OFB) would either rectify or replace the same. Accordingly, 
erstwhile OFB/MIL provided the replacement of the ammunition in the instant 
case.” 
 
12.2 With regard to steps taken to ensure supply of zero-defect ammunition in future, 
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:  
 
“Munitions India Limited (MIL) is following international quality assurance 
standards. Acceptance Quality Limits (AQL) and sampling plans are 
implemented as per IS-2500 standards. All Quality Assurance Plans (QAPs) 
are vetted by DGQA. QAPs and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are in 
place, further, in certain cases where continued quality issues are observed, 
quality audit is being carried out and the revision, if required, is being made in 
consultation with DGQA to ensure continual improvement.” 
 
12.3 Further with regards to concerns of the Committee with regard to the necessity 
for supplying defect free ammunition to the Army, the representative of the Ministry 
during Evidence held on 7th January, 2026, explained as under: 
“The second aspect is when this good item went to the ordnance factory, 
Badmal it got filled up. During the filling process, they have to take care of 
certain things and then they should do the filling process. But notwithstanding 
that time also we did a lot of check like whether the filling is proper, if the crack 
is there, or if porosity is there, whether density is okay, all these parameters 
also had been checked and that also we found it okay. After four years, this 
phenomenon had exhibited. There is one chemical aspect of TNT and it has 
got a natural tendency, in case of any impurities which are present inside the 
explosive, these impurities will exhibit this phenomenon after a lapse of time. It 
cannot be detected at the instant case during the manufacture, but after a lapse 
of time.So, in the instant case the 19 FAD which was there in Rajasthan, where 
the temperature goes to 50-55 degree centigrade, after four years they found 
that there is something leaking. That is due to the impurities which has caused 

7 
 
this problem. But we tried to derive from the quality point of view, wherever the 
documents were available. But all the documents were in order both from the 
manufacturing side as well as the QA side. Then, what remedial measures and 
the preventive measures we needed to immediately implement had been 
addressed through a task force. The task force has given various directions for 
both the manufacturer of the explosives as well as the explosives.” 
 
12.4 Responding to the specific query of the Committee on the outcome of 
suggestions given by the task force, the Representative of the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
“The task force was constituted by the QA agency. They studied it, and then 
our chemical military explosive experts also analyzed everything. After the 
analysis, they given the various suggestions how it can be improved upon. So, 
based on the improvement only, they have implemented in the 
factories…….After this, we have not experienced this.” 
 
 
V. Ordnance Factory, Badmal and DGQA 
 
13.1 When the Committee asked for the details of performance of Ordnance Factory, 
Badmal (OFBL) during the last five years, the Ministry in their written reply submitted 
as under: 
 
“OFBL is a critical production unit supplying Large calibre ammunition to the 
Indian Army, including 155 mm. 130 mm. 125 mm. and 105 mm ammunition, 
which are vital for the Artillery Division. OFBL has supplied various types of 
ammunition valuing Rs. 3,098 Crore during the last 5 years (2020-21 to 2024-
25) to Indian Army. Also, ammunition valuing Rs. 475 Crore has been exported 
to friendly foreign countries(export authorised by GoI) during last 5 years (2020-
21 to 2024-25) without any Quality Issues being reported.” 
 
13.2 Responding to query of the Committee about the sanctioned and present 
strength of officials in the DGQA, the Ministry in their written reply furnished following 
information: 
“ 
Group Sanctioned strength 
(in Nos) 
Held 
(in Nos) 
Group - A 1188 605 
Group – B (G) 2483 1572 
Group – B (NG) 3762 761 
Group - C 7625 2670 

8 
 
Total 15058 5608* 
  
* The held strength is subjected to variation based on retirement, resignation etc.” 
 
13.3 During Evidence held on 7th January, 2026, responding further to concerns of 
the Committee with regard to the need for adequate manpower in DGQA, the 
representative of the Ministry stated the following: 
 
“less number of manpower is there….. DGQA organisation as such had 
undergone a restructuring. The manpower finalisation is in the process. It is in 
the Ministry, it is under process.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 The Committee note from the audit observations that the Ordnance 
Factory, Badmal (OFBL), which is a unit of Munitions India Limited (MIL) had 
supplied two types of 155 mm ammunition to the Army in March, 2009 and 
March, 2010, respectively and that the Army reported exudation of TNT mix 
explosives from the shells of ammunition within their shelf life, due to lower set 
point (melting point) of TNT than the specified range. The Committee also note 
that required test of set point value of TNT in TNT mix were not carried out at OF 
Badmal before filling in shell due to absence of provision for such testing in the 
CQA’s specification. OFB had to give free replacement of 14,159 ammunition to 
Army resulting in loss of Rs. 62.10 crore on account of replacement of defective 
ammunition by the OFB. 
 The Committee observe that there was no provision for testing of TNT mix 
in the Controllerate of Quality Assurance (CQA) specification for such a crucial 
ammunition being supplied to the Indian Army.  The Committee are of the view 
that non inclusion of testing provisions for the ammunition points towards 
lacunae on the part of the OFBL, CQA, DGQA and the Ministry as a whole with 
regard to the methodology and mechanism being adopted by them for 
inspection and evaluation of arms and ammunitions being produced to ensure 
quality assurance. The Committee note that after receipt of customer feedback, 
OFBL had introduced additional tests to measure set point value of TNT for all 
lots and grades since December 2016, as a corrective action. The Committee 
therefore recommend the Ministry to duly revisit the relevant provisions related 
to specifications for testing or method for testing of various ammunitions which 
are currently under development at various OFs to ensure that all such products 
are subjected to stringent quality tests and trials and thereby to prevent 
recurrence of such incidents. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to 
review the collaboration and coordination mechanism being followed between 

10 
 
various stakeholders and also to improve the functioning of OFB to build a more 
robust and credible checking as well as testing methodology to ensure that our 
defence forces are supplied with quality ammunitions. The Committee firmly 
believe that such measures for quality control are of utmost necessity to prevent 
ammunition related accidents in the field, which can cause injuries and fatalities 
to personnel handling them and also restore confidence amongst the armed 
forces with regard to ammunitions being manufactured by OFB.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that the 
Munitions India Limited (MIL) follows international quality assurance standards 
and as per IS-2500, and also that all Quality Assurance Plans (QAPs) are vetted 
by DGQA. The Committee also note that the concerned ammunition was 
supplied to the Indian Army after clearing multiple levels of inspection at various 
stages of manufacture and after successful proof firing. The Committee further 
note that all the quality tests and trials for the ammunition were passed and 
cleared by the independent quality assurance agency- DGQA (Directorate 
General of Quality Assurance) and that additional test to measure Set point 
value of TNT for all lots and grades were introduced later after receipt of 
customer feedback.  
             The Committee find it concerning that even after various levels of 
inspection during manufacturing of the ammunition at Ordnance Factory 
Badmal, and trials and tests having cleared by DGQA, the final product supplied 
to the Army turned out to be defective. The Committee are of the considered 
view that the incident highlights the presence of major gap between trials and 
testing protocols of ammunition and its actual performance in the field. 
  In a broader perspective, the Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to review the whole methodology of testing by the quality control 
department of the OFs, CQA and DGQA, including the method of sampling. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to explore the possibility of testing multiple 
samples for certification of an ammunition. The Committee also recommend that 

11 
 
the inputs/ materials being used for production of the ammunition must also be 
stringently checked to ensure that end products are of the utmost quality. The 
Committee further recommend the Ministry to duly examine the technical as well 
financial competency of the concerned manufacturers before awarding such 
high value projects.  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 The Committee note that the DGQA ensures Quality Assurance on behalf 
of Indian Army for all products supplied to the Indian Army. The Committee also 
note that in the instant case the role of DGQA was to provide Quality Audit and 
Surveillance (QA&S) on sampling basis as per Quality Assurance Plans, 
technical specifications and proof schedule, and also that none of these 
procedures and protocols were diluted or bypassed.  However, the Committee 
are not convinced with the submission of the Ministry with regard to 
accountability in the case, wherein they have stated that the issue of fixing of 
responsibility in the case do not arise as the ammunition complied with all the 
prescribed quality standards.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
such matters are related to national security and lack of accountability for poor 
quality of arms ammunition are not in national interest, as it has potential to 
adversely impact the operational preparedness of the Army. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to strengthen the 
mechanism of accountability in such cases where ammunitions turn out to be 
defective after clearing all necessary tests as per stipulated specifications or if 
detected by the end users at the field level. The Committee further recommend 
the Ministry to comprehensively examine all such cases of ammunition 
accidents in recent years, including the instant case, to identify the basic 
reasons and pattern of ammunition accidents, which will enable the concerned 
stakeholders to make necessary improvements in the products as well as on the 
kind of additional tests or trials that may be required for ensuring quality 
assurance. The Committee further urge upon the Ministry to take steps for 
studying and adoption of global best practices with regard to testing 

12 
 
methodologies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
the Government in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee have been informed of the presence of a well defined 
Quality assurance and inspection mechanism at the Ordnance Factory, Badmal 
(OFBL), by the Ministry. The Committee note the audit observations which 
states that the ammunition were issued following quality check by the Quality 
Control Cell of OFBL and by the Senior Quality Assurance Officer of DGQA. The 
Committee also note with satisfaction that the OFBL has supplied various types 
of ammunition worth Rs. 3,573 crore, including to certain friendly foreign 
countries, during the last five financial years.  
 However, the Committee are of the view that the Quality Control (QC) cell 
of Ordnance factories including OFBL, the erstwhile OFB and DGQA are 
perhaps not performing at the desired level of expectations, as exemplified by 
the instant case. There also appears to be a perceptible gap at both factory level 
and DGQA inspections of ammunition. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry take steps to review the overall functioning & performance of 
DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance (erstwhile OFB), which is the main source 
of supply of arms and ammunition to our strong Army, to further strengthen 
their roles and responsibilities. The Committee believe such review is of utmost 
necessity, as India is pitching for self reliance in the defence sector through 
various initiatives including the Make in India initiative. The Committee further 
recommend the Ministry to take steps to well equip the OFs, DGQA and other 
related organizations with ever evolving and emerging advanced technologies 
including AI to enable them to discharge their responsibilities efficiently.  
          The Committee also note that around 62% of the sanctioned strength of 
various posts of Group A, B and C under DGQA and its various establishments 
are lying vacant. The Committee find it quite surprising that the organization 
whose primary responsibility is to ensure quality control and quality assurance 
of arms and ammunitions being produced by various Ordnance Factories is 
functioning with less than half of its sanctioned strength.  

13 
 
            The role and responsibilities entrusted upon DGQA make it incumbent 
upon its officials to conduct inspections, testing and certifications, and also 
offer assistance to manufacturers in meeting standards of products, for which 
the Committee believe will require constant visit by the concerned officials to 
the project sites and testing facilities, which are located at different parts of the 
country. The Committee are of the considered view that without sufficient 
manpower, the DGQA may not be able to discharge its responsibilities 
efficiently and in a time bound manner, due to unbalanced workload on 
incumbent officials. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to fill up all the vacant posts and also pursue strongly with the 
concerned recruitment agency to complete the process expeditiously. Given the 
critical nature of quality assurance in defence production, the Committee cannot 
rely on open-ended assurances regarding recruitment. The Committee direct the 
Ministry to submit a time-bound, phase-wise institutional roadmap, detailing 
specific targets for recruitment and the structural reorganization of the DGQA. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     K. C. VENUGOPAL 
21 July, 2026                                                                        Chairperson       
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 