13 
CATERING SERVICES IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 115th Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
PAC NO. 2407 
 
T H I R T E E N T H  R E P O R T  
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 115th Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
                                        
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 19-03-2025 
 
          Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 19-03-2025 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
March, 2025/ Phalguna,1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
CATERING SERVICES IN INDIAN 
RAILWAYS 
 

3 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-
25)  
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Public 
Account (2024-25) held on 12.02.2025. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee on  Public Accounts contained in their 
One Hundred and Fifteenth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
Secretariat 
1. Dr.  Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary   
 

5 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Fifteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Catering Services in Indian Railways” relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway 
Board). 
  
2.       The One Hundred and Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024. The Committee considered the draft 
Action Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th 
February, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report. 
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
  
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
  
5.        An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

6 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accounts deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and 
Fifteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  “Catering Services in Indian 
Railways”  relating to the Ministry of Railways, Railway Board.” 
2. The One Hundred and Fifteenth Report, which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08 February, 2024, 
contained 11 Observations/Recommendations.  The Action Taken Notes 
on all the Observations /Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government:  
 Para No. 06,07,08,09,10 & 11 
          Total: 06 
                Chapter: II 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 
 Para No.: NIL  
     Total: nil 
            Chapter: III 
 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Para No.: 01,02,03,04 & 05 
     Total: 05 
            Chapter: IV 
 
 

7 
  
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
 
3.  The Committee noted that the Indian Railways (IR) carries about 
22.21 million passengers per day. Passenger traffic of this magnitude 
needs the services of a well-managed catering and vending system for 
supply of healthy and wholesome food at reasonable prices. In Indian 
Railways, catering services are provided by IR departmentally, through 
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) and by 
engaging outside agencies at stations and in trains. The Audit Report 
includes the assessment of adequacy and availability of good quality and 
hygienic food to railway passengers at affordable rates. Audit analysis 
related to management of contracts awarded for providing catering services 
at stations and in trains for ensuring good quality catering services was 
also included in this Report. Audit also conducted joint inspection along 
with the Railway personal to assess and check the adequacy and 
availability of catering services at stations and in trains. 
Indian Railways has changed its catering policy three times since 2005. 
Frequent change in catering policy and consequent transfer of 
responsibility to manage catering units from railways to IRCTC and back, 
have created a state of uncertainty in management of catering services 
provided to the passengers over the years. As per the new policy (issued in 
February 2017), a number of catering activities which were assigned to 
IRCTC in 2005 policy and then transferred to Zonal Railways in 2010 
policy, have now been assigned back to IRCTC. However, the concerns of 
quality, hygiene, affordability and availability of food to passengers are 
needed to be adequately addressed. Also, due to frequent policy changes, 
IR could not take effective steps to bridge the gap to provide necessary 
infrastructure in terms of base kitchens, Static Catering Units, Trains Side 
Vending arrangements and Automatic Vending Machines etc.  
 

8 
Zonal Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan (Blue Print) of 
catering services to be provided at each station and onboard trains. Audit 
noticed that Blue Print for provision of catering services was not prepared 
in seven Zonal Railways (East Central, Eastern, Northeast Frontier, North 
Western, South Eastern, South Western and East Coast Railways).  The 
Zonal Railways did not ensure provision of pantry cars in a number of long 
distance trains. During joint inspection, it was seen that in nine trains 
having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car was provided. Alternative 
services through train side vending and/or base kitchens were also not 
provided in some of the trains checked in audit. No Train Side Vending 
Services were provided by North Central, South East Central and Southern 
Railways for the trains which run for more than 12 hours during the day 
time. Absence of pantry cars in long distance trains and Train Side Vending 
Services attracts unauthorized vendors in trains and sale of unhygienic and 
unhealthy food products.  
 4. The Committee had accordingly given their observations / 
Recommendations in the 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha).  The gist of 
important Observations /Recommendations as contained in the Report as 
given as under:- 
 The Committee while noting that 15  Kitchen Units were 
planned to be upgraded and 9 Green Field Base Kitchens were 
to be set up by IRCTC, desired to be apprised of the present 
status of all Kitchen Units envisioned to be upgraded; Green 
Field Base Kitchens to be set up and also the status of the sub-
judice cases. 
 
 The Committee while noting that the Blue Print had been 
prepared by all the 16 zonal railways and it was under 
implementation desired to be apprised of the reasons for the 
delay in the preparing a Blue Print of catering services by the 
seven zonal railways. 
 
 The Committee recommended that the Ministry undertake a 
survey on the present number of trains running with ICF 
coaches and formulate a cost effective feasible plan to 
expeditiously replace the ICF coaches with LHB coaches 
without adversely impacting the functioning of the Indian 

9 
Railways and its catering services. The Committee also desired 
to be apprised of the present status in this regard. 
 
 The Committee desired to be apprised of details of setting up 
base kitchens inside the railway premises and further desire 
that a review of the services rendered through these kitchens 
may be undertaken by the Ministry to ascertain their 
effectiveness in maintaining quality, hygiene and cleanliness. 
 
 To ensure that no unauthorized vendors are allowed on Indian 
railways, the Committee recommended that regular surprise 
inspections of catering services provided in trains/ stations may 
be undertaken and the report thereof uploaded immediately on 
an online portal for enabling the senior officers to take 
immediate remedial action against those found responsible. 
 
 The Committee hoped that necessary action had been taken by 
the Ministry and IRCTC to ensure 100% compliance and 
mandatory adherence to ISO 22000 and FSSAI certification for 
all existing catering units in Indian Railways. 
 
 The Committee were optimistic that a mechanism had since 
been put in place and responsibilities had been clearly specified 
to ensure constant communication and seamless flow of 
information amongst IRCTC and Zonal Railways in their 
endeavor towards improving the quality of catering service to 
passengers of Indian Railways.   
 
 
 The Committee, therefore desired to be apprised of the 
subsequent follow-up measures undertaken and upgrades 
initiated by the Indian Railways and IRCTC on the basis of 
various surveys conducted by the third party and also desired 
to be apprised of the suggestions on which action  had not 
been taken/pending till date. 
 
 The Committee also desired that a mechanism for real time 
reporting/submission and resolution of passenger 
complaints/grievances to be put in place so as to ensure that 
defective food items could immediately be removed from the 
supply chain and the unauthorized and erring vendors 
blacklisted. 
 

10 
 The Committee while noting that the mandate of IRCTC also 
included promoting domestic and international tourism through 
development of budget hotels, special tour packages etc., 
recommended that the O/o C&AG may undertake a fresh audit 
on the performance of IRCTC in providing various services, 
particularly in premium/luxury trains including Maharajas’ 
Express. 
5. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry of Railways in 
respect of all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in their One Hundred and Fifteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) have 
been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee 
will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations /Recommendations made in their One Hundred and Fifteenth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha), which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways to furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations /Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report within 3 months of its 
presentation to the House. 
6. The Committee in their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:-  
“It is apparent for the Committee to see that as per the new policy, a 
number of catering activities which were assigned to IRCTC as per 
2005 policy and then transferred to Zonal Railways as per 2010 
policy, were assigned back to IRCTC. The Committee note that for 
implementation of Catering Policy 2017, transfer of catering units to 
IRCTC has already been completed with the exception of one mobile 
unit and 13 static units which were sub-judice. The Committee while 
noting that 15  Kitchen Units were planned to be upgraded and 9 
Green Field Base Kitchens were to be set up by IRCTC, desire to be 
apprised of the present status of all Kitchen Units envisioned to be 
upgraded; Green Field Base Kitchens to be set up and also the status 
of the sub-judice cases. The Committee hope that Ministry and 
IRCTC have formulated plans to facilitate time bound further 
upgradation of all catering units in line with the emerging 
requirements and desire to be apprised of any plans for setting up 
additional base kitchens, catering units and deadline for completion of 
such projects.” 

11 
[Recommendation Para No.1] 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“Transfer of catering units from Zonal Railways to IRCTC as 
mandated in Catering Policy 2017 has been completed over all Zonal 
Railways. Upgradation/Setting up/development of Kitchens is an 
ongoing process. So far, 48 Kitchen Units including Base Kitchens 
have been upgraded/developed by IRCTC from where meals are 
being supplied in trains. The number and location of Kitchens is 
decided as per the requirement of meals and route of the train. The 
supply of meals on trains is being ensured from the designated 
kitchen units.” 
8. The vetting comments of Audit are as follows:- 
“MoR has not furnished the details sought by the PAC regarding the 
status of all kitchen units envisioned to be upgraded, green field base 
kitchens to be set up, and the status of sub-judice cases. The plans 
for setting up additional base kitchens, or catering units and the  
deadline for completing such projects were also not furnished.” 
9. The Ministry of Railways in their response to the Audit comments 
have further stated as under:- 
“It is reiterated that transfer of catering units from Zonal Railways to 
IRCTC as mandated in Catering Policy 2017 has been completed. 
The number and location of Kitchens is decided as per the 
requirement of meals and route of the train and accordingly supply of 
meals on trains is being ensured from the designated kitchens. 
Upgradation/Setting up/development of Kitchens is an ongoing 
process and so far, 177 Base Kitchens have been commissioned.” 
  
10. The Committee in para (1) of their 115th Report (17 Lok Sabha), 
while taking cognizance of the fact that 15 Kitchen Units were planned 
to be upgraded and 9 Green Field Base Kitchens were to be set up by 
IRCTC,  sought present status of all Kitchen Units envisioned to be 
upgraded; Green Field Base Kitchens to be set up and also the status 
of the sub-judice cases. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply 
of the Ministry of Railways. The reply does not specifically mention 

12 
about the status of all kitchen units envisioned to be upgraded, green 
field base kitchens to be set up and also the status of sub-judice 
cases.    
Further, the Committee also desire to be apprised of the plans 
for setting up of additional base kitchens, or catering units and the 
deadline for completing such projects. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire to be apprised of the 
specific details of the status of kitchen units envisioned to be 
upgraded green field base kitchens to be set up and also the status of 
sub-judice cases. 
11. The Committee in their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that Zonal Railways were required to prepare a 
Master Plan (Blue Print) of catering services to be provided at each 
station and onboard trains. The Committee also note that the Blue 
Print for provision of catering services in seven Zonal Railways (East 
Central, Eastern, Northeast Frontier, North Western, South Eastern, 
South Western and East Coast Railways) were prepared only after 
the Audit pointed out the same and that many zonal Railways were 
not reviewing and updating the plan periodically. The Committee 
while noting that the Blue Print has now been prepared by all the 16 
zonal railways and it is under implementation desire to be apprised of 
the reasons for the delay in the preparing a Blue Print of catering 
services by the seven zonal railways. The Committee are optimistic 
that necessary instructions have been issued to all zonal railways for 
undertaking periodic review based on which updation of the Master 
Plan may be effected. The Committee while opining that proper 
planning is an integral part of effective functioning in any enterprise 
recommend that the Ministry, IRCTC and Concerned zonal railways 
must undertake a joint review of the functioning vis-à- vis the blue 
prints prepared by each zonal railway every five years for better 
monitoring of the same.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 2] 
 12. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“As per extant policy, a comprehensive blue print for the catering 
units at each station is prepared by Railways taking into consideration 
that adequate facilities are available to cater to the needs of traveling  
passengers. Station wise Master Plans/ Blue prints have been 

13 
prepared by all Zonal Railways as envisaged in Catering Policy 2017. 
These Master Plans/ Blueprints for each station is prepared by Zonal 
Railways, in coordination with Divisions and IRCTC ensuring that 
adequate catering services are available to the passengers.” 
13. The vetted comments of Audit are as under: 
“MoR has not furnished any action taken on the recommendation of 
PAC to ensure that the Ministry, IRCTC, and concerned zonal 
railways must undertake a joint review of the functioning vis-à- vis the  
blueprints prepared by each zonal railway every five years for better 
monitoring of the same.” 
14. In their further comments to the said Audit observation, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
“Station wise Master Plans/Blue Prints have been prepared by all 
Zonal Railways as envisaged in Catering Policy 2017. These Master 
Plans/Blueprints for each station are prepared by Zonal Railways, in 
coordination with Divisions and IRCTC ensuring that adequate  
catering services are available to the passengers. Review of Master 
Plan/Blueprint for stations is undertaken as and when necessitated 
due to passenger and operational requirements.” 
15. In para 2 of their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha), the Committee 
while observing that proper planning is an integral part of effective 
functioning in any enterprise recommend that the Ministry, IRCTC and 
Concerned zonal railways must undertake joint review of the 
functioning vis-à- vis the blue prints prepared by each zonal railway 
every five years for better monitoring of the same.  The Committee 
regret to note from the reply of the Ministry appears to be evasive to 
the extent that there is no mention about undertaking joint review 
meetings of the functioning vis –a-vis the blueprints prepared by each 
zonal railway every five years.   
The Ministry should establish an effective and robust system of 
review meeting(s) to periodically monitor the functioning of catering 
services. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry may take prompt and 
timely remedial action on their observations and apprise them within 
three months of the presentation of the Report. 

14 
16. The Committee in their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee further note that as per the Catering Policy 2010, 
mobile catering services were to be provided with suitable design 
pantry cars and equipment of state-of-art technology. There was to 
be progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power 
equipment. The Committee, however note that the policy of 
progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment 
in pantry cars to avoid the occurrence of fire accidents specially in 
running trains was not followed while manufacturing the pantry cars in 
Integral Coach Factory, Perambur. In this regard specifically, the 
Committee find that a total of 103 pantry cars were manufactured by 
Integral Coach Factory during April 2011 to March 2016 at a total cost 
of RS. 111.94 crore with provision for centralized LPG cylinders with 
open flames, instead of providing electric power equipment panel 
counters etc. and the same were distributed to alI the Zonal Railways. 
Clarifying its position, the Ministry submitted that it is technically not 
feasible to retrofit an existing Integral Coach Factory (|CF) Pantry car 
with electric power equipment due to heavy power demand of the 
electrical equipment and hence switchover to Linke Hofmann Busch 
(LHB) coaches from ICF is the only viable option. 
The Committee also note that on 10.10.2018, a Joint Procedure 
Order (JPO) for attachment of Pantry Cars was issued entailing 
provisions to switch over from flamed cooking with gas burner in 
Pantry Cars to flameless cooking by using the electrical equipment 
provided in the re-designed/modified Pantry Cars. The Committee 
further note that production of ICF pantry cars has been discontinued 
w.e.f 01.04.2018. Hence, LHB pantry cars with electric power 
equipment will only be manufactured henceforth on Indian Railway 
and cooking with gas burners will be phased out in due course of 
time.  
The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons as to why 103 
pantry cars were manufactured by Integral –Coach Factory, during 
April, 2011 to March 2016 with provision- for centralized-LPG 
cylinders with open flame instead of providing electric power 
equipment panel counters despite the provision in Catering Policy 
2010 for progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power 

15 
equipment in pantry cars. The Committee are hopeful that the 
Ministry must have had conducted an internal inquiry to find out the 
reasons for continuing the production of gas based pantry cars till 
March 2016 and appropriate action taken thereon. Noting that as of 
April, 2018, the Ministry had taken the decision to stop the production 
of ICF coaches and manufacture only LHB pantry cars with electric 
power equipment and phase out the ICF coaces, the Committee in no 
uncertain words recommend that the Ministry need to prioritize 
phasing out the ICF coaches and stocks on its pre- decided 
trajectory. The Committee recommend that the Ministry undertake a 
survey on the present number of trains running with 1CF coaches 
and formulate a cost effective feasible plan to expeditiously replace 
the ICF coaches with LHB coaches without adversely impacting the 
functioning of the Indian Railways and its catering services. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the present status in this 
regard.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 3] 
17. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under: 
“Indian Railways is committed to flameless cooking through electric 
power equipment in pantry cars. From April 2018 onwards, only LHB 
pantry cars with electrical equipment are being manufactured. As 
such switchover from flame based pantry in existing ICF pantries to 
flameless LHB pantries is being achieved progressively as envisaged 
in the extant policy while ensuring availability of adequate catering 
facilities to passengers in trains.” 
 
18.  The vetted comments of Audit are as under: 
“The reply of MoR is silent on the observation of the committee 
regarding conducting an internal inquiry to find out the reasons for 
continuing the production of gas based pantry cars till March 2016 
and appropriate action taken thereon. MoR has also not furnished 
action taken on the recommendation of the PAC to undertake a 
survey on the present number of trains running with ICF coaches and 
formulate a cost-effective feasible plant expeditiously replace the ICF 
coaches with LHB coaches without adversely impacting the 
functioning of the Indian Railways and its catering services.” 

16 
 
19. In response to the vetted comments of Audit, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
 
“Indian Railways is committed to flameless cooking through electric 
power equipment in pantry cars. From April 2018 onwards, only LHB 
pantry cars with electrical equipment are being manufactured. 
Production of ICF pantry during the period from 2011 to 2016 
continued to ensure provision of uninterrupted catering services to 
passengers during the transition period. As such, switchover from 
flame based pantry in existing ICF pantries to flameless LHB pantries 
is being achieved progressively as envisaged in the extant policy. 
 
As regards trains running with ICF coaches, presently 746 ICF rakes 
are being utilised for passenger carrying train operations and Indian 
Railways have been able to convert a total of 1241 ICF rakes into 
LHB. Further, conversion of ICF rakes into LHB rakes is a continuous 
process on Indian Railways being undertaken in a phased manner, 
based on availability of rolling stock.” 
20. In para 3 of their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha), the Committee 
had expressed its concern over the fact that the policy of progressive 
switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment in pantry 
cars to avoid the occurrence of fire accidents specially in running 
trains was not followed while manufacturing the pantry cars in 
Integral Coach Factory, Perambur.  
The Committee are further unable to comprehend the reasons as to 
why 103 pantry cars were manufactured by Integral –Coach Factory, 
during April, 2011 to March 2016 with provision- for centralized-LPG 
cylinders with open flame instead of providing electric power 
equipment panel counters despite the provision in Catering Policy 
2010 for progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power 
equipment in pantry cars. The Committee are also appalled to note 
the silence of the Ministry regarding conducting an internal inquiry to 
find out the reasons for continuing the production of gas based 
pantry cars till March 2016.  
The Committee were further dismayed to note that the reply of the 
Ministry is silent on the aspect of undertaking a survey on the present 

17 
number of trains running with ICF coaches and formulate a cost-
effective feasible plan to expeditiously replace the ICF Coaches with 
LHB coaches without adversely impacting the functioning of the 
Indian Railways and its catering services. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Ministry to 
initiate independent investigation into the matter and also take penal 
action against the officials of the Ministry/IRCTC for violating the 
directions. The Committee desire that the Ministry may directly 
oversee the survey and ensure timebound replacement of ICF 
coaches with LHB coaches without impacting the catering services 
and passenger amenities. 
21. The Committee in their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee learn that in the new Catering Policy 2017, the 
responsibility of setting up and operation of base kitchens had been 
given to IRCTC and that base kitchens were to be set up in railway 
premises to monitor and control the quality and hygiene of food 
served in trains and a business plan in this regard was to be 
submitted within 30 days of issue of the policy. As per Audit, only 16 
base kitchens were inside the railway premises whereas 115 base 
kitchens were located outside the railway premises and were not 
subjected to quality check.  
As the available base kitchens were not adequate to cater to the 
needs of the trains, food was being procured by licensee from outside 
instead of being prepared in the base kitchens. Further, meals were 
picked up from outside base kitchens in respect of 128 trains of 
seven Zonal Railways. In the opinion of the Committee, since food 
was being procured by licensee from outside, they were evidently not 
subjected to regular and constant quality checks and thus, could not 
register an assurance for quality, hygiene and cleanliness. The 
Committee note that the Business Plan submitted by IRCTC was not 
in accordance with Catering Policy 2017 and, therefore, a revised 
Business Plan’ was submitted. The Committee are hopeful that the 
Ministry have ensured that necessary provisions for quality, hygiene 
and- cleanliness checks and for expeditious setting up of sufficient 
base kitchens and catering units within a time frame have been 
incorporated in the revised Business Plan.  

18 
The Committee desire to be apprised of details of setting up base 
kitchens inside the railway premises and further desire that a review 
of the services rendered through these kitchens may be undertaken 
by the Ministry to ascertain their effectiveness in maintaining quality, 
hygiene and cleanliness.” 
[Recommendation (Para No. 4)] 
22. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
In an endeavour to ensure good quality and hygienic food production, 
following measures are under implementation: 
 
 Supply of meals in trains from the designated Base Kitchens. 
 Upgradation /development of Base Kitchen /Kitchen Units are being 
undertaken 
 CCTV Cameras are being installed in upgraded Base Kitchens 
/Kitchen Units for better monitoring of food preparation. 
 QR codes have been introduced on food packets enabling display of 
details like name of kitchen, date of packaging, expiry date etc. 
 Third Party Audit is done to examine hygiene and cleanliness in 
Pantry Cars and Kitchen Units. Customer satisfaction survey is also 
conducted. 
 To ensure compliance of Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from Designated 
Food Safety Officers of each catering unit has been made mandatory. 
 Food Safety Supervisors are being deployed at Kitchen Units to 
monitor food safety and hygienic practices. 
 Regular and surprise inspections are conducted by Railway/IRCTC 
officials including Food Safety Officers. 
 23. The vetted comments of Audit are as under: 
“The reply of MoR does not address the observation of the committee 
regarding incorporating necessary provisions for quality, hygiene and 
cleanliness checks and for expeditious setting up of sufficient base 
kitchens and catering units within a time frame in the revised 
Business Plan.  

19 
MoR has also not furnished the details of setting up base kitchens 
inside the railway premises.” 
24. In response to the vetted comments of Audit, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
Measures taken for ensuring quality, hygiene and cleanliness have 
been intimated in the earlier replies which are reiterated as under: 
● Supply of meals in trains from the designated Base Kitchens. 
● Setting up /development of Base Kitchen /Kitchen Units are being 
undertaken as per the laid down standards. 
● CCTV Cameras are being installed in upgraded Base Kitchens 
/Kitchen Units for better  monitoring of food preparation. 
● QR codes have been introduced on food packets enabling display of 
details like name of kitchen, date of packaging, expiry date etc. 
● Third Party Audit is done to examine hygiene and cleanliness in 
Pantry Cars and Kitchen Units. Customer satisfaction survey is also 
conducted. 
● To ensure compliance of Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from Designated 
Food Safety Officers of each catering unit has been made mandatory. 
It is further intimated that supply of meals on trains is being ensured 
from the designated kitchens. The number and location of Base Kitchens 
are decided as per the requirement of meals and route of the trains. Setting 
up/development of Kitchens is an ongoing process and so far, 177 Base 
Kitchens have been commissioned. 
25. The Committee noted that the Business Plan submitted by 
IRCTC was not in accordance with Catering Policy 2017 and, 
therefore, recommended that a revised Business Plan' may be 
submitted. The Committee also impressed upon the Ministry to 
ensure that necessary provisions for quality, hygiene and- cleanliness 
checks and for expeditious setting up of sufficient base kitchens and 
catering units within a time frame ought to be incorporated in the 
revised Business Plan.  

20 
The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has failed 
to address the issue regarding incorporating necessary provisions of 
quality, hygiene and cleanliness checks and for expeditious setting of 
sufficient base kitchens and catering units inside railway premises 
within a timeframe in the revised Business Plan.  The Committee are 
also unhappy to note that the Ministry has not furnished details of 
setting up of base kitchens inside the railway premises. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the Action Taken by the 
Railways in this regard within the stipulated timeframe. The 
Committee are of the opinion that Railways need to draw up a revised 
Business Plan with identified milestones to ensure high level of 
quality, hygiene and cleanliness at all times. 
In the opinion of the Committee, since food was being procured 
by licensee from outside, they were evidently not subjected to regular 
and constant quality checks and thus, could not register an 
assurance for quality.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that 
Railway must not lose sight of the big picture while executing their 
duty to the nation. Cleanliness and hygiene on Indian Railway should 
be manifested as a top priority in the Business Plan that the Railways 
undertake while catering to the heterogeneous crowd. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry displays enhanced enthusiasm 
towards this aspect and lead by example.  
Moreover, till such time base kitchens are established inside 
railway premises, the Ministry must ensure that not only regular 
monitoring is done but also the functionary and supervisory 
authorities should not be the same while engaging private 
parties/vendors. Thus, it is necessary that the terms and conditions of 
the catering contracts bind the contractors to adhere to the basic 
tenets of cleanliness failing which penalty ought to be levied. 
The Committee have noted that there has been manifold surge in 
the number of passengers using railways as their mode of 
transportation. The Committee are not oblivious to the fact that 
catering services is an integral part of passengers amenities and is 
directly proportional to the infrastructure and the passenger footfall. 
The Committee note with concern that since the oversight / review of 
outsourcing in catering units (base kitchens) is not feasible till they 
are established in the railway premises, the Committee intend to know 

21 
as to what measures have been adopted by the Ministry to ensure that 
proper review of licensee from outside is undertaken to achieve the 
desired objectives.  
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations 
urge the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the action taken in this 
regard at the earliest. 
26. The Committee in their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee observe that some Zonal Railways had not ensured 
provision of pantry cars in a number of long distance trains. They find 
that in nine trains having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car 
was provided. Moreover, alternative services through Train Side 
Vending (TSV) and/or base kitchens were also not provided in some 
of the trains. The Committee note that the absence of pantry cars in 
long distance trains and Train Side Vending Services invariably 
attracts unauthorized vendors in trains which results in not only sale 
of unhygienic and unhealthy food products but also poses a safety 
threat for the passengers.  The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that in order to ensure provision of adequate catering 
services for passengers, Zonal Railways have been advised to grant 
Platform Vending Permissions to Static Catering Units.  
While recommending that due diligence may be taken in awarding 
Platform Vending Permissions to Static Catering Units to ensure 
engagement of vendors with excellent credentials and track record, 
the Committee seek to be apprised of the status of granting Platform 
Vending Permission to Static Catering Units. Here, the Committee 
recommend that provision of adequate and quality food to 
passengers in every train should be accorded top most priority and 
necessary steps taken to ensure efficient and adequate catering 
service. It goes here without saying that these services are availed by 
the passengers on ‘user basis’ and IRCTC is only managing the 
services on behalf of the passengers. The Committee are also 
hopeful that a contingency plan has also been put in place for 
provision of food and water to passengers in the event of inordinate 
delays, accidents etc. To ensure that no unauthorized vendors are 
allowed on Indian railways, the Committee recommend that regular 

22 
surprise inspections of catering services provided in trains/ stations 
may be undertaken and the report thereof uploaded immediately on 
an online portal for enabling the senior officers to take immediate 
remedial action against those found responsible. 
[Recommendation (Para No. 5)] 
27. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as 
under:- 
“Attachment of Pantry car in trains depends upon various factors 
such as availability of pantry car, operational feasibility, priority of 
train, duration of journey etc. However, provision of catering services 
to passengers travelling by trains not having pantry car is ensured 
through adequate number of static catering units at en route stations, 
Train Side Vending, E-Catering facilities, Platform Vending Services 
etc. As on 31.12.2023, 544 pairs of trains covering premium trains 
and long distance Mail/Express trains are provided with pantry car 
facility. In addition, 692 pairs of Mail/Express Trains are provided with 
Train Side Vending (TSV) services with meals pick up from en route 
stations. E-catering facility is available at 379 stations. 
Further it is stated that continuous and ongoing efforts are made to 
check on unauthorized vending on trains and platforms with the help 
of RPF. Punitive actions are accordingly taken against the 
unauthorized vendors/hawkers under Section 144 of Indian Railway 
Act 1989 which includes imprisonment, fine or both.  
 
Drives against unauthorized vending are organized by RPF and 
Commercial Staff constantly to check this menace.” 
28. The vetted comments of Audit are as under: 
“MoR has not furnished action taken on online uploading of the 
reports based on surprise inspections of the catering services.” 
29. In response to the vetted comments of Audit, the Ministry replied as 
under: 
 

23 
“Special drives, regular and surprise inspections of catering services 
provided in trains/stations are undertaken. Necessary punitive actions 
are taken against the instances of unauthorized vending/any other 
deficiency in services noticed during the drive/inspection. The 
observations /outcomes /findings are also shared with/communicated 
to the concerned officials for taking further corrective measures.” 
 
30. In para 5 of their 115th Report (17th Lok Sabha), the Committee 
noted that the absence of pantry cars in long distance trains and 
Train Side Vending Services invariably attracts unauthorized vendors 
in trains which results in not only sale of unhygienic and unhealthy 
food products but also poses a safety threat for the passengers. To 
ensure that no unauthorized vendors are allowed on Indian railways, 
the Committee recommended that regular surprise inspections of 
catering services provided in trains/ stations may be undertaken and 
the report thereof uploaded immediately on an online portal for 
enabling the senior officers to take immediate remedial action against 
those found responsible. The Committee are astonished to note that 
Railways are yet to adopt any standard operating procedures or 
performance indicators to upload reports based on surprise 
inspections of the catering services on the online portal. The 
Committee recommend that there should be periodic surprise checks 
by the senior officers and it should be video recorded to clearly keep 
a track record of the cleanliness levels in the pantry cars / base 
kitchens/green field kitchens and same pattern should be vigorously 
followed by all the zones.  
In this connections, the Committee desire that a Task Force 
ought to be constituted to address the issues of cleanliness, gadgets 
and equipment in base kitchen. Moreover, the Ministry must bring out 
a status report on the subject of execution of the earlier 
recommendations especially the number of cases of action taken in 
each Railway Zone in respect of violations notified during surprise 
inspections so far within three months of presentation of this report. 
  

24 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation / Recommendation 
As per Clause 4 of the Catering Policy 2010, all major catering units were 
required to obtain ISO 22000 certification. Audit found that only 1.07 
percent of major units managed by Zonal Railways and 70 percent of units 
managed by IRCTC were ISO 22000 certified as on 31 March 2016 and 
IS0 certification had not been updated in 42 IRCTC units. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Points (HACCP) guidelines are covered under Schedule IV of FSSAI 
Regulations 2011 and all catering units in Indian Railway/IRCTC have 
FSSAl certification. More than 70% of major catering units of IRCTC (Food 
Plazas and Fast Food Units) are ISO 22000 certified as well as registered 
with FSSAI. The Committee are unable to understand as to why 1SO 
22000 and FSSAI certification of all catering units of Indian Railways and 
IRCTC was not made mandatory before engaging them. The Committee 
are hopeful that necessary action has been taken by the Ministry and 
IRCTC to ensure 100% compliance and mandatory adherence to ISO 
22000 and FSSAl certification for all existing catering units in Indian 
Railways. 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 6 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
  To ensure compliance of Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from Designated Food Safety 
Officers of each catering unit has been made mandatory. The same is 
being complied in respect of each catering unit over Indian Railways. 
Further, ISO certifications for major units like Base Kitchens, Food Plaza, 
etc are being obtained progressively. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
 
 Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
  

25 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee note that as per Catering Policy 2017, as per the revised 
protocol of understanding for time bound improvements in catering services 
on " Indian Railways, while the operation of major catering units has been 
mandated to IRCTC, Zonal Railways would continue to supervise and 
monitor catering services provided by IRCTC. The Committee are of the 
view that while responsibilities of IRCTC and Zonal Railways have been 
broadly demarcated, responsibility of the Indian Railways has not been 
earmarked. The Committee are of the opinion that the Indian Railways 
ought to have assumed the crucial task of ensuring that both IRCTC and 
the Zonal Railways adhere to the catering guidelines laid down in the 
Catering Policy, 2017. Noting from the audit observation that the division of 
responsibilities and mechanism of coordination between IRCTC and Zonal 
Railways with regard to daily procurement, preparation and servicing of 
food was not clear, the Committee are optimistic that a mechanism has 
since been put in place and responsibilities have now been clearly 
specified to ensure constant communication and seamless flow of 
information amongst IRCTC and Zonal Railways in their endeavor towards 
improving the quality of catering service to passengers of Indian Railways. 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 7 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
The existing Catering Policy of 2017 envisages clear roles and 
responsibilities between Zonal Railways and IRCTC. This has been done 
keeping passengers’ interest in mind and they (Zonal Railways and IRCTC) 
are mandated to execute their responsibility within the framework of the 
extant policy instructions. The provisions of Catering Policy 2017 are being 
implemented accordingly. 
Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
 

26 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee find that the Ministry conducts Customer Satisfaction 
Survey at various units through third party. In year 2017-18, IRCTC had 
conducted Passenger Satisfaction Survey in 117 Mobile units and 205 
Static units. In year 2018-19, IRCTC had conducted 3 surveys regarding 
passengers' feedback on 'Choice of Menu' and their opinion on Upgraded 
Services in Rajdhani/Shatabdi and Duronto trains'. The Committee feel that 
the objective of improving the customer experience with the Indian 
Railways by conducting satisfaction surveys would be incomplete if no 
follow up improvement measures are taken thereon and the issues are not 
followed to a logical conclusion. The responsibility of the Indian Railways 
and IRCTC does not end by engaging a third party for conducting 
satisfaction surveys. The Committee, therefore wish to be apprised of the 
subsequent follow-up measures undertaken and upgrades initiated by the 
Indian Railways and IRCTC on the basis of various surveys conducted by 
the third party and also desire to be apprised of the suggestions on which 
action has not been taken/pending till date. 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 8 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
Third party Customer Satisfaction surveys are undertaken to get the 
feedback and opinion of traveling passengers through a professional 
market research agency. Consequent upon the findings in these customer 
satisfaction surveys, actions taken inter-alia include the following: 
 
 Ensuring availability of regional cuisines. Implementation of 
rationalized menu in trains so as to introduce the items of regional 
cuisines/preferences, seasonal delicacies, food items as per the 
preferences of different groups of passengers such as diabetic food, 
baby food, health food options including millet based local products, 
etc. 
 Provision of combo meal as second meal of the day in pre-paid trains 
withdrawn. 
 Ensuring maintenance of hygienic practices in Kitchens through 
deployment of Food Safety Supervisors. 

27 
 Introduction of improved packing material including crockery items in 
Vande Bharat rains. 
 Improvement in quality of food production through real time 
monitoring of kitchens. 
 Availability of menu cards with the service personnel was 
emphasized. 
 Supervision and monitoring was strengthened through regular and 
periodic inspections and special drives by the officials of Railways 
and IRCTC. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
 
  

28 
Observation / Recommendation 
During the course of examination of this subject, the Committee found that 
unfair practices were being followed in execution of catering services at 
stations and trains. The Committee note that discrepancies like non-
provision of bills for the food items served in mobile units in trains, non-
availability of printed menu cards with tariff for the list of food items sold in 
the mobile units with waiters and Catering Managers in trains, serving of 
food items less than the prescribed quantity, sale of unapproved packaged 
drinking water, sale of Proprietary Article Depot(PAD) items at Maximum 
Retail Price (MRP) with weight and prices different from the open market, 
sale of food articles in railway premises at higher price etc. do exist in 
almost all catering services. To the utter dismay of the Committee, they 
learn that articles unsuitable for human consumption, contaminated 
foodstuff, recycled food stuff, shelf life expired packaged and bottled items, 
unauthorized brands of water bottles, etc., were offered for sale on stations. 
In reply, the Ministry had stated that surprise inspections are conducted to 
check on the quality, quantity and overcharging of food in Indian Railways, 
punitive action including monetary penalty and debarring and termination of 
contract are done as per gravity of the complaint. To deter and discourage 
unfair practices, the Indian Railways are also undertaking awareness 
campaigns like display of menu/tariff through websites, social media, 
newspaper, "Trains at a Glance' mandatory with waiters, deployment of 
onboard IRCTC supervisors, introduced hand held POS machine with QR 
code for generation of bills, MRP on food boxes, e-mail and SMS based 
complaint facilities etc. While appreciating the steps being taken by the 
Indian Railways towards ensuring fair and transparent catering services, 
the Committee feel that the old, illiterate and passengers without access to 
mobile and internet services are still vulnerable to unfair treatment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to the measures being 
taken by Indian railways and IRCTC, provision for manual 
submission/reporting of complaints may also be made available, in the form 
of installing suggestion/complaint boxes.  
 
Moreover, the Committee feel that the onus of ensuring fairness in catering 
services should be on the Indian Railway and IRCTC rather than leaving it 
to the passengers. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Indian 
Railways and IRCTC exercise vigilant monitoring and impose stringent 
penalty for any divergence from fair practices. Moreover, the Committee 

29 
are optimistic that necessary steps are necessary to be taken to Keep 
unauthorized vendors at bay and contaminated food items are invariably 
removed/ restricted before reaching the passenger. The Committee are 
also hopeful that a mechanism for real time reporting/submission and 
resolution of passenger complaints/grievances have been put in place so 
as to ensure that defective food items are immediately discontinued from 
the supply chain and the unauthorized and erring vendors blacklisted. 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 9 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 It is the continuous endeavor of Indian Railways to provide quality and 
hygienic catering facilities to the passengers. Supervision and monitoring 
mechanism has been strengthened and a robust mechanism has been put 
in place for receiving passenger feedback, complaints through RailMadad 
for real time monitoring. In addition, other sources such as Twitter handle 
@IR CATERING, CPGRAMS, E-Mails, SMS, etc are in place. The 
passengers may also submit the written complaints/grievance with the 
Station Master/Manager/Train Superintendent. It is stated that continuous 
and ongoing efforts are made to check on unauthorized vending on trains 
and platforms with the help of RPF. Punitive actions are accordingly taken 
against the unauthorized vendors/hawkers under Section 144 of Indian 
Railway Act 1989 which includes imprisonment, fine or both. Drives against 
unauthorized vending are organized by RPF and Commercial Staff 
constantly to check this menace. Further, the recommendations of the 
Committee to exercise vigilant monitoring and imposition of stringent 
penalty for any divergence from fair practices have been noted for 
compliance. 
Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 

30 
Observation / Recommendation 
Noting that the responsibility of providing catering services in Indian 
Railways have been given to IRCTC and catering services in Indian 
Railways has been managed by IRCTC since the introduction of the new 
Catering Policy, 2017, the Committee opine that the services provided by 
Railways/IRCTC need to be fine tuned and the policy up-dated on the basis 
of the emerging landscape to streamline the catering network. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the findings of periodic inspections 
or review, if any, conducted by the Ministry, third parties etc. on the 
performance of IRCTC in providing catering services in Indian Railways. 
Further, the Committee while noting that the mandate of IRCTC also 
includes promoting domestic and international tourism through 
development of budget hotels, special tour packages etc., recommend that 
the O/o C&AG may undertake a fresh audit on the performance of IRCTC 
in providing various services, particularly in premium/luxury trains including 
Maharajas' Express.  
(Recommendation/Observation No. 10 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
Performance of IRCTC is evaluated by the Ministry of Railways on the 
basis of achievements of IRCTC against each parameter having targets 
mutually agreed and defined in the performance MOU for each Financial 
Year. Performance Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is a negotiated 
agreement between the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Railways and 
the concerned CPSE i.e. IRCTC. The purpose of the MoU is to measure 
the performance of the management of the CPSE on key selected 
parameters against the targets agreed upon so as to improve the critical 
performance indicators of the organization. 
 Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
 
Observation / Recommendation 

31 
In Summation, the examination of this subject assumes special 
significance, as it pertains to the fourth largest railways of the world. It 
dwells on providing the catering services to a very large number of 
passengers commuting every day which includes a fair number of foreign 
tourists who travel throughout the length and breadth of the country for 
various forms of tourism such as cultural, adventure, leisure and religious 
etc. A good service rendition in terms of good and satisfactory catering 
services needs an all-out effort right from the stage of inception on planning 
till its effective implementation. Such state-of- the-art services would not 
only result in full passenger satisfaction but would also become a symbol to 
reckon with internationally. India Railways and IRCTC should show an 
unwavering efficacy in improving its catering services at all points be it the 
running train or the platforms or any other place where passengers need 
them. This should be a holistic and ever improving exercise for the benefit 
of the commuters.  
(Recommendation/Observation no. 11 of the 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
Indian Railways is committed to provide good quality and hygienic Catering 
Services to the travelling passengers. All efforts are being made to bring 
improvement and innovation in catering services to passengers. Regular 
supervision and monitoring is being done to ensure services as per laid 
down standards. Indian Railways shall continue to put in place all 
necessary measures in this regards. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
No comments. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
 
  

32 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED 
FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

33 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
It is apparent for the Committee to see that as per the new policy, a number 
of catering activities which were assigned to IRCTC in 2005 policy and then 
transferred to Zonal Railways as per 2010 policy, were assigned back to 
IRCTC. The Committee note that for implementation of Catering Policy 
2017, transfer of catering units to IRCTC has already been completed with 
the exception of one mobile unit and 13 static units which were sub-judice. 
The Committee while noting that 15 Kitchen Units were planned to be 
upgraded and 9 Green Field Base Kitchens were to be set up by IRCTC, 
desire to be apprised of the present status of all Kitchen Units envisioned to 
be upgraded; Green Field Base Kitchens to be set up and also the status of 
the sub-judice cases. The Committee hope that Ministry and IRCTC have 
formulated plans to facilitate time bound further upgradation of all catering 
units in line with the emerging requirements and desire to be apprised of 
any plans for setting up additional base kitchens, catering units and 
deadline for completion of such projects.  
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 Action Taken 
 
Transfer of catering units from Zonal Railways to IRCTC as mandated in 
Catering Policy 2017 has been completed over all Zonal Railways. 
Upgradation/Setting up/development of Kitchens is an ongoing process. So 
far, 48 Kitchen Units including Base Kitchens have been 
upgraded/developed by IRCTC from where meals are being supplied in 
trains. The number and location of Kitchens is decided as per the 
requirement of meals and route of the train. The supply of meals on trains 
is being ensured from the designated kitchen units. 
 
 
  

34 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
MoR has not furnished the details sought by the PAC regarding the status 
of all kitchen units envisioned to be upgraded, green field base kitchens to 
be set up, and the status of sub-judice cases. The plans for setting up 
additional base kitchens, or catering units and the  deadline for completing 
such projects were also not furnished. 
 
Ministry’s Reply 
It is reiterated that transfer of catering units from Zonal Railways to IRCTC 
as mandated in Catering Policy 2017 has been completed. The number 
and location of Kitchens is decided as per the requirement of meals and 
route of the train and accordingly supply of meals on trains is being 
ensured from the designated kitchens. Upgradation/Setting 
up/development of Kitchens is an ongoing process and so far, 177 Base 
Kitchens have been commissioned. 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
 
Please refer to Para 10 of Chapter I for the comments of the 
Committee 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee note that Zonal Railways were required to prepare a 
Master Plan (Blue Print) of catering services to be provided at each station 
and onboard trains. The Committee also note that the Blue Print for 
provision of catering services in seven Zonal Railways (East Central, 
Eastern, Northeast Frontier, North Western, South Eastern, South Western 
and East Coast Railways) were prepared only after the Audit pointed out 

35 
the same and that many zonal Railways were not reviewing and updating 
the plan periodically. The Committee while noting that the Blue Print has 
now been prepared by all the 16 zonal railways and it is under 
implementation desire to be apprised of the reasons for the delay in the 
preparing a Blue Print of catering services by the seven zonal railways. The 
Committee are optimistic that necessary instructions have been issued to 
all zonal railways for undertaking periodic review based on which updation 
of the Master Plan may be effected. The Committee while opining that 
proper planning is an integral part of effective functioning in any enterprise 
recommend that the Ministry, IRCTC and Concerned zonal railways must 
undertake a joint review of the functioning vis-à- vis the blue prints 
prepared by each zonal railway every five years for better monitoring of the 
same. 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
As per extant policy, a comprehensive blue print for the catering units at 
each station is prepared by Railways taking into consideration that 
adequate facilities are available to cater to the needs of traveling  
passengers. Station wise Master Plans/ Blue prints have been prepared by 
all Zonal Railways as envisaged in Catering Policy 2017. These Master 
Plans/ Blueprints for each station is prepared by Zonal Railways, in 
coordination with Divisions and IRCTC ensuring that adequate catering 
services are available to the passengers. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
MoR has not furnished any action taken on the recommendation of PAC to 
ensure that the Ministry, IRCTC, and concerned zonal railways must 
undertake a joint review of the functioning vis-à- vis the  blueprints 
prepared by each zonal railway every five years for better monitoring of the 
same. 
Ministry’s Reply 
Station wise Master Plans/Blue Prints have been prepared by all Zonal 
Railways as envisaged in Catering Policy 2017. These Master 
Plans/Blueprints for each station are prepared by Zonal Railways, in 
coordination with Divisions and IRCTC ensuring that adequate  catering 

36 
services are available to the passengers. Review of Master Plan/Blueprint 
for stations is undertaken as and when necessitated due to passenger and 
operational requirements. 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
Please refer to Para 15 of Chapter I for the comments of the 
Committee 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee further note that as per the Catering Policy 2010, mobile 
catering services were to be provided with suitable design pantry cars and 
equipment of state-of-art technology. There was to be progressive switch 
over from gas burners to electric power equipment. The Committee, 
however note that the policy of progressive switch over from gas burners to 
electric power equipment in pantry cars to avoid the occurrence of fire 
accidents specially in running trains was not followed while manufacturing 
the pantry cars in Integral Coach Factory, Perambur. In this regard 
specifically, the Committee find that a total of 103 pantry cars were 
manufactured by Integral Coach Factory during April 2011 to March 2016 
at a total cost of RS. 111.94 crore with provision for centralized LPG 
cylinders with open flames, instead of providing electric power equipment 
panel counters etc. and the same were distributed to alI the Zonal 
Railways. Clarifying its position, the Ministry submitted that it is technically 
not feasible to retrofit an existing Integral Coach Factory (|CF) Pantry car 
with electric power equipment due to heavy power demand of the electrical 
equipment and hence switchover to Linke Hofmann Busch (LHB) coaches 
from ICF is the only viable option. 
The Committee also note that on 10.10.2018, a Joint Procedure Order 
(JPO) for attachment of Pantry Cars was issued entailing provisions to 
switch over from flamed cooking with gas burner in Pantry Cars to 
flameless cooking by using the electrical equipment provided in the re-
designed/modified Pantry Cars. The Committee further note that production 

37 
of ICF pantry cars has been discontinued w.e.f 01.04.2018. Hence, LHB 
pantry cars with electric power equipment will only be manufactured 
henceforth on Indian Railway and cooking with gas burners will be phased 
out in due course of time. The Committee are unable to comprehend the 
reasons as to why 103 pantry cars were manufactured by Integral -Coach 
Factory, during April, 2011 to March 2016 with provision- for centralized-
LPG cylinders with open flame instead of providing electric power 
equipment panel counters despite the provision in Catering Policy 2010 for 
progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment in 
pantry cars. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry must have had 
conducted an internal inquiry to find out the reasons for continuing the 
production of gas based pantry cars till March 2016 and appropriate action 
taken thereon. Noting that as of April, 2018, the Ministry had taken the 
decision to stop the production of ICF coaches and manufacture only LHB 
pantry cars with electric power equipment and phase out the ICF coaces, 
the Committee in no uncertain words recommend that the Ministry need to 
prioritize phasing out the ICF coaches and stocks on its pre- decided 
trajectory. The Committee recommend that the Ministry undertake a survey 
on the present number of trains running with 1CF coaches and formulate a 
cost effective feasible plan to expeditiously replace the ICF coaches with 
LHB coaches without adversely impacting the functioning of the Indian 
Railways and its catering services. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the present status in this regard. 
 (Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Indian Railways is committed to flameless cooking through electric power 
equipment in pantry cars. From April 2018 onwards, only LHB pantry cars 
with electrical equipment are being manufactured. As such switchover from 
flame based pantry in existing ICF pantries to flameless LHB pantries is 
being achieved progressively as envisaged in the extant policy while 
ensuring availability of adequate catering facilities to passengers in trains. 
 
 
 

38 
Audit Vetting Comments 
The reply of MoR is silent on the observation of the committee regarding 
conducting an internal inquiry to find out the reasons for continuing the 
production of gas based pantry cars till March 2016 and appropriate action 
taken thereon. MoR has also not furnished action taken on the 
recommendation of the PAC to undertake a survey on the present number 
of trains running with ICF coaches and formulate a cost-effective feasible 
plant expeditiously replace the ICF coaches with LHB coaches without 
adversely impacting the functioning of the Indian Railways and its catering 
services. 
Ministry’s reply 
 
Indian Railways is committed to flameless cooking through electric power 
equipment in pantry cars. From April 2018 onwards, only LHB pantry cars 
with electrical equipment are being manufactured. Production of ICF pantry 
during the period from 2011 to 2016 continued to ensure provision of 
uninterrupted catering services to passengers during the transition period. 
As such, switchover from flame based pantry in existing ICF pantries to 
flameless LHB pantries is being achieved progressively as envisaged in the 
extant policy. 
 
As regards trains running with ICF coaches, presently 746 ICF rakes are 
being utilised for passenger carrying train operations and Indian Railways 
have been able to convert a total of 1241 ICF rakes into LHB. Further, 
conversion of ICF rakes into LHB rakes is a continuous process on Indian 
Railways being undertaken in a phased manner, based on availability of 
rolling stock. 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
Please refer to Para 20 of Chapter I for the comments of the 
Committee 
 
  

39 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee learn that in the new Catering Policy 2017, the 
responsibility of setting up and operation of base kitchens had been given 
to IRCTC and that base kitchens were to be set up in railway premises to 
monitor and control the quality and hygiene of food served in trains and a 
business plan in this regard was to be submitted within 30 days of issue of 
the policy. As per Audit, only 16 base kitchens were inside the railway 
premises whereas 115 base kitchens were located outside the railway 
premises and were not subjected to quality check. As the available base 
kitchens were not adequate to cater to the needs of the trains, food was 
being procured by licensee from outside instead of being prepared in the 
base kitchens. Further, meals were picked up from outside base kitchens in 
respect of 128 trains of seven Zonal Railways. In the opinion of the 
Committee, since food was being procured by licensee from outside, they 
were evidently not subjected to regular and constant quality checks and 
thus, could not register an assurance for quality, hygiene and cleanliness. 
The Committee note that the Business Plan submitted by IRCTC was not in 
accordance with Catering Policy 2017 and, therefore, a revised Business 
Plan' was submitted. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry have 
ensured that necessary provisions for quality, hygiene and- cleanliness 
checks and for expeditious setting up of sufficient base kitchens and 
catering units within a time frame have been incorporated in the revised 
Business Plan. The Committee desire to be apprised of details of setting up 
base kitchens inside the railwày premises and further desire that a review 
of the services rendered through these kitchens may be undertaken by the 
Ministry to ascertain their effectiveness in maintaining quality, hygiene and 
cleanliness.  
(Recommendation/Observation No. 4 of 115th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 
In an endeavour to ensure good quality and hygienic food production, 
following measures are under implementation:  
 
 Supply of meals in trains from the designated Base Kitchens.  

40 
 Upgradation /development of Base Kitchen /Kitchen Units are being 
undertaken. 
 CCTV Cameras are being installed in upgraded Base Kitchens 
/Kitchen Units for better monitoring of food preparation. 
 QR codes have been introduced on food packets enabling display of 
details like name of kitchen, date of packaging, expiry date etc. 
 Third Party Audit is done to examine hygiene and cleanliness in 
Pantry Cars and Kitchen Units. Customer satisfaction survey is also 
conducted. 
 To ensure compliance of Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from Designated 
Food Safety Officers of each catering unit has been made mandatory. 
 Food Safety Supervisors are being deployed at Kitchen Units to 
monitor food safety and hygienic practices. 
 Regular and surprise inspections are conducted by Railway/IRCTC 
officials including Food Safety Officers 
 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
The reply of MoR does not address the observation of the committee 
regarding incorporating necessary provisions for quality, hygiene and 
cleanliness checks and for expeditious setting up of sufficient base 
kitchens and catering units within a time frame in the revised Business 
Plan. MoR has also not furnished the details of setting up base kitchens 
inside the railway premises. 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
Measures taken for ensuring quality, hygiene and cleanliness have been 
intimated in the earlier replies which are reiterated as under: 
 
● Supply of meals in trains from the designated Base Kitchens. 
● Setting up /development of Base Kitchen /Kitchen Units are being 
undertaken as per the laid down standards. 
● CCTV Cameras are being installed in upgraded Base Kitchens 
/Kitchen Units for better monitoring of food preparation. 

41 
● QR codes have been introduced on food packets enabling display of 
details like name of kitchen, date of packaging, expiry date etc. 
● Third Party Audit is done to examine hygiene and cleanliness in 
Pantry Cars and Kitchen Units. Customer satisfaction survey is also 
conducted. 
● To ensure compliance of Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from Designated Food 
Safety Officers of each catering unit has been made mandatory. 
 
It is further intimated that supply of meals on trains is being ensured from 
the designated kitchens. The number and location of Base Kitchens are 
decided as per the requirement of meals and route of the trains. Setting 
up/development of Kitchens is an ongoing process and so far, 177 Base 
Kitchens have been commissioned. 
 
 
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
Please refer to Para 25 of Chapter I for the comments of the 
Committee 
Observation / Recommendation 
The Committee observe that some Zonal Railways had not ensured 
provision of pantry cars in a number of long distance trains. They find that 
in nine trains having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car was 
provided. Moreover, alternative services through Train Side Vending (TSV) 
and/or base kitchens were also not provided in some of the trains. The 
Committee note that the absence of pantry cars in long distance trains and 
Train Side Vending Services invariably attracts unauthorized vendors in 
trains which results in not only sale of unhygienic and unhealthy food 
products but also poses a safety threat for the passengers. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that in  order to ensure provision of 
adequate catering services for passengers, Zonal Railways have been 
advÍsed to grant Platform Vending Permissions to Static Catering Units. 
While recommending that due diligence may be taken in awarding Platform 

42 
Vending Permissions to Static Catering Units to ensure engagement of 
vendors with excellent credentials and track record, the Committee seek to 
be apprised of the status of granting Platform Vending Permission to Static 
Catering Units. Here, the Committee recommend that provision of 
adequate and quality food to passengers in every train should be accorded 
top most priority and necessary steps taken to ensure efficient and 
adequate catering service. It goes here without saying that these services 
are availed by the passengers on 'user basis' and IRCTC is only managing 
the services on behalf of the passengers. The Committee are also hopeful 
that a contingency plan has also been put in place for provision of food and 
water to passengers in the event of inordinate delays, accidents etc. To 
ensure that no unauthorized vendors are allowed on Indian railways, the 
Committee recommend that regular surprise inspections of catering 
services provided in trains/ stations may be undertaken and the report 
thereof uploaded immediately on an online portal for enabling the senior 
officers to take immediate remedial action against those found responsible. 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 5 of 115th Report of  
Public Accounts Committee) 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
  
Action Taken 
Attachment of Pantry car in trains depends upon various factors such as 
availability of pantry car, operational feasibility, priority of train, duration of 
journey etc. However, provision of catering services to passengers 
travelling by trains not having pantry car is ensured through adequate 
number of static catering units at en route stations, Train Side Vending, E-
Catering facilities, Platform Vending Services etc. As on 31.12.2023, 544 
pairs of trains covering premium trains and long distance Mail/Express 
trains are provided with pantry car facility. In addition, 692 pairs of 
Mail/Express Trains are provided with Train Side Vending (TSV) services 
with meals pick up from en route stations. E-catering facility is available at 
379 stations.  
Further it is stated that continuous and ongoing efforts are made to check 
on unauthorized vending on trains and platforms with the help of RPF. 
Punitive actions are accordingly taken against the unauthorized 
vendors/hawkers under Section 144 of Indian Railway Act 1989 which 

43 
includes imprisonment, fine or both. Drives against unauthorized vending 
are organized by RPF and Commercial Staff constantly to check this 
menace.  
Audit Vetting Comments 
MoR has not furnished action taken on online uploading of the reports 
based on surprise inspections of the catering services. 
Ministry’s reply 
Special drives, regular and surprise inspections of catering services 
provided in trains/stations are undertaken. Necessary punitive actions are 
taken against the instances of unauthorized vending/any other deficiency in 
services noticed during the drive/inspection. The observations /outcomes 
/findings are also shared with/communicated to the concerned officials for 
taking further corrective measures.  
Sd/- 
Pawan Kumar Kalarwal  
Executive Director (S&E) 
Railway Board 
(Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/115th Report) 
Please refer to Para 30 of Chapter I for the comments of the 
Committee 
 
 
  

44 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 

45 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

46 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
            a. XXXXXXXXXXX 
     b. XXXXXXXXXXX 
     c. XXXXXXXXXXX 
d. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their 115th Report (17th LS) on ‘Catering Services in Indian Railways’ 
     e. XXXXXXXXXXX 
     f. XXXXXXXXXXX 

47 
     g. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    h. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    i. XXXXXXXXXXX 
    
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
  

48 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
 
Total: 06 
Percentage: 
54.54 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 
45.45 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which the Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  
 
 