 
 
05 
BLOCKAGE OF CAPITAL DUE TO NON-
COMPLETION OF APPROACH ROADS: 
CENTRAL RAILWAY 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety third Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


  
PAC No. 2388  F I F T H  R E P O R T   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2024-25) (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)                                [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety third Report (17th Lok Sabha)]                                                                                         Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.12.2024 Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   17.12.2024    L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I  December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka)   
BLOCKAGE OF CAPITAL DUE TO NON-COMPLETION OF APPROACH ROADS: CENTRAL RAILWAY            

i 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 03.12.2024 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their Ninety third  Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr. Faiz Ahmad                  -                  Under Secretary 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety third Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Blockage of 
capital due to non-completion of approach roads: Central Railway" relating to the 
Ministry of Railways. 
 
2. The Ninety third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 07.02.2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report on the 
subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 03.12.2024. Minutes of the Sitting 
of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 93rd Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                               K. C. VENUGOPAL 
03 December, 2024                Chairperson, 
12 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                            Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
            This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Ninety third Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Blockage of capital due to 
non-completion of approach roads: Central Railway” 
2. The Ninety third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on -
07.02.2024.  It contained two Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes 
on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs, and are categorized as under: 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.  2 and 3 
a                                                                                                                            
                                                                  Total:       2       
                                                                                                      Chapter -   II  
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
      Para No. NIL 
                                                                                                      Total:         0 
     
                                                                                                      Chapter - III 
 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
      Para No. NIL                                                                          
                                                                                                      Total: 0 
                                                                                                      Chapter - IV 
 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/no replies: 
      Para No. NIL                                                  
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                          Total:        
 0   
                                                                                                      Chapter - V 
  

2 
 
  
3.         The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Railways, which inter-alia 
included non-compliance with the directives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board 
and non-commissioning of ROBs etc. The Committee had accordingly given their 
observations/recommendations in their Ninety Third Report. 
4.         The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways, on each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety Third 
Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The Committee 
will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
5.         The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken Notes in 
respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
  
Need for stringent regulatory mechanism for compliance 
  
Paragraph 2 of PAC Report No. 93 (17th Lok Sabha) 
 6.         The Committee note from audit observation that despite Ministry of Railways 
directives of May 2008, Central Railway Administration did not obtain the requisite 
Undertakings from the State Government in case of both the ROBs and executed the 
work of ROBs without ensuring the commensurate progress by the State PWD. As a 
result, the ROBs could not be commissioned even after a lapse of four years after 
completion of Railway's portion of the work of bridge proper and Capital expenditure of 
Rs 18.75 crore incurred by Railway Administration on the above two ROBs remain 
blocked due to non-completion of approach portion of ROBs by PWD. Work of 
construction of the two ROBs was to be completed within a period of 18 months from 
the date of commencement of work. However, in both the cases, work could not be 
completed even after seven years after commencement and Level Crossings (LCs) 
could not be closed. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that 
Consent of cost sharing and closure of level crossing after construction of ROB had 
been taken from the state government and the Railway had started the portion of ROB 

3 
 
within Railway boundary in 2014 and would have possibly been completed by October, 
2016. The Committee are of the view that the requisite undertaking for timely 
completion of work and encumbrance free land should have been taken from the State 
Government in case of both the ROBs. The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
need to find out the officers responsible for not undertaking the necessary consultation 
process before executing the project and apprise the Committee of the action taken, if 
any of the officials in this regard 
7.         The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in their Action Taken Notes have 
stated as under:- 
            “The Ministry of Railways directives were issued in May 2008 after 
sanction of Road Over Bridge in lieu of LC no. 99-A (Sanction year 1996). 
Consent of cost sharing and consent of level crossing gate closure was taken in 
the year 2011-12 and 1996-97 respectively. Railway started the work of 
construction of ROBs after start of work in the approaches of both ROBs by State 
Govt. The start of the work in the approaches is sufficient to prove their priority 
for the work and commitment towards early land acquisition. Therefore, Railway 
took up the work for completion more of less simultaneously with the completion 
of the State Portion. Land acquisition is one of the major constraints in 
construction of the Road Over Bridge. The state government had been requested 
to expedite and complete the work in approaches as fast as possible but land 
acquisition is a time consuming and complex process, hence there is no specific 
undertaking of time period to complete the work of approaches. Due to delay in 
work of approaches in state portion, state government was chased regularly by 
Central Railway through letters as mentioned in table given below.” 
  
S. 
No. Letter date Subject From To 
1 15.09.2017 Expediting the 
land acquisition 
process and 
completing the 
approach road of 
the ROB at LC no. 
99/A 
Dy.CE(C) 
BSL/DO/NiphadROB/III 
District Collector 
and Public Works 
Department, 
(Nashik) 
2 07.12.2017 
3 20.03.2018 
4 25.03.2018 
5 30.09.2020 
6 29.10.2020 
7 30.04.2021 
8 21.02.2022 
9 23.06.2022 
10 29.06.2022 

4 
 
11 27.12.2021 EW/ROB/Genl/N iphad 
District Collector 
and Public Works 
Department, 
(Nashik) 
12 24.06.2022 
ROB at LC No. 
144 Various 
correspondences 
were made in the 
past with State 
PWD for 
expediting the 
progress of work. 
Dy.CE(C) 
BSL/DO/MWD ROB 
District Collector 
and Public Works 
Department, 
(Nashik) 
13 29.06.2022 
14 05.05.2022 
15 21.02.2022 
16 27.12.2021 
17 30.04.2021 
18 29.10.2020 
19 30.09.2020 
20 25.03.2019 
21 20.08.2018 
22 20.03.2018 
  
  
8.         While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
  
“Audit vide their U.O. No. 427-Rly/CR/12-09/2021 dated 05.06.2024 vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:- Road Over Bridge in lieu of LC 
no. 144 (at Mhasawad) was sanctioned in the year 2012-13 after issuance of the 
directive (May 2008) of MoR. Hence, fact remains that CR administration did not 
take requisite Undertaking from State Government which was in contrary to 
MoR's order issued (May 2008) in this regard. MoR has not furnished any 
information regarding the measures taken to find out the officers responsible for 
not undertaking necessary consultation process before executing the project and 
the action taken in this regard, as recommended by the Committee. MoR is 
requested to forward the ATR along with Audit comments to the PAC for their 
consideration.” 
  
  
  
  
Ministry’s comments:  
  
Railway and state Govt. started the construction of LC no. 144 (at Mhasawad) 
ROB in their respective portion almost simultaneously but work on approaches 
stopped many times and for many years due to land acquisition issue and later 
court case regarding this. Railway pursued the matter with state Govt. regularly 
for expediting the work.  
  
Present status of approach road:  
  

5 
 
Land acquisition for both the approach roads at LC 144 has been completed. The 
work for construction of ROB in lieu of LC no. 144 is targeted to be 
commissioned by Dec-2024. Nobody is individually responsible in this matter 
because Railway had already completed Railway portion work in Dec 2016 i.e. 8 
years back. Approach work is being done by State PWD and they have already 
completed the UP side approach 2 years back and DN side work was held up for 
many years due to a court case in land acquisition issue. The same has already 
been resolved in Dec 23 and work is in progress in full swing and likely to be 
completed by Dec.’ 24. 
  
9.         The Committee had observed a persistent delay in the construction 
of Road Over Bridges (ROBs). Based on the responses from the Ministry 
of Railways, the Committee believe there are significant lapses in the 
regulatory and compliance mechanisms between the Ministry and the 
State Government of Maharashtra, particularly since directives were 
issued by the Ministry in 2008. The Committee note that the Railway 
Administration failed to secure the necessary commitments from the State 
Government regarding LC No. 144 at Mhasawad. This failure not only 
contravened official directives but also resulted in a blockage of capital 
expenditure amounting to Rs. 18.75 crores due to the incomplete work on 
the State's part. 
The Ministry’s justification that simultaneous work on both portions of the 
ROB indicates the State Government’s commitment is found by the 
Committee as questionable. The prolonged delays, primarily attributed to 
land acquisition and court cases, could have been mitigated if the Ministry 
had enforced a more stringent compliance mechanism and initiated 
effective consultations from the outset. Moreover, the Committee highlight 
the numerous communications between the Railways and the State Public 
Works Department (PWD), which reveal a bureaucratic stalemate. In 
response to the Committee’s recommendation that the Ministry identify 
the officials responsible for failing to engage in the necessary consultation 
process prior to project execution, the Ministry stated that no individual 
could be held accountable. The Committee find it surprising that, despite a 

6 
 
delay of over four years and the blocking of public funds amounting to Rs. 
18.75 crores, the Ministry's assertion that no one is individually 
responsible raises several concerns.  
  
While the Committee acknowledge the external challenges, such as land 
acquisition issues and court cases, the failure to hold anyone accountable 
reflects a broader failure of governance and oversight. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend identifying officials accountable for the Ministry's 
failure to secure commitments from the State Government and to actively 
engage with them. The ROB project, originally expected to be completed 
within 18 months, has now extended over eight years. The Ministry's 
stance that the Railway portion of the ROB was completed in 2016, while 
the State Government's delay in finishing the approach road halted the 
project, suggest that Railway authorities are more focused on their 
responsibilities rather than the overall completion and utilization of the 
project. This indicates a clear lack of decisive action or accountability and 
reflects a lack of urgency and proper oversight from the Ministry. 
Consequently, the Committee urges the Ministry to fix accountability on 
the involved officials and to review systemic errors in the procedures. 
  
  
  
Consultative mechanism to iron out land related issues 
  
Paragraph 3 of PAC Report No. 93 (17th Lok Sabha) 
  
10.   Noting from audit observation, the Committee find that due to non-commissioning 
of the ROBs and non-closure of Level Crossings Central Railways further incurred an 
avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1.04 crore towards pay and allowances of Gatemen 
manning the two LCs in addition to the expenditure on maintenance of these LCs for the 
period April 2017 to December 2021. Besides, Railway would continue to incur the 
expenditure on manning and maintenance of LCs until their closure. Though the State 
government also started the work in 2012 but work couldn't be completed as few issues 
in land acquisitions surfaced. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note 
that there is no failure in following the system and following the procedure laid down. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should have ensured the 
commensurate progress by the PWD before execution of work. The Committee are of 

7 
 
the view that most of the ROB infrastructure projects face challenges relating to land 
acquisition and right-of-way for construction. ROBs often require substantial land area 
and acquiring private properties and negotiating with landowners can be time 
consuming and complex. Legal and administrative procedures have to be followed to 
ensure fair compensation to the parties so as to minimize the possibility of disputes. For 
this, planning and coordination with local authorities as also shareholders is necessary 
with a view to effectively ironing out the difficulties. The Committee opine that MoR, 
while preparing the detailed project should invariably consult the local elected 
representatives and also consider appointment of consultants to oversee the planning 
and coordination with local authorities/landowners so that such projects do not suffer 
delays due to land acquisition/right of way related disputes. The Committee are also of 
the view that the Ministry of Railways need to henceforth explore the possibility of 
arriving at a cost sharing agreement with the concerned State Government and 
thereafter pay the full cost in the first instance and realize the State's share of the cost 
alongside the execution of work and deposit the amount so realized in a dedicated 
account for the project. This would not only ensure completion of work in time but would 
also rationalize cost sharing agreements between the Railway administration and the 
concerned State(s). The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest status in the 
matter. 
  
11.       The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
“Railway started the work of construction of ROBs after start of work in the 
approaches of both ROBs by State Govt. The start of the work in the 
approaches is sufficient to prove their priority for the work and commitment 
towards early land acquisition. Therefore, Railway took up the work for 
completion more or less simultaneously with the completion of the State 
Portion. Legal and administrative procedures have also been followed in 
this case to ensure fair compensation to the parties. Similarly, planning 
and co-ordination of the Road crossing works is done in consultation with 
local authorities. Accordingly, the General Arrangement Drawing (GAD) 
and Alignment plan are jointly signed with the State Govt. However, the 
committee opinion regarding consultation with local elected 
representatives will also be considered in the future planning and 
execution of Road Over Bridges. Moreover, as per revised policy, Road 
crossing works at all LCs can be sanctioned at 100% Railway cost 
irrespective of TVU of LCs, except on National Highways (NH) and where 
State Govt./ Road Owning Authority/ Local Authority wants to take-up the 
works at its cost. As such the requirement of cost sharing agreement has 
been minimized.  
The latest status of both the Road Over Bridges given below:  
1. LC no. 144 Rly Portion Completed in Oct '16. Approach-I (Jalgaon end) 
- Completed. Approach-II (Mhasawad end) Land acquisition completed in 
Dec '23. Now work has started. TDC-Dec '24.  

8 
 
2. LC no. 99-ARly Portion Completed in Mar '17. Approach-I and II Only 
part work done. Balance held up due to land acquisition issues. Land 
Acquisition in progress (600 m approach length) - Towards Pimpalgaon 
side affected patch A3-A4 about 400 m length. Towards Niphad about 200 
m patch (A6 to CH:1300m) is pending due to Land Acquisition dispute and 
matter in High Court.  
System Improvement  
No officer is therefore responsible for delay in the execution of these ROB 
works. To streamline the system, Railway Board has now issued 
guidelines and made it mandatory to prepare the Detailed Project Report 
at the proposal stage itself i.e. before sanctioning of work, so that area 
and cost for land acquisition and likely issues in land acquisition and utility 
shifting may be predetermined and action can be taken accordingly.”  
12.       Audit vide their U.O. No. 427-Rly/CR/12-09/2021 dated 05.06.2024 vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks:-  
“No further comments.” 
13.       The Committee had opined that Ministry of Railways, while preparing the 
detailed project should invariably consult the local elected representatives and 
also consider appointment of consultants to oversee the planning and 
coordination with local authorities/landowners so that such projects do not suffer 
delays due to land acquisition/right of way related disputes. The Ministry in their 
reply have stated that committee opinion regarding consultation with local 
elected representatives will also be considered in the future planning and 
execution of Road Over Bridges. However, details of the mechanism for its 
implementation have not been spelt out for this purpose. The Committee desire 
that the status in this regard be apprised to the Committee. The Committee had 
also observed that the Ministry of Railways needed to henceforth explore the 
possibility of arriving at a cost sharing agreement with the concerned State 
Government and thereafter pay the full cost in the first instance and realize the 
State's share of the cost alongside the execution of work and deposit the amount 
so realized in a dedicated account for the project. This would not only ensure 
completion of work in time but would also rationalize cost sharing agreements 
between the Railway administration and the concerned State(s). The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have stated that as per revised policy, the requirement of 
cost sharing agreement has been minimized. The Committee, while appreciating 
the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard, desire that latest status of action 
taken in compliance with the recommendation be apprised to the Committee.  
******* 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee note from audit observation that despite Ministry of Railways directives 
of May 2008, Central Railway Administration did not obtain the requisite Undertakings 
from the State Government in case of both the ROBs and executed the work of ROBs 
without ensuring the commensurate progress by the State PWD. As a result, the ROBs 
could not be commissioned even after a lapse of four years after completion of 
Railway's portion of the work of bridge proper and Capital expenditure of Rs 18.75 crore 
incurred by Railway Administration on the above two ROBs remain blocked due to non-
completion of approach portion of ROBs by PWD. Work of construction of the two ROBs 
was to be completed within a period of 18 months from the date of commencement of 
work. However, in both the cases, work could not be completed even after seven years 
after commencement and Level Crossings (LCs) could not be closed. From the 
submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note that Consent of cost sharing and 
closure of level crossing after construction of ROB had been taken from the state 
government and the Railway had started the portion of ROB within Railway boundary in 
2014 and would have possibly been completed by October, 2016. The Committee are of 
the view that the requisite undertaking for timely completion of work and encumbrance 
free land should have been taken from the State Government in case of both the ROBs. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry need to find out the officers responsible for 
not undertaking the necessary consultation process before executing the project and 
apprise the Committee of the action taken, if any of the officials in this regard 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 2 of 93rd Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
Action taken 

10 
 
 “The Ministry of Railways directives were issued in May 2008 after sanction of 
Road Over Bridge in lieu of LC no. 99-A (Sanction year 1996). Consent of cost 
sharing and consent of level crossing gate closure was taken in the year 2011-12 
and 1996-97 respectively. Railway started the work of construction of ROBs after 
start of work in the approaches of both ROBs by State Govt. The start of the work 
in the approaches is sufficient to prove their priority for the work and commitment 
towards early land acquisition. Therefore, Railway took up the work for 
completion more of less simultaneously with the completion of the State Portion. 
Land acquisition is one of the major constraints in construction of the Road Over 
Bridge. The state government had been requested to expedite and complete the 
work in approaches as fast as possible but land acquisition is a time consuming 
and complex process, hence there is no specific undertaking of time period to 
complete the work of approaches. Due to delay in work of approaches in state 
portion, state government was chased regularly by Central Railway through 
letters as mentioned in table given below.” 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 
“vetted the Action Taken Note with the following remarks:- Road Over Bridge in 
lieu of LC no. 144 (at Mhasawad) was sanctioned in the year 2012-13 after 
issuance of the directive (May 2008) of MoR. Hence, fact remains that CR 
administration did not take requisite Undertaking from State Government which 
was in contrary to MoR's order issued (May 2008) in this regard. MoR has not 
furnished any information regarding the measures taken to find out the officers 
responsible for not undertaking necessary consultation process before executing 
the project and the action taken in this regard, as recommended by the 
Committee. MoR is requested to forward the ATR along with Audit comments to 
the PAC for their consideration.” 
 
 
Ministry’s comments: 
 
Railway and state Govt. started the construction of LC no. 144 (at Mhasawad) 
ROB in their respective portion almost simultaneously but work on approaches 
stopped many times and for many years due to land acquisition issue and later 
court case regarding this. Railway pursued the matter with state Govt. regularly 
for expediting the work.  
 
Present status of approach road:  
 
Land acquisition for both the approach roads at LC 144 has been completed. The 
work for construction of ROB in lieu of LC no. 144 is targeted to be 
commissioned by Dec-2024. Nobody is individually responsible in this matter 
because Railway had already completed Railway portion work in Dec 2016 i.e. 8 
years back. Approach work is being done by State PWD and they have already 
completed the UP side approach 2 years back and DN side work was held up for 

11 
 
many years due to a court case in land acquisition issue. The same has already 
been resolved in Dec 23 and work is in progress in full swing and likely to be 
completed by Dec.’ 24. 
 
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/93rdReport) 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. 427-Rly/CR/12-09/2021 dated 
05.06.2024 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Noting from audit observation, the Committee find that due to non-commissioning of the 
ROBs and non-closure of Level Crossings Central Railways further incurred an 
avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1.04 crore towards pay and allowances of Gatemen 
manning the two LCs in addition to the expenditure on maintenance of these LCs for the 
period April 2017 to December 2021. Besides, Railway would continue to incur the 
expenditure on manning and maintenance of LCs until their closure. Though the State 
government also started the work in 2012 but work couldn't be completed as few issues 
in land acquisitions surfaced. From the submissions of the Ministry, the Committee note 
that there is no failure in following the system and following the procedure laid down. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should have ensured the 
commensurate progress by the PWD before execution of work. The Committee are of 
the view that most of the ROB infrastructure projects face challenges relating to land 
acquisition and right-of-way for construction. ROBs often require substantial land area 
and acquiring private properties and negotiating with landowners can be time 
consuming and complex. Legal and administrative procedures have to be followed to 
ensure fair compensation to the parties so as to minimize the possibility of disputes. For 
this, planning and coordination with local authorities as also shareholders is necessary 
with a view to effectively ironing out the difficulties. The Committee opine that MoR, 
while preparing the detailed project should invariably consult the local elected 
representatives and also consider appointment of consultants to oversee the planning 
and coordination with local authorities/landowners so that such projects do not suffer 
delays due to land acquisition/right of way related disputes. The Committee are also of 
the view that the Ministry of Railways need to henceforth explore the possibility of 
arriving at a cost sharing agreement with the concerned State Government and 
thereafter pay the full cost in the first instance and realize the State's share of the cost 
alongside the execution of work and deposit the amount so realized in a dedicated 
account for the project. This would not only ensure completion of work in time but would 
also rationalize cost sharing agreements between the Railway administration and the 
concerned State(s). The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest status in the 
matter. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 93rd Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Action Taken 
 
“Railway started the work of construction of ROBs after start of work in the 
approaches of both ROBs by State Govt. The start of the work in the approaches 
is sufficient to prove their priority for the work and commitment towards early land 
acquisition. Therefore, Railway took up the work for completion more or less 
simultaneously with the completion of the State Portion. Legal and administrative 
procedures have also been followed in this case to ensure fair compensation to 
the parties. Similarly, planning and co-ordination of the Road crossing works is 
done in consultation with local authorities. Accordingly, the General Arrangement 
Drawing (GAD) and Alignment plan are jointly signed with the State Govt. 
However, the committee opinion regarding consultation with local elected 
representatives will also be considered in the future planning and execution of 
Road Over Bridges. Moreover, as per revised policy, Road crossing works at all 
LCs can be sanctioned at 100% Railway cost irrespective of TVU of LCs, except 
on National Highways (NH) and where State Govt./ Road Owning Authority/ 
Local Authority wants to take-up the works at its cost. As such the requirement of 
cost sharing agreement has been minimized.  
The latest status of both the Road Over Bridges given below:  
1. LC no. 144 Rly Portion Completed in Oct '16. Approach-I (Jalgaon end) 
- Completed. Approach-II (Mhasawad end) Land acquisition completed in 
Dec '23. Now work has started. TDC-Dec '24.  
2. LC no. 99-ARly Portion Completed in Mar '17. Approach-I and II Only 
part work done. Balance held up due to land acquisition issues. Land 
Acquisition in progress (600 m approach length) - Towards Pimpalgaon 
side affected patch A3-A4 about 400 m length. Towards Niphad about 200 
m patch (A6 to CH:1300m) is pending due to Land Acquisition dispute and 
matter in High Court.  
System Improvement  
No officer is therefore responsible for delay in the execution of these ROB 
works. To streamline the system, Railway Board has now issued 
guidelines and made it mandatory to prepare the Detailed Project Report 
at the proposal stage itself i.e. before sanctioning of work, so that area 
and cost for land acquisition and likely issues in land acquisition and utility 
shifting may be predetermined and action can be taken accordingly.” 
 Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2024-BC-PAC-XVII/93rdReport) 
 
Vetting comments of Audit 
 

13 
 
No further comments 
 
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. 427-Rly/CR/12-09/2021 dated 
05.06.2024 
 
******** 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
NIL 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                               K. C. VENUGOPAL 
03 December, 2024                Chairperson, 
12 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                            Public Accounts Committee 
  

17 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 03rd DECEMBER 2024 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, the 3rd of December 2024, from 
1600 hrs to 1745 hrs in Committee Room '3', Block A, First Floor, Extension to 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri Jai Parkash 
5. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
6. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
8. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
11. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
15. Dr. K. Laxman 
16. Shri Praful Patel 
17. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
18. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
19. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
 

18 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following six draft reports may be 
taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
b) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
c) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
d) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
e) Action Taken by the Government on the  Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 93rd Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Blockage of capital due to non-completion of approach roads: Central 
Railway”; and 
f) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX. 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has 
been kept on record. 
  

19 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 2 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos.  2, and 3 
Total: 2 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 