 
 
23 
 
 
 
LOSS DUE TO INDECISION OF RAILWAY 
ADMINISTRATION IN THE MATTER OF LAND 
ACQUISITION: EAST CENTRAL RAILWAY  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 97thReport (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


  
 
PAC NO. 2417       T W E N T Y - T H I R D  R E P O R T    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA)         
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 97thReport (17th Lok Sabha)]     Presented to Lok Sabha on:  25/07/2025             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   25/07/2025   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I   JULY, 2025 /SHRAAVANA, 1947 (Saka)  
 LOSS DUE TO INDECISION OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION IN THE MATTER OF LAND ACQUISITION: EAST CENTRAL RAILWAY  

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
   
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iv) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 18th Sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2024-25) held on 29-04-2025. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety-
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C M Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.    Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.  Sanjeev Sharma                - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P          - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Pragya Nama                 - Assistant Committee Officer 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-Third Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) "Loss due to indecision of Railway Administration in 
the Matter of Land Acquisition: East Central Railway"relating to the Ministry of 
Railways (MoR).  
 
2. The Ninety-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 7th February, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received.The Public 
Accounts Committee (2024-25) considered and adopted the Twenty-Third Report at 
their Sitting held on 29th April, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form 
appendix to the Report. 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninety-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI   K. C. Venugopal 
22July, 2025 Chairperson, 
31Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accountsdeals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Loss due 
to indecision of Railway Administration in the Matter of Land Acquisition: East 
Central Railway" relating to the Ministry of Railways (MoR).  
 
2. The Ninety Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 07.02.2024.  It contained eight Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.     
       
         Total:        8 
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 NIL 
         Total:    NIL      
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 NIL           
         Total:     NIL 
         Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 NIL      
           
           
         Total:    NIL    
         Chapter -V

 
 
2 
 
3.  The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Railways which inter-
alia includedlack of prudent decision-making and timely payments resulting in 
avoidable extra expenditure of ₹134.21 crore; lapses and mismanagement in the 
land acquisition process, particularly in East Champaran; lack of coordination 
between the Railway Administration and District Authorities, leading to disputes and 
delays in land acquisition etc. The Committee had accordingly given their 
observations/recommendations in their Ninety Seventh Report. 
4. The Committee had accordingly given their observations / Recommendations 
in the 97th Report (17th Lok Sabha).  The gist of important Observations 
/Recommendations as contained in the Report as given as under:- 
 The Committee find that a focal point of concern highlighted in the audit 
para revolves around the land acquisition process in East Champaran. 
The Railway Administration's interactions with the Collector/District 
Magistrate of East Champaran and  State Authoritiesas scrutinized by 
Audit, throw light on delays, disputes over cost, and their subsequent 
impact on the overall project expenditure. The Committee’s analysis 
highlight a critical juncture in the timeline, particularly in the failure to 
address the payment issue for the land already acquired from the 28 
villages.   
 
 The Committee consider the Railway Administration's response, citing  
lack of funds and delayed award declarations by District Authorities, 
unacceptable. The Committee also observe that the Railway's lack of 
prudent decision-making and timely payments resulted in avoidable 
extra expenditure, underscoring the importance of meticulous financial 
planning and adherence to land acquisition policies. 
 
 The Committee, note that there have been several shortcomings related 
to financial planning, land acquisition procedures and coordination 
between the Railway Administration and District Authorities. The 
Committee also note with concern that the Railway Administration 
incurred an avoidable additional expenditure of ₹134.21 crore due to the 
lack of prudent decision-making and delayed payments. The Railway 
Administration's response, citing paucity of funds and delayed award 
declaration, is unacceptable, emphasizing the need for meticulous 
financial planning and adherence to land acquisition policies, ab-initio.  
 
 The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure consistency in their 
explanations and provide detailed justifications for changes in project 
parameters to uphold transparency and accountability. Regarding Land 
acquisition process, the Committee observe a series of lapses and 
mismanagement in the land acquisition process, particularly in East 

 
 
3 
 
Champaran. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
conduct a thorough review of land acquisition procedures to ensure 
adherence to land acquisition policies, preventing delays, disputes, and 
cost escalations in all future projects. 
 
 The Committee, here, emphasize that the Ministry must adhere to 
existing land acquisition laws and policies and establish internal 
mechanisms to ensure compliance with legal and procedural 
requirements. Any revisions or modifications to estimates should be 
clearly justified and documented. Further, recognizing the complexity of 
land acquisition processes, the Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry should invest in capacity building for its personnel involved in 
project planning and execution which must include professional training 
on financial management, policy compliances, effective communication 
strategies and cost escalation mitigations.  
 
 The Committee are pained to notethat the Hajipur – Sagauli via Vaishali 
New Line Project was sanctioned in the year 2003-04, however, the 
project is yet to see the light of the day. Keeping the above failurein the 
mind, the Committee recommend the Ministry to establish a mechanism 
for timely and adequate fund allocation in future to address land 
acquisition requirements. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry develop a comprehensive strategy to address delays in land 
acquisition payments, taking into account inter alia the possible impact 
on the persons from whom the land is acquired. 
 
 The Committee also recommend that the Ministry develop a 
comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition payments, 
taking into account inter alia the possible impact on the persons from 
whom the land is acquired. This should include clear timelines for 
payment disbursement and measures to mitigate the potential hardships 
faced by landowners. The Ministry should also consider collaborating 
with relevant state authorities and experts to enhance its understanding 
of local laws and dynamics, particularly in areas where projects are 
implemented. 
 
5.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway 
Board) on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Ninety Seventh Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this 
Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
6.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of 

 
 
4 
 
the Report, positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to 
the Parliament. 
A. Assessment of reasons for delays in land acquisition 
 
7.  The Committee had found that huge cost escalation was registered as 
compared from the initial sanctioning of Rs 324.66 crore in 2003-04 to the 
subsequent detailed estimate of Rs 528.65 crore in October 2007, and a revised 
estimate-cum-material modification amounting to a staggering Rs 2,066.78 crore in 
January 2019. The Committee had also taken note of the trajectory of cost 
escalation and the underlying factors contributing to such significant adjustments. 
The Committee find that a focal point of concern highlighted in the audit para 
revolves around the land acquisition process in East Champaran. The Railway 
Administration's interactions with the Collector/District Magistrate of East Champaran 
and State Authorities as scrutinized by Audit, throw light on delays, disputes over 
cost, and their subsequent impact on the overall project expenditure. The 
Committee's analysis had highlighted a critical juncture in the timeline, particularly in 
the failure to address the payment issue for the land already acquired from the 28 
villages. The Committee had taken note of the consequences of the Railway 
Administration's decisions, leading to avoidable extra expenditures amounting to Rs 
134.21 crore. 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
8.  The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes has stated as under:- 
  
 “ Land under three districts i.e,Vaishali, Muzaffarpur and West Champaran 
was already acquired by making proper interaction and collaboration with 
state authorities and payment of all required demand. But, non-payment of 
cost of required land in initial years for East Champaran Dist., where major 
portion of land acquisition was involved, was an issue. Interaction and 
collaboration with State Govt in connection with land acquisition was 
only possible after payment of demanded cost of land. But, there was 
fund constraint in initial years which was not sufficient for both land payment 
and construction activities even in initial stretches starting from Hajipur and 
due to this, payments couldn’t be made in those years. But just after payment 
of balance dues in the year 2016 & 2017 under Dist- East Champaran, 
meetings with district administration were commenced for timely acquisition of 
land.” 
 
9. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
  
 “No comments” 
 
10. The Committee had taken note of the consequences of the Railway 
Administration's indecision, leading to avoidable extra expenditure amounting 
to Rs 134.21 crore.The Ministry inits action taken note has stated that after 

 
 
5 
 
payment of balance dues in the year 2016 & 2017 under Dist- East Champaran, 
meetings with district administration were commenced for timely acquisition 
of land. As regards, the Ministry’s stand relating to fund constraint in initial 
years, the Committee are of the view that  the Ministry need to strengthen their 
financial planning models for future projects to ensure that accurate 
estimation of sufficient funds required for land payment and construction 
activities may be made for smooth progression of work. In this context, the 
Committee note that while understanding the fund constraints in initial years 
would like to highlight that delay in completion of railway projects affects 
common citizens adversely thereby impacting their connectivity and strategic 
importance. The Committee observe that the land acquisition particularly 
related to development works should not result in paralyzing the railway 
services to the public. The Committee thus hope that in future such delays  
may be avoided or be reduced to a minimum.  
Considering the fact that land is a highly valuable resource and the peril of 
encroachment of the land can not be disregarded, as such, the Committee are 
of the considered opinion that concerted efforts be made to collaborate with 
local bodies and authorities to address encroachment and unauthorised 
occupation on the land which have been earmarked for a specific use  and all 
necessary steps must be taken to ensure that the encroached land, if any, is 
reclaimed. The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to prepare a 
statement indicating balance dues paid during FY 2016-17 status of execution 
of selected and pending land acquisition, if any, not only in the East 
Champaran District but also in other stretches of the Hajipur-Sagauli via 
Vaishali New Line Project. The Committee also desire that the Statement may 
also include reasons for non acquisition of stretches of land  with status. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of progress on the 
entire project. 
B. Need for meticulous financial planning 
 
11. The Ministry had explained that the initial demand for ₹58.76 crore in 2006 
could not be met due to insufficient fund allotment, leading to a deposit of only ₹1.0 
crore. The subsequent revised estimate in 2007 had seen a deposit of only 17.0 
crore. When the Committee had questioned the Ministry about the significant 
increase in the estimated cost of the HajipurSagauli New Line project from ₹324.66 
crore to ₹2,066.78 crore, the Ministry clarified that the detailed estimate of Rs 528.65 
crore in 2007 faced the problem of insufficient fund availability initially, resulting in 
delayed payments for land acquisition. The process of land acquisition began in 
Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, and West Champaran, with payment made only for these 
districts before 2012. The cost of land in East Champaran was later revised due to 
the New Land Acquisition Act coming into force contributing to the overall cost 
increase, compounded by rising expenses in materials, labor, fuel, and machinery,  

 
 
6 
 
as well as adjustments for salary structures from the 6th and 7th Pay Commission. 
The Committee, after comprehensive review of the Hajipur-Sagauli New line project 
had expressed serious concern over the significant cost escalation from the initial 
estimate of ₹324.66 crore to the Revised Estimate-cum-Material Modification of 
₹2,066.78 crore. The Committee, had noted that there have been several 
shortcomings related to financial planning, land acquisition procedures and 
coordination between the Railway Administration and District Authorities. The 
Committee had also noted with concern that the Railway Administration incurred an 
avoidable additional expenditure of ₹134.21 crore due to the lack of prudent 
decision-making and delayed payments. The Railway Administration's response, 
citing paucity of funds and delayed award declaration, was found unacceptable, 
emphasizing the need for meticulous financial planning and adherence to land 
acquisition policies, ab-initio. 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
12. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes has stated as under:- 
 “Proper financial planning for this project could not be done during initial years 
due to paucity of fund. Shortcomings related to financial planning, land 
acquisition procedures and coordination between the Railway Administration 
and District Authorities were resolved after interaction with State Govt. 
authorities. Now, proper financial planning with adhering to land acquisition 
procedure is being adopted in other railway projects from very beginning also. 
This effort has resulted in a reduction in avoidable additional expenditure from 
₹134.21 crore as demanded earlier wrongly by State Govt as per New Land 
Acquisition Act to Rs. 22.22 Cr as per old Land Acquisition Act in this project 
and subsequently extra payment made in this project was refunded to 
Railway, details of which have already been intimated to Railway Board in 
December 2023. As of now, no extra payment has been made by Railway for 
this project.” 
 
13. While vetting the above ATNs, Audit made the followingobservation:- 
“No comments” 
14. The Committee had noted that the Railway Administration incurred an 
avoidable additional expenditure of ₹134.21 crore due to the lack of prudent 
decision-making and delayed payments. The Railway Administration's 
response had cited among others, paucity of funds and delayed award 
declaration as reasons for the delay. As per the Ministry, the Committee’s 
insistence on the need for meticulous financial planning and adherence to 
land acquisition policies has been noted and shortcomings related to financial 
planning, land acquisition procedures and coordination between the Railway 
Administration and District Authorities were resolved after interaction with 

 
 
7 
 
State Govt. authorities. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry 
ought to have exercised abundant caution while planning  projects involving 
land acquisition  and adequate budget allocation.The Committee hope that the 
changes broughtby the Ministry will assist in fast-tracking of future 
projects.However, the Ministryshould  ensure that  the financial planning for  
land acquisition and coordination between the Railway Administration and 
District Authorities should be well laid down in the DPR. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend  the Ministry to focus on developing and monetizing its 
existing land bank, maximising the value of these assets and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. 
C. Need for Comprehensive policy for project execution 
 
15. At this stage, the Committee can only lay emphasis on the need on the 
part of the Ministry to implement robust financial planning mechanisms in future to 
prevent such drastic escalations and emphasizing the Importance of timely allocation 
and disbursement of funds too. The Committee note the discrepancies in the 
Ministry's responses regarding the reduction in land requirement and the subsequent 
cost implications. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to ensure 
consistency in their explanations and provide detailed justifications for changes in 
project parameters to uphold transparency and accountability. Regarding Land 
acquisition process, the Committee observe a series of lapses and mismanagement 
in the land acquisition process, particularly in East Champaran. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to conduct a thorough review of land acquisition 
procedures to ensure adherence to land acquisition policies, preventing delays, 
disputes, and cost escalations in all future projects. 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
16. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes has stated as under:- 
“Earlier requirement of land was estimated and based on which detailed 
estimate was sanctioned. But during commencement of execution at site, 
railway became acquainted with actual site condition which was different in 
comparison to what estimated in earlier time during sanction of project. Land 
requirement was also reduced in terms of various circulars and instruction 
published from time to time. Hence land required as per guideline for laying 
new rail line with providing minimum essential amenities in best economic 
manner. 
Railway have already been following a comprehensive policy to address the 
delays in future projects and fund allotment is being provided in projects with 
clear time line and payment disbursement for land acquisition for railway 
projects. Railway is making proper collaboration with state govt official for land 

 
 
8 
 
acquisition with adhering land acquisition procedure as per extant provisions 
and act.” 
17. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 “No comments”  

 
 
9 
 
18. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry conduct a thorough 
review of land acquisition procedures to ensure adherence to land acquisition 
policies, preventing delays, disputes, and cost escalations in all future 
projects. The Ministry in its reply has mentioned that Railway has been 
following a comprehensive policy to address the delays in future projects and 
fund allotment and  disbursement  are being done with clear time lines. The 
Ministry has further maintained that Railway is making proper collaboration 
with State Government for land acquisition  while acquiring land as per extant 
provision of the Act. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry had 
no mechanism in place to gauge the actual site conditions which led to 
avoidable loss to the exchequer thereby causing delay in execution of the 
project.  Keeping the lackadaisical manner and approach by the Ministry in 
view, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to apprise the Committee of 
the action taken to remove palpable bottlenecks in land acquisition in a time 
bound manner. Further, as far as the presence of a comprehensive policy 
within Railways is concerned, the Committee wonder if the said 
comprehensive policyfinds a mention of avoidable delays in land acquisition 
and consequent time and cost overruns.  
D. Need for mechanisms for speedy land acquisition 
 
19. In regard to a specific query on the efforts made to secure additional 
funds in 2012 to make the payment of Rs. 3.20 crore, especially considering the 
demands from the District Administration, the Ministry intimated that allocation to a 
railway project is made as overall priority of projects and availability of funds. 
Regarding the refund of Rs. 134.21 crore by the State Government to the Railway 
for 28 villages in West Champaran under the old Land Acquisition Act, the Ministry 
clarified that 80% payment was made in 2007, and consequent to the discussions 
with the District Authority, the cost was revised to Rs. 22.22 crore. The extra 
payment was refunded through the payment of land acquisition costs for other 
railway projects in the region. In response to concern of the Committee about the 
delayed compensation to villagers, the Ministry stated that land acquisition filing and 
demands were made by the District Administration, but the land was not handedover 
until 2020. The Ministry highlighted steps taken to prevent future delays, including 
the establishment of Gati Shakti Units, project prioritization, increased fund 
allocation, delegation of powers, and close monitoring. The Committee express their 
dissatisfaction with the Railway Administration's failure to deposit Rs. 58.76 crore in 
2006 for land acquisition in East Champaran, leading to avoidable extra expenditure. 
The Committee are pained to note that the Hajipur-Sagauli via Vaishali New Line 
Project was sanctioned in the year 2003-04, however, the project is yet to see the 
light of the day. The Committee after having reviewed and assessed the details 
surrounding the Hajipur-Sagauli New Line Project are of the view that in future 
whenever a new project is sanctioned, it must be meticulously planned and sufficient 
funds should be made available upfront. The crux of the present issue relate to the 
fact that during the initial phase of the project, only token grants were sanctioned by 
the Ministry. Keeping the above failure in the mind, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to establish a mechanism for timely and adequate fund allocation in future to 

 
 
10 
 
address land acquisition requirements. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry develop a comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition 
payments, taking into account inter alia the possible impact on the persons from 
whom the land is acquired. This should include clear timelines for payment 
disbursement and measures to mitigate the potential hardships faced by 
landowners. The Ministry should also consider collaborating with relevant state 
authorities and experts to enhance its understanding of local laws and dynamics, 
particularly in areas where projects are implemented. Keeping the above failure in 
the mind, the Committee recommend the Ministry to establish a mechanism for 
timely and adequate fund allocation in future to address land acquisition 
requirements. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry develop a 
comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition payments, taking into 
account inter alia the possible impact on the persons from whom the land is 
acquired. This should include clear timelines for payment disbursement and 
measures to mitigate the potential hardships faced by landowners. The Ministry 
should also consider collaborating with relevant state authorities and experts to 
enhance its understanding of local laws and dynamics, particularly in areas where 
projects are implemented. 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
20. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes has stated as under:- 
 “Rs. 134.21 crore was refunded by State Government to the Railway for 28 
villages in West Champaran as per the old Land Acquisition Act consequent 
to the discussions with the District Authority, the cost was revised to Rs. 22.22 
crore. Demand of Rs. 58.76 Cr in year 2006 could not be made due to non 
availability of sufficient fund in initial years. However 17 Cr was provided for 
payment of 80% of land losers in 28 villages. As major portion of payment was 
provided and land had also been under possession of land losers till final 
payment. Railway was in regular touch with State Govt in connection with land 
acquisition but non-payment of demanded cost was one of the reason for 
delay in handing over of land. Further,  all the demanded cost of Rs. 796 Cr 
was paid in the year 2016 & 2017 but even though state administration was 
not pro active for land acquisition under this district of East Champaran. 
Railway officials were regularly chasing for acquisition of land but state govt 
officials were silent on these issues till year 2020. Further, railway has opted 
comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition issues with 
minute study of possible impact on the persons from whom the land is 
acquired. A mechanism i.e PMG developed through which proper interaction, 
meetings with Railway officials to State Govt official arranged and as a result, 
all land in this district has been received till Nov, 2023. Further, Railway has 
marked the projects as per their priority and other importance and accordingly 
sufficient fund is being allocated for speedy execution of works. Railway has 
effective communication channels and coordination mechanisms to address 
issues promptly and accordingly being enacted with emphasizing adherence 
to existing land acquisition laws and policies. Railway has been following a 

 
 
11 
 
comprehensive strategy to address the delays in future projects and fund 
allotment is being provided in projects with clear time line and payment 
disbursement for land acquisition for railway project of ECR. Railway is 
making proper collaboration with state govt official for land acquisition with 
adhering land acquisition procedure as per extant provisions of Act.”  
21. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“No comments” 
22. Observing that the Hajipur-Sagauli via Vaishali New Line Project was 
sanctioned in the year 2003-04, and the project is yet to see the light of the 
day, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry develop a 
comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition payments, 
taking into account inter-alia the possible impact on the persons from whom 
the land is being acquired and that the Ministry should also consider 
collaborating with relevant State authorities and experts to enhance 
understanding of local laws and dynamics, particularly in areas where projects 
are implemented. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has mentioned that a 
mechanism i.e PMG was developed through which proper interaction and 
meetings with Railway officials and State Government officialswere arranged 
and as a result, all land in East Champaran District had been received till 
November, 2023. The Committee would like to be apprised of the duration by 
which the Ministry was able to finally acquire the land for the New Line Project 
i.e. Hajipur-Sagauli via Vaishali and also the time taken to acquire the land 
through thenewly introduced PMG mechanism along with the parameters 
which are considered to be the bedrock of implementation of this mechanism. 
The Committee opine that the Ministry of Railways should be sensitive to 
understand that Railways being the lifeline of the nation and delays not only 
affect a large section of population but also has far reaching consequences in 
terms of development of a region. The Committee, therefore,desire that the 
Ministry to carry out an intensive study to flag the reasons for probable 
bottlenecks and delays so as to be better equipped to deal with unforeseen 
situations with bare minimum delay in execution of projects and to the time  
and cost overruns. 
  

 
 
12 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 Consequent to the sifting of all the material and information - mainly from the 
written information and depositions made before the Committee, they have come to 
certain observations and recommendations which are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of this part of the Report. This report examines the evolution of the 
project's financial landscape, scrutinizing the decisions and actions undertaken by 
the Railway Administration, District Authorities, and State Authorities in East 
Champaran in regard to the acquisition of the land required for the new railway line 
project. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 1 of 97th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 No Comment. 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee have reviewed and assessed the details surrounding the Hajipur - 
Sagauli New Line project, as highlighted in the audit para. Initiated by the Ministry of 
Railways (MoR) in 2003-04, the project had to undergo substantial changes in its estimated 
costs, particularly in regard to land acquisition an integral component contributing 
significantly to the overall expenditure. The audit reveals a series of events, spanning over a 
decade that culminated in noteworthy financial implications, especially concerning the 
acquisition of land for the project. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 2 of 97th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 

 
 
13 
 
 
 Action Taken 
Yes, it is true that instant estimate has undergone substantial change in its 
estimated cost since sanction of project since 2003-04. This is because of less 
allocation of fund in initial years which was not sufficient to cater to the whole 
demand of land of the project. However, railway has taken appropriate decision at 
that time to invest those less allocated fund in initial stretches of the project for 
commissioning of section in phase wise manner. This was the effort taken at that 
time due to which commissioning of 35.5 Km could be possible in year 2020 and 
revenue is being earned from this section from Hajipur to Vaishali.  
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 “No comments”  
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee find that huge cost escalation was registered as compared 
from the initial sanctioning of Rs 324.66 crore in 2003-04 to the subsequent detailed 
estimate of Rs 528.65 crore in October 2007, and a revised estimate-cum-material 
modification amounting to a staggering Rs 2,066.78 crore in January 2019. The 
Committee also take note of the trajectory of cost escalation and the underlying 
factors contributing to such significant adjustments. The Committee find that a focal 
point of concern highlighted in the audit para revolves around the land acquisition 
process in East Champaran. The Railway Administration's interactions with the 
Collector/District Magistrate of East Champaran and State Authorities as scrutinized 
by Audit, throw light on delays, disputes over cost, and their subsequent impact on 
the overall project expenditure. The Committee's analysis highlight a critical juncture 
in the timeline, particularly in the failure to address the payment issue for the land 
already acquired from the 28 villages. The Committee note the consequences of the 
Railway Administration's decisions, leading to avoidable extra expenditures 
amounting to Rs 134.21 crore which are dealt in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 97th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 Land under three districts i.e,Vaishali, Muzaffarpur and West Champaran was 
already acquired by making proper interaction and collaboration with state authorities 

 
 
14 
 
and payment of all required demand. But, non-payment of cost of required land in 
initial years for East Champaran Dist., where major portion of land acquisition was 
involved, was an issue. Interaction and collaboration with State Govt in connection 
with land acquisition was only possible after payment of demanded cost of land. But, 
there was fund constraint in initial years which was not sufficient for both land 
payment and construction activities even in initial stretches starting from Hajipur and 
due to this, payments couldn’t be made in those years. But just after payment of 
balance dues in the year 2016 & 2017 under Dist- East Champaran, meetings with 
district administration were commenced for timely acquisition of land.  
 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
 
 [ Please refer to Para 10 of Chapter I for the comments of the Committee] 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that the Railway Administration incurred an 
additional expenditure of ₹134.21 crore that could have been avoided with timely 
payment. The Committee consider the Railway Administration's response, citing a 
lack of funds and delayed award declarations by District Authorities, unacceptable. 
The Committee also observes that the Railway's lack of prudent decision-making 
and timely payments resulted in avoidable extra expenditure, underscoring the 
importance of meticulous financial planning and adherence to land acquisition 
policies. 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 4 of 97th Report of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
  
 
Action Taken 
 
 Yes it is true that Railway administration had incurred an additional expenditure of 
Rs. 134.21 Cr as demanded by the State Govt wrongly as per New Land Acquisition Act at 
that time which could be avoided if sufficient allocation of fund was made available in this 
project in initial years. However, subsequently  this increased cost had been pruned down  to 
Rs. 22.22 Cr as per Old Land Acquisition Act on Railway's request and extra payment made 
earlier by Railway as per New Land Acquisition Act  was refunded by State Govt to Railway. 

 
 
15 
 
Now onwards Railway has been acting as per guideline of PAC in other railway projects 
under ECR. 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Ministry have explained that the initial demand for ₹58.76 crore in 2006 
could not be met due to insufficient fund allotment, leading to a deposit of only ₹1.0 
crore. The subsequent revised estimate in 2007 saw a deposit of only 17.0 crore. 
When the Committee questioned the Ministry about the significant increase in the 
estimated cost of the HajipurSagauli New Line project from ₹324.66 crore to 
₹2,066.78 crore, the Ministry clarified that the detailed estimate of Rs 528.65 crore in 
2007 faced the problem of insufficient fund availability initially, resulting in delayed 
payments for land acquisition. The process of land acquisition began in Vaishali, 
Muzaffarpur, and West Champaran, with payment made only for these districts 
before 2012. The cost of land in East Champaran was later revised due to the New 
Land Acquisition Act coming into force contributing to the overall cost increase, 
compounded by rising expenses in materials, labor, fuel, and machinery, as well as 
adjustments for salary structures from the 6th and 7th Pay Commission. The 
Committee, after comprehensive review of the Hajipur-Sagauli New line project 
express serious concern over the significant cost escalation from the initial estimate 
of ₹324.66 crore to the Revised Estimate-cum-Material Modification of ₹2,066.78 
crore. The Committee, note that there have been several shortcomings related to 
financial planning, land acquisition procedures and coordination between the 
Railway Administration and District Authorities. The Committee also note with 
concern that the Railway Administration incurred an avoidable additional expenditure 
of ₹134.21 crore due to the lack of prudent decision-making and delayed payments. 
The Railway Administration's response, citing paucity of funds and delayed award 
declaration, is unacceptable, emphasizing the need for meticulous financial planning 
and adherence to land acquisition policies, ab-initio.  
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 5 of 97thReport of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
  

 
 
16 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Proper financial planning for this project could not be done during initial years 
due to paucity of fund. Shortcomings related to financial planning, land acquisition 
procedures and coordination between the Railway Administration and District 
Authorities were resolved after interaction with State Govt. authorities. Now, proper 
financial planning with adhering to land acquisition procedure is being adopted in 
other railway projects from very beginning also. This effort has resulted in a 
reduction in avoidable additional expenditure from ₹134.21 crore as demanded 
earlier wrongly by State Govt as per New Land Acquisition Act to Rs. 22.22 Cr as per 
old Land Acquisition Act in this project and subsequently extra payment made in this 
project was refunded to Railway, details of which have already been intimated to 
Railway Board in December 2023. As of now, no extra payment has been made by 
Railway for this project.  
 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
[Please refer to Para 14 of Chapter I for the comments of the Committee] 
   
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 At this stage, the Committee can only lay emphasis on the need on the part of 
the Ministry to implement robust financial planning mechanisms in future to prevent 
such drastic escalations and emphasizing the Importance of timely allocation and 
disbursement of funds too. The Committee note the discrepancies in the Ministry's 
responses regarding the reduction in land requirement and the subsequent cost 
implications. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to ensure consistency in 
their explanations and provide detailed justifications for changes in project 
parameters to uphold transparency and accountability. Regarding Land acquisition 
process, the Committee observe a series of lapses and mismanagement in the land 
acquisition process, particularly in East Champaran. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to conduct a thorough review of land acquisition procedures 
to ensure adherence to land acquisition policies, preventing delays, disputes, and 
cost escalations in all future projects. 

 
 
17 
 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 6 of 97thReport of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
Earlier requirement of land was estimated and based on which detailed 
estimate was sanctioned. But during commencement of execution at site, railway 
became acquainted with actual site condition which was different in comparison to 
what estimated in earlier time during sanction of project. Land requirement was also 
reduced in terms of various circulars and instruction published from time to time. 
Hence land required as per guideline for laying new rail line with providing minimum 
essential amenities in best economic manner. 
Railway have already been following a comprehensive policy to address the 
delays in future projects and fund allotment is being provided in projects with clear 
time line and payment disbursement for land acquisition for railway projects. Railway 
is making proper collaboration with state govt official for land acquisition with 
adhering land acquisition procedure as per extant provisions and act. 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
 
[Please refer to Para 18 of Chapter I for the comments of the Committee] 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee also learn that due to insufficient funds in the Initial years, the 
complete cost of land in all four districts (Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, East Champaran, 
and West Champaran) for the railway line originating from Hajipur could not be paid 
at once. Land filing was completed in all four districts, with payment made for 
Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, and West Champaran before 2012. However, the cost of land 
in East Champaran was revised under the New Land Acquisition Act, and the 
revised estimate of Rs. 796.28 crore in January 2016 was paid later when funds 
became available. In regard to the revised estimates the Committee have been given 
to understand by the Ministry that the Railway had requested the District Authority to 
review costs for 21 out of 49 villages in East Champaran. Although the cost was 
reduced to Rs. 236.65 crore, it was not even paid due to insufficient funds. The 

 
 
18 
 
revised amount was eventually paid as funds became available. The Ministry 
attributed the delayed payment of Rs. 58.76 crore in 2005-06 to limited funds in the 
initial years, prioritizing land acquisition and construction in Vaishali and Muzaffarpur 
for phase-wise commissioning. The Committee express concern over the lack of 
coordination between the Railway Administration and District Authorities, leading to 
disputes and delays. The Committee recommend the Ministry to establish effective 
communication channels and coordination mechanisms to address Issues promptly 
and avoid unnecessary complications. The Committee, here, emphasize that the 
Ministry must adhere to existing land acquisition laws and policies and establish 
internal mechanisms to ensure compliance with legal and procedural requirements. 
Any revisions or modifications to estimates should be clearly justified and 
documented. Further, recognizing the complexity of land acquisition processes, the 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry should invest in capacity building for its 
personnel involved in project planning and execution which must include 
professional training on financial management, policy compliances, effective 
communication strategies and cost escalation mitigations.      
  
[Observations/Recommendation No. 7 of 97thReport of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 It cannot be overruled that there was fund constraint in initial years and 
payment of demand of cost of Rs. 236.65 Cr was not made available to State Govt at 
that time and due to which cost escalated in future. Moreover, Railway is also of the 
view that this cost of Rs. 236.65 Cr is a reduced cost on specific effort of Railway in 
spite of funds crunch at that time. Railway has already effective communication 
channels and coordination mechanisms to address issues promptly and accordingly 
is being enacted with emphasizing adherence to existing land acquisition laws and 
policies. All the revisions or modifications to estimates is being clearly justified and 
documented. However, Ministry will arrange professional training on financial 
management, policy compliances, effective communication strategies and cost 
escalation mitigations alongwith mechanism to develop capacity building for its 
personnel involved in project planning and execution.  
 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
Observation/Recommendation 

 
 
19 
 
 
In regard to a specific query on the efforts made to secure additional funds in 
2012 to make the payment of Rs. 3.20 crore, especially considering the demands 
from the District Administration, the Ministry intimated that allocation to a railway 
project is made as overall priority of projects and availability of funds. Regarding the 
refund of Rs. 134.21 crore by the State Government to the Railway for 28 villages in 
West Champaran under the old Land Acquisition Act, the Ministry clarified that 80% 
payment was made in 2007, and consequent to the discussions with the District 
Authority, the cost was revised to Rs. 22.22 crore. The extra payment was refunded 
through the payment of land acquisition costs for other railway projects in the region. 
In response to concern of the Committee about the delayed compensation to 
villagers, the Ministry stated that land acquisition filing and demands were made by 
the District Administration, but the land was not handed over until 2020. The Ministry 
highlighted steps taken to prevent future delays, including the establishment of Gati 
Shakti Units, project prioritization, increased fund allocation, delegation of powers, 
and close monitoring. The Committee express their dissatisfaction with the Railway 
Administration's failure to deposit Rs. 58.76 crore in 2006 for land acquisition in East 
Champaran, leading to avoidable extra expenditure. The Committee are pained to 
note that the HajipurSagauli via Vaishali New Line Project was sanctioned in the 
year 2003-04, however, the project is yet to see the light of the day. The Committee 
after having reviewed and assessed the details surrounding the Hajipur-Sagauli New 
Line Project are of the view that in future whenever a new project is sanctioned, it 
must be meticulously planned and sufficient funds should be made available upfront. 
The crux of the present issue relate to the fact that during the initial phase of the 
project, only token grants were sanctioned by the Ministry. Keeping the above failure 
in the mind, the Committee recommend the Ministry to establish a mechanism for 
timely and adequate fund allocation in future to address land acquisition 
requirements. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry develop a 
comprehensive strategy to address delays in land acquisition payments, taking into 
account inter alia the possible impact on the persons from whom the land is 
acquired. This should include clear timelines for payment disbursement and 
measures to mitigate the potential hardships faced by landowners. The Ministry 
should also consider collaborating with relevant state authorities and experts to 
enhance its understanding of local laws and dynamics, particularly in areas where 
projects are Implemented. Keeping the above failure in the mind, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to establish a mechanism for timely and adequate fund 
allocation in future to address land acquisition requirements. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry develop a comprehensive strategy to address delays in 
land acquisition payments, taking into account inter alia the possible impact on the 
persons from whom the land is acquired. This should include clear timelines for 
payment disbursement and measures to mitigate the potential hardships faced by 
landowners. The Ministry should also consider collaborating with relevant state 
authorities and experts to enhance its understanding of local laws and dynamics, 
particularly in areas where projects are implemented. 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 8 of 97thReport of the Public  
Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 

 
 
20 
 
Rs. 134.21 crore was refunded by State Government to the Railway for 28 villages in 
West Champaran as per the old Land Acquisition Act consequent to the discussions 
with the District Authority, the cost was revised to Rs. 22.22 crore. Demand of Rs. 
58.76 Cr in year 2006 could not be made due to non availability of sufficient fund in 
initial years. However 17 Cr was provided for payment of 80% of land losers in 28 
villages. As major portion of payment was provided and land had also been under 
possession of land losers till final payment. Railway was in regular touch with State 
Govt in connection with land acquisition but non-payment of demanded cost was one 
of the reason for delay in handing over of land. Further,  all the demanded cost of 
Rs. 796 Cr was paid in the year 2016 & 2017 but even though state administration 
was not pro active for land acquisition under this district of East Champaran. Railway 
officials were regularly chasing for acquisition of land but state govt officials were 
silent on these issues till year 2020. Further, railway has opted comprehensive 
strategy to address delays in land acquisition issues with minute study of possible 
impact on the persons from whom the land is acquired. A mechanism i.e PMG 
developed through which proper interaction, meetings with Railway officials to State 
Govt official arranged and as a result, all land in this district has been received till 
Nov, 2023. Further, Railway has marked the projects as per their priority and other 
importance and accordingly sufficient fund is being allocated for speedy execution of 
works. Railway has effective communication channels and coordination mechanisms 
to address issues promptly and accordingly being enacted with emphasizing 
adherence to existing land acquisition laws and policies. Railway has been following 
a comprehensive strategy to address the delays in future projects and fund allotment 
is being provided in projects with clear time line and payment disbursement for land 
acquisition for railway project of ECR. Railway is making proper collaboration with 
state govt official for land acquisition with adhering land acquisition procedure as per 
extant provisions of Act. 
(Railway Board O.M. No. 2024-BC-PAC -XVII/97thReport  
dated 23.04.2024) 
 
Audit Vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN 
“No comments” 
(Audit vide their U.O. No. 596/Rly/ECR/12-26/2019  
dated 20.08.2024)  
  
[Please refer to Para 22 of Chapter I for the comments of the Committee] 
 
   

 
 
21 
 
  

 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
24 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:     K C VENUGOPAL 
22July, 2025       Chairperson, 
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)                               Public Accounts Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 29 APRIL, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, 29 April, 2025 from 1303 
hrs to 1425 hrs in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
3. Shri Jai Parkash 
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
5. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
6. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
7. Dr. Amar Singh 
8. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri Praful Patel 
13. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
14. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
26 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Atreyee Das Deputy C&AG 
2.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri  Deputy C&AG 
3.  Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj Deputy C&AG 
4.  Ms. Yashodhara Ray Chaudhuri Addl. Deputy C&AG 
5.  Shri Samar Thakur  Director General 
6.  Shri Anadi Mishra Director General 
 
  At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) 
to the Sitting of the Committee. He invited suggestions of the Members on the 
following four Draft Reports. 
i. XXXXXXX       XXXXXXX        XXXXXXX XXXXXXX   XXXXXXX  
ii. Draft Action Taken Report on the 97th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on "Loss due to indecision of Railway Administration in the Matter of 
Land Acquisition: East Central Railway" relating to the Ministry of 
Railways (MoR). 
iii. XXXXXXX       XXXXXXX        XXXXXXX XXXXXXX   XXXXXXX  
iv. XXXXXXX       XXXXXXX        XXXXXXX XXXXXXX   XXXXXXX  
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise 
the Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINTY SEVENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  08 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee         Total : 08  
which have been accepted by the Government:           Percentage: 100 
 Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 & 8 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  - Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 0 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos. - Nil 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 0 
  
 Para No.    Nil 
******* 