 
 
08 
EXTRA EXPENDITURE DUE TO DELAY IN 
FINALIZING POWER PURCHASE 
AGREEMENTS THROUGH OPEN ACCESS-
WEST CENTRAL RAILWAY 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Ninety ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
PAC No. 2391 
 
E I G H T H  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
     
                       
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Ninety ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
                                                                                       
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   17.12.2024 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
  
EXTRA EXPENDITURE DUE TO 
DELAY IN FINALIZING POWER 
PURCHASE AGREEMENTS THROUGH 
OPEN ACCESS-WEST CENTRAL 
RAILWAY 

i 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.12.2024. 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their Ninety ninth  Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh        -                  Committee Officer 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Ninety ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Extra 
Expenditure due to delay in finalizing power purchase Agreements through 
Open Access: West Central Railway” relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway 
Board). 
 
2. The Ninety ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken 
Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12.12.2024. 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 99th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 December, 2024               Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                        Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Ninety Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Extra Expenditure due to delay 
in finalizing power purchase Agreements through Open Access: West Central 
Railway” relating to the Ministry of Railways. 
 
2. The Ninety Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 07 February, 2024, contained three 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry 
of Railways have been broadly categorized as under : 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1-3 
 
                  Total:      03      
Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
   Total:         0 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
             NIL 
Total:  0  
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            NIL  
Total:      00 
Chapter - V 

 
 
2 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Railways.  The Committee had 
accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Ninety Ninth Report.   
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety Ninth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this 
Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which 
require reiteration/merit comments.  
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken Notes 
in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of the report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the report to the Parliament.   
6         Recommendation at Para No. 2 
      The Committee noted from audit observation that despite Ministry of 
Railways’ instructions/repeated instructions of February/ March/April 2015 to 
ensure timely procurement of ‘Availability Based Tariff’ (ABT) compliant 
meters at the Traction Substations (TSS) points in 2015-16, the West Central 
Railway (WCR) Administration did not promptly do the needful to secure and 
install the necessary equipment (ABT meters). The ABT meters were finally 
procured and installed between the period 10 January 2017 and 20 April 
2017. Thus, there was delay of more than a year in the procurement of ABT 
meters as well as in preparation of estimates resulting into huge extra 
expenditure of Rs. 75.10 crore during the period from 15 March 2016 to 10 
January 2017. From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee noted that 
this activity did not involve Railway network alone. It involved State agencies 
and their network also, where Railway had no direct access, and without 
consent and involvement of the State agencies, ABT meters could not have 
been installed. Procurement of ABT meters and associated equipment could 
not be initiated without knowing the suitability/compatibility of ABT meters and 
associated equipment with the State Transmission Utilities (STUs) network 
and they continued to delay the matter on these issues. The Committee 
observe that it was only four months after Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission’s (CERC) order dated 05.11.2015 confirming the Railway as 
‘Deemed Licensee’ eligible for procurement of power through Open Access, 
that the Railway wrote letters on 04.03.2016, 24.03.2016, 12.04.2016 and 
25.04.2016 to RVPN with a request to provide ABT meters & 0.2 S class 
CT/PT. This resulted in wastage of four precious months. Further, from the 
submission made by the Ministry, the Committee noted that Zonal Railways 
were advised on 27.05.15 to provide details of ABT meters to Railway Energy 
Management Company Limited (REMCL) for inviting bids. Besides, a meeting 
was held on 10.09.15 with all Zonal Railways, wherein, inter-alia Zonal 
Railways were instructed to verify the class of CT/PT available at GSS (Grid 
Sub Station) from STUs and based upon the same only, STUs (State 
Transmission Utility) were to be asked to provide CT/PT & ABT meters. The 
Committee were of the view that after MoR’s repeated instructions of 
March/April 2015 to obtain ABT compliant meters, the Railway Administration 
should have straight away initiated the process for completing the 

 
 
3 
 
procurement and installation of ABT meters without delays. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry needed to streamline and fast track 
the procedures for procurement of all items that are relevant to the Railways’ 
operational network. 
 
 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
  “The Railway’s status as ‘Deemed Licensee” was sub-judice at 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC). Railway had to wait 
for judgment of Hon’ble CERC in the matter till Nov-2015. After getting 
“Deemed Licensee” status, West Central Railway (WCR) wrote a letter to 
Energy Department Rajasthan on 17.02.2016, for issue of NOC to use 
State Transmission Utilities network for Open Access, after WCR was 
allotted power through Open Access in Rajasthan state. Later, Railway 
Energy Management Company Limited (REMCL) vide their letter dated 
26.02.2016, furnished draft Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for 
signing with Jindal India Thermal Power Ltd. (JITPL). On the same date, 
notice for disconnection of power supply from Rajasthan Discom was 
served to JVVNL, Jaipur by WCR. Initial request of NOC was also served 
to Rajasthan Vidyut Prasaran Nigam (RVPN) on 04.03.2016 without 
copy of signed PPA. In the Meantime, PPA was processed for legal 
vetting, accounts vetting and sanction by Competent Authority. Finally, 
PPA was signed on 15.03.2016 and letter for NOC was written to 
Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd. (RVPN) on 24.03.2016 with 
copy of signed PPA. This action was completed well within time. Thus, 
WCR has taken prompt action without any delay for getting NOC from 
RVPNL after CERC order in November, 2015 and allocation of power to 
WCR. 
WCR initiated the process of provision of ABT meters timely through 
State Govt. Authorities as per standard procedure, but they delayed the 
procurement as they were going to lose revenue by losing a valuable 
customer. After repeated chasing, finally they gave letter in April 2016 to 
Railway mentioning that “supply of ABT meters through their tender will 
take 6-7 months" and suggested Railway to install ABT meters by 
Railway itself. After that, Railway came to action immediately and done 
necessary process for purchase and installation of ABT meter and 
associated equipments. The entire process of sanction of detailed 
estimate and issue of LOA was done in just one month period and LOA 
was issued in May-2016. 
Further, Railway applied to state Authorities for schematic diagram for 
installation of ABT meters. This was delayed by state Authorities by 03 
months and finally Railway got these diagrams in the end of Aug-2016. 
In one month only Railway installed ABT meters and finally State 
Authorities gave NOC in end of Sep-2016. 

 
 
4 
 
Indian Railways have well defined and streamlined procedures for 
procurement of goods and services to meet the needs of Railways 
operational network. Amendments to further improve these procedures are 
a continuous process over IR, depending on requirements and in 
accordance with the guidelines of Government of India. 
8.   While vetting the above ATNs, Audit made the following comments: 
“No comments” 
9.  The Committee had in their original report observed that the Ministry of 
Railway’s repeated instructions of March/April 2015 to ensure timely 
procurement and installation of ‘Availability Based Tariff’ (ABT) compliant 
meters at the Traction sub-stations (TSS) points in 2015-16, the West Central 
Railway did not act promptly to do the needful and there was a delay of more 
than a year that resulted into huge extra expenditure of Rs.75.10 crore during 
the period from 15 March, 2016 to 10 January, 2017. Besides, four precious 
months were wasted by the Railways after the confirmation of their status as 
‘Deemed Licensee’ by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC). 
They had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry needed to streamline and 
fast track the procedures for procurement of all items that were relevant to the 
Railways’ operational network.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have 
stated that due to the Railways status as “Deemed Licensee” being sub-judice 
under Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), the Railway had to 
wait for judgment of CERC till November, 2015 and after that West Central 
Railway (WCR) took prompt action in the matter.  The Ministry have further 
submitted that the State Governments delayed the procurement of ABT meter 
and suggested Railway to install meters on their own.  Besides, there was also 
delay in getting schematic diagram for installation of ABT meters.  The 
Ministry have further submitted that Railways have well defined and 
streamlined procedures for procurement of goods and services to meet the 
needs of Railways operational network. Thus, due to lack of proper 
coordination between different agencies and lackadaisical approach of the 
Railways, extra expenditure was incurred. 
 The Committee observe that the process for procurement and 
installation of ABT meters should have been promptly initiated by the Railways 
so that wasteful expenditure incurred due to inordinate delay in the process 
could be avoided. The accurate and real-time energy consumption data 
provided by ABT compliant meters would enable the Railways in efficient 
energy management and conservation. The Committee would like to 
recommend that the Railways should use inputs of demand scheduling with 
demand forecasting so that an economically optimal power purchase schedule 
is generated and implemented. 
 

 
 
5 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
          
In order to reduce the traction tariff to optimize the unit cost of 
transportation, MoR (Ministry of Railways) issued (March 2015) 
instructions to all Zonal Railways to get direct power from Generating 
Companies through Open Access and ensure provision of Availability 
Based Tariff (ABT) Meters. Despite entering into the Agreement in March 
2016 under Open Access, power supply was commenced only from 
January 2017 mainly due to delay in provisioning of ABT Meters. Delay in 
shifting to Open Access resulted in extra expenditure on power purchase 
amounting to Rs. 75.10 crore. Some of the issues contained in the Audit 
Report have been examined by the Committee and commented upon 
suitably in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 99th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Introductory:  Observations are factual in nature. 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
No further comments 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note from audit observation that despite MoR’s 
instructions/repeated instructions of February/ March/April 2015 to ensure 
timely procurement of ‘Availability Based Tariff’ (ABT) compliant meters at 
the TSS points in 2015-16, the WCR Administration did not promptly do the 
needful to secure and install the necessary equipment (ABT meters). The 
ABT meters were finally procured and installed between the period 10 
January 2017 and 20 April 2017. Thus, there was delay of more than a 
year in the procurement of ABT meters as well as in preparation of 
estimates resulting into huge extra expenditure of Rs. 75.10 crore during 
the period from 15 March 2016 to 10 January 2017. From the submission 

 
 
6 
 
of the Ministry, the Committee note that this activity did not involve Railway 
network alone. It involved State agencies and their network also, where 
Railway has no direct access, and without consent and involvement of the 
State agencies, ABT meters could not have been installed. Procurement of 
ABT meters and associated equipment could not be initiated without 
knowing the suitability/compatibility of ABT meters and associated 
equipment with the State Transmission Utilities (STUs) network and they 
continued to delay the matter on these issues. The Committee observe 
that it was only four months after CERC’s order dated 05.11.2015 
confirming the Railway as ‘Deemed Licensee eligible for procurement of 
power through ‘Open Access’, that the Railway wrote letters on 
04.03.2016, 24.03.2016, 12.04.2016 and 25.04.2016 to RVPN with a 
request to provide ABT meters & 0.2 S class CT/PT. This resulted in 
wastage of four precious months. Further, from the submission made by 
the Ministry, the Committee note that Zonal Railways were advised on 
27.05.15 to provide details of ABT meters to REMCL for inviting bids. 
Besides, a meeting was held on 10.09.15 with all Zonal Railways, wherein, 
inter-alia Zonal Railways were instructed to verify the class of CT/PT 
available at GSS (Grid Sub Station) from STUs and based upon the same 
only, STUs (State Transmission Utility) were to be asked to provide CT/PT 
& ABT meters. The Committee are of the view that after MoR’s repeated 
instructions of March/April 2015 to obtain ABT compliant meters, the 
Railway Administration should have straight away initiated the process for 
completing the procurement and installation of ABT meters without delays. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry need to streamline 
and fast track the procedures for procurement of all items that are relevant 
to the Railways’ operational network. 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 99th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 “The Railway’s status as ‘Deemed Licensee” was under sub-judice at 
CERC. Railway had to wait for judgment of Hon’ble CERC in the matter 
till Nov-2015. After getting “Deemed Licensee” status, WCR wrote a 
letter to Energy Department Rajasthan on 17.02.2016, for issue of NOC 
to use STU network for Open Access, after WCR was allotted power 
through Open Access in Rajasthan state. Later, REMCL vide their letter 
dated 26.02.2016, furnished draft Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for 
signing with Jindal India Thermal Power Ltd. (JITPL). On the same date, 
notice for disconnection of power supply from Rajasthan Discom was 
served to JVVNL, Jaipur by WCR. Initial request of NOC was also served 
to RVPN on 04.03.2016 without copy of signed PPA. In the Meantime, 
PPA was processed for legal vetting, accounts vetting and sanction by 
Competent Authority. Finally, PPA was signed on 15.03.2016 and letter 
for NOC was written to RVPN on 24.03.2016 with copy of signed PPA. 
This action was completed well within time. Thus, WCR has taken 
prompt action without any delay for getting NOC from RVPNL after 
CERC order in November, 2015 and allocation of power to WCR. 

 
 
7 
 
WCR initiated the process of provision of ABT meters timely through 
State Govt. Authorities as per standard procedure, but they delayed the 
procurement as they were going to lose revenue by losing a valuable 
customer. After repeated chasing, finally they gave letter in April 2016 to 
Railway mentioning that “supply of ABT meters through their tender will 
take 6-7 months" and suggested Railway to install ABT meters by 
Railway itself. After that, Railway came to action immediately and done 
necessary process for purchase and installation of ABT meter and 
associated equipments. The entire process of sanction of detailed 
estimate and issue of LOA was done in just one month period and LOA 
was issued in May-2016. 
Further, Railway applied to state Authorities for schematic diagram for 
installation of ABT meters. This was delayed by state Authorities by 03 
months and finally Railway got these diagrams in the end of Aug-2016. 
In one month only Railway installed ABT meters and finally State 
Authorities gave NOC in end of Sep-2016. 
Indian Railways have well defined and streamlined procedures for 
procurement of goods and services to meet the needs of Railways 
operational network. Amendments to further improve these procedures are 
a continuous process over IR, depending on requirements and in 
accordance with the guidelines of Government of India. 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
 
 “No further comments” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I       
   
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note from audit observation that the Power supply 
through Open Access was commenced from 10 January 2017 in four TSSs 
(Traction Substation) and between 19 January 2017 and 20 April 2017 in 
remaining eight TSSs despite issuance of Letter of Award (LOA) in favour 
of the successful bidder i. e. M/s Jindal India Thermal Power Limited 
(JITPL) on 26 February 2016 and Agreement for procurement of Power 
between WCR and M/s JITPL on 15 March 2016. The Committee further 
note that delay in observance of MoR’s instructions for fulfillment of pre-
requisite requirements for purchase of power through Open Access 
deprived the Railway Administration of the savings in traction energy bills. 

 
 
8 
 
Despite availability of power at lower rate of Rs. 4.09 per kWh, WCR 
Administration purchased power at higher rate of Rs. 6.50 per kWh. From 
the submission of the Ministry, the Committee note that although Railway 
Board had advised for suitable arrangements for obtaining power through 
‘Open Access’, there was ambiguity about 'Deemed Licensee’ status, 
which was raised by various State Electricity Boards/Transmission Utilities. 
Railways were defending the ‘Deemed Licensee’ status, for procurement 
of power through ‘Open Access’, in CERC. The Committee are of the view 
that in the first place, spending as many as four months in clearing the 
discrepancies at the application stage, which contributed to the delays and 
wasteful expenditure should have been avoided. The Committee are also 
of the view that after CERC issued orders dated 05.11.2015 confirming the 
Railway as ‘Deemed Licensee’, obtaining power through open access 
should have been ensured promptly. The Committee desire to be apprised 
of the status in this regard. 
 
 
(Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 99thReport of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
Correspondences were done with state bodies for grant of NOC but they 
purposefully delayed the NOC as the State Agencies were losing valuable revenue 
from Railway. This activity was not only involving Railway network but it also 
involved State agencies and their network also, where railway has no direct access 
and without consent and involvement of State agencies, ABT meters could not 
have been installed. Therefore, it took four months in clearing the discrepancies at 
the application stage. 
Further, the explanation for delay of four months in clearing the discrepancies at the 
application stage has been covered in the reply to Para-2 above. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
No further comments  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration 
 
            NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government 
have furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 
            
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 December, 2024               Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                  Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
12 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 9th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 12th DECEMBER 2024 FROM 1530 HRS. ONWARDS 
The Committee met on Thursday from 1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 12th December, 
2024 in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6. Prof. Sougata Ray 
7. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
10. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
11. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12.   Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
13.   Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
14.   Dr. K. Laxman 
15.   Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
16.   Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Mehta  - Deputy Secretary 
7. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
4. Shri Gurveen Sindhu - Director General 
 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following three draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
b) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 99th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Extra expenditure due to delay in finalizing power purchase agreements 
through open access-West Central Railway”; and 
c) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX. 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in 
the light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting 
has been kept on record. 
 
 
******** 
  

 
 
14 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY NINTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 3 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos.  1, 2 and 3 
Total: 3 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 