10 
IRREGULAR PENSION PAYMENTS BY 
POST OFFICES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty Fifth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
PAC No. 2404 
 
T E N T H  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
                           
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty Fifth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
                                             
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on :19-03-2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 19-03-2025 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
March 2025/ Phalguna 1946 (Saka) 
IRREGULAR PENSION PAYMENTS BY 
POST OFFICES 

iii 
 
Contents 
                                                                                                                                PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  (2024-25) (ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.02.2025 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their Eighty Fifth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
           
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighty Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Irregular Pension 
Payments by Post Offices” relating to the Ministry of Communication (Department of 
Posts). 
  
2.       The Eighty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 7th February, 2024. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report 
on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th February, 2025. 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
  
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
  
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
  
5.       An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 85th Report (17th Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II 
  
  
  
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accounts deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighty Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Irregular Pension Payments by Post 
Offices”. 
2. The Eighty Fifth Report, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 07 February, 2024, contained 04 Observations/Recommendations.  The 
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations /Recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 Para No. 01, 02, 03 & 04 
          Total: 04 
               Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
NIL 
     Total: nil 
            Chapter: III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
NIL 
     Total: nil 
            Chapter: IV 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies /no replies: 
NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
 

2 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts).  The 
Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their Eighty Fifth 
Report. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninetieth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee 
will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) to 
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations contained 
in Chapter I of the report, positively within three months of the presentation of the 
report to the Parliament.   
  
 Recommendation No. 2 of Eighty Fifth Report of PAC (17th Lok Sabha) 
6.  Recovery of excess/irregular pension: 
The Committee noted that as per the review done at the Circle level, 12 Circles 
(Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, North 
East, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand) had reported 'Nil' cases of payment of 
pension without submission of life certificate, 08 Circles, namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Telangana had made full 
recovery in all the irregular pension credit cases and 03 Circles namely Assam, Jharkhand 
and Tamil Nadu, have pending recovery cases. The Committee had been given to 
understand that Postal Directorate was actively pursuing the matter the Circles concerned 
for speedy recovery/regularization of pending pension cases. The Committee, while 
impressing upon the Department of Posts of the imminent need for minimizing such cases, 
urged the Department to expedite the process of recovery/regularization of irregular 
payment of pension.  
7. The Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) in their Action Taken Reply 
have stated as under:- 
It has already been informed that out of 23 Circles, 12 Circles have reported Nil cases of 
payment of Pension without the life certificate. Out of the remaining 11 Circles, recovery has 

3 
 
already been completed in 08 Circles. In three circles namely Assam, Jharkhand and Tamil 
Nadu recovery were pending at the time of Previous Report Submitted to PAC.  
Now, Jharkhand Circle has also reported that full recovery has been made and no dues are 
pending. Further, the report of the remaining two circles namely Assam and Tamil Nadu are 
as under:  
Sl 
No. 
Circle Current Status 
1. Assam The Circle has reported that in Tinsukia Division, full recovery amounting 
to Rs.150447/- (including penal interest of Rs.20168/-) have been made.  
In Guwahati Division, out of 5 identified cases of irregular credit of pension, 
full recovery amounting to Rs.291596/- have been made in 3 cases, 
whereas a total amount of Rs.155034/- is pending for recovery in 2 cases 
wherein recoveries are being made in installments 1/3rd  of net pension 
and full recovery will be completed by March, 2015 
2. Tamil 
Nadu 
The Circle has reported that there is one case pending for recovery of 
amount Rs.76,577/- at Udhagamandalam HO in Western Region, wherein 
the pensioner produced Life Certificate on 05.11.2016 and he expired on 
10.01.2017.  The pension was credited to his savings bank account upto 
October, 2017 based on the Life Certificate submitted in November, 2016.  
His son continued to draw the pension through ATM.  However, Western 
Region has submitted that the action will be completed within six months 
as the son of the pensioner does not have a regular income for full 
recovery. 
 
8. The vetting comments of Audit are as follows:- 
As the recovery in respect of two Postal Circles is still pending, Ministry may apprise 
the recovery status of outstanding amount in respect of both Postal Circles i.e. Assam and 
Tamil Nadu to PAC. 
9. The Ministry in their Final Action Taken Reply stated as under : 
It has already been informed that out of 23 Circles, 12 Circles have reported Nil 
cases of payment of Pension without the life certificate. Out the remaining 11 Circ1es, 
recovery are already completed in 09 Circles and w.r.t. two Circles namely Assam, and. 
Tamil Nadu, recovery were pending at the time of Previous Report Submitted to PAC.  
Now, Assam Circle has also reported that fuIl recovery has been made. Further, the 
report of the remaining one Circle namely Tamil Nadu is as under:-  

4 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Circle Current Status 
1. Tamil Nadu The Circle has reported that there is one case pending for recovery of 
amount Rs.76,577/- at Udhagamandalam HO in Western Region, 
wherein the pensioner produced Life Certificate on 05.11.2016 and 
he expired on 10.01.2017.  The pension was credited to his savings 
bank account upto October, 2017 based on the Life Certificate 
submitted in November, 2016.  His son continued to draw the 
pension through ATM. 
 
The Circle  has reported that there is no family pensioner in this case 
for effecting recovery.  Legal action has been initiated by filing FIR 
against the son of pensioner for recovery.  However, no response 
has been received from him to repay the remaining amount of 
Rs.76,577/- in installments. 
 
The Circle has also reported that there is no lacuna on the part of the 
DDO, like drawl of pension after expiry of Life Certificate/after receipt 
of intimation of death. 
 
Hence, this case does not fall under the purview of the subject audit 
under recovery of excess/irregular pension.  The report submitted by 
Tamil Nadu Circle may be accepted and be excluded from the 
purview of the PAC Para and may be closed. 
 
Since, recovery has already been completed, in all the Circles except Tamil Nadu 
and as per the details provided by the Tamil Nadu Circle, the case does not fall und.er the 
category of irregular payments of pension and necessary legal action as per the law has 
already been started by the Circle, which will take its due course and time, accordingly, it is 
requested that this Para may be dropped.  
10.  The Committee in their original report recommended that the Department of 
Posts enhance their monitoring mechanisms to effectively identify cases of pension 
payments made without the necessary life certificate, including conducting regular 
audits to maintain oversight and accountability. They had emphasized the 
importance of providing periodic updates on the recovery status of outstanding 
amounts, particularly in Assam and Tamil Nadu, to ensure transparency and 
recommended to keep the PAC informed. 

5 
 
In response, the Ministry has indicated that they had issued instructions to all 
23 Heads of Circles and General Managers (Finance) to remind pensioners to submit 
their life certificates through SMS, email, and other digital modes. The Committee 
also note the reply of the Ministry that these efforts were aimed at minimizing cases 
of irregular payments. They also note the response of the Audit that the recovery in 
respect of two Postal Circles i.e. Assam and Tamil Nadu is still pending.  
The Committee recommend that the Department of Posts continue to 
strengthen its monitoring mechanisms and enhance outreach efforts to educate 
pensioners about the importance of submitting life certificates. They emphasize the 
necessity of establishing a support system for vulnerable pensioners and encourage 
Circles that have successfully completed recoveries to share their best practices. 
Further, the Committee recommend a comprehensive evaluation of current recovery 
processes to ensure their effectiveness, along with an annual review of pension 
management practices across all Circles. The pending recovery in Tamil Nadu circle 
may be completed immediately and a final status in this regard may be updated on 
APMS Portal. 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 4  
 
11. Fixing of responsibility 
 
The Committee noted that recovery of payment of irregular pension is pending in Assam and Tamil Nadu Circles. While the Assam Circle has intimated that full recovery would be made by March, 2025, no timeline for recovery had been fixed in the case of Tamil Nadu Circle. The Circle had filed FIR against the son of the deceased (expiredon10.01.2017) for irregular withdrawal of money from ATM after the death of the pensioner till expiry of DLC in October, 2017. The Committee, further noted that responsibility had already been fixed by U.P. Circle and Assam and Gujarat Circles had intimated that the process of fixing the responsibility is underway. Moreover, the Department of Posts had also issued instructions to all the circles to fix responsibility and to intimate the same to the Department by 31.12.2023. Though the Department had not initiated action for recovery, the Committee were constrained to note that no concrete action was hitherto been taken against the officials responsible for irregular payment of pension. The Committee desired to be apprised of the disciplinary action taken against all errant postal officials who had released pension without undertaking thorough verification of life certificates of each pensioner. 
 

6 
 
 
(Sl. No.1Appendix II› Part-II Para No. 4 of the 85th* Report of the  Committee on Public Accounts(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
12.  The Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) in their Action Taken Reply 
have stated as under: 
 
This Department has taken up the case of fixing the responsibility with all the 11 Circles, 
where the irregular payment of pension occurred. Out of 11 Circles, 01 Circle namely Bihar 
has already issued the charge-sheet under Rule 16 of CCS(CCA) Rule. Another Circle 
namely Uttar Pradesh has already issued the punishment order for withholding of one 
increment for one year without cumulative effect against the responsible officer. 2. The 
investigation process and process of fixing the responsibility is at completion stage in 07 
circles namely Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal. 
3. Two Circles namely Andhra Pradesh and Telangana has reported as under: 1 A.P No 
official has been found to be liable as action was done under the DoPPW OM dated 
31.12.2021. 2 Telangana The Circle has investigated and reported that no such case of 
irregular pension payment has been found. 
 
13. The vetting comments of Audit are as under: 
Ministry may submit final compliance report to PAC along with supporting documents. 
 
14. The Ministry in their final Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN     (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
This Department has taken up the case of fixing the responsibility with allthe11Circles,where their regular payment of pension occurred. Out of 11 Circles, 04 Circles namely Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana have already completed it sanction and already been reported, vide previous report dated 29.04.2024. 
 
The updated position w.r.t. the remaining 07 pending Circles (Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal) areas under: 
 

7 
 
SI. No CircIe Current Status 
1. Assam The cases in Assam Circle were distributed in its two Divisions Namely Guwahati and Tinsukia Division. The updated position 
Are as under- 
 
In Guwahati Division The charge sheet under Rule 16of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 has been issued to three officials. 
In Tinsukia Division: fixing of responsibility does not arise as the pensioner was required to submit Life Certificate in the month of November each year and in the absence of life certificatefortheyear2021, the pension was stopped w.e.f. December, 2021. 
Hence, no action is pending. 2. Tamil Nadu    
There is no lacuna on the part of the DDO, like drawal of pension after expiry of Life Certificate/after receipt of intimation of death. Hence, this does not fall under the purview of recovery of excess/irregular pension. 
hence, no action is pending and may be excluded from the Para as per the report. 
3. West Bengal   
The Circle has reported that Charge Sheet in 02 cases has already been issued. Further in 03cases, draft charge-Sheet has been approved for action. 
Further, the Circle has informed that in addition to above cases, Disciplinary proceedings are under process in04 cases  against the officers. 
 Further, in the remaining 04Circles (Gujarat, Haryana Jharkhand and Karnataka), the process is underway and are in advance stage. Accordingly, PAC is requested to kindly drop this para. 
 
Dy. Director General (Personnel)(L/O) (DepartmentofPostsO.M.No.10003/2022-Pension(Vol.-11dated31.07.2024.) 
15. The Committee, in their original recommendation, have observed that recovery 
of irregular pension payments remains pending in several postal circles, particularly 
in Assam and Tamil Nadu. While Assam has provided a timeline for recovery by 
March 2025, no such timeline has been established for Tamil Nadu. The Committee 
also note that, although disciplinary action has been initiated in some circles like 
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, the process of fixing responsibility and completing recovery 

8 
 
actions is still ongoing in others, such as Gujarat, Haryana, and Jharkhand. In light of 
the Ministry's reply, where the Ministry has mentioned that disciplinary proceedings 
are under process and charge-sheets have been issued in some circles, the 
Committee find merit in the Audit observation that despite these efforts, the process 
is delayed, and concrete actions have not been consistently taken across all circles. 
The Committee are therefore constrained to recommend that the Ministry expedite 
the completion of the responsibility-fixing process in all pending cases. They would 
like to see a specific timeline being set for each circle to ensure timely resolution, 
with regular updates furnished to the Committee in their final action taken statement. 
Moreover, the Committee would like to stress the importance of enhancing the 
verification of life certificates for pensioners across all circles, as the irregularities in 
payment were often linked to lapses in this process. The Committee recommend  that 
the Ministry issue clear guidelines and protocols to ensure strict adherence to life 
certificate submission deadlines, as part of a broader effort to prevent future 
irregularities and maintain the integrity of the pension payment system. 
********** 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Non adherence to rules 
The Committee learn that P&T Financial Handbook Volume-II mandates an 
annual verification of the continuity of life of pensioners. The pensioners are 
required to submit a life certificate in November each year to facilitate crediting of 
pension in subsequent months for the coming year. Audit had highlighted that 
lapses on the part of the Postal authorities in undertaking annual 
verification of continuity of life before crediting pension, resulted in the 
irregular crediting of pension amounting to Rs. 6.02 crore to 122 pensioner 
accounts in five Head Post Offices (HPOs) of West Bengal Circle. Further, 
analysis of these cases reveal serious lapses like crediting of monthly pension 
despite non-receipt of life certificate from pensioners for prolonged period 
ranging from one to ten years, non-operation of accounts by pensioners and 
crediting of pension accounts wherein the pensioners had deceased 1-10 years 
back. In response, the Department of Posts have submitted that in respect of 
these five HPOs, full recovery has been made. The Committee are of the opinion 
that full recovery has been made in the cases pertaining to the West Bengal -
Postal Circle, the whole situation of irregular crediting of pension would have 
avoided had the Postal Authorities concerned adhered to the laid down rules 
diligently. The fact that irregular crediting of pension remained undetected for 
years is indicative of serious lapses in the system of verification of life certificate on 
the part of the authorities concerned which needs to be rectified urgently. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in order to ensure timely submission of life 
certificates, the Department needs to issue reminders from the month of Oc tober  
till t he end of November to the pensioners through s ms/e-
mail/post/television/radio/social media etc. detailing the various modes of 
submission of life certificates and also make alternate arrangements to cater to 
pensioners who are not tech-savvy or are incapacitated to submit their life 
certificates either online or otherwise. 

10 
 
(S1. No. 1; Appendix II; Part-II Para No. 1 of the 85th  
Report of the Committee on Public Accounts  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken (Department of Posts) 
Pension in Department of Posts is calculated, managed and disbursed by its 23 
Postal Circle offices located across India as the staff member gets its pension from 
the Circles, from where they have retired. Accordingly, in order to comply with the 
recommendation of the PAC, the Department with the approval of the Competent 
Authority has instructed all its 23 Heads of Circles and all GMs (Finance) to issue 
reminders to the respective pensioners from the months of October till November 
through SMS/Email/other digital modes for submission of life certificate and also 
to sensitize the Pensioners through other accessible and affordable modes to submit 
the Digital Life Certificate. 
Considering the compliance of the recommendation and considering the 
instructions already issued, it was requested to finally close this Para as 
complied, vide this Department's communication dated 29.04.2024. 
(Remarks:- The ATN submitted vide Communication of even no. dated 
29.04.2024 has been examined and accepted by the Principal Director of Audit 
(Delhi) vide U.O. no. Report- DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATN dated 17.05.2024 with 
remarks no further comments are being offered) 
 
Dy. Director General (Personnel)(L/O) 
(Department of Posts O.M. No. 100-03/2022-Pension (Vol.-II dated 31.07.2024) 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATR dtd. 28.5.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks: 

11 
 
In view of the reply of the Ministry, no further comments are being offered. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 Recovery of excess/irregular pension 
The Committee note that as per the review done at the Circle level, 12 
Circles (Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharas htra, Nort h East , Odis ha, Punjab,  Rajasthan and 
Uttarakhand) have reported 'Nil' cases of payment of pension without 
submission of life certificate, 08 Circles, namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Telangana 
have made full recovery in all the irregular pension credit cases and 03 Circles 
namely Assam, Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu, have pending recovery cases. The 
Committee have been given to understand that Postal Directorate is actively 
pursuing the matter the Circles concerned for speedy recovery/regularization of 
pending pension cases. The Committee, while impressing upon the 
Department of Posts of the imminent need for minimizing such cases, urge the 
Department to expedite the process of recovery/regularization of irregular 
payment of pension. 
(S1. No. 1; Appendix II; Part-II Para No. 2 of the 85th  
Report of the Committee on Public Accounts  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken (Department of Posts) 
It has already been informed that out of 23 Circles, 12 Circles have 
reported Nil cases of payment of Pension without the life certificate. Out the 
remaining 11 Circles, recovery are already completed in 09 Circles and w.r.t. 

12 
 
two Circles namely Assam, and Tamil Nadu, recovery were pending at the time 
of Previous Report Submitted to PAC. 
Now, Assam Circle has also reported that full recovery has been made. 
Further, the report of the remaining one Circle namely Tamil Nadu is as under:- 
Sl
. 
Circle Current Status 
 Tamil 
Nadu 
The Circle has reported that there is one case pending for 
recovery of amount Rs. 76,577/- at Udhagamandalam HO in 
Western Region, wherein the pensioner produced Life 
Certificate on 05.11.2016 and he expired on 10.01.2017. The 
pension was credited to his savings bank account upto October, 
2017 based on the Life Certificate submitted in November, 
2016. His son continued to draw the pension through ATM. 
The Circle has reported that there is no family pensioner in 
this case for effecting recovery. Legal action has been 
initiated by filing FIR against the son of pensioner for 
recovery. However, no response has been received from him to 
repay the remaining amount of Rs. 76,577/- in installments. 
The Circle has also reported that there is no lacuna on the 
part of the DDO, like drawl of pension after expiry of 
Life Certificate/after receipt of intimation of death. 
Hence, this case does not fall under the purview of the subject 
audit under recovery of excess/irregular pension. The report 
submitted by Tamil Nadu Circle may be accepted and be 
excluded from the purview of the PAC Para and may be closed. 
 
Since, recovery has already been completed in all the Circles except Tamil 
Nadu and as per the details provided by the Tamil Nadu Circle, the case does 
not fall under the category of irregular payments of pension and necessary legal 
action as per the law has already been started by the Circle, which will take its 
due course and time, accordingly, it is requested that this Para may be dropped. 
Dy. Director General (Personnel)(L/O) 

13 
 
(Department of Posts O.M. No. 100-03/2022-Pension (Vol.-II dated 31.07.2024) 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATR dtd. 28.5.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks: 
As the recovery in respect of two Postal Circles is still pending, Ministry may apprise 
the recovery status of outstanding amount in respect of both Postal Circles i.e 
Assam and Tamil Nadu to PAC. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I.  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Easing submission of life certificates and verification processes 
The Committee note that to streamline the process of claiming pension, the 
Department of Posts had provided for submission of a Digital Life Certificate 
(Jeevan Pramaan) on-line from the year 2014, specifically for pensioners with 
Aadhar-linked pension accounts. Additionally, the Finacle software was also 
introduced in the postal network during 2015-16 to enable pensioners to withdraw 
pension funds form any post offices across India. The Department have also 
stated that to develop suitable control checks in the existing software to stop 
automatic credit of pension, technical upgradations have been made with the 
integration of Jeevan Pramaan Portal (NIC) with Core System Integration — 
Human Resource Management System (CSI-HRMS) for auto-verification of Digital 
Life Certificate (DLC), and the DDO can authentically verify availability life 
certificate through the Jeevan Pramaan Interface by sing DDO login. The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite a  s l e w  o f  m e a s u r e s  t a k e n  
b y  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  t o  f a c i l i t a t e  submission/verification of life certificate, 
cases of pension being credited to pensioners' accounts without confirming the 

14 
 
continuity of the life certificates do persist. The Committee, therefore, in no 
unequivocal terms recommend that the whole system of verification and crediting 
of pension may be reviewed with a view to identify the loopholes in the existing 
system and to address the same. 
(S1. No. 1; Appendix IL Part-II Para No. 3 of the 85th  
Report of the Committee on Public Accounts  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken (Department of Posts) 
It has already been reported that the problem of Irregular payment of 
pension occurred due to the lack of the integration of Jeevan Praman Portal of NIC 
with CSI-HRMS for auto verification of Digital Life Certificate. Now after the 
integration of both the portal w.e.f. 22nd December 2022, it is possible for the DDO to 
check about the availability of the DLC and thus, there are no scope  now for re-
occurrence of such incident. Since, all cases of irregular pension pertains  to 
period prior to 22nd December 2022, according ly,  the  recommendation 
of the Committee has already been examined in depth in the  Department and 
necessary checks and balances to stop such re-occurrences  have been placed 
in system.  
. Accordingly, it was requested that the PAC Para may please be dropped, vide this Department's communication dated 29.04.2024  
(Remarks:- The ATN submitted vide Communication of even no. dated 
29.04.2024 has been examined and accepted by the Principal Director of Audit 
(Delhi) vide U.O. no. Report- DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATN dated 17.05.2024 with 
remarks no further comments are being offered) 
Dy. Director General (Personnel)(L/O) 
(Department of Posts O.M. No. 100-03/2022-Pension (Vol.-II dated 31.07.2024) 

15 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATR dtd. 28.5.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks: 
In view of the reply of the Ministry, no further comments are being offered. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
Fixing of responsibility 
The Committee note that recovery of payment of irregular pension is 
pending in Assam and Tamil Nadu Circles. While the Assam Circle has 
intimated that full recovery would be made by March, 2025, no time line for 
recovery has been fixed in the case of Tamil Nadu Circle. The Circle has filed FIR 
against the son of the deceased (expired on 10.01.2017) for irregular 
withdrawal of money from ATM after the death of the pensioner till expiry of DLC in 
October, 2017. The Committee, further note that responsibility had already been 
fixed by U.P. Circle and Assam and Gujarat Circles had intimated that the process 
of fixing the responsibility is underway. Moreover, the Department of Posts 
had also issued instructions to all the circles to fix responsibility and to 
intimate the same to the Department by 31.12.2023. Though the Department 
has not initiated action for recovery, the Committee are constrained to note that 
no concrete action was hitherto been taken against the officials responsible for 
irregular payment of pension. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
disciplinary action taken against all errant postal officials who had released 
pension without undertaking thorough verification of life certificates of each 
pensioner. 
(S1. No. 1; Appendix II; Part-II Para No. 4 of the 85th  
Report of the Committee on Public Accounts  
(17th Lok Sabha) 
ACTION TAKEN (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 

16 
 
This Department has taken up the case of fixing the responsibility with all 
the 11 Circles, where the irregular payment of pension occurred. Out of 11 
Circles, 04 Circles namely Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana have already completed its action and already been reported, vide 
previous report dated 29.04.2024. 
The updated position w.r.t. the remaining 07 pending Circles (Assam, 
Gujrat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal ) are as 
under:- 
Sl.  
No 
Circle Current Status 
1.  Assam The cases in Assam Circle were distributed in its two Divisions 
namely Guwahati and Tinsukia Division. The updated position 
are as under:- 
In Guwahati Division: The charge sheet under Rule 16 of 
CCS(CCA) Rules, 1965 has been issued to three officials. 
In Tinsukia Division: fixing of responsibility does not arise as 
the pensioner was required to submit Life Certificate in the 
month of November each year and in the absence of life 
certificate for the year 2021, the pension was stopped w.e.f. 
December, 2021. 
Hence, no action is pending. 
2.  Tamil  
Nadu 
There is no lacuna on the part of the DDO, like drawal of 
pension after expiry of Life Certificate/after receipt of 
intimation of death. Hence, this does not fall under the purview of 
recovery of excess/irregular pension. 
Hence, no action is pending and may be excluded from the Para 
as per the report. 

17 
 
3.  West  
Bengal 
The Circle has reported that Charge-Sheet in 02 cases has 
already been issued. Further in 03 cases, draft Charge-Sheet 
has been approved for action. 
Further, the Circle has informed that in addition to above 
cases, Disciplinary proceedings are under process in 04 cases 
against the officers. 
 
Further, in the remaining 04 Circles (Gujarat, Haryana Jharkhand and 
Karnataka), the process is under way and are in advance stage. Accordingly, 
PAC is requested to kindly drop this para. 
Dy. Director General (Personnel)(L/O) 
(Department of Posts O.M. No. 100-03/2022-Pension (Vol.-II dated 31.07.2024.) 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
Audit vide their UO No. DOP/2(D)/F-10266/ATR dtd. 28.5.2024 have vetted the 
Action Taken Note with the following remarks: 
Ministry may submit final compliance report to PAC alongwith supporting documents. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
  

19 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
 

21 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 

22 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports        
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
85th Report (17th LS) on ‘Irregular Pension Payments by Post Offices’ 
b. XXXXXXXXXX 
c. XXXXXXXXXX 
d. XXXXXXXXXX 
e. XXXXXXXXXX 
f. XXXXXXXXXX 

23 
 
g. XXXXXXXXXX 
h. XXXXXXXXXX 
i. XXXXXXXXXX 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 04 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4  
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 0 
 
 