 
21 
 
SHORT CLOSURE OF PROJECT FOR 
DEVELOPMENT OF SPECIAL GRADE CARBON 
FIBRE 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


  
PAC NO.  2415 O N E  H U N D R E D  A N  T W E N T Y  F I R S T  R E P O R T  COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)     DEPARTMENT OF SPACE                                                                                             Presented to Lok Sabha on:  26.03.2025            Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   26.03.2025   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT N E W  D E L H I   March, 2025 /Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)   
SHORT CLOSURE OF PROJECT FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SPECIAL GRADE CARBON FIBRE 

i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) (ii) 
  INTRODUCTION (iii) 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II Short closure of project for development of Special Grade Carbon Fibre 1 
 PART II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  13-17 
APPENDIX 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) held 
on 25.03.2025                          . 
18-19 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave                  -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh        -                  Committee Officer 
 
 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this 21st Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Short closure of project for 
development of Special Grade Carbon Fibre” based on Para 2.3 of C&AG Report No. 24 of 
2023, relating to the Department of Space. 
 
2.  The C&AG Report No. 24 of 2023 was laid on the Table of the House on 09.02.2024. 
 
3.  The Committee on Public Accounts (2024-2025), selected the aforesaid subject for 
detailed examination and held informal discussion with the representatives of the Department of 
Space at Bengaluru on 16.10.2024.  Based on the written replies furnished by the Department 
of Space, the Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
4. The Committee on Public Accounts (2024-2025) considered and adopted the Draft 
Report on the aforementioned subject at their Sitting held on 25.03.2025. The Minutes of the 
Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form  
Part- II of the Report. 
 
6.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Space for furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection 
with the examination of the subject. 
 
7.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                             K. C. VENUGOPAL 
 25 March, 2025                      Chairperson 
Chaitra 4, 1947 (Saka)                                  Committee on Public Accounts  
  
 
 
  

PART- I 
INTRODUCTION  
    The Report of the Committee is based on Para no 2.3 of the C&AG Report No. 
24 of 2023. The C&AG Report No. 24 of 2023 for the year ended 2022 contains 
significant results of the compliance audit of the Department of Space of the Union 
Government. 
         Committee on Public Accounts (2023-24) selected the aforesaid C&AG Report 
for examination and report. The Committee considered the subject for detailed 
examination, held informal discussion with the representatives of the 
Ministry/Department concerned during their study visit to Bengaluru and Kochi from 
16-18 October, 2024 and obtained written replies to the List of Points. 
 
1. Para no 2.3 “Short closure of project for development of Special Grade Carbon 
Fibre” 
 
Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram a unit of 
Indian Space Research Organisation of Department of Space is mandated 
for the design and development of launch vehicle programme. VSSC 
procures launch vehicle consumables for the program from vendor on 
proprietary basis. VSSC imports carbon fibres (T 800) for its launch 
vehicle programme. National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL) of Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research had established (July 2004) an 
integrated facility for making Carbon fibres, developed a process for T 300 
grade fibres and has facilities for processing special grade carbon fibres. 
VSSC therefore signed a Memorandum of Understanding with NAL in Feb 
2006 to develop the process technology for special grades of carbon (T 
800 grade) fibres for space use as an import substitute. The project was to 
be completed by September 2007 which was extended five times up to 
March 2015. An aMoUnt of ₹3.50 crore was paid (Feb 2006) on signing 
the MoU towards ‘facility upgradation and development work’ and another 
₹ 50 lakh subsequently requested by NAL was released (Feb 2009) 
towards ‘Manpower for the developmental work.  
 
As per the MOU, NAL was to supply special grade Carbon Fibres to VSSC 
initially for five years and continue thereon. Further, the MOU also 
included provisions related to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) of the 
project. The Intellectual property that is knowhow/ process generated was 
to be jointly owned by NAL and VSSC. 
 

2 
 
  Audit observed that due to delays in procurement of equipment and 
other technical problems that occurred during the execution, the project 
had to be extended five times upto 2015 which was indicative of improper 
planning. Further, despite repeated extensions, NAL could not develop the 
special grade (T 800 grade) Carbon fibres due to its inability to support the 
project in terms of manpower. VSSC and NAL mutually agreed (July 2019) 
to short close the MOU. NAL did not pursue the activity after October 
2015. In a review meeting of the project held in July 2019, it was decided 
to short close the MOU without extension considering the huge investment 
and time required for further development in the project and pre-
occupation of the NAL team with the setting up of carbon fibre plant for 
DRDO and BARC. 
 
As per the MOU the Joint Review Committee (JRC) consisting of 
members from NAL and VSSC was to review the project once every three 
months. Audit observed that during the period from February 2006 to May 
2019, the JRC meetings were held continuously up to the end of year 
2007. However, the meetings of the JRC were not held on regular basis in 
the subsequent period. Review meetings were held only once or twice in 
each year during the period 2008 to 2016.  After 2016, the JRC met only 
once in 2019. 
 
  A committee appointed by Director, VSSC visited NAL facilities and 
recommended (November 2005) that NAL has the expertise and capability 
to develop special grade carbon fibre to the requirement of ISRO. 
However, NAL replied in (Dec 2022) that the equipment to improve the 
carbon fibre properties to the requirement of ISRO are in the technology 
denial regime and sufficient indigenous expertise is not available to 
develop the equipment.  
 
Thus, improper planning and lack of clarity on resource availability 
(facility, financial and manpower) required for the project, finally resulted in 
short closure of the project and the expenditure of ₹ 4 crore remained 
largely infructuous.  
 
VSSC replied (October 2020) that the development of T 800 grade 
of carbon fibre require significant funding and establishment of a 
production facility in an industrial setting. VSSC added (October 2021) that 
NAL could not fully accomplish the specification as required by VSSC. 
Even though NAL came out with a carbon fibre which was better than its T 
300 grade, it did not reach the required level of T 800 grade.  
 

3 
 
DOS replied (Jan 2023) that due to uncertainty of achieving the 
desired results along with difficulty of NAL to support the project in terms 
of manpower it was decided to short close the MoU.  
 
Reply of VSSC/DOS is not acceptable. NAL was not even able to 
successfully develop the material to the requirement of ISRO at its 
laboratory level. Further, no efforts were made to secure Intellectual 
Property Rights on the process knowhow developed as a result of the 
project.  
 
2. The Ministry in their Background Note have stated as under:- 
 T800 carbon fibre is a critical raw material used for making upper 
stage motor cases of launch vehicles, Pressurant tanks for 
spacecraft and Gaganyaan application. The raw material was 
sourced from M/s Toray, Japan, the only qualified source available 
in the world from the beginning. The material has wider applications 
in Defence sector also. Considering single point dependency and 
export clearance issues under export control regime, it was decided 
to indigenize the item to meet the national demands through NAL 
which was the only agency considered to have much technical 
expertise in the country. 
 Considering NAL's experience of establishing the process 
technology for T300 grade of Carbon fibre, a National level 
committee was constituted by Director, VSSC in 2005 to discuss 
and review the expertise available with NAL for developing special 
grades of Carbon fibre. 
 Based on the recommendations of the above Committee, VSSC 
entered into an MoU with NAL for development of high strength and 
high modulus fibre. MoU was signed on 03.02.2006 with expected 
date of completion as September 2007. 
 Scope of the MoU included Pilot Plant scale development of 
processes for the high strength carbon fibre equivalent to 
commercially available T 800 grade and from high modulus carbon 
fibre equivalent to commercially available M55 J grade using 
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) based resin. 
 However, high molecular weight PAN precursor was found 
unsuitable to realize required specification of M 55 J fibre. Hence, 
work could not proceed further for development of M 55 J fibre.  
   

4 
 
  Work carried out at NAL  
 NAL already had a pilot plant to process T300 grade Carbon fibre, 
which needed modification to develop T800 grade Carbon fibre. 
 The existing equipments were modified/ augmented for processing 
T 800 fibre. A number of trials were carried out in all the three 
major areas related to process technology of carbon fibre viz 
Polymerization, Spinning and Carbonization.  
 However, analysis of the process - details and results of spinning 
as well as carbonization experiments showed that the existing set 
of equipment could not yield the required mechanical properties. 
 To address the above inadequacies of the existing processing 
equipment, a major work was undertaken for the augmentation / 
modification of the existing facilities. It took more than 3 years to 
complete the above works and to commission the new process- 
lines.  
 The optimization trails of process resumed after modification of the 
plant and the properties of carbon fibre obtained by the end of 
MoU validity period (Mar 2016) and submitted to VSSC are given 
below: 
 
Tow Strength Tensile strength (GPa) Tensile Modulus (GPa) % elongation Density (g/cc) Target specifications of commercially available T800 (as tested at VSSC and NAL) 4.65 300 1.55 1.80 Values Obtained 3.8 280 1.36 1.78 
 
Achievements of Process Development Activities at NAL: 
 Establishment of Polyacrylonitrile Copolymer with <2.7 molecular 
weight distribution (MWD) and monomer composition having 
optimum stretch ability (10-11X) in wet spinning.  

5 
 
 Establishment of Wet Spinning Technology for 3K and 6K Tow for 
titer reduced down to 0.85 denier per filament (dpf) 
 Establishment of Heat Treatment Process for 0.85 DPF Special 
Acrylic Fibre with 90 mins residence time in oxidation oven, ~5 mins 
residence time in pre carbonization and carbonization, which is the 
optimum possible in the existing heat treatment line. 
 Process development of continuous operation at every stage, i.e: 
polymerization, wet spinning and heat treatment. 
 Well controlled co - efficient of variation in filament properties. 
 
Budget details 
 The project was for a total cost of Rs. 482 lakhs wherein Rs. 350 
lakhs was paid on signing the MoU. 
 An additional a MoUnt of Rs. 50 lakhs was paid to meet manpower 
deployment expenses through an MoU amendment in February 
2009.  
 Total fund allocation: Rs 532 lakhs, Total paid: Rs 400 lakhs. 
 Remaining Rs. 132 lakhs was earmarked to be paid after delivering 
the 1st lot of T-800 grade carbon fibre or its prepreg, as per MoU 
terms. 
 
Present Status 
 Development work (with NAL) for T-800 equivalent grade carbon 
fibre so far has resulted in preparation of carbon fibre within 80% of 
the targeted strength and~ 95% of the targeted modulus. 
 The annual requirement is 400 kg with the cost of Rs.92.00 L. At 
present, M/s Toray, Japan, Formosa, Taiwan, Hyosoung, Korea and 
Hexcel, USA are the four sources known in the world for supplying 
this item. Since this item is of dual use nature, risk of facing the 
export clearance issue still exist considering the geo political 
scenario. Hence, indigenization effort for the development of T800 
carbon fiber is essential. 
 
MoU Short Closure 
 The Expert review committee constituted by Director, VSSC met on 
7th June, 2019. The committee noted that though the results 
obtained were close to the target (80 % of strength and other 
parameters), the specification of T800 could not be achieved. A 
further investment of Rs.700.00 L was required for establishing 
additional facilities for further process improvements to achieve final 
specification of T800. Considering the above, the committee 

6 
 
decided to short close the MoU without further extension. 
 Being a critical technology development, there were many technical 
challenges experienced during the final phases of the process 
optimization. It may be noted that such critical research and 
development activities are always associated with high risks and 
uncertainties and hence the efforts made in pursuit of national goals 
may not achieve the desired outcome sometimes. 
 
IPR Process 
  The developed carbon fibre was better than T300 grade but did not 
reach that of T800 grade as per the MoU. Since, this development had 
reached an intermediatory stage against the original plan, IPR process 
was not initiated. 
 
3. On being asked about the import bill of T 800 carbon fibre since the start 
of its import and the probable cost of the project to develop Special Grade (T 
800 grade) Carbon fibre, the Ministry in their written reply stated: 
 
“Total import from 2005 works out to be 3408 kg at a total cost of Rs.4.80 
crores. (at current US dollar exchange rate i.e 1 USD = Rs. 83.93). The 
estimated cost of indigenous development is Rs.12.32 Crore 
(including the MoU value of Rs.5.32 crore and the additional investment 
of Rs. 7.00 Crore projected by NAL in 2019).” 
 
4. When asked to furnish details of comparison between the cost of import 
of T 800 grade and the probable cost of its indigenous development, if any, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Yes. Development cost would be higher for indigenizing the complex 
technology considering the capital investment, process development and 
operational cost.” 
 
5. Initially, VSSC showed faith in NAL’s ability to develop T 800 grade but 
lost that faith later simply because the project would cost significantly and 
outcome was not certain. On being asked whether such a haphazard approach 
towards R&D would bring about the desirable result, the Ministry through a 
written note stated:- 
 
“It may be noted that the Department had followed a fairly structured 
approach to initiating this research & development activity with NAL. This 
approach has yielded several successes in the development of metallic & 
non-metallic materials, notably Maraging Steel in association with 
MIDHANI, which is the backbone material for ISRO’s launch vehicle 
programme. This approach has eliminated the need for importing steels 

7 
 
and has also resulted in the successful development of superalloys and 
other non-metallic materials & chemicals for the Indian Space 
Programme. The approach taken for this activity with NAL went through 
the following phases. 
a. Assessment of the technical feasibility & evaluation by a 
National Committee and initiating the R & D activity with NAL. 
 
    As of the year 2005, NAL had established an integrated facility for 
making carbon fibre in Bangalore in the T300 grade and had agreed to 
develop high strength carbon fibres (T800 grade) meeting ISRO’s 
requirements utilizing the available expertise at NAL and the facility with 
minimum modifications & augmentation. Before initiating the R & D with 
NAL, a National level committee including experts from ISRO, Central 
Leather Research Institute (CLRI) & Sardar Patel University, Gujarat was 
constituted by Director, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre of ISRO to 
evaluate & assess the technical feasibility, proposed process 
methodology along with the proposed facility augmentation at NAL. The 
Committee held discussions with the NAL team and recommended to 
initiate the R & D activity with NAL with the proposed process 
methodology and augmentation of the equipment. Considering the 
strategic nature of these types of carbon fibers and the availability of a 
single import source at the time along with the embargo imposed on 
ISRO at that time, it was decided to enter into an MoU with NAL based 
on the recommendations of the National Committee. 
 
b. Progress of the activity & periodic Monitoring of the 
activity through a Joint Review Committee (JRC). 
 
   The existing equipment at NAL were modified/augmented and 
number of trials were carried out in areas of polymerization, spinning and 
carbonization. A Joint Review Committee regularly monitored the 
progress of the activity during the period 2006-2016. Since the 
modification of equipment did not yield results, a further major 
modification was carried out by NAL over 3 years. However, the batches 
of carbon fibre could not achieve the desired results. Being a closely 
guarded technology, it was difficult to comprehend the further 
modification needed to obtain the desired parameters. Subsequently it 
was felt by NAL team that a further investment of Rs. 7.00 Crore would 
be required towards new equipment that could possibly yield the results 
but the assessment of the Department was that the suggested 
equipment had little chance of obtaining export clearance considering the 
dual use nature. Moreover, the availability of multiple global sources of 
this strategic item had eased the supply risk for high strength carbon 

8 
 
fibres in 2014 & beyond. In view of the above and also considering the 
high risk of further cost & schedule overrun, Director, VSSC constituted a 
Committee in 2019 to review the status of the activity, assess the 
outcomes and suitably recommend further course of action. 
 
c. Assessment of status & recommendation of short closure. 
 
    The Committee constituted in 2019, reviewed the status and 
assessed the outcome of the activity and determined that the efforts of 
NAL had resulted in Carbon fibre samples with improved parameters w.r.t 
T300 grade but fell short of the targeted specifications of high strength 
T800 grade fibres. Concurrently, NAL had also entered into an MOU with 
DAE and was in the process of assisting DAE and DRDO in establishing 
a plant for the production of T300 fibres. The Committee took cognizance 
of this situation where the resources at NAL would now be also engaged 
for this purpose. Subsequently, the Committee recommended to short 
close the activity considering the huge cost & schedule risk and also the 
uncertainty in obtaining the export clearance for the dual use equipment. 
One more Committee was constituted in 2020 to further review and 
formally close the MOU, which was done in 2021. 
 
     Therefore, it may be noted that the Department has followed a 
structured and systematic approach in initiating the activity, monitoring 
the progress and recommending for short closure of the activity.” 
 
6. It is stated that NAL team achieved higher than T 300 grade and was 
nearer to T 800 grade. When enquired that considering this backdrop whether 
VSSC made hurry in short closing the project, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under: 
 
“With all the modifications to the existing plant and R&D efforts, NAL 
could achieve Carbon fibre better than that of T-300 grade. Last batch of 
carbon fibre was supplied by NAL to VSSC in the year 2014 which was 
not meeting the required specification of T- 800 grade. The decision to 
short close was taken only after all possible options were exhausted with 
the existing equipment and it became clear that new equipment (that is 
under stringent export controls) would require to be imported. The 
desired material properties could not be achieved even after 12 years 
from signing the MoU and the decision was taken to short close after 
review by two committees in 2019 and 2021. Therefore, there was no 
hurry in short closing the project.” 
 
  

9 
 
 
7. On the one hand, VSSC stated that indigenization of high strength 
carbon fibre is still not a reality due to technological complexity and high 
investment and inadequate commercial demands and on the other hand, it is 
called strategically important in long term stating that R&D in this regard should 
not be treated as infructuous. On being asked how does the Ministry plan to 
address this paradox, the Ministry in their written reply intimated:- 
    
“As mentioned above, the efforts of NAL had resulted in Carbon fibre 
samples with improved parameters w.r.t T300 grade but fell short of the 
targeted specifications of high strength T800 grade fibres. In spite of this 
shortfall, the MoU had achieved the following: 
 
(a) The development of a continuous mode process that was an 
improvement over the previously existing batch mode process. 
(b) The technical specifications of the Carbon fibre achieved with 
improved properties w.r.t T300 grade that is suitable for several other 
applications. 
 
     Therefore, it may be noted that the MoU has resulted in the 
development of a process technology from batch mode to continuous 
processing for Carbon fibre with improved properties that can be gainfully 
utilized by the Ministry of Defense and DAE for those applications which 
require standard modulus carbon fibres. Therefore, the R & D activity 
carried out at NAL under this MoU was not entirely infructuous.” 
 
8. When asked to respond to audit conclusion that improper planning and a 
lack of clarity regarding resource availability (facilities, finances and manpower) 
for the project ultimately led to its premature closure, rendering the expenditure 
of Rs 4 crore largely unproductive, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under:- 
 
“As already substantiated in Sl No.2 above, the Department had followed 
a fairly structured approach in initiating the activity, monitoring the 
progress through a joint mechanism, reviewing the status and deciding 
on induction / short closure. This approach has resulted in successful 
indigenization of many materials & sub-systems along with the 
qualification of new vendors through development orders and technology 
transfer. 
  

10 
 
 
          In the case of this activity, as of 2005, NAL was the only agency in 
the country with an integrated facility for T300 grade fibres along with the 
human resources which provided NAL the advantage to proceed with 
the development of high strength fibres in the T800 grade. Therefore, 
the Department initiated the activity with NAL after an assessment by a 
National Committee of experts which held discussion with NAL on the 
feasibility and process methodology. 
 
Considering the strategic & closely guarded nature of the 
technology, embargo issues at the time and single source availability, the 
Department proceeded with this technologically complex and challenging 
task based on the recommendations of the National Committee. It may be 
noted that R & D of this complex nature is always a calculated risk and it 
is very difficult to assess apriori the technical challenges involved and 
exact investment needed to develop this product. 
 
In this case, NAL had to upgrade their facility and processes to 
achieve the desired parameters. The existence of just one or two global 
players in this product segment over many decades up to 2005 and even 
beyond till 2014 is evidence of the highly challenging nature of this 
activity. It may be noted that the activity has resulted in an improvement 
in the process in spite of shortfall in achieving the properties of T800 
grade fibre. This improvement can be gainfully utilized by NAL for 
establishing the plants for T300 fibre to meet the requirements of DAE 
and MoD and therefore the activity undertaken with NAL cannot be 
termed unproductive. 
 
 
Further, when the MoU was initiated, there was no industry in 
India for converting the carbon fibre into a semi-processed form called 
prepregs, which is the structural material for composite hardware. As on 
today, multiple industries are available today in the country to convert the 
carbon fibre into prepregs. Considering the strategic importance of the 
technology, ISRO is encouraging these industries to take up the 
technology of carbon fibre development.” 
  

11 
 
 
9. Considering the fact that as to why the MoU to develop special-grade carbon 
fibres (T-800 grade) was extended five times, despite NAL lacking the expertise and 
capability to meet ISRO’s requirements for special-grade carbon fiber, the Ministry in 
their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“As mentioned above, R & D of this complex nature is always a 
calculated risk and it is very difficult to assess apriori the technical 
challenges involved and exact schedule to develop this product. Being 
highly process sensitive, several trials and equipment modifications were 
essential as part of the activity that required multiple extensions. The 
decision to short close was taken only after all possible options were 
exhausted with the existing equipment and it became clear that new 
equipment would require to be imported.” 
 
10. On being asked why Joint Review Committee (JRC) meetings were not 
held regularly as per the MoU after 2007, the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under:- 
 
“It may be noted that Joint Review Committee (JRC) meetings were held 
regularly between 2005-2016 with at least 1 or 2 meetings per year.” 
 
11. To a question as to whether pre-occupation of the NAL team with DRDO 
and BARC holds sufficient ground for short-closure of the MoU, the Ministry in 
their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“It may be noted that the decision on short-closure was predominantly 
taken owing to the following.” 
• Cost overrun 
• Schedule overrun 
• Reduced risk of supply due to availability of multiple global vendors 
• Availability of Indian industries to process prepreg from carbon fibre. 
 
     As NAL had entered into an MoU with DAE and was in the process 
of assisting DAE and DRDO in establishing a plant for the production of 
T300 fibres, the Department took cognizance of this situation where the 
resources at NAL would now be also engaged for this purpose and may 
not be able to fully devote their efforts towards this activity that can further 
contribute to the schedule risk.” 
  

12 
 
 
12. When asked as to why it took so long to file IPR for the process know-how 
developed as a result of  this project, the Ministry in their written reply stated:- 
 
“IPR was not filed since T800 properties were not achieved.” 
 
13. Going by the economic logic of ‘money saved is money produced’. When 
asked to express their opinion keeping in mind that the invention cost could have 
been much less than the continuous import cost and this it would also protect 
national interest from prospective possibilities of embargo on the Indian State for 
reasons of its strategic importance, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under:- 
 
“In this case, the invention cost cannot be considered less than the 
continuous import cost. Considering the low volume requirement of T800 
fibres and also with the invention cost amortised based on the 
development cost and cost of machinery, import cost would still be 
substantially lower. In 2005, ISRO was in the restricted list which 
warranted exploring the feasibility of indigenous development. By 2019, 
ISRO was removed from the restricted list and multiple suppliers were 
identified globally including Asia, USA and Europe. This has reduced the 
supply risk substantially.” 
 
 
  

13 
 
Part II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Introduction 
The Committee learn that Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) imports 
carbon fibres (T 800) for its launch vehicle programme from vendors on 
proprietary basis. National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL) of CSIR established in 
July 2004 is an integrated facility for making Carbon Fibres, developing a process 
for T 300 grade fibres with facilities for processing special grade carbon fibres. 
On the recommendation of a committee appointed by Director, VSSC, a 
Memorandum of Understanding was signed between VSSC and NAL in Feb 2006 
to develop special grades of carbon (T 800 grade) fibres for space use as an 
import substitute. The project was to be completed by September 2007 which was 
extended five times up to March 2015 due to delays in procurement of equipment 
and other technical problems. An advance of ₹3.50 crore was paid in February, 
2006 on signing the MoU towards ‘facility upgradation and development work’ at 
NAL and an amendment to MoU was effected in February 2009 and  ₹ 50 lakh was 
released in February, 2009 towards ‘Manpower for the developmental work’.  This 
constitute 75% of total payment as per MoU for completion of the project by 
September 2007. Despite repeated extensions, NAL could not develop the special 
grade (T 800 grade) Carbon fibres to the requirement of VSSC. Hence, VSSC and 
NAL mutually agreed in July 2019 to short close the MoU. NAL did not pursue the 
activity after October 2015.  
 
1. Lack of capacity Assessment and improper planning 
 
From the audit finding, the Committee note that due to delays in 
procurement of equipment and other technical problems that occurred during the 
execution, the project had to be extended five times upto 2015 which was 
indicative of improper planning and lack of foresight. The audit further observed 
that despite repeated extensions, NAL could not develop the special grade (T 800 
grade) Carbon fibres due to its inability to support the project in terms of 
manpower.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of VSSC that the 
development of T-800 grade of carbon fibre require significant funding and 

14 
 
establishment of a production facility in an industrial setting. VSSC added in 
October 2021 that NAL could not fully accomplish the specification as required by 
VSSC. The reply further stated that even though NAL came out with a carbon fibre 
which was better than its T300 grade, it did not reach the required level of T 800 
grade. To this, the Department of Space replied in January, 2023 that due to 
uncertainty of achieving the desired results along with difficulty of NAL to 
support the project in terms of manpower, it was decided to short close the MoU.  
 
1.1 The Committee note that a committee appointed by Director, VSSC visited 
NAL facilities and recommended in November 2005 that NAL has the expertise 
and capability to develop special grade carbon fibre to the requirement of ISRO. 
However, NAL replied in December, 2022 that the equipment to improve the 
carbon fibre properties to the requirement of ISRO are in the technology denial 
regime and sufficient indigenous expertise is not available to develop the 
equipment. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons as to why the 
committee appointed by the Director of VSSC in November 2005 recommended 
that NAL had the expertise and capability to develop special-grade carbon fibre.  
The Committee may also be apprised as to why was the MoU to develop special-
grade carbon fibres (T-800 grade) extended five times, despite NAL lacked the 
expertise and capability to meet ISRO's requirements for special-grade carbon 
fibre.  
1.2 The Committee find that NAL did not have the requisite level of technical 
capabilities and equipment to develop Special Grade of Carbon T800 at the time 
of signing of MoU with VSSC, which is evident from the fact that NAL could not 
succeed in achieving the objective of MoU even after extending the term for five 
times upto March 2015.  The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for 
lack of proper capacity assessment of NAL by the Committee appointed by VSSC 
and VSSC before signing MoU with NAL, release of advance payment and 
extension of the term of MoU for five times. Further, the Committee note that 
VSSC appointed Committee and VSSC also had not taken into consideration the 
crucial fact of technology denial regime that was applicable on import of high 
grade carbon.  In view of above, the Committee feel the requirement of framing 
proper guidelines and SOPs that are to be mandatorily followed by Scientific 

15 
 
Departments and Autonomous Institutions before entering into Agreements 
/MoUs with other Department/Organisations. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that such guidelines/SOPs should be framed and circulated within 6 
months of presentation of this report to Parliament.  
 
2. Loss to the exchequer 
    
2.1 The Committee find that VSSC and NAL mutually agreed in July 2019 to 
short close the Memorandum of Understanding, which was signed in 2006 and 
extended five times upto March 2015. The Committee further note that NAL did 
not pursue the activity after October 2015 and there was no coordination between 
VSSC and NAL for four years.  The Committee find it difficult to understand as to 
why the MoU was described to be ‘Short closed or prematurely closed’ when it 
was closed after a period of 13 years without achieving the intended objective. In 
July 2019 considering the huge investment and time required for further 
development in the project and pre-occupation of the NAL team with the setting 
up of carbon fibre plant for DRDO and BARC it was decided to short close the 
MoU.  The Committee are constrained to note that there was no project 
monitoring mechanism within VSSC to assess the progress in the project as per 
MoU and to report inaction on the part of NAL for timely decision, instead of 
extending the term of MoU for five times upto 2015 and wasting another 4 years 
without even extending the term of MoU, which ultimately resulted in loss of Rs.4 
crore to the exchequer and waste of valuable time of 13 years without any results.  
 
2.2 The Committee, considering the facts as brought out in the above 
paragraph  recommend that there should be stringent provisions for project 
monitoring Committee constituted to assess physical progress and report in all 
projects and release of payment should be linked to such report. 
 
3. Joint Review Committee Meetings 
 
The Committee note that as per the Memorandum of Understanding, the 
Joint Review Committee (JRC) consisting of members from NAL and VSSC was 
to review the project once every three months. The Committee further note that 

16 
 
that during the period from February 2006 to May 2019, the JRC meetings were 
held continuously up to the end of year 2007. The Committee are peeved to note 
that the meetings of the JRC were, however, not held on regular basis in the 
subsequent period. The review meetings were held only once or twice in each 
year during the period from 2008 to 2016. The Committee are also note with 
constraint that after 2016, the JRC met only once in 2019. Noting that significant 
time could have been saved, the Committee may be apprised of the reasons for 
not convening Joint Review Committee (JRC) meetings as per the MoU after 2007, 
given that only one JRC meeting took place after 2016. 
 
4. Provision of recovery in MoU 
The Committee note that despite multiple extensions of the MoU and 
modifications to NAL’s existing facilities, the desired T800-grade specifications 
could not be achieved. The Department has justified the short closure of the 
project by citing the availability of multiple global suppliers reducing supply 
risks, high costs and uncertainty in obtaining export clearance for necessary 
equipment and involvement of NAL in other projects with DAE and DRDO. The 
Committee have every reason to believe that the prolonged nature of the project 
for over 13 years would have impacted other projects of ISRO/VSSC. While the 
Department claim to have followed a structured review process, the failure to 
achieve the desired outcome despite continuous extensions indicates that 
project risks were not adequately accounted for at the outset and initial years. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that future projects involving high-risk 
technology development incorporate well-defined exit strategies and periodic 
audits to assess feasibility at different stages and to recover the advance 
payments made but no tangible progress in the project could be achieved within 
the targeted period.  
5. Policy for critical raw materials and technologies 
The Committee find that the Department initially pursued indigenous 
development due to embargo concerns. But by 2019, ISRO was removed from 
restricted lists, and multiple global suppliers were available. The Committee 
further note that the shift in the global trade landscape played a key role in the 

17 
 
decision to short-close the project. However, the Committee believe that the 
given rationale of “money saved is money produced” is not entirely valid in the 
case of strategic materials. While import dependency has been eased, the long-
term risk of embargoes or supply chain disruptions still remains. The Committee, 
in no uncertain words recommend the Department to reassess India’s 
requirement for strategic materials and formulate policies so as to ensure that 
critical raw materials and technologies are developed indigenously, with a robust 
and planned financial and institutional support from friendly nations. 
 
***** 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
25 March, 2025                               
 Chaitra 4, 1947 (Saka) 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
 Committee on Public Accounts 
 
  

18 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 25 MARCH, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, the 25 March,2025 
from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs in Room No. 51, Hon’ble Chairperson’s 
Chamber, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Shri Jai Parkash 
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
5. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
7. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
10. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
12. Dr. K. Laxman 
13. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
14. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 

19 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad   -  Director General 
2. Shri Ashutosh Sharma   - Director General 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur   - Director General 
 
 At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and 
Officers of the office of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following three draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption:-  
 
(i) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
(ii) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; and 
(iii) Draft report on “Short closure of project for development of 
Special Grade Carbon Fibre” based on Para 2.3 of C&AG Report 
No. 24 of 2023. 
 
2. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports with some modifications in the Report at Sl. No. (i) and authorised 
the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of factual verification 
done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 