 
 
03 
 
PROCUREMENT OF X-ENGINES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 81 st Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY) 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024-25) 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
PAC NO. 2386 
 
 
T H I R D  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
(2024 -25 ) 
 
 
(EIGHT EENT H LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 81 st Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (INDIAN NAVY) 
 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
                           Presented to Lok Sabha on: 12.12.2024  
 
                                                    Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 12.12.2024 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
  
    PROCUREMENT OF X-ENGINES 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  (2024-25)                       (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                           (iii) 
CHAPTER I  Report                                                                                1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government...................................                 7 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................        17 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                replies of the Government have not been accepted   
                 by the Committee and which require reiteration.....               18 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which   
                the Government have furnished interim replies/no replies    19 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25) held on                  
3rd December, 2024 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public  Accounts Committee contained 
in their Eighty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Vijay Mishra                -                  Executive Officer 
  
 
ii 

iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (202 4-25) having been 
authorised by the  Committee, do present this  Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the  Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee on Public Accounts contained in their Eighty First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Procurement of X-Engine’.  
 
2. The Eighty First Report was presented to L ok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                       
18th December, 2023 . Replies of the Government  to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The  
Committee on Public Accounts considered and  adopted the draft Report at their Sitting 
held on  3rd December, 2024.  Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of  the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by  the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.   An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 81st Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
is given at Appendix-II 
 
  
 
 
 
 
            NEW DELHI:   
 03 December  , 2024                               
           12 Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 
                          
 
              K.C. VENUGOPAL  
            Chairperson, 
      Committee on Public Accounts 
  
  
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the  Committee on Public Accounts deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighty First Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on "Procurement of X -Engines" based on 
Para 3.2 of C&AG Report No. 20 of 2022  pertaining to  Ministry of Defence  (Indian 
Navy). 
2.  The Eighty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18th 
December, 2023.  The Report contained six Observations/Recommendations. Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) and are categorized as under: 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 
                 Total: 06          
                 Chapter – II 
 
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
                                               NIL 
                   Total:     0  
                Chapter – III 
 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
                               NIL           
                                                                                              Total:    0 
                 Chapter – IV 
 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
                                         NIL    
          Total:     0    
          Chapter –V 

2 
 
 
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy)  on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty First  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this 
Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken  
by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need 
reiteration or merit comments. 
4. The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) to furnish Action 
Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contain ed in Chapter I 
within three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.  
 
Recommendation No. 4 of the 81st Report of the PAC (17th LS) 
5. PREVENTION OF RESOURCE WASTAGE 
 The Committee had appreciated the decision of Indian Navy for taking timely 
measures in the context of Crim ea Annexation. However, they were  not inclined to 
agree with the decision of not reducing the number of X -Engines on account of 
decommissioning. In Request for Proposal (RFP)s, I ndian Navy could consider adding  
the clause that the number of items may be increased / decreased at the time of final 
order, if not already included which is a general clause for each tender/Reque st For 
Proposal. The Committee had, therefore  desired that Indian Navy should prepare 
standard Tender Document and conduct a thorough and timely review of X -Engines 
stock levels annually for all depots and initiate the process for procurement, 
maintenance, re-use, disposal/de-commissioning, as the case may b e, and implement 
corrective measures as per guidelines in Navy Instructions (NI) -2006.  The Committee, 
further, desire d that future procurements should be based on actual needs, while 
simultaneously maintaining a plan for contingency/crisis keeping the na tional interest 
paramount.  
6. The Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy)  in their action taken reply stated as 
under:- 
 “In accordance with observations/recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 4 
the following necessary actions have been taken by Indian Navy (IN):- 

3 
 
a) General clause in each tender/Request for Proposal for future orders that ‘the 
number items/qua ntity may be increased or decreased at the time of final order’ has 
been incorporated. Issues arising due to change in qua ntity post issue of RFP will hav e 
to be progressively addressed by the Contracting Authority on case to case basis prior 
Cost Negotiations as seller might not hold the prices due the necessity of Minimum 
Order Quantity. 
b) Further, review of the X -engine stock level for all depots is being undertaken 
annually as per IN guidelines promulgated in 2014, to initiate the process for 
procurement, maintenance, re -use, disposal/ de -commissioning, as the case may be. 
The last review of the stock levels were undertaken in November 2023.  
c) All future procurements of X-engines being initiated, will be against BER (Beyond 
Economical Repair)/ ABER (Anticipated Beyond Economical Repair) maintaining a ratio 
of 1:2 considering the short life span of X -engines for prompt onboard replacements, 
catering for actua l needs whilst simultaneously maintaining plan for contingency/ crisis 
keeping the national interest paramount.”  
7. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
a) “DPM 2009 provides for a Tolerance Clause, enabling the buyer to reserve the 
right to increase or decrease the quantity of the required item during the period starting 
from issue of Request for Proposal (RFP) till placement of the contract without any 
change in term and conditions and prices quoted by the seller. In view of existing 
enabling c lause of DPM 2009 above, PAC may be apprised about the difference 
between general clause mentioned by the Ministry and tolerance clause as per DPM 
2009. 
b) The measures taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched in audit. “ 
 
8. The Ministry in their Updated Action taken reply stated as under:-  
 “In accordance with observations/ recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 4 
the following necessary actions have been taken by Indian Navy (IN):- 
a) The RFPs previously issued to OEM (prior Feb 2015 in the instant Contracts) 
had not included ‘Tolerance Clause’ as per DPM 2009 since Contracts were being 
concluded as per the format of ‘General Agreement dated 04 November 92’ between 
Government of India and OEM. However, in accordance with recommendations of PA C 
and as brought out by DG Audit (Navy), Tolerance Clause as per DPM 2009 is being 
included for future orders in each tender/ Request for Proposal. 

4 
 
b) Further, review of the X -engine stock level for all depots is being undertaken 
annually as per IN guidelines promulgated in 2014, to initiate the process for 
procurement, maintenance, re -use, disposal/ de -commissioning, as the case may be. 
The last review of the stock levels were undertaken in November 2023.  
c) All future procurements of X-engines being initiated, will be against BER (Beyond 
Economical Repair)/ ABER (Anticipated Beyond Economical Repair) maintaining a ratio 
of 1:2 considering the short life span of X -engines, for prompt onboard replacements, 
catering for actual needs whilst simultaneously maintaini ng plan for contingency/ crisis 
keeping the national interest paramount.” 
 
9.     The Committee in their original report had desired that future procurements 
should be based on actual needs, while simultaneously maintaining a plan for 
contingency/crisis keeping the national interest paramount. The Committee note 
from action taken notes furnished by the Ministry that  in accordance with 
recommendations of PAC and as brought out by DG Audit (Navy), Tolerance 
Clause as per DPM 2009 is being included for futu re orders in each tender/ 
Request for Proposal. The Committee, in this context, are surprised that 
Tolerance Clause which was already available in DPM 2009 had not been included 
in RFPs issued prior to February 2015. From the replies furnished by the Minis try 
of Defence, they do not find substantial difference between the general clause 
mentioned by the Ministry and tolerance clause as per DPM 2009. The Committee 
recommend that Ministry may comprehensively review their procurement 
procedures with a view to ensure that they have final authority to review as well 
as increase or decrease the quantities at the time of final order in all future 
orders. The Committee have also been informed that last review of the stock 
levels for X -Engines were undertaken in Nove mber 2023. In this context, the 
Committee desire to be informed about the details of the reviews undertaken in 
the last five years with respect to X-engines. 
Recommendation No. 5 of the 81st Report of the PAC (17th LS) 
ENHANCING 'MAKE IN INDIA' AND RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS 
10. The Committee had appreciated the Indian Navy for Innovative X -Engine Design 
prepared by their officer(s).  Currently the progress is theoretical and its industrial 

5 
 
production and its evaluation for use is yet to be done.  The Committee had emphasized 
the need to expedite actions aimed at achieving indigenous production of X -Engines, 
aligning with the goals of the 'Make in India' initiative and therefore, recommend ed that 
the Indian Navy needs to undertake research and development initiatives to address the 
current challenges and explore innovative approaches.   
11. The Ministry of Defence (Indian Navy) in their action taken reply stated as 
under:- 
 “In accordance with observations/ recommendations of the PA C Report at Para 
5, IN is adopting a multi -pronged approach towards indigenization of components of in -
service engines and development of new engines. Few of the initiatives of IN are as 
follows:-  
a) RFP to Indian Industry for Procurement of 1.25 MW Gas Turbine Generators has 
been issued in Mar 23 and the Proposals of bidders has cleared Technical Evaluation 
and the case is at FET stage. This will boost the indigenous GT development efforts.  
b) Academia and Industry are pro -actively being engaged by IN to address current 
challenges in development/ production of Marine Gas Turbine. MoU signed with Indian 
Industry partner towards development of Indigenous Marine Gas Turbine.” 
 
12. Vetting comments of Audit are as under:- 
 
   “ The measures taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched in audit.” 
 
13. The Committee had emphasized the need to expedite actions aimed at 
achieving indigenous production of X -Engines, aligning with the goals of the 
'Make in Indi a' initiative and had therefore recommended that the Indian Navy 
need to undertake research and development initiatives to address the current 
challenges and explore innovative approaches. In this regard it has been 
informed by the Ministry that  RFP to In dian Industry for Procurement of 1.25 MW 
Gas Turbine Generators has been issued in Mar 23 and the Proposals of bidders 
has cleared Technical Evaluation and the case is at FET stage. Further, Academia 
and Industry are pro -actively being engaged by Indian Na vy to address current 
challenges in development/ production of Marine Gas Turbine. Also Memorandum 

6 
 
of Understanding (MoU) has been signed with Indian Industry partner towards 
development of Indigenous Marine Gas Turbine.  In this context, while 
appreciating the steps already taken, the Commit tee recommend that vigorous 
efforts may be made to achieve concrete results so as to reach self sustenance in 
this domain within a limited time frame. 
                                                                         *** 
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee take note of the critical role played by the X -Engines in achieving high 
navigational speeds required by the Indian Navy’s SS Class Ships.  The SS Class Ships 
are missile corvettes acquired by Indian Navy  and integrated into their fleet.  These X -
Engines have a short life time, thereby,  necessitating a sufficient stock for prompt 
onboard replacements.  The Engine provisioning guidelines of 2014 were introduced to 
address past stock shortages and prevent future stock situations.  However, the audit 
has brought to light several issues rega rding the inventory holding of X -Engines, non-
consideration of de -commissioned ships while placing order, and non -adherence to 
stock levels prescribed under NI-2006, which warrant careful scrutiny.   
 
[Observations/Recommendation No.1 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
The Observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have been 
noted for compliance.  
“This para pertains to understanding of the subject by PAC and states that observations 
brought out by the audit regarding the inventory holding of X-Engines, non-adherence of 
de-commissioned ships while placing order and non -adherence to stock levels 
prescribed under NI -2006 warrant careful scrutiny. “Action Taken on the observa tions 
post scrutiny has been elucidated at ATN on Sl No. 4; Para 4 of the 81 st Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee.” 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 

8 
 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
Same as ‘Action Taken’ above 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 The Committee note that the Navy’s Instruction is a general guideline and does 
not cater for equipment specific service requirements. It has been reported that the 
matter of 'Nil ' stock situation directly affecting the operational capability of the platfo rms 
was experienced on four occasions before 2016, that is in 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2013. 
The only procurement undertaken since 1995 was for two engines in 2009. The 
Committee also note that the subsequent indents from 2009 to 2013 had all got 
bunched up an d fructified into contracts on four occasions, that is in 2013, 2015 and 
2016. The Committee have been informed that the decommissioning of the two ships in 
2016 could not be taken into account as it would have resulted in delay in supply of the 
required X -Engines. Also, the Request for Proposal had already been issued in 
February, 2015 before the decision to decommission these two ships was taken. It has 
also been informed that the uncertainty created due to Annexation of Crimea also 
necessitated early placement of orders to secure the supply chain. 
[Observations/Recommendation No.2 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 This para pertains to understanding of the subject by PAC and no observations 
were brought out. Hence, no actions have been taken by MoD on this para. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
Same as ‘Action Taken’ above 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 

10 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
  The Committee observe that in all likelihood the procurement decisions in 2015 
and 2016 were influenced by geopolitical uncertainties, which necessitated bulk 
procurement to address potential supply chain-disruptions due to the Crimea crisis.  The 
Committee note the affirmation of the Ministry that there has been no consequential 
wastage of public money on account of ending of warranty as all the X -Engines have 
been earmarked for installation within their service  life. It has also been stated that the 
benefits of bulk procurement have been accrued on account of the conclusion of 
contracts in 2016. The Committee believe that the procurements have ensured 
operational readiness of SS Class ships in the on -going operational scenario. The 
Committee desire that t he concrete roadmap prepared for the management of X -
Engines of these ships may strictly be followed for catering the future requirements. 
[Observations/Recommendation No.3 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 “In accordance with observations/recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 3, 
the stock position of X -Engines is being annually reviewed for initiation of procurement 
process and maintenance/overhaul of engines removed from onboard ships towards 
catering for future requirements of SS class ships.”  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
“The measures taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched in audit.” 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
Same as ‘Action Taken’ above 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 
 

11 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 PREVENTION OF RESOURCE WASTAGE 
 The Committee appreciate the decision of Indian Navy for taking timely 
measures in the context of Crimea Annexation. However, they are not inclined to agree 
with the decision of not reducing the number of X -Engines on account of 
decommissioning. In Request for Proposal (RFP)s, Indian Navy could consider adding  
the clause that the number of items ma y be increased / decreased at the time of final 
order, if not already included which is a general clause for each tender/Request For 
Proposal. The Committee, therefore, desire that Indian Navy should prepare standard 
Tender Document and conduct a thorough and timely review of X -Engines stock levels 
annually for all depots and initiate the process for procurement, maintenance, re -use, 
disposal/de-commissioning, as the case may be, and implement corrective measures as 
per guidelines in Navy Instructions (NI) -2006.  The Committee, further, desire that 
future procurements should be based on actual needs, while simultaneously 
maintaining a plan for contingency/crisis keeping the national interest paramount.  
[Observations/Recommendation No.4 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 “In accordance with observations/recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 4 
the following necessary actions have been taken by Indian Navy (IN):- 
a) General clause in each tender/Request for Proposal for future orders that ‘the 
number items/quality may be increased or decreased at the time of final order’ 
has been incorporated. Issues arising due to change in quality post issue of RFP 
will have to be progressively addressed by the Contracting Authority on case to 
case basis prior Cost Negotiations as seller might not hold the prices due the 
necessity of Minimum Order Quantity. 
b) Further, review of the X -engine stock level for all depots is being undertaken 
annually as per IN guidelines promulgated in 2014, to initiate the process for 
procurement, maintenance, re-use, disposal/ de-commissioning, as the case may 
be. The last review of the stock levels were undertaken in November 2023.  

12 
 
c) All future procurements of X-engines being initiated, will be against BER (Beyond 
Economical Repair)/ ABER (Anticipated Beyond Economical Repair) maintaining 
a ratio of 1:2 considering the short life span of X -engines for prompt onboard 
replacements, catering for actual needs whilst simultaneously  maintaining plan 
for contingency/ crisis keeping the national interest paramount.”  
 
  
Audit vetting comments on Ministry’s ATNs 
a) DPM 2009 provides for a Tolerance Clause, enabling the buyer to reserve the 
right to increase or decrease the quantity of the required item during the period 
starting from issue of Request for Proposal (RFP) till placement of the contract 
without any change in term and conditions and prices quoted by the seller. In 
view of existing enabling clause of DPM 2009 above, PAC may be ap prised 
about the difference between general clause mentioned by the Ministry and 
tolerance clause as per DPM 2009. 
b) The measures taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched in audit.  
 
Updated Action Taken 
 
 “In accordance with observations/ recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 4 
the following necessary actions have been taken by Indian Navy (IN):- 
a) The RFPs previously issued to OEM (prior Feb 2015 in the instant Contracts) 
had not included ‘Tolerance Clause’ as per DPM 2009 since Contracts were 
being concluded as per the format of ‘General Agreement dated 04 November 
92’ between Government of India and OEM. However, in accordance with 
recommendations of PAC and as brought out by DG Audit (Navy), Tolerance 
Clause as per DPM 2009 is being included for  future orders in each tender/ 
Request for Proposal. 
b) Further, review of the X -engine stock level for all depots is being undertaken 
annually as per IN guidelines promulgated in 2014, to initiate the process for 
procurement, maintenance, re-use, disposal/ de-commissioning, as the case may 
be. The last review of the stock levels were undertaken in November 2023.  
c) All future procurements of X-engines being initiated, will be against BER (Beyond 
Economical Repair)/ ABER (Anticipated Beyond Economical Repair) maintaining 

13 
 
a ratio of 1:2 considering the short life span of X -engines, for prompt onboard 
replacements, catering for actual needs whilst simultaneously maintaining plan 
for contingency/ crisis keeping the national interest paramount.” 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
ENHANCING 'MAKE IN INDIA' AND RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS 
 The Committee appreciate the Indian Navy for Innovative X -Engine Design 
prepared by their officer(s).  Currently the progress is theoretical and its industrial 
production and its evaluation for use is yet to be done.  Th e Committee, emphasize the 
need to expedite actions aimed at achieving indigenous production of X -Engines, 
aligning with the goals of the 'Make in India' initiative and therefore, recommend that the 
Indian Navy needs to undertake research and development i nitiatives to address the 
current challenges and explore innovative approaches.   
[Observations/Recommendation No.5 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 In accordance with observations/ recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 5, 
IN is adopting a multi -pronged approach towards indigenization of components of in -
service engines and development of new engines. Few of the initiatives of IN are as 
follows:-  
a) RFP to Indian Industry for Procurement of 1.25 MW Gas Turbine Generators has 
been issued in Mar 23 and the Proposals of bidders has cleared Technical 
Evaluation and the case is at FET stage. This will boost the indigenous GT 
development efforts.  
 
b) Academia and Industry are pro -actively being engaged by IN to address current 
challenges in development/ production of Marine Gas Turbine. MoU signed with 
Indian Industry partner towards development of Indigenous Marine Gas Turbine. 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
“The measures taken vis-à-vis outcome would be further watched in audit.” 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
Same as ‘Action Taken’ above 

15 
 
 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Observations/Recommendation 
COLLABORATION WITH RELEVANT INDUSTRIES AND ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS 
 The Committee are of the opinion that by investing in preservation techniques, 
specialized lubricants, and equipments/processes required, for innovative storage 
methods, Indian Navy can mitigate the effects of prolonged inactivity of the X -Engines 
and enha nce their operational reliability.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
collaboration with relevant industries and academic institutions may be made for 
exploring the best storage practices.  Further, training of manpower may also be 
undertaken for the purpose.  
[Observations/Recommendation No.6 of 81st Report of the  
Committee on Public Accounts (17th Lok Sabha)] 
Action Taken 
 In accordance with observations/ recommendations of the PAC Report at Para 6, 
IN is adopting the latest storage and preservation practices of X-engines. The same has 
been implemented for the first time in 2022 on one engine and is progressively being 
implemented pan Navy. The X -engines can be stored in Depots/ Yards with proper 
preservation techniques for a maxi mum inactive duration of 20 years (subject to re -
preservation every 5 years) as authenticated by OEM.  
Vetting Comments of Audit 
No further comments 
Updated Action taken reply of the Ministry 
Same as ‘Action Taken’ above 
Sd/- 
(Vikram Menon) 
Rear Admiral 
Joint Secretary (Navy & Def Staff) 
(Ministry of Defence D (Parliament), MoD ID Note No. H-11013/36/2023) 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
  

18 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
  

19 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                NEW DELHI:   
 03 December  , 2024                               
           12 Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 
                          
 
              K.C. VENUGOPAL  
            Chairperson, 
      Committee on Public Accounts 
  
  

20 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 03rd DECEMBER 2024 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, the 3rd of December 2024, from 
1600 hrs to 1 745 hrs in Committee Room '3 ', Block A, First Floor, Extension to 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri Jai Parkash 
5. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
6. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
8. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
11. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
15. Dr. K. Laxman 
16. Shri Praful Patel 
17. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
18. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
19. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
 

21 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following six draft reports may be 
taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) XXXXX 
b) XXXXX 
c) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 81st Report (Seventeenth Lok  
Sabha) on “Procurement of X-Engines”; 
d) XXXX 
e) XXXXX 
f) XXXXXX 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports  
without any modifications  and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has 
been kept on record. 

22 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of 
Observations/Recommendations 
       06 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 
 
Total: 06 
Percentage: 
100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which the Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
  