 
 
 
14 
 
INORDINATE DELAY IN SETTING UP OF 
INDIAN NATIONAL DEFENCE UNIVERSITY 
(INDU) 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their One Hundred and Eighteenth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
               
 
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
PAC NO. 2408    F O U R T E E N T H  R E P O R T   COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  (2024-25)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)                                        
 [Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha)]            MINISTRY OF DEFENCE                                            Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19-03-2025  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on: 19-03-2025   L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I  March, 2025 / Phalguna, 1946 (Saka)  
INORDINATE DELAY IN SETTING UP OF INDIAN NATIONAL DEFENCE UNIVERSITY (INDU)  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-
25)  
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government………………. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration……. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies…………………………………………………… 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Public 
Account (2024-25) held on 12.02.2025. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee on  Public Accounts contained in their 
One Hundred and Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Ms. Malvika Mehta   - Deputy Secretary   
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
          I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2024-25), having been 
authorized by the Committee do present this Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Inordinate delay in setting up of Indian National Defence University (INDU)” relating to 
the Ministry of Defence. 
2.       The One Hundred and Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024. The Committee considered the draft 
Action Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 12th 
February, 2025. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report. 
3.       For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
4.       The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
5.       An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 118th Report (17 Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee  

 
 
CHAPTER 1 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One Hundred Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Inordinate delay in setting 
up of Indian National Defence University (INDU)” pertaining to the Ministry of Defence, 
Department of Defence. 
2. The One Hundredth Eighteenth Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 8th 
February, 2024, contained 03 Observations/Recommendations.  Action Taken Notes on 
all the Observations /Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of 
Defence and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Para Nos. 1 and 3 
                  Total:02 
                      Chapter:II 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No.: NIL 
     Total:Nil 
            Chapter: III 
 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para No.: NIL 
     Total:Nil 
            Chapter:IV 
 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.:2 
Total:01 
            Chapter:V 
 
3. The Committee’s examination of the subject “Inordinate delay in setting up of 
Indian National Defence University (INDU)” revealed that post Kargil War in 1999, in 
order to address the deficiencies in India’s Security Management System, 
establishment of a Defence University was envisioned.  The Committee observed that 
the land for the University was acquired in September, 2012 and the proposal was 

 
 
revised in February, 2015 thereby enhancing the scope of the project.  However, 
despite lapse of more than 2 decades, the revised proposal for establishment of the 
University was still pending with the Ministry of Defence.   
4. The Committee had accordingly given their observations / recommendations in 
the 118th Report (17th Lok Sabha).  The gist of important observations 
/recommendations as contained in the Report is given as under:- 
 The Committee desired to be apprised of the precise reasons, ad-seriatim for the 
inordinate delay in establishment of such an important institution. 
 The Ministry may expedite submission of report by the two member Committee 
and further consultation with the stakeholders may be held within a strict 
timeframe to enable an early decision in the matter. 
 Earnest and concerted efforts may be made by the Ministry to ensure that the 
University is set up at the earliest to curb further cost escalations. 
 The Indian National Defence University may be established with world-class 
infrastructure, learned faculty and idea/content developers to match similar 
institutions in the global arena. 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence in respect of all the 
Observations /Recommendations of the Committee as contained in their One 
Hundredth Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations /Recommendations made in their One 
Hundredth Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
6. The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence to 
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and V within three months of the presentation of the 
Report to the House. 
7. The Committee in their original report no. 118 (17 LS) had recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee had noted that the entire process of setting up the Indian 
National Defence University had been beset by delays owing to extensive 
deliberations for several years without any concrete results. After the Kargil 
Review Committee recommended setting up such a University, a Group of 
Ministers reviewed the entire spectrum of Defence management. Thereafter, a 
Committee on NDU was set up to ‘examine’ establishment of NDU in India. 
Subsequently, a Project Formulation Team was created which continued to 
operate till the time of the report with recurring expenses on pay and allowances 

 
 
of staff deployed but without any tangible results on ground. The Committee had 
noted that M/s Education Consultants of India Limited (EdCIL) had been hired for 
preparation of Detailed Project Report, draft layout plan, Acts and statutes for 
setting up INDU. After enhancement of scope of the project, the draft legislation 
was pending with Cabinet Secretariat for almost 2 years. The Committee had 
noted with much trepidation that even then the proposal was under consideration 
and another 2 member committee had been constituted to ‘evolve’ the proposal 
in consultation with various stakeholders. This Committee was to finalise its 
report in February, 2023. While noting that the objectives of setting up the 
University inter-alia included promoting policy oriented research on all aspects 
relating to national security, both internal and external and coordination and 
interaction between the Armed Forces, academicians and other Government 
Agencies including friendly foreign countries, the Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the precise reasons, ad-seriatim for the inordinate delay in 
establishment of such an important institution. In view of the delay in setting up of 
the University, the Committee had also recommended that  the two member 
committee may submit its report urgently and further consultation with 
stakeholders may be carried out within a strict timeframe to enable an early 
decision in the matter”. 
[Recommendation Para No. 1] 
 
8. The Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence in their Action Taken Reply 
have stated as under:- 
“(a) After circulation of the Cabinet Note, in the inter-Ministerial consultation, 
the need for reworking of the proposal to broaden the mandate of IDU as 
an institution of Excellence to study various areas of emerging challenges 
such as modern warfare, our neighbourhood environment, space, seas 
cyber and other areas has emerged.  Accordingly, in this direction, a two 
member Committee with Dr. Anil Kakodkar as Chairman and Prof. V. 
Venkata Ramana as Member was constituted in this Ministry on 
09.11.2020 to evolve the proposal in consultation with stakeholders like 
Centre for Air Power Studies (CAPS), Manohar Parrikar Institute for 
Defence Studies and Analyses (MP-IDSA), Indian Council of World Affairs 
(ICWA) etc. 
(b) The Committee has held discussions with various institutions. Based on 
the mandate given to the Committee and inputs received by it during 

 
 
interaction with various institutes and the Ministry, the Committee is in the 
process of finalizing the report.  On receipt of the report of the Committee, 
consultation with stakeholders will be carried out to give final shape to the 
proposal. The Committee is being requested to expedite its report.” 
9. Audit in their vetting Comments stated as under:- 
“The Ministry’s reply does not mention about any specific timeframe for the two-
member committee for submission of its report and further consultation with 
stakeholders.” 
10.  The Ministry furnished the following reply to the comments of Audit:- 
“Further consultation with the stakeholders will be taken up after receipt of the 
two-member committee report and hence no specific timeframe has been 
mentioned.” 
11. Noting that the setting up the Indian National Defence University had been 
beset by delays owing to extensive deliberations for several years without any 
concrete results, the Committee exhorted the Ministry of Defence to apprise them 
of the precise reasons, ad-seriatim for the inordinate delay in establishment of 
such an important institution and had impressed upon the Ministry to arrange to 
expedite the finalization of the report of two member Committee. The Committee 
had also desired that consultation with stakeholders may be carried out within a 
strict timeframe.  The Committee are surprised to observe that a trite reply has 
been submitted by the Ministry with no mention of the specific reasons for delay 
of over 2 decades in setting up of the University. The Committee reiterate that 
specific reasons for delay in chronological order may be furnished to the 
Committee as this would allow the Ministry to identify problem areas so that the 
same may be obviated while finalizing and establishing the University. 
The Committee had also recommended that the two member committee may 
submit its report urgently and further consultation with stakeholders may be 
carried out within a strict timeframe to enable an early decision in the matter. The 
Committee are disappointed to note the lax reply of the Ministry that the 2 
member committee is still being requested to expedite its report. In view of the 
dire need of establishment of a National Defence University, the Committee may 
be apprised of the details of original deadline and extensions, if any, granted to 
the Committee with reasons for delay in submission of its report. The Ministry 
may closely assist the committee and simultaneous consultations be carried out 

 
 
with the stakeholders to avoid any further delay in setting up of the University. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of date-wise progress in the matter.   
 
 
12. The Committee in their original  report no. 118 had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that land was purchased in September, 2012 for Rs. 
164.62 crore and additional expenditure of Rs. 11.60 crore was incurred for 
barbed wire fencing, boundary wall, perimeter road and that the project cost has 
increased from Rs. 395 crore in May 2010 to Rs. 4,007.22 crore in December 
2017. The Committee in this regard infer that the indecision on the part of the 
Ministry has led to huge cost escalation which is bound to increase with further 
delays in setting up the University. The Committee while expressing concern 
over the inordinate delay and resultant cost escalation recommend that the 
University may be set up at the earliest to curb further escalations in the costs.” 
[Recommendation Para No. 2] 
 
13.  The Ministry gave the following action taken reply :- 
“Land was purchased in September, 2012 for Rs.164.62 crore. Additional 
expenditure of Rs.11.60 crore was incurred for barbed wire fencing, boundary 
wall, perimeter road etc. The Education Consultants of India Limited (EdCIL) 
report had projected the estimated cost of Rs. 4007.22 crore as per the scope of 
the proposed university in December, 2017.  The actual estimates can be worked 
out only after the scope and mandate of Indian Defence University (IDU) is 
evolved.” 
14. The following are the vetting comments of Audit:- 
“The fact is that the Ministry is unable to project actual estimates of the cost 
involved in setting up the University even after eleven years of purchase of Land 
as the scope and mandate of the University are yet to be evolved.” 
15. The Ministry furnished the following reply on comments of audit:- 
“The Ministry agrees with the comments of Audit as the actual cost involved in 
setting up of the University can be projected only after evolution of scope and 
mandate of the University.” 
16. While expressing concern over the inordinate delay and resultant cost 
escalation in setting up of the University, the Committee had recommended that 

 
 
the University may be set up at the earliest to curb further escalations in the 
costs. The Committee had noted that land for the University was purchased in 
September, 2012 for Rs. 164. 62 crore and additional expenditure of Rs. 11.60 
crore was incurred for barbed wire fencing, boundary wall and perimeter road. 
The Committee note from the response of the Ministry that the actual estimates of 
setting up the university can be worked out only after the scope and mandate of 
Indian Defence University are evolved. In this context, the Committee desire to be 
apprised of the status of the land as on date- whether there are any 
encroachments on it and if so, details thereof. The Committee further desire to be 
apprised of the specific measures being taken to ensure that there is no 
encroachment on the land. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that the entire process of setting up the Indian National Defence 
University has been beset by delays owing to extensive deliberations for several years 
without any concrete results. After the Kargil Review Committee recommended setting 
up such a University, a Group of Ministers reviewed the entire spectrum of Defence 
management. Thereafter, a Committee on NDU was set up to ‘examine’ establishment 
of NDU in India. Subsequently, a Project Formulation Team was created which 
continues to operate till date with recurring expenses on pay and allowances of staff 
deployed but without any tangible results on ground. The Committee note that M/s 
Education Consultants of India Limited (EdCIL) were hired for preparation of Detailed 
Project Report, draft layout plan, Acts and statutes for setting up INDU. After 
enhancement of scope the project, the draft legislation was lying with Cabinet 
Secretariat for almost 2 years. The Committee note with much trepidation that even now 
the proposal is under consideration and another 2 member committee has been 
constituted to ‘evolve’ the proposal in consultation with various stakeholders. This 
Committee was to finalise its report in February, 2023. The Committee while noting that 
the objectives of setting up the University inter-alia include promoting policy oriented 
research on all aspects relating to national security, both internal and external and 
coordination and interaction between the Armed Forces, academicians and other 
Government Agencies including friendly foreign countries desire to be apprised of the 
precise reasons, ad-seriatim for the inordinate delay in  establishment of such an 
important institution. In view of the delay in setting up of the University, the Committee 
also recommend that  the two member committee may submit its report urgently and 
further consultation with stakeholders may be carried out within a strict timeframe to 
enable an early decision in the matter . 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 1 of 118th Report of the Committee on Public 
Accounts (17thLokSabha)] 
 
Action taken 

 
 
(a) After circulation of the Cabinet Note, in the inter-Ministerial consultation, the need 
for reworking of the proposal to broaden the mandate of IDU as an institution of 
Excellence to study various areas of emerging challenges such as modern warfare, our 
neighbourhood environment, space, seas cyber and other areas has emerged.  
Accordingly, in this direction, a two member Committee with Dr. Anil Kakodkar as 
Chairman and Prof. V. Venkata Ramana as Member was constituted in this Ministry on 
09.11.2020 to evolve the proposal in consultation with stakeholders like Centre for Air 
Power Studies (CAPS), Manohar Parrikar Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses 
(MP-IDSA), Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) etc. 
(b) The Committee has held discussions with various institutions. Based on the 
mandate given to the Committee and inputs received by it during interaction with 
various institutes and the Ministry, the Committee is in the process of finalizing the 
report.  On receipt of the report of the Committee, consultation with stakeholders will be 
carried out to give final shape to the proposal. The Committee is being requested to 
expedite its report. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The Ministry’s reply does not mention about any specific timeframe for the two-member 
committee for submission of its report and further consultation with stakeholders. 
Reply of Ministry on Comments of Audit 
Further consultation with the stakeholders will be taken up after receipt of the two-
member committee report and hence no specific timeframe has been mentioned. 
[Please refer to Para 11 of Chapter I for observation/recommendation of the 
Committee] 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee observe that the idea of this autonomous institution of national 
importance was first mooted by the Chief of Staff Committee in 1967 and again 
endorsed by the in-house Lt Gen Sethna Committee in 1982. The Committee are 
disappointed to note that fifty-seven years after it was first mooted, and over seven 
years after the Indian National Defence University (INDU) Bill, 2015 was made available 
for public consultation, the University  has still not been established. The Committee 
opine that in the current geopolitical scenario, an intellectual feeder and platform for 
dealing holistically with all aspects of national security is required and, therefore, 
recommend that the Indian National Defence University may be established with world-

 
 
class infrastructure, learned faculty, and idea/content developers to match up to similar 
institutions on the global arena. 
[Observations/Recommendation No. 3 of 118th Report of the Committee on Public 
Accounts (17thLokSabha)] 
 
 
Action taken 
(a) After circulation of the Cabinet Note, in the inter-Ministerial consultation, the need for 
reworking of the proposal to broaden the mandate of IDU as an institution of Excellence 
to study various areas of emerging challenges such as modern warfare, our 
neighbourhood environment, Space, Seas Cyber and other areas, has emerged.  
Accordingly, in this direction a two-member Committee, with Dr. Anil Kakodkar as 
Chairman and Prof. V. Venkata Ramana as Member, was constituted in this Ministry on 
09.11.2020 to evolve the proposal in consultation with stakeholders like Centre for Air 
Power Studies (CAPS), Manohar Parrikar Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses 
(MP-IDSA), Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) etc. 
(b) The Committee has held discussions with various institutions. Based on the 
mandate given to Committee and inputs received by it during interactions with various 
institutes and the Ministry, the Committee is in the process of finalizing the report.  On 
receipt of the report of the Committee, consultation with stakeholders will be carried out 
to give final shape to the proposal.  The Committee is being requested  to expedite 
its report. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The Ministry has stated that the two – member Committee was being requested 
to expedite its report.  Ministry may inform the PAC after the finalization of the said 
report. 
Reply of Ministry on Comments of Audit 
Vetting comments of Audit has been noted for compliance. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
  CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that land was purchased in September, 2012 for Rs. 164.62 
crore and additional expenditure of Rs. 11.60 crore was incurred for barbed wire 
fencing, boundary wall, perimeter road and that the project cost has increased from Rs. 
395 crore in May 2010 to Rs. 4,007.22 crore December 2017. The Committee in this 
regard infer that the indecision on the part of the Ministry has led to huge cost 
escalation which is bound to increase with further delays in setting up the University. 
The Committee while expressing concern over the inordinate delay and resultant cost 
escalation recommend that the University may be set up at the earliest to curb further 
escalations  in the costs.[Observations/Recommendation Nos. 2 of 118th Report of the 
Committee on Public Accounts (17thLokSabha)] 
Action taken 
Land was purchased in September, 2012 for Rs.164.62 crore. Additional 
expenditure of Rs.11.60 crore was incurred for barbed wire fencing, boundary wall, 
perimeter road etc. The Education Consultants of India Limited (EdCIL) report had 
projected the estimated cost of Rs. 4007.22 crore as per the scope of the proposed 
university in December, 2017.  The actual estimates can be worked out only after the 
scope and mandate of Indian Defence University (IDU) is evolved. 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
The fact is that the Ministry is unable to project actual estimates of the cost 
involved in setting up the University even after eleven years of purchase of Land as the 
scope and mandate of the University are yet to be evolved. 
Reply of Ministry on Comments of Audit 
The Ministry agrees with the comments of Audit as the actual cost involved in 
setting up of the University can be projected only after evolution of scope and mandate 
of the University. 
[Please refer to Para 16 of Chapter I for observation/recommendation of the 
Committee] 
NEW DELHI:                                                                           K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 February, 2025                                                                        Chairperson, 
23 Magha, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee  

 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF  XXXXXX 
1. XXXXXXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXXXXXX 
9. XXXXXXXXXXX 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following nine draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a. XXXXXXXXX 
b. XXXXXXXXX 
c. XXXXXXXXX 
d. XXXXXXXXX 
e. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
118th Report (17th LS) on ‘Inordinate delay in setting up of Indian 
National Defence University (INDU)’ 
f. XXXXXXXX 
g. XXXXXXXX 

 
 
h. XXXXXXXXX  
i. XXXXXXXXX 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide para 5 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations - 03 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1 and 3  
 
- Total: 02 
Percentage – 66.66% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
  
-Nil- 
 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage - 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
 
-Nil-                                    
                     
- Total: Nil 
Percentage– 0% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies: 
           Para No. 2 
- Total: Nil 
Percentage –33.33% 
 
 