 
 
33 
LEVY AND REGULATION OF FEES, TARIFFS, USER 
CHARGES ETC. ON PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
OTHER PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
 
PAC NO. 2427 
 
 
T H I R T Y  T H I R D  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(E IG HTEENTH LOK S ABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  12  August, 2025 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   12 August, 2025 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
LEVY AND REGULATION OF FEES, TARIFFS, USER CHARGES 
ETC. ON PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND OTHER PUBLIC 
UTILITIES 
 

i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
CONTENTS 
S. No.  Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) ii 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2025-26) iii 
 INTRODUCTION iv 
 PART-I  
1. Introduction 1 
2. A) Overview of the National Highway Act and Fee Structure 2 
3. B) Toll Charges, FASTag System, and User Grievances 12 
4. C) DPR Preparation and Monitoring 24 
5. D) Maintenance and Sub-Contracting 27 
6. E) Highway design failures and transition from concrete to bitumen 32 
7. F) Project Financing and Toll Utilisation 43 
8. G) Environmental and technological concerns 52 
9. H) General issues  56 
 PART-II  
10. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 62 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the 13th Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 25) 
held on 12 February, 2025 79 
II. Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) 
held on 29 May, 2025 83 
III. Minutes of the 10th Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025- 26) 
held on 11 August, 2025 87 
IV. Annexures 89 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
 
            Shri K. C. Venugopal   -       Chairperson    
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
  
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
  
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
 

iii 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
             Shri K. C. Venugopal       -       Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
  
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
  
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 Secretariat 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash                -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania               -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi              -                  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Vijay Mishra                       -                  Executive Officer 

iv 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Thirty-third Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject “Levy and regulation of fees, tariffs, user charges etc. on public 
infrastructure and other public utilities” – Mo RTH and NHAI.  
 
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2024-25) selected the aforesaid subject for 
detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways on the subject on 12 February, 2025. The Committee 
(2025-26) selected the subject once again and took evidence on the subject on 29 May, 
2025. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Report was drafted.  
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
Sitting held on 11 August, 2025. Minutes of the Sittings are given at Appendix . 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and National Highways Authority of 
India (NHAI) for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing the requisite information 
to the Committee.  
 
6.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat.   
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
                
11 August , 2025       
20  Shravana,  1947 (Saka)  
 
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
 Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
REPORT 
 
PART-I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.  The National Highways Act, 1956 was enacted to provide for the declaration 
ofcertain highways to be national highways and for matters connected therewith. 
Section 7 of the Act empowered the Government to levy fees for services or benefits 
rendered on National Highways and Section 9 of the National Highways Act, 1956 
empowers the Central Government to make rules in this regard. 
 
To speed up the development of National Highways and augment fund 
requirement, Government decided to bring in the private partnership in the highway 
construction. Accordingly, Government amended the National Highways Act, 1956 in 
1995 and incorporated Section 8A, which states that “notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, the Central Government may enter into an agreement with any 
person in relation to the development and maintenance of the whole or any part of a 
National Highway. The person will be entitled to collect and retain fees at such rate, for 
services or benefits rendered by him as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify having regard to the expenditure involved in building, 
maintenance, management and operation of the whole or part of such national highway, 
interest on the capital invested, reasonable return, the volume of traffic and the period of 
such agreement.    
 For the purpose of providing for the constitution of an Authority for the 
development, maintenance and management of national highways and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto, NHAI Act 1988 was enacted. As per the 
Preamble of the Act, its objective is to ensure the effective administration and operation 
of national highways across the country. In accordance with Section 16(1) of the Act, 
the Authority has been entrusted with the responsibility to develop, maintain, and 
manage the national highways and any other highways vested in, or entrusted to it, by 
the Central Government. This statutory framework empowers NHAI to undertake a wide 
range of functions essential for the planning, execution, and supervision of national 
highway projects in India. 
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2024–25), in pursuance of their mandate to 
examine issues of financial accountability and public interest, selected the subject “Levy 
and Regulation of Fees, Tariffs, User Charges, etc., on Public Infrastructure and Other 
Public Utilities” for detailed examination. Recognising the increasing public concern over 
toll charges, user fee frameworks, and the quality of services rendered on national 
highways, the Committee considered it imperative to review the policy, legal framework, 
and execution of toll collection on India's road infrastructure. The Public Accounts 
Committee (2025–26) continued this examination, with a sharper focus on the National 
Highways sector, especially the functioning of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH) and the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), which are the 
principal policymakers and implementing agencies. The Committee in their examination 

2 
 
 
 
have focused on issues such as transparency in toll rate determination, enforcement of 
user-friendly provisions under the National Highways Fee Rules, long-term financial 
sustainability of highway operations, and public grievances regarding toll burden and 
road quality. 
3. This Report presents the findings and recommendations of the Committee based 
on the evidence placed before them, including data from the Ministry, oral evidence of 
officials and written replies to the Committee’s List of Points/questionnaires. The 
findings of the Committee have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. The 
Committee’s aim is to ensure a transparent, equitable, and accountable system of toll 
collection that balances public interest with financial viability and service quality. This is 
an interim Report and the subject shall continue to remain under examination of Public 
Accounts Committee. 
A. OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY ACT AND FEE STRUCTURE 
4. To a specific query regarding how highway projects are conceptualised by 
NHAI/MoRTH, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Highway projects are conceptualized in NHAI/MoRTH using an integrated 
network planning approach. The visionary corridor based National Highway 
Development (GQ and NS-EW) was conceptualized under National Highways 
Development Project (NHDP) Phase I (2000) and Phase II (2003). Subsequent 
Phases of NHDP were planned with the following objectives: 
 NHDP Phase II (6,702 km): 4-laning of NS-EW & Port Connectivity 
 NHDP Phase III (12,109 km): 4-lane connectivity to State Capitals 
 NHOP Phase IV (20,000 km): 2L / 4L NH connectivity to district HQs 
 NHDP Phase V (6,500 km): 6-lane of GQ and high-density corridors 
 NHDP Phase VI (1,000 km): Expressways 
 NHDP Phase VII (700 km): Bypasses, Ring Roads, Flyovers 
Thereafter, Bharatmala Pariyojana (2017) was conceptualized through a 
scientific Origin-Destination study to enable Corridor based National Highway 
Development connecting 550+ districts of the country catering to 70-80% of 
total freight on National Highways, shortest and most efficient connectivity 
between key economic hubs, integrated multimodal transportation with 
development of Multi Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs). 
Until 16th November 2023, a cumulative length of 26,425 km had been 
awarded by all agencies post which award under BPP-I was discontinued with 
immediate effect as per the instructions from Ministry of Finance. 

3 
 
 
 
Construction and development of National Highways is a continuous process. All 
NH development projects are planned in line with PM GatiShakti National Master 
Plan (NMP) Principles. The PM GatiShakti NMP portal depicts the economic 
zones and the infrastructure linkages required to support them with an objective 
to holistically integrate all the multimodal connectivity projects. This also 
facilitates identifying the missing gaps for seamless movement of people, goods 
and services for proper connectivity, thereby improving the logistics efficiency.” 
5. When asked what the total road network in India is and the average yearly 
increase, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“As per the latest available report, Road network including National 
Highways/State Highways/rural roads in India has increased from about 
54,02,486 km in March, 2014 to about 63,31,791 km in March, 2019.  
Government in MoRTH is primarily responsible for development and 
maintenance of National Highways (NHs). NH network in the country has 
increased from 91,287 km in March, 2014 to 1,46,204 km at present. Year – wise 
details of State Roads, including State  Highways (SHs) and greenfield stretches, 
notified as NHs since 2014-15 onwards is as under: -“ 
 
2014-
15 
2015
-16 
2016
-17 
2017
-18 
2018
-19 
201
9-20 
2020
-21 
2021-
22  
2022-
23  
2023-
24  
2024
-25  
5,584 3,133 12,962 12,393 6,174 495 5,237 3,129 3,794 883 81 
6. The National Highway Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 
were issued on 5th December, 2008 under Section 9 of the National Highways Act, 
1956, superseding the earlier 1997 rules. The base rate of user fee for four-lane 
highways was fixed at ₹0.65/km for LMVs, scaling up to ₹4.20/km for oversized 
vehicles."   
 In their Background Note, the MoRTH explained the Salient Features of National 
Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008  and stated as 
under:- 
“(a) In view of the experience gained from tolling of various stretches/bridges in 
NHDP under Public funded and BOT projects as well as with an increasing length 
of theNational Highways under NHDP coming under tolling, a need was felt to 
review theexisting toll policy (National Highways (Fee for the Use of National 
HighwaysSection and Permanent Bridge – Public Funded Project) Rules, 1997) 

4 
 
 
 
to have a tollregime that provides more predictability, transparency and certainty 
for privateinvestors. Some critical issues necessitating review of Toll Policy were: 
i. Concept of continuous corridors instead of standalone sections/bridges. 
ii. Synchronization between BOT and public funded projects to avoid 
variations in rates, concessions and exemptions. 
iii. Demand from local/frequent users for more appropriate concessions. 
iv. Adoption of a standard category of vehicles and a fee structure. 
v. Miscellaneous other issues arising out of experience with the present toll 
policy such as rationalisation and indexing of fee rates, vehicle categories, 
distance between two toll plazas and toll on slow moving vehicles etc. 
(b) It was, therefore, decided to review the user fee framework. The need for a 
comprehensive user fee policy had also assumed greater significance in the 
context of an expanded National Highway Development Programme (NHDP) 
which envisaged bulk of the investment from Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) 
where user fee revenues constituted the mainstay of financial viability. 
(c) The National Highway Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 
2008were issued on 5th December, 2008 in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Section 9of the National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) for making rules and in 
supersession of the National Highways (Temporary Bridges) Rules, 1964, the 
National Highways(Collection of Fees by any person for the Use of Section of 
National Highways/Permanent Bridge /Temporary Bridge on National Highways) 
Rules, 1997, the National Highways (Fees for the Use of National Highways 
Section and Permanent Bridge – Public Funded Project) Rules, 1997 and the 
National Highways (Rates of Fees)Rules, 1997. 
(d)  The rate of fee for use of a Section of a National Highway of 4 or more lanes 
shall for the base year 2007-08 by the product of length of such section multiplied 
by the following rates, namely:- 
S. 
No. 
Type of Vehicle Base rate of fee per 
km (in Rupees) 
i. Car, Jeep, Van or Light Motor Vehicle 0.65 
ii. Light Commercial Vehicle, Light Goods Vehicle 
or Mini Bus 
 
1.05 
iii. Bus or Truck (Two Axles) 2.20 

5 
 
 
 
iv. Three–axle commercial vehicles 2.40 
v. Heavy Construction Machinery(HCM) or Earth 
Moving Equipment (EME) or Multi Axle Vehicle 
(MAV)(four to six axles) 
3.45 
vi. Oversized Vehicles (seven or more axles) - 4.20 
(e).  Base rates of user fees specified above have been provided for National 
Highways of 4 or more-lanes. For National Highways of 2-lane with paved 
shoulders, user fees are collected at 60% of the base rates specified for 4 or 
more lane highways. 
(f). The rates of fee are increased without compounding by 3% each year from 
the1st day of April, 2008. Additionally, to neutralize impact of variable cost of 
operation and maintenance, 40% of annual increase of WPI is provided. 
(g). The increased rate shall be deemed to be the base rate for the subsequent 
years. 
(h).  Fee levied under these Rules shall be collected by the Central Government 
or the Concessionaire as the case may be, at the Fee plaza. 
(i). In case of public funded projects, the fee collected under the provisions of 
these Rules by every executing authority shall be remitted to the Central 
Government provided that the Central Government by notification allow any or all 
executing authorities to appropriate the whole or any part of the fee for such 
purposes and subject to such conditions as may be specified. 
7. When the Committee enquired about the enabling provisions of the Parent Act 
and subordinate legislation that authorise the determination and collection of fees on 
National Highways and related infrastructure, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“Section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956 empowers the Government to levy 
fees for services or benefits rendered on National Highways and Section 9 of the 
National Highways Act, 1956 empowers the Central Government to make rules in 
this regard.   
Accordingly, the policy for the collection of user fee is formulated and governed 
by the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 
2008, along with subsequent amendments to the original NH Fee rules” 
The Ministry has further furnished the detailed list of NH Fee rules for collection 
which is given in Annexure –I 

6 
 
 
 
8. The Ministry while referring to the applicability of the Rules to various Roads 
stated as under:- 
“All National Highways which were built or commenced construction on or after 
the notification dated 5th December, 2008 was issued, are governed by- National 
Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008. 
 The Public Funded and BOT(Annuity) projects under the National Highways Fee 
Rules, 1997 are transited to the Fee Rules, 2008 by amendment dated 
12.10.2011.The BOT(toll) projects on National Highways as per National 
Highways Rules, 1997 will continue till the expiry of their concession period.” (sic) 
9. When asked whether the base rate of toll tax has changed on the basis of WPI in 
the last four years, year-wise details were sought and the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
“User fee rates are revised annually based on Wholesale Price Index in 
accordance with the provision of NH Fee rules which is as follows- 
  
The rates specified under rule 4 of NH fee Rule, 2008 shall be increased without 
compounding, by three percent each year with effect from the 1st day of April, 
2008 and such increased rate shall be deemed to be the base rate for the 
subsequent years. 
The applicable base rates shall be revised annually with effect from April 1 each 
year to reflect the increase in wholesale price index between the week ending on 
January 6, 2007 (i.e.,208.7) and the wholesale price index for the month of 
December of the year in which such revision is undertaken but such revision shall 
be restricted to forty percent of the increase in wholesale price index. 
The formula for determining the applicable rate of fee shall be as follows:- 
Applicable rate of fee = base rate + (base rate * [(WPI A - WPI B) / WPI B] * 0.4). 
WPI-A means the wholesale price index for the month of December of the 
immediately preceding year 
WPI-B means the wholesale price index of the week ending on 6th January, 
2007 i.e.208.7” 
10. When asked whether there exists any authority to check the reasonableness of 
user fees determined by NHAI and if stakeholders are consulted in the process, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The user fee is determined as per National Highways Fee (Determination of 
Rates and Collection), Rules, 2008 - original (Notification no. G.S.R. 838(E) 

7 
 
 
 
dated 5th December 2008) as amended from time to time & collected as per 
gazette notification of MoRTH (Government of India). The base rates that were 
fixed in 2008 under the Rules have continued as such since then with an annual 
increase in accordance with NH fee Rule, also indexed to the Wholesale Price 
Index.  
After the user fee is calculated as defined in Fee Rules, 2008, it is published in 
newspaper and electronic media for information of public.” 
 
11. Elaborating on the power of NHAI, before the Committee, during the evidence 
held on 12.02.2025, the representative of the Ministry, informed as under: 
‘Sir, we are covered by National Highway Act 1956 and it provides that any 
highway can be declared as National Highway. Section 7 empowers the Central 
Government to levy fees for services or benefits rendered on National Highway. 
Section 8 says that the Central Government can enter into an agreement with 
any person for development and maintenance of the National Highway. In that 
case, all the BOT projects are covered under this section. Lastly, the Central 
Government can make rules for tolling. So, NH free rules have been framed.’ 
12. Further on the current user fee structure, he continued: 
‘Sir, presently user fees is levied as per National Highway fees determination of 
fee and collection rules 2008 for sections of National Highway permanent 
bridges, bypasses and tunnels which has superseded the previous rule of 1997. 
Most of the tolling is done as per the 2008 rules but in some cases, as you rightly 
said, still 1997 rules are used, and mostly it is in the case of the BOT projects 
where agreement is done with the BOT concessionaire as per the 1997 rules. So, 
till the agreement period is over and that whole stretch becomes a public funded 
the same 97 rules are prevailing. After that once the agreement period is over, 
concession period is over, the stretch and the toll is handed over to the NHAI. It 
becomes a public funded toll plaza and then it takes few months to revise the 
tolls as per the 2008 rules.’ 
13. The Ministry informed that all National Highways built or whose construction 
began post-December 2008 are governed by the 2008 Rules. Public Funded and BOT 
(Annuity) projects previously under the 1997 Rules were transitioned to the 2008 Rules 
via amendments in 2011, while BOT (Toll) projects remain under 1997 Rules until their 
concession period ends.  

8 
 
 
 
14. The Ministry stated that the 2008 Fee Rules, introduced two new vehicle 
categories namely three-axle commercial vehicles and oversized vehicles with seven or 
more axles, and revised the base toll rates across all categories compared to the 1997 
Rules. 
15. On the topic of toll fee revisions, the representative of the Ministry explained: 
‘Sir, for the public funded toll plaza under 1997 rule, toll fee is to be revised every 
five years. In the 2008 fee rule, it has to be revised every year and the revision 
will take place from 1st of April automatically. For BOT concession period, it was 
annually as per the agreement. Now that is also to be done annually as on 1st of 
April. Earlier, 100 per cent changes were permitted based on the wholesale 
pricing tax. Now 3 per cent is the fixed increase in the toll rates and 40 per cent is 
the change in the wholesale pricing index. So that is the 40 per cent weightage is 
taken and it is rounded off to nearest 5 rupees. So, if a toll stretch is 34 
kilometres and a toll is 36 rupees and after one year if it is rounded off to 37 it will 
remain 35. So, it will be either 35 rupees or 40 rupees. So, it is rounded off to the 
nearest 5 rupees.’ 
16. The Ministry informed that the toll rates under the 2008 Rules increase annually 
by 3%, with an additional adjustment linked to 40% of the change in the Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI). The increased rate then becomes the new base rate for subsequent 
years. 
17. Discussing discounts available to users, the representative of the Ministry 
mentioned as under:  
‘Earlier, few discounts were available. Now as per the latest toll fee rules of 2008, 
if people are residing within 20 kilometres of the toll plaza based on proof of 
residence as their Aadhaar card or any other proof, then they get a monthly pass 
of Rs.340 in the current financial year 2024-25. In 2008, it was Rs.150; now it is 
Rs.340. So, they can do any number of travels through that toll plaza which is 
near to their home or village.’ 
18. Further elaborating on toll collection and discounts for commercial vehicles, be 
submitted the following: 
‘The second thing is this. In the case of commercial vehicles which are registered 
in that district, within that district they get 50 per cent discount for all tolls in that 
district. If a person conducts a return journey within 24 hours, he will get 25 per 
cent discount. It will be only 1.5 times of the one way. If a person takes a monthly 
pass for 50 journeys in a month, then the toll rate will be two-third. So, these kind 
of discounts are made available. 

9 
 
 
 
…….If some toll collecting agency is doing unauthorized collection, in that case 
whatever excess amount is charged plus 25 per cent penalty on the excess 
amount charged is levied on the toll collecting agency. If tolling is done for a by-
pass, then base rate multiplied by 1.5 times will be the tolling rate, if the cost of 
the bypass is more than Rs. 10 crore. If it is a structure, then in that case, either 
bridge or a tunnel, then 10 times will be charged provided that the length of the 
bridge or tunnel is more than 60 meter.’ 
19. While giving a comparison of tolling charges, he stated the following: 
‘This is the base rate comparison between 1997 and 2008. It has been already 
explained. As I said in the previous slide, if it is an Expressway, the tolling charge 
will be 125 per cent of the base rate. If it is a by-pass, then tolling charges will be 
150 per cent of the base rate, and if it is a two-lane with a paved shoulder, then 
tolling charges will be 60 per cent of the base rate. And as I said for the structure, 
if the length of the structure is more than 60 meter, then effective length for that 
structure will be 10 times.’ 
20. Detailing the exemptions, he stated as under:  
‘In the present tolling policy, no fee will be levied for two wheelers, three 
wheelers, tractors, combine harvesters and animal drawn vehicles, any vehicle 
with a special person and their security vehicles. Also, three-wheeler, tractors, 
combine harvester and animal drawn vehicle shall not be allowed on a section of 
National Highway in a case where service or alternative road is made available. 
While we do the upgradation from four-lane to six-lane, the fee levied will be 75 
per cent, and as you rightly said, it will not be revised on annual basis. It will 
remain in the completion of the project. Also an amendment took place in the 
year 2023 that user fees will be collected in perpetuity. It means if the concession 
period of a BOT toll is over, that will be handed over to the NHAI, and it will 
become a public funded toll plaza, and toll will continue to be levied, but fund will 
directly go to the Consolidated Fund of India. It will not accrue to the NHAI or to 
the Ministry. It will straight away go to the Consolidated Fund of India.’ 
21. The Ministry informed that exemptions under Rule 11 of the 2008 Rules include 
vehicles transporting dignitaries such as the President, Prime Minister, Governors, 
Judges, MPs, defence and paramilitary personnel, ambulances, funeral vans, and 
specially designed vehicles for persons with disabilities. (Annexure-II)  

10 
 
 
 
22.  On being asked whether daily commuters are forced to pay toll on highways 
without alternative roads and if any study or relief measures are planned, the Ministry in 
a written reply stated as under:- 
“As per rule 9(3) of NH fee rules, a person who owns a mechanical vehicle with 
valid functional FASTag, registered for non-commercial purposes and uses it as 
such for commuting on a section of National Highway, permanent bridge, 
bypass or tunnel, may obtain a monthly pass, authorising it to cross the fee 
plaza specified in such pass. Provided that no such pass shall be issued if a 
service road or alternative road is available for use by such driver, owner or 
person in charge of a mechanical vehicle.  
  
Provision for passes has been made for the convenience of Road user where 
service road or alternate road could not be made available. 
  
For Financial Year 2024-25, the rate of such monthly pass is Rs 340/- (Rupees 
Three Hundred Forty only). 
  
Such pass shall be issued only if such driver, owner or person in charge of such 
mechanical vehicle resides within a distance of twenty kilometres from the fee 
plaza specified by such person and the use of such section of national highway, 
permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel, as the case may be, does not extend 
beyond the fee plaza next to the specified fee plaza. Farmers using Tractor for 
Agriculture use and 2/3 wheelers are also not charged for any Toll Fee for using 
any section of the National highway.” 
23.    When the Committee sought to know how the Ministry tracks vehicles that avoid 
tolls by exiting to State Highways and then re-entering NH, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
“National Highways Fee plazas are located after due diligence so as to avoid any 
leakages due to alternate or competing road facilities. Further, 
highways/expressways are now being developed as access controlled based on 
closed tolling, where user fee is based on the length travelled further reducing 
scope of any traffic leakages.” 
24. The representative of the Ministry continued, explaining rules for plazas near 
municipal boundaries:  
‘Then second category, under the municipal boundary, the toll plaza has to be 10 
kilometres away from the municipal boundaries. However, there are certain 

11 
 
 
 
situations, if another major road is crossing before 10 kilometres, there is an 
apprehension of loss of toll revenue. In that case, we are forced to set up toll 
plaza within 10 kilometres of the municipal boundaries and some other instances 
are also there. So, in that case with the approval of the competent authority, toll 
plaza can be set up.’ 
25. Elaborating  on the third category, he further stated as under:  
‘Third category is, if a Highway or a road is serving the people of the municipal 
corporation staying there in the municipal corporation, then toll plaza can be set 
up within 5 kilometres with the approval of the competent authority.’ 
26. While explaining the rationale for Toll Plaza Density and FASTag Program, he 
further stated as under: 
‘So, these are the provisions. This has been a much point of discussion that if the 
distance between the toll plazas is less, then toll is less. Each and everykilometre 
of the National Highway has to be tolled. The tolling has to be loaded in either 
one toll plaza or the second toll plaza or it has to be divided between two toll 
plazas. If we see the example, there are two toll plazas, namely Toll Plaza 1 and 
Toll Plaza 2. At Toll Plaza 1, the toll fee is Rs.40, and in the second Toll Plaza, 
the toll fee is Rs.70. If a person is crossing from point ‘A’ and is exiting the 
Highway at point ‘O’, he has to pay only Rs.40. But if the suggestions come that 
there should be toll plaza at longer distance, in that case the second toll plaza 
burden will also come on the first toll plaza. In that case, a person who is entering 
the road at point ‘A’ and leaving at point ‘O’ has to pay Rs.110. So, it will cause a 
burden to the citizens if their distances are longer and the toll fee is loaded on a 
single toll plaza. So, those who are crossing the toll plaza will have to bear a 
higher burden. So, it is in the public interest that we should have more toll plazas. 
But all the time we keep in mind that at least 60 km distance should be there.’ 
 
27. Providing an update on the FASTag program, he further stated as under: 
 "In our FASTag programme, so far, we have 5.54 crore active FASTag. Total 
FASTag issued are about 10 crores but 5.54 crores are active. About 1.2 crore 
average daily transaction of FASTag is taking place. The daily collection is about 
Rs.193 crore. Altogether, the National Highway toll plazas are 1021 in number. 
There are State Government toll plazas. We have MoUs with almost all the 
States where on the State Highways we are collecting the toll. In about 593 toll 
plazas of states, we are using the FASTag system. Through an MoU, the State 
Government has authorised us to collect the toll revenue. There are 30 other 
MoRTH toll plazas. As the Secretary Sir said, 99 per cent of the toll collection is 

12 
 
 
 
done through the electronic toll collection system. The waiting time at the toll 
plaza because of the use of FASTag has come down drastically. Earlier, it was in 
minutes. Now, the average time is 47 seconds. We do not deny that at some 
places it can be slightly higher also.” 
28. Discussing the Toll Revenue Growth and Future Tolling Systems, he informed 
the Committee as under: 
‘This is the growth of the toll revenue. In 2005-06, it was Rs.1046 crore. Now, in 
the financial year 2023-24 it is Rs.55,000 crore. Out of it, at public funded toll 
plazas where revenue is going straightaway to the Consolidated Fund of India, it 
is Rs.25,000 crore and Rs.30,000 crore is the concessionaire toll plaza that 
includes ToT, InvIT and BoT toll plazas.’ 
29. He also stated the future plans for barrierless tolling:- 
‘As you said, convenience is very important and it has been an issue for some 
time. So, the Ministry is working on a barrierless free flow tolling system where 
besides the high quality FASTag readers, Automatic Number Plate Recognition 
(ANPR) cameras will also be used. So, any vehicle crossing the toll plaza need 
not stop there. The ANPR camera can read the vehicle number and the FASTag 
in a moving vehicle so that money can be realised without actually vehicle getting 
stopped. So, that is the thinking going on in the Ministry. This technology uses 
the optical character recognition. It uses a software and a camera. It captures the 
type of the vehicle. It is linked with our VAHAN database. So, the moment we are 
able to read the number plate, we know the type of the vehicle, the kind of 
vehicle and we know how much is to be charged from that vehicle. So, in a 
moving vehicle, toll fee can be realised. It consists of a gantry mounted high 
performance equipment, as I said, FASTag readers and ANPR cameras. Then, 
there is toll collection through high performance equipment. We capture data 
through front and rear licence plate and FASTag information. Now, it may be 
possible that some of the FASTag may not have money with them, or the wallet 
may not have money. In that case, it will be case of a violation and a notice will 
be served to the vehicle owner to pay the toll within seven days. And then, he 
has to pay double the penalty. We are trying to avoid cash collection at toll 
plazas. So, that is a thinking which is going on.’ 
B)TOLL CHARGES, FASTAG SYSTEM, AND USER GRIEVANCES 
30. During the meeting held on 12.02.2025, when asked as to where the money from 
toll gets collected,  the representative of the Ministry replied before the Committee as 
under: 

13 
 
 
 
‘There are nine banks which act as acquiring banks. The money goes into the 
banks and from there to the Consolidated Fund of India through the NHAI 
mechanism.’ 
31. While elaborating on the toll receipts, Secretary of the Ministry, during the course 
of the evidence, stated as under:- 
“Sir, we will be happy to have any clarifications or suggestions. I would like to 
mention one more thing that highways are the property of the Central 
Government and the toll receipts are also the revenues of the Central 
Government. So, it is a non-tax revenue. All the toll receipts that are done by 
NHAI -- a single entity which does the toll collection for everybody -- are filled to 
the Consolidated Fund of India, and any proceeds out of that toll receipts also, 
which are to be utilised by NHAI, come through the Consolidated Fund of India.” 
32. While elaborating on the issue of cost, the Secretary of the Ministry, during the 
course of evidence held on 12.02.2025 stated as under:- 
‘Now, to the issue of the cost, we are still reconsidering the rules, the modification 
to the rules. The problem is that there are some contractual issues that come in.  
Otherwise, it is not a very difficult decision for the Government to say that we will 
modify these rules.  
The methodology which was used in 1997, one of the thoughts is this.  Can we 
do that again? The other part is a simple easier solution because that part goes 
into a study as to what constitutes the cost on the road. At that time, there were 
three major factors taken into this.  
When was the vehicle operating cost. This has reduced over time. The second is 
the vehicle damage factor. That is, how much does the vehicle end up damaging 
the road as a result of its use.  Heavier vehicles will damage more and lighter 
vehicles will damage less. So, therefore, this difference. The third is willingness 
to pay. So, at that time, willingness of pay survey was also carried out. ....’ 
33. He has further added as under: 
‘One of the thoughts that is there in the Ministry is this. Can we build in annual 
pass system irrespective of the number of times we use toll, an annual pass? So, 
on that, some kind of work is happening. It will take a little bit of time before we 
get all the approvals and then, we are in a position to notify it but that is a thought 
in the Ministry that one way we can reduce the cost and to have a reasonable 
annual pass, cost of an annual pass. The only thing is we will have to study its 
impact on the BOT and TOT concessions that have already being given as to 
what would be the payout that would have to be required from Government in the 

14 
 
 
 
in case of toll receipts because .......the greater proportion of toll revenues goes 
to BOT contracts.’ 
34. On the issue of leakages in FASTag System and Multi Lane Free Fow System, 
the representative from the Ministry, during the course of evidence held on 12.02.2025, 
informed  under:- 
‘It was just inaugurated in August and that has led to an increase in toll revenues 
of about 12 to 15 per cent .................... When the beginning happens because 
the idea is to provide convenience at the same time not compromise on the 
revenue. So, matching this, this has been done on a few sectors but the target 
that the Ministry has set out is in the next 4 years, we should convert on all our 
four lane plus highways, expressways toll plazas into a barrier free trolling 
process. Now, technology has improved to that extent with AI. It is not just 
ANPR. It is ANPR and top of that is an artificial intelligence system that reads the 
vehicle, touches vaahan database, pulls the data from vaahan, classifies the 
vehicle as to what type of vehicle and then through the fast tag, the tolling gets 
completed. ..........I am fairly confident that this is going to work.’ 
35. On the issue of annual charge to the Highway users, the Secretary of the 
Ministry, stated as under:- 
‘.....We hope to close it now. We have reached a stage where broadly, we have 
worked out the financials.’ 
36. The Representative of the Ministry,during the course of evidence held on 
29.05.2025, while elaborating on the re-look at base-rates of the fee collected, informed 
the Committee as under:- 
‘Sir, we are initiating a study to re-look at the base rates. This issue had come up 
in the last PAC hearing also. And, that study is now being initiated through NITI 
Aayog.So, we have more or less finalized the contours of that study. So, after 
about 17 years now, we will be re-looking at the base rates also.’ 
37. On the issue of fee reduction on account of widening of roads etc., the 
representative of the Ministry, during the evidence, informed as under:- 
‘Sir, there is also a provision that if a four-lane road is getting converted to a six-
lane road, the user fee is reduced to 75 per cent. It is because inconvenience is 
caused to the citizens while traveling on that road. And also, user fee is not 
increased till the completion of the upgradation. If due to some reasons, we are 
not able to provide the land or the forest or environment clearance, in that case, 
the scheduled completion date gets extended and the concession of 75 per cent 
continues till the completion of the road is achieved.’ 

15 
 
 
 
38. As regards types of toll plazas and revenue collected thereon, the representative 
of the Ministry, during the evidence, informed as under:- 
‘Sir, there are four kinds of toll plazas. Those are, concessioner-managed toll 
plazas, InvIT, TOT, and public-funded toll plazas. We can see the length. 
Presently, we are getting Rs. 28,000 crore from the public-funded toll plazas. It is 
directly going into the Consolidated Fund of India. The Ministry is getting almost 
the same money in the budget. About Rs. 3,800 crore is the collection by InvIT. 
About Rs. 4,857 crore is the collection by the TOT agencies, and Rs. 23,000 is 
the collection under the concessioner which is retained by the concessioner as 
per the concession agreement.’ 
39. On being asked about the challenges faced in the determination, collection and 
regulation of fees and charges, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The user fee is determined as per National Highways Fee (Determination of 
Rates and Collection), Rules, 2008 - original (Notification no. G.S.R. 838(E) 
dated 5th December 2008) & collected as per gazette notification of MoRTH 
(Government of India). 
Ministry/NHAI face certain challenges in collection of user fee like non-eligible 
users demanding exemption nuisance at the time of user fee collection at Fee 
plaza leading to congestion, etc.” 
40. As regards the collection of user fees during the delayed period of construction, 
in violation of the NH Fee Amendment Rules, 2013, the Ministry in a written reply stated 
as under:- 
“Remedial measure for correct implementation of the provisions of Fee Rules 
2008 as amended time to time have been taken by NHAI and further fresh 
guidelines stipulating that the provisions of amended Fee Rules Notification 
dated 16/12/2013 should strictly be adhered by ROs/PIUs in the cases of 
upgradation of 4 lane to 6 lane highways, have been issued to the effect that:  
-The rate of fee for section of 4 lane to 6 laning be 75% till the completion of the 
project, and  
-No user fee shall be levied for delayed period, etc. 
 User Fee is being collected only for the section of National Highways which has 
been completed in all respect and certified by Engineer for opening safely for 
commercial operation.” 

16 
 
 
 
41. When the Committee sought to know the reasons for delay in reduction of user 
fees and revision of tolls at Paranur and Madpam toll plazas in violation of Fee Rules, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“NHAI/Ministry has reduced user fee rate to 75 per cent w.e.f. April 2021 in 
respect of Vandalur to Guduvanchery section, 5.3 km under Paranur Toll Plaza 
and on Nandigama to Srikakulam stretch under Madapam Toll Plaza. 
Presently, in respect of Paranur Public Funded Fee Plaza, the existing stretch is 
8 lane carriage way and there are no ongoing works (except widening of ROB 
works) having impact on revision of user fee. Hence there was no requirement of 
review of ongoing works for 75 per cent applicability of User Fee.  
In respect of Madapam Public Funded Fee Plaza, letter PDs have been 
instructed to note the rules and ensure compliance in future. 
NHAI has taken corrective action and User Fee rates have been re-calculated as 
per the amended toll fee rules. To avoid such discrepancies in other projects also 
in future, guidelines have been issued to all NHAI field units for correct 
implementation of the User Fee Rules as amended from time to time.” 
42. As regards reports of excess toll fee collection at Paliyekkara Toll Plaza, 
Chalakudy underpass and Pudukkad underpass in Kerala, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
“No excess toll fee collection has been observed at PaliyekkaraUserfeeplaza and 
the toll is being levied as per the respective Concession Agreement in 
consonance with User Fee notification published vide S.O.1424(E) dated 
20.06.2011. Further, all the Main carriageway works (MCW) have been 
completed as per CA, except few works pertaining to service road, drains, 
miscellaneous works etc which could not be completed owing to various site 
hindrances as well as other reasons and the same had been included as 
Negative Change of Scope items in the form of penalty imposed by the Authority 
on Concessionaire. Chalakuddy underpass has already been completed and 
further as per demand of public, Pudukkad underpass is undertaken by NHAI 
through separate tender, which is under consideration.” 
43. On the issue of excess tolling, the Secretary of the Ministry, during the course of 
evidence stated as under:- 
‘The problem is that there is excess tolling. In that case, we have to tighten up 
the call centre and the Rajmarg Yatra process, and the banking system enables 
us that wherever there is excess tolling, we can refund also. We know the bank 
account, and the money has to be put back into the bank account. So, that is 

17 
 
 
 
also happening. But it takes a little bit of time before the clearance happens and 
the reverse entry happens.’ 
44. When asked about the refund process in case of excess toll collection and the 
amount refunded in the last three years, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“In respect of the Hybrid Annuity Mode (HAM) Projects and Public Funded 
(EPC) Projects, User Fee is collected by NHAI and the revenue collection is 
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) on daily basis as Non-Tax 
Revenue Receipts of the Government of India.  Thus excess Toll collection, if 
any, is also remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India. There is no mechanism 
prescribed for refund of such excess toll collection to the Payee (Road User). 
However, in BOT(Toll) projects where the Toll is collected by the 
Concessionaire, in case it is found and established that excess Toll is collected, 
then the same is recovered from the Concessionaire as per Concession 
Agreement Provisions and remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
 However, in case of any wrongful transactions through FASTag, the same is 
remitted back to the account of the user on verification of the Grievance / 
complaint raised by the user. 
For refund of any incorrectly charged Fee through electronic toll collection, the 
road users can request charge backs through  1033 National Highway Helpline 
or through respective FASTag issuer Banks. Each case is inquired by IHMCL 
with electronic records and charge back order are issued if complaint are found 
bonafide. 
The year wise chargeback due to incorrect deduction under NETC Programme 
is as below:” 
  
2022 2023 2024 
Rs  47,23,40,050 Rs 58,60,92,403 Rs 40,69,03,493 
   
45. To a specific query regarding public use of the Rajmarg App and grievance data 
for the last three years, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Rajmargyatra was launched in May 2023. Since then, it has been downloaded 
more than 4 lakh times across iOS and Android. At present, about 4000 
complaints have been submitted across various categories.  
  
To increase the usage of the app two features are under-testing and will go live 
shortly: 

18 
 
 
 
  
1. Allowing recharge of FASTag wallets from the app itself.  
  
2. Allow Monthly Pass to be bought and other such passes in the future directly 
from the app. At present, users have to go to various portals from acquirer 
banks to purchase monthly pass. These portals have varying experiences and 
there is no standard interface. Rajmargyatra will be the one-stop place to buy 
passes through the app itself. 
  
The year wise details of grievances received and resolved through 
Rajmargyatra App as Annexure-III” 
46. When the Committee enquired about other grievance redressal mechanisms and 
the number of grievances received and resolved in the past three years, the Ministry in 
a written reply stated as under:- 
“The Users can submit their grievances through 1033 National Highway 
Helpline for issues related to Highways and emergencies. The grievances are 
transferred to concerned official for redressal.  
  
Also, issues raised by media including those on social media by users are 
marked to the concerned officials for redressal and is reviewed by the Ministry. 
  
For issues related to FASTag transactions, the road users lodge their 
grievances to respective FASTag issuer Banks for redressal.   
  
The details of the Grievances received and resolved is attached as Annexure-
IV.” 
47. On being asked whether toll plazas are made toll-free once the break-even point 
is achieved by the construction company, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“The levy of user fee is based on the base rates fixed under the NH Fee Rules 
across the country and are not related to the cost of construction or its 
recovery.” 
48. However, the official website of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(https://morth.nic.in/hi/toll) states as under: 

19 
 
 
 
“Once cost is recovered, the fee is collected at reduced rate of 40% as the road 
is to be maintained in good condition for the travellers.” 
49. When asked whether there is any proposal to levy an annual toll fee on 
passenger vehicles to avoid daily toll stoppage, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“A proposal that introduces an Annual Pass for private cars is under 
consideration at MoRTH.”  
50. When the Committee sought to know how the Ministry tracks vehicles that avoid 
tolls by exiting to State Highways and then re-entering NH, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
“National Highways Fee plazas are located after due diligence so as to avoid any 
leakages due to alternate or competing road facilities. Further, 
highways/expressways are now being developed as access controlled based on 
closed tolling, where user fee is based on the length travelled further reducing 
scope of any traffic leakages.” 
51. On being asked how toll leakages through FASTag are detected and prevented, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Electronic Toll Transactions through FASTag System is processed through a 
secure ecosystem involving the Acquirer Bank at Toll Plaza, NPCI and Issuer 
Bank of FASTag. The Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) system is designed such 
that no FASTag transaction can take place without the participation of all three 
stakeholders i.e., Acquirer Bank at user fee plaza, NPCI and Issuer Bank.  
  
Additionally, the Toll Collection Contract is awarded through an open bidding 
auction process wherein the Toll Collection Agencies offer fixed remittance to 
NHAI based on the annual calculated potential of User Fee Revenue. The base 
price of the auction is derived through past collection and other traffic data.” 
 
52. To a specific query regarding the justification for the 4–5% toll hike across 855 
plazas from 1 April 2025, and documentation correlating revisions with contractual 
clauses, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The User Fee Rates on National Highways (NH) and National Expressway 
(NE) are fixed as per Fee Notification, published in Gazette of India in 
accordance with the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and 

20 
 
 
 
Collection) Rules, 2008 as amended time to time and revised annually as per 
Rule 5 of NH Fee Rule.Copy of relevant NH Fee rule is Annexure V.” 
 
53. When the Committee enquired about institutional redressal mechanisms in 
NHAI/MoRTH addressing complaints of malfunctioning FASTag readers, long queues, 
and cash-only lanes, including toll-free numbers or apps for complaints, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
“Complaints of road users related to FASTag/Toll related issues can also be 
registered and redressed with 1033 Toll free number and Rajmargyatra mobile 
application.For addressing incorrect Toll deduction, dedicated email 
falsededuction@ihmcl.com has also been created.In case of wrong deduction, 
refund is made to road users through charge back mechanism. Refunds are 
processed through the respective issuer banks of the FASTag after 
investigation. While the standard refund policy of the banks allows for a period 
of up to 40 days, such cases are duly investigated, and refund requests are 
typically initiated within 3 days.” 
 
54. On being asked whether all toll plazas are uniformly equipped for users to 
purchase, recharge, or replace FASTags on-site and reasons if not, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
“The FASTags can be recharged online using MyFASTag mobile application or 
issuer bank website.” 
55. As regards evaluation of root causes behind delays at congested toll plazas, 
infrastructure augmentation plans, and details thereof, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“All the lanes of the fee Plazas are ETC enabled for smooth and fast passage of 
vehicles fitted with FASTag. 
Further, NHAI has on pilot basis implemented Geographic Information System 
(GIS)-based toll congestion monitoring software across 100 toll plazas 
nationwide. This live monitoring and tracking system assists in real-time 
congestion management and facilitates data- based decision-making for 
necessary actions at toll plazas. Based on this short-term measures and long-
term measures are being adopted. 

21 
 
 
 
NHAI is targeting phased national implementation of MLFF using existing 
ANPR+AI and RFID Technologies. Request for Proposal (RFP) to implement 
barrier-free tolling system on the fee plazas of “Gharonda, Choryasi, Nemili, 
UER-II and Dwarka Expressway” has been invited/ floated, with the possibility of 
implementing it on other fee plazas in a phased manner depending upon the 
outcomes and efficacy of the implementation on these projects.” 
56. When the Committee sought to know the average waiting time at toll plazas and 
the impact of FASTag, including if toll is waived beyond a certain limit, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under:- 
“Impact Assessment study on FASTag System was conducted by National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) through consultant. The finding of above 
study reflects that average waiting time at fee plazas has been reduced from 734 
Seconds to 47 Seconds for Financial Year 2022. Congestion on fee plaza are 
monitored through a GIS based Toll congestion monitoring solution. 
NH Fee rules does not prescribe any limit of waiting timeline for road users at toll 
plazas.” 
57. When asked to provide details of fake or unauthorised toll plazas reported (e.g., 
Bhachau–Gandhidham in Gujarat), penal/administrative actions taken, revenue loss 
reported, and recovery actions, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“No fake toll plaza was found established on any National Highways. However, in 
the state of Gujarat in district Morbi, a diversion had been found erected near 
Vaghasiya BOT Toll Plaza by private persons by diverting traffic through a 
defunct factory known as 'White House” and had started collection on this 
diversion. 
Concessionaire sent legal notice to violators on 12.05.2023 and further made 
complaint before Wankaner Police Station, DisttMorbi on 30.05.2023 and on 
16.06.2023 before S.P. Office, Morbi. 
Project Director Rajkot, NHAI also gave Notice to the Owner of The White 
House Company on 12.07.2023 under the Control of National High Ways (Land 
and Traffic) Act, 2022. However, the illegal road passing through the White 
House factory was closed on 04.12.2023 by NHAI with the help of local police 
and the traffic leakage has been stopped.  
FIR was also registered against the owner of White House Company and 05 
others on 04.12.2023 by State Police of Gujarat under IPC Section 384, 406, 

22 
 
 
 
420, 506(2) and 34 for illegally constructing road and collecting toll. Charge 
sheet has also been filed by Police in Wankaner Taluka Court (Case No. 
CC1043/2024) on 10/3/2024…. 
The matter is currently sub-judice. 
Further Concessionaire has the Obligations to protect the RoWand also to 
prevent any Toll evasion.  
As it was a BOT (Toll) project and the Concessionaire is responsible for 
preventing evasion of fee. there was no adverse financial implication for the 
Government of India.” (sic.) 
58. To a specific query on NHAI’s time-bound targets for national rollout of Multi-
Lane Free Flow (MLFF) system with ANPR and pending legal amendments for e-
penalty enforcement, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“NHAI is targeting phased national implementation of MLFF using existing 
ANPR+AI and RFID Technologies. Request for Proposal (RFP) to implement 
barrier-free tolling system on the fee plazas of “Gharonda, Choryasi, Nemili, 
UER-II and Dwarka Expressway” has been invited/ floated, with the possibility of 
implementing it on other fee plazas in a phased manner depending upon the 
outcomes and efficacy of the implementation on these projects” 
59. While elaborating on Smart tolling, the representative of the Ministry, during the 
course of theevidence,  stated as under:- 
‘Sir, one of the questions was related to smart tolling. Multi-lane free flow is 
actually a smart tolling process which is AI plus ANPR based. In a sense, we are 
trying to leverage technology to better the facility. Rather, it is not facility   
because any charge which is levied will always pinch. But to that extent, we can 
do it in a manner where the person is able to accept it and it does not cause him 
too much inconvenience. We are moving ahead on that process and our target is 
to expand multi-lane free flow or the barrier-less tolling mechanism to all the four-
lane plus expressways in the country in the next four years.’ 
 
60. When the Committee sought details of other revenue sources of NHAI apart from 
toll/user charges, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The other sources of revenue of NHAI other than the Toll / User Charges (Toll 
Plough-back) at present are as under:- 
A. Govt Budgetary Support:- 

23 
 
 
 
1. NHAI Investment (Cess) 
2. ToT and InvIT Plough-back (Monetisation of NHs) 
3. Funds for Maintenance 
4. External Assistance (JICA/EAP) 
B. NHAI Internal (other) Resources 
1. Interest on surplus funds 
2. Penalties and liquidated damages. 
3. Receipts through securitisation of user fee in Delhi Mumbai Expressway 
4. Revenue Receipts mainly Sale of Tender documents, Sale of Scraps, Old 
Newspapers etc. 
Receipts from State Govts for construction of Eastern Peripheral Expressway” 
 
61. As regards revenue from hoardings, fuel outlets, food services on highways, and 
details thereof, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Advertisement and billboards are not permitted on the ROW of National 
Highways and no revenue is earned in this account.  
The licence fee for granting access permission to the fuel outlets from National 
Highways is being collected in accordance with the applicable norms and 
guidelines set by MoRT&H under the provisions of the Control of National 
Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002” 
62. When asked for details of projects where the concessionaire has recovered 
project cost and now collects fees at a reduced rate of 40%, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“The user fee (toll) rates under these Rules are determined primarily levied on 
the base rate prescribed in the Rules and other factors such as the type of road 
(2-lane/4-lane/6-lane) and are subject to annual revision based on the 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) to offset inflation. It has no relation to the project 
construction cost.  
Following amendment has been issued to the NH Fee Rules, 2008 vide 
Notification No. G.S.R.725(E) dated 06.10.2023. 
The fee as notified as per Concession Agreement shall be leviable till the end of 
the concession period and after the concession period is over, the fee shall be 
collected by the Central Government or the executing authority as per the fee 
specified under sub-rule (2) of rule 4 on the date of transfer of such section of 

24 
 
 
 
the National Highway, bridge, tunnel or bypass, as the case may be, to be 
revised annually in accordance with these rules.” 
 
63. To a specific query regarding the current status of the proposed NITI Aayog 
study to re-evaluate toll base rates including terms of reference, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“The base rates for levy of user fee has been fixed as on 2008 under the NH 
Fee Rules. Presently, Ministry is considering to initiate a comprehensive study 
of factors, that impinge upon user determination such as Vehicle Operating 
Costs, Vehicle Damages Factor and Willingness to pay. NITI Aayog has been 
requested to undertake this study in association with an academic institution of 
repute such as IITs or IIMs.” 
C) DPR PREPARATION AND MONITORING 
64. When the Committee enquired how DPRs are prepared by NHAI and what 
details are generally available in DPRs, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“NHAI Invites proposals for selection of technical consultants who prepare 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). The consultants should have expertise in 
carrying out similar kind of job, should have team of experienced experts of 
design domain of highways and bridges. 
The selection of the consultants is made through Quality and Cost Based 
Selection (QCBS) method of procurement, where both the technical quality of 
the proposal and the proposed cost are considered. 
The DPR generally includes details of the following but not limited to:- 
1. Traffic Surveys and analysis. 
2. Topographic surveys report – It includes digital elevation model, land use 
information, hydrology etc. 
3. Environmental screening and environment assessment – (Requirement of 
forest clearance wildlife clearance, CRZ clearance). 
4. Alignment of the project, details of realignments or By-passes. 
5. Detailed design of highway. 
6. Detailed design of bridges, flyovers, underpasses, Rail over Bridges, 
(ROBs) and other cross drainage structures. 
7. Materials report 
8. Land acquisition plan. 

25 
 
 
 
9. Utility relocation plan. 
10. Technical specification. 
11. Cost estimates including Bill of quantities and rate analysis. 
12. Viability and financial option which includes economic analysis and financial 
analysis. 
13. Bid Document based on viability and mode of procurement.” 
65. As regards the role and responsibility of the concessionaire in finalising design post-
DPR approval and how the Ministry ensures such delegation does not compromise 
safety, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“The concessionaire is responsible for undertaking detailed investigations, 
surveys and engineering design to translate the DPR’s conceptual design into 
executable construction drawings which include Geometric Design, Pavement 
Design, Structural Design, Drainage Design, Traffic management plans, Utility 
shifting plans, material selection and specifications, construction methodologies, 
Quality assurance plans etc. For all detailed design and engineering work, the 
Concessionaire is required to appoint following Consultants prior to start the 
work: 1. Design consultant; 2. Proof consultant; and 3. Safety consultant. These 
consultants are proposed by the concessionaire from a pool of expert consultants 
and Authority approves one of the consultants based on his credentials, expertise 
and past performances. It is the responsibility of the concessionaire to develop 
the design conforming to IRC/MoRT&H/NHAI specifications and guidelines, 
meeting the requirements specified in contract. These designs developed by the 
design consultant are proof checked by Proof Consultant and vetted by safety 
consultant. Authority ensures safety in design and construction stage by 
undertaking Road Safety Audits by independent safety consultants. The day to 
day construction activities are monitored and supervised through an Independent 
Engineer who undertakes design review, construction monitoring, and quality 
control.” 
66. When the Committee enquired why basic structures like culverts, flyovers, and 
drain slab covers are often excluded from initial DPRs and only added after repeated 
requests by MPs and local authorities, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“The structures like flyover, underpasses are provisioned in the DPR based on 
the norms, specifications and guidelines of Indian Roads Congress (IRC).Cross-
drainage structures like culverts and bridges are planned based on topographic 
and drainage studies and generally not excluded in initial DPR. Initial DPRs 
primarily focus on overall project feasibility, cost optimization and prioritizing 
through traffic volume. Sometimes due to public demand need of additional 

26 
 
 
 
structures may be necessitated in larger public interest which are added after 
giving due consideration to the specifications and safety of road users.” 
67. When asked what standard protocols NHAI follows to vet DPRs for geotechnical 
integrity in ecologically sensitive regions, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“NHAI engages qualified DPR Consultants for DPR preparation, which are 
selected through open bidding, based on the technical credentials suitable for the 
proposed project.The scope of the DPR includes geotechnical investigations. 
Geotechnical investigations are mandatory for all the regions and special 
emphasis is given to Geotechnical investigations in ecologically sensitive regions 
which are incorporated while designing the project.NHAI has engaged Geologists 
who assist the DPR consultant in identifying strategy for Geo tech investigations 
and review the results for adoption in design and vetting the DPRs. 
Additionally, for sensitive projects, consultation may be made from IITs, ISM 
Dhanbad and other such institutions.” 
68. To a specific query regarding the involvement of Geological Survey of India 
(GSI), Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), and other technical institutions during 
DPR preparation, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Geological Survey of India (GSI), Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) are 
not directly involved in DPR preparation. However, should a specific project 
necessitate, their specialized expertise may be obtained such as engagement of 
Tehri Hydropower Development Corporation Ltd. (THDCL) for hill slope 
stabilisation projects.” 
69. On being asked whether poorly designed or non-continuous drainage systems 
cause recurrent waterlogging and submergence of adjacent homes and service roads, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“The drainage systems are designed in accordance with MoRTH specifications 
and IRC guidelines. As per these guidelines, the drains are constructed parallel 
to the service road to avoid the waterlogging on the road surface and to ensure 
that the surface water drains off from the Main carriageway and service road 
without creating waterlogging. However, the reliance is on the local authority to 
link the drains along the NHs with the master drainage plan and problems occur 
where the local authority is unable to construct the master drainage for the area.” 
70. When the Committee sought to know the standard ground improvement and 
drainage norms for constructing National Highways in wetland or paddy terrain, and why 

27 
 
 
 
these were not enforced in projects like Kooriyad, Malappuram etc. in Kerala, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“For National Highway (NH) construction in wetland, waterlogged, or paddy field 
terrains, IRC:34-2011 provide guidelines for ground improvement and drainage. 
In addition, the MoRTH’s Specifications for Road and Bridges (5th Revision) 
under Clauses 305.4.6, and 314 provide specifications for ground improvement 
techniques and Clauses 309, and 704 provide the framework for effective surface 
and subsurface drainage.It is important to note that NHAI has successfully 
executed several highway widening and upgradation projects across districts 
such as Kasaragod, Kannur, Palakkad, Thrissur, Ernakulam, and 
Thiruvananthapuram—regions that also experience heavy rainfall and share 
similar geotechnical conditions. Construction of RE wall has also been 
undertaken in these locations successfully.However, the incident at Kooriyad has 
occurred due to lapses by the Concessionaire and Independent Engineer, who 
are, as per the Concession Agreement, responsible for the design and approval 
of the design, respectively. As per the preliminary report submitted by the expert 
team engaged by NHAI, the actual site conditions, particularly the soil 
characteristics and drainage behaviour were wrongly assessed and as a result, 
design parameters were wrongly assumed, leading to global slope failure. At the 
same time, NHAI treats even such isolated incidents with utmost seriousness, 
recognising their potential impact on public safety and confidence. Immediate 
precautionary measures and response actions are taken to minimise public 
inconvenience and address site-specific vulnerabilities. In the case of Kooriyad, 
disciplinary action was taken against the Concessionaire and Consultants, 
including suspension of key personnel and debarment, to reinforce accountability 
and set a clear precedent.” 
D)MAINTENANCE AND SUB- CONTRACTING 
71. On the issue of maintenance of Highways, the representative of the Ministry, 
during the evidence, informed as under:- 
‘Maintenance always has been our concern, Sir. One is the Network Survey 
Vehicle survey which is being done. Second is the drone, and third is the NHAI 
One app.In the NSV right now, we have done survey for about one lakh kilometre 
of the lane. We have done the NSV survey, and it is like x-ray of the road. It gives 
us the report, like roughness, cracking, rutting, ravelling, potholes. It gives us the 
report, and then the same is shared with the contractors, concessioners, and the 
authority engineers. In the last six months, this has been a considerable success, 
and most of the concessioners and contractors are agreeing to their mistakes, 
and they are ensuring that the quality is maintained, and they are penalized also. 
Next is the drone monitoring survey. Through a drone camera, we are monitoring 

28 
 
 
 
40 parameters related to how much plantation is done, how much is the 
encroachment, etc. In the last six-seven months, 50,000 kilometres of the drone 
survey is done, and this is also proving to be very, very useful on the highways. 
For maintenance of the National Highways, we have short-term maintenance 
contracts, where the DPR is just coming, or a new contractor is coming, so for 
one year or two years, we have short-term maintenance contract. The 
performance-based maintenance contract has been quite successful because 
payment is staggered over a period of five to seven years, so it is the 
responsibility of the BBMC contractor to ensure that maintenance is done 
properly over a period of five to seven years. On the black spot, so far, 13,795 
black spots have been identified. We have rectified about 5,000 black spots, and 
we are working continuously on these black spots.’ 
72. While elaborating on the maintenance budget of NHAI, the Secretary, during the 
evidence stated as under:- 
‘There is a lot of work that the NHAI is doing, which is visible to people, and you 
also have mentioned that. We are at a stage where the capital works expansion 
is happening. Our maintenance costs are not high. Our total maintenance budget 
out of this Rs. 2.87 lakh crore is about Rs. 5,000 crore.’ 
73. When asked whether toll operators are responsible for maintenance works on 
National Highways and what public facilities they are required to maintain, the Ministry 
in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Tolling is either done by the Concessionaire in case of Build Operate & Transfer 
(Toll) (BOT (Toll)), Operation, Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) and Toll Operate 
and Transfer (TOT) contracts or by Dedicated User Fee Collection Agencies 
appointed by NHAI (for Public Funded Toll Plazas) in case of other contracts. 
In case of tolling by concessionaire, the entire National Highway assets including 
public toilet are to be maintained by the Concessionaire as per provision of the 
respective Concession Agreement. In case of Public Funded Toll Plazas the 
tolling Infrastructure as well as Public Toilet Infrastructure is to be maintained by 
the dedicated user fee Collection agencies.  
Monitoring of maintenance of National Highways along with Toilet Maintenance is 
done through an online NHAI One Application wherein defects are notified to the 
Concessionaire/ Contractor by the Supervision Consultants and the action taken 
report is also uploaded by the Contractor/ Concessionaire on the online 
application. Further, NHAI also conducts inspection through Network Survey 
Vehicles and Drone Surveys to monitor the condition of the road infrastructure 
during the maintenance period at regular intervals”  

29 
 
 
 
74. When asked whether performance-based maintenance contract models have 
been effective in ensuring road longevity and defect rectification, particularly comparing 
EPC and HAM contracts, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Upon completion of Defect liability period of EPC or HAM contract and to 
ensure long term maintenance of National Highways for a specified period, 
O&M Works are being carried out on Performance Based Maintenance 
Contract (PBMC) mode. PBMC document has been circulated by MoRTH vide 
letter no. RW/G-23012/01/2019-W&A (Pt. III) dated 06.07.2023 (Annexure VI) 
in which the payment for the deliverable is linked to the contractor successfully 
meeting certain clearly defined performance indicators/ Service Levels and 
Penalties for non-achieving the desired service levels. 
Also, the routine maintenance of National Highways is being carried out through 
Short Term Maintenance Contracts (STMC) Works by Field Units (RO/ PD) for a 
short duration (i.e. 06 months to 02 years) based on the specific requirement of 
the stretches, wherever the project is proposed to be taken up for strengthening/ 
widening/ capacity augmentation in within next 05 years.” 
75. When asked whether works awarded to concessionaires by NHAI can be further 
subcontracted, permissible levels of subcontracting, and approval requirements, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The primary concessionaire or contractor may engage sub-contractors for 
execution of the project works. However, such sub-contracting is subject to the 
conditions specified in the agreement, including compliance with eligibility 
criteria and quality standards. 
 As per the provisions of the EPC contract, subcontracting above 5% of 
project cost, requires approval of authority. Additionally, the main contractor 
shall not sub-contract any work more than 49% of the contract price. 
 As per provisions of HAM agreement, Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is 
created for Implementation of the project. The SPV engages EPC 
contractors for execution of the work. 
 Generally, it is ensured that the approved Sub-contractors only work at site. 
The main contractor is responsible and liable for all its obligations as per 
agreement in subcontracting also. 
1.  As per letter comprising the Technical Bid given at Appendix-1A of the RFPs 
of HAM &BOT(Toll) projects, the bidder is required to submit the names of the 
EPC Contractors. 

30 
 
 
 
2. There is a provision of sub-contracting in EPC projects. Clause 4.2 of 
Standard MCA for EPC Projects dated 05.03.2019 stipulates the following: 
(i) The Contractor, whether Joint Venture or sole, shall not sub-contract any 
Works in more than 49% (forty nine per cent) of the Contract Price and shall 
carry out Works directly under its own supervision and through its own 
personnel and equipment in at least 51% (fifty one per cent) of the Contract 
Price. Further, in case the Contractor is a Joint Venture, then the Lead Member 
shall carry out Works directly through its own resources (men, material and 
machines etc.) in at least 51% (fifty one per cent) of total length of the Project 
Highway. Provided, however, that in respect of the Works carried out directly by 
the Contractor, it may enter into contracts for the supply and installation of 
Materials, Plant, equipment, road furniture, safety devices and labour, as the 
case may be, for such Works. For the avoidance of doubt, the Parties agree 
that the Contractor may sub-divide the aforesaid length of 51% (fifty one per 
cent) in no more than 5 (five) sections of the Project Highway. The Parties 
further agree that all obligations and liabilities under this Agreement for the 
entire project Highway shall at alltimes remain with the Contractor. 
(ii) In the event any sub-contract for Works, or the aggregate of such sub-
contracts with any Sub-contractor, exceeds 5% (five percent) of the Contract 
Price, the Contractor shall communicate the name and particulars, including the 
relevant experience of the Sub-contractor, to the Authority prior to entering into 
any such sub-contract. The Authority shall examine the particulars of the Sub- 
contractor from the national security and public interest perspective and may 
require the Contractor, no later than 15 (fifteen) business days from the date of 
receiving the communication from the Contractor, not to proceed with the sub-
contract, and the Contractor shall comply therewith. 
(iii) In the event any sub-contract referred to in Clause 4.2 (ii) relates to a Sub- 
contractor who has, over the preceding 3 (three) years, not undertaken at least 
one work of a similar nature with a contract value exceeding 40% (forty per 
cent) of the value of the sub-contract to be awarded hereunder, and received 
payments in respect thereof for an amount equal to at least such 40% (forty per 
cent), the Authority may, no later than 15 (fifteen) business days from the date 
of receiving the communication from the Contractor, require the Contractor not 
to proceed with such sub-contract, and the Contractor shall comply therewith 
without delay or demur. 

31 
 
 
 
(iv) It is expressly agreed that the Contractor shall, at all times, be responsible 
and liable for all its obligations under this Agreement notwithstanding anything 
contained in the agreements with its Sub-contractors or any other agreement 
that may be entered into by the Contractor, and no default under any such 
agreement shall excuse the Contractor from its obligations or liability under this 
Agreement. However, in case of non-compliance of the Contractor towards his 
obligations for payments to the approved Sub-contractor(s), which is likely to 
affect the progress of works, the authority reserves the right to intervene and 
direct the Contractor to release such outstanding payments to approved Sub-
contractor(s) out of the payments due for the completed Works in the interest of 
work. 
To conclude, there is no provision for subcontracting in HAM & BOT (Toll) 
Projects. However, as per letter comprising the Technical Bid given at Appendix-
1A of the RFPs of HAM &BOT(Toll) projects, the bidder is required to submit the 
names of the EPC Contractors. The PPP Concessionaire may thus engage an 
EPC contractor, wherein EPC cost (reflecting the civil construction cost) would 
invariably be substantially lower than the Bid Project Cost (BPC) for the 
Concessionaire as BPC quoted by bidder includes Base Civil Work Cost, 
Financing Costs, Interest During Construction (IDC), Return on Equity and 
Independent Engineer Expenses. This is because the government pays 40% of 
Bid Project Cost (BPC) during construction and the rest 60% is arranged by the 
Developer/ Concessionaire, with 70-75% of debt and 25-30% of equity. The 
Concessionaire is paid back the 60% of the cost in terms of half-yearly annuities 
over the remaining concession period.” 
76. On being enquired about penal provisions in NHAI concessionaire contracts for 
construction and maintenance defects and frequency of invocation in the last five years, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Any action against the defaulting concessionaire is taken as per the 
concession agreement. Such penalties imposed on the concessionaires in the 
last 5 years is as follows:” 
Year Penalty (in Cr.) 
2020-21 129.41 
2021-22 65.74 
2022-23 115.43 
2023-24 244.54 

32 
 
 
 
2024-25 701.69 
Total 1256.81 
 
77. As regards the status of rectification of 13,795 black spots identified nationwide, 
with only 5,036 addressed, the Ministry was requested for a year-wise status and 
explanations for delays, to which the Ministry replied as under: 
“Rectification of black spots is a continuous process and temporary measures 
are taken on immediate basis. Out of total 13,795 black spots identified on 
National Highways (NHs) in the country, short-term rectification has been 
completed on 11,703 black- pots. It is further to mention that, the severity of 
accidents is majorly reduced through temporary rectification on black-spots. 
Long-term rectification has been completed on 5,197 increasing from previously 
reported number of 5,036 black spots. 
Long term rectification works take time as they involve improvement of road 
geometrics, junction improvements, spot widening of carriageway, construction 
of underpasses/overpasses, etc. which involves pre-construction activities such 
as land acquisition, forest clearance & utility shifting. 
The status of Blackspot in respect of NHAI for the last 5 years are enclosed in 
Annexure VII.” 
E) HIGHWAY DESIGN FAILURES AND TRANSITION FROM CONCRETE TO 
BITUMEN 
78. To a specific query regarding reasons for reconsidering the shift from concrete to 
bituminous roads and related experiences, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“National Highways are being constructed in both bituminous and concrete as per 
site condition.” 
79. On being asked about the design part of the pavement mechanism of highways, 
the representative of the Ministry stated as under: 
“Sir, on the concrete pavement part, there have been two issues that I have 
noticed. I have been here only for the last six months. But I have also noticed 
that one, the construction practices have to be very good. If our construction 
practices and concrete is not good, then it immediately shows up in the quality of 
the pavement. 

33 
 
 
 
Two, our capability of testing whether the construction of the pavement 
has been to the right specifications or not. We were dependent heavily on the 
Authority engineer to do that. Now, clearly there are certain areas and mainly it 
has happened in a few States where this issue has come up. 
The issue of whether we should do a large-scale concrete pavement 
exercise — the feeling is, no because we have to work with the systems we 
have. We cannot expect an ideal system to emerge suddenly. The other part is 
where the local soil condition or the local rainfall requirement, drainage 
requirement requires a concrete road, then we have to do it with proper checks 
and balance.”  
80. When the Committee enquired whether a forensic audit has been conducted on 
PQC roads cracking prematurely and plans to revise PQC and jointing standards 
nationally, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“No forensic audit has been conducted. However, the required quality check of 
materials is being carried out by IE/AE/Authority’s representatives as per 
requirement to check the material conformity as per specifications and 
standards. 
As informed by RO Jaipur, however, IIT, Delhi, IIT Gandhi Nagar, M/s Shriram 
Institute & CRRI investigated the quality pavement & slope portion of DVE 
section. 
NHAI, HQ, New Delhi vide letter no. NHAI/BM/Delhi-Vadodara/2022/E-
167644/RM-01 dated 10.01.2025 has issued the advisory on rectification 
methodology of Delhi Vadodara Expressway NE-4. 
As per advisory, the Contractor’s are carrying out rectification works on Delhi–
Vadodara Expressway (NE-4), including routine maintenance as mandated in 
the Contract Agreement. Additionally, any specific repair works suggested by 
IIT and CRRI is being undertaken. 
M/s TTL Engineering has conducted field inspection using testing services such 
as Network Survey Vehicle (NSV) and Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD). 
M/s Complete Instrumentation Solution Pvt. Ltd. has conducted field Inspection 
and Investigation using testing service Network service (NSV) and Falling Weight 
Deflectometer (FWD) (Amritsar-Jamnagar, NH-754A Package AJ/SR-6, 7 & 8” 

34 
 
 
 
81. When the Committee sought to know whether any penalty has been levied on the 
contractor for non-completion of construction at Paliyekkara and the amount recovered, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“As recommended by IE, a consolidated penalty of Rs 2387 Cr has been 
imposed by NHAI on Concessionaires as damages (which includes Rs 1810 Cr, 
for Negative Change of scope items which had not been completed/recovery for 
works executed by Authority under risk and cost of Concessionaire/Non-
maintenance of Project Highway and failure in accomplishing O&M obligations 
etc) including interest up to 31.01.2025 (Ltr No 335 dtd 22.02.2025). No amount 
has been recovered from Concessionaire till date towards Penalty, as the 
Concessionaires have invoked Arbitration which is undergoing.” 
82. When the Committee enquired why GSI’s warnings on landslide-prone zones 
and slope protection were ignored during DPR finalisation in light of NH-66 collapses, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“It is important to highlight that the widening of NH-66 in Kerala is being 
undertaken within a severely constrained Right of Way (RoW) of 45 meters, 
despite the IRC-recommended minimum standard of 60 meters for a six-lane 
divided carriageway with service roads. Since the early 2000s, MoRTH and 
NHAI have consistently advocated for a 60 m RoW. However, public resistance 
and lack of concurrence from the State Government led to delays, and the 
highway was even entrusted back to the State PWD in 2014. It was only after a 
subsequent review that the Government of Kerala agreed to a 45 m RoW, 
which MoRTH accepted as a special case to facilitate progress. This limited 
corridor width, especially in hilly or undulating terrain, poses substantial 
challenges during construction, particularly in stretches involving steep vertical 
cuts and constrained slope geometry. 
The GSI report forwarded by the District Collector vide letter dated 06.12.2024 
to Project Director, PIU Kannur is restricted for Kasaragod district only and not 
for the entire state of Kerala. While the report indicated broad areas vulnerable 
to landslides, it was generic in nature and did not provide comments on the 
design and methodology adopted by the concessionaire to accommodate the 6-
lane NH within restricted ROW of 45m. Nevertheless, the matter was promptly 
communicated to the respective Concessionaire as an advisory, and 
appropriate caution was advised.” 
 

35 
 
 
 
83. To a specific query on accountability fixed for DPR consultants, contractors, or 
engineers for failures in ground improvement and drainage in flood-prone zones, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“As per the Concession Agreement, the responsibility for designing the National 
Highway and approval of the designs lies with the Concessionaire and the 
Independent Engineer. According, the Concessionaire M/s KNR Constructions 
Ltd and M/s Megha Engineering have been disallowed from participating in 
ongoing/ future bidding forthwith. Project Consultant/ Independent Engineer, 
M/s Highway Engineering Consultant has also been disallowed from 
participating in ongoing/ future bidding. Project Manager of Concessionaire and 
Team Leader of Consultant have also been suspended from their duties.” 
 
84. On being asked whether structural audits or pre-monsoon readiness 
assessments were conducted in Kerala despite heavy rainfall, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“It is mention that Structural Audits are carried out on completed Structures to 
ascertain the safety and integrity of the structure as it shows wear and tear due 
to ageing, use, misuse or overuse, exposure to the weathering / environment 
and structurally unplanned modifications and additions. Accordingly, structural 
audit is not required for under construction structures. 
In view of Kerala’s well-known climatic conditions, including high-intensity and 
prolonged monsoon periods typically lasting 6–7 months, NHAI and MoRTH 
place significant emphasis on monsoon preparedness and construction-stage 
safety. MoRTH regularly, prior to onset of Monsoon, issues instructions to 
agencies for monsoon preparedness. Accordingly, reviews are routinely 
undertaken in NHAI the adequacy slope protection measures, drainage 
arrangements, embankment stability, and general site preparedness to mitigate 
risks during the monsoon season.” 
 
85. (i) When asked to furnish details of findings from IIT Delhi experts who examined 
causes of road collapse on NH-66 in Kerala and provide a copy of the report if available, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 

36 
 
 
 
“The Expert Committee visited the site on 21.05.2025. As per their preliminary 
report dated 27.05.2025, the failure appears to be a deep-seated rotational 
failure of the embankment, with the failure surface passing behind and below 
the Left-Hand Side (LHS) reinforced soil wall, extending through the foundation 
strata and beneath the adjoining RCC retaining wall. The committee has noted 
that a combination of factors may have contributed to the incident, such as 
inadequacies in the geotechnical investigation, a tendency to follow the 
geotechnical report recommendations without critical scrutiny, lack of proper 
engineering judgment in selecting shear strength parameters for foundation 
strata, and possible mismatch between the soil replacement depth considered 
in the RE wall design and what was actually executed at site. 
The Committee further stated that precise identification of the root cause requires 
a comprehensive investigation, including reliable assessment of foundation strata 
through a planned geotechnical program, verification of ground improvement 
measures, sampling and testing of fill materials, validation of geogrid design 
parameters, and review of the construction schedule, quality checks, and stability 
and settlement analyses based on updated data. The Final Report is awaited” 
(ii) On being enquired about the status of the findings of expert team from IIT Palakkad, 
CRRI, and GSI investigating NH-66 Valanchery bypass collapse, recommendations 
for the remaining packages, and corrective actions taken by MoRTH/NHAI, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“It is submitted that a team of experts comprising representatives from IIT 
Palakkad, the Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), and the Geological 
Survey of India (GSI) was constituted to investigate and assess slope and 
embankment stability along the NH-66 corridor in Kerala. The expert team 
conducted a comprehensive field inspection across affected and vulnerable 
locations between 10.06.2025 and 15.06.2025. 
As of now, the report from the Expert Committee is awaited. Based on the 
findings and recommendations to be received, further course of action, 
including any mid-course design corrections or enhancements to slope 
protection and drainage measures, shall be taken up in consultation with the 
concerned stakeholders. 
Regarding the progress of 17 packages of NH-66 in Kerala has been enclosed as 
Annexure VIII / Annexure VIII(A). Work is in progress in these stretches under 
various stages.” 

37 
 
 
 
86. When asked whether NHAI conducted surveillance and NSV surveys in NH-66 
prior to collapses and if accountability was fixed for omissions, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“The primary objective of NSV is to assess requirement of maintenance though 
evaluation the condition of the pavement surface by measuring parameters 
such as roughness, rutting, surface distress, and geometry, to ensure 
conformity with riding quality and safety standards. NSV surveys are carried out 
on completed section of the NH that are open-to-traffic. Since many NH-66 
sections under construction were not yet completed or operational at the time of 
the incident, NSV surveys were not carried out.” 
 
87. As regards why NHAI did not consider 60-metre RoW acquisition necessary 
when more than 45 metres was required for service roads, drainage, and safety 
structures, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The minimum standard Right of Way (RoW) recommended by the Indian 
Roads Congress (IRC) and adopted by MoRTH for a six-lane National Highway 
with service roads is 60 metres, which allows adequate space for carriageways, 
service roads, drainage, utilities, and safety structures. Accordingly, since the 
early 2000s, both MoRTH and NHAI have consistently advocated for a 60-
metre RoW for the widening of NH-66 in Kerala. 
However, with regards to NH-66 in Kerala, during the initial stages of project 
planning and stakeholder consultations, the State Government did not concur 
with the 60-metre RoW proposal. There was significant resistance on the 
grounds of land availability, dense habitation, and socio-political sensitivities 
along the corridor. State government demanded for widening of NH 66 within 
30m RoW, which was found to be technically inadequate and was subsequently 
not accepted by NHAI/MoRTH. Due to the lack of consensus, the project was 
delayed and, in 2014, the National Highway-66 was entrusted back to the State 
PWD. 
Following renewed deliberations, the Government of Kerala later agreed to 
acquire a 45-metre RoW, which was approved by MoRTH as a special case to 
enable project implementation. While this concession allowed the long-pending 
widening works to proceed, it also introduced significant design and 
construction challenges, particularly in accommodating steep cut slopes, 

38 
 
 
 
drainage systems, utilities, and safety zones within a restricted corridor, 
especially in hilly and urbanised stretches. 
Despite these spatial constraints, NHAI has adapted its engineering approach 
to optimise space usage and is implementing appropriate slope protection, 
drainage, and safety structures within the available RoW, while maintaining 
adherence to safety and technical standards. However, the limited RoW has 
undeniably increased construction-stage vulnerability, especially during the 
monsoon season in high-cut areas, and necessitates enhanced interim 
protection and monitoring measures”. 
 
88. On being enquired whether local PWD engineers, State Roadways, and revenue 
officials were consulted before road design finalisation in Kerala, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“It is submitted that all proposed alignments for NH widening are presented to 
the respective District Administration. Subsequent to the consultation the 
alignment is recommended by the concerned District Collectors (DCs). Based 
on these recommendations, the State PWD provides formal concurrence for the 
final alignment after their scrutiny. 
Furthermore, during the land acquisition process, starting from the issuance of 
Section 3A notification under the National Highways Act, 1956, the Revenue 
Authorities of the State Government play an active and integral role.” 
89. When the Committee sought to know actions taken against officials and 
concessionaires to fix accountability for the collapsed stretch, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“It is submitted that NHAI has taken prompt and stringent action to ensure 
accountability at the project level in the wake of road collapse incidents along 
NH-66. 
Following the failures in Kannur and Kasargod districts, the Concessionaire, 
M/s Megha Engineering, has been suspended from participating in future bids. 
The Concessionaire has been directed to rectify all reported failures and 
defects at its own cost, as per contractual obligations, and is also responsible 
for maintaining the project for a period of 15 years post-construction. 
Similarly, in the Valanchery Bypass section, the Concessionaire, M/s KNR 
Ramanattukara Infra Pvt. Ltd., and the Consultant, M/s Highway Engineering 
Consultants, have been suspended from participating in ongoing and future 
bidding processes. Additionally, the Project Manager of the Concessionaire and 

39 
 
 
 
the Team Leader of the Consultant have been suspended from their respective 
duties.The Concessionaire has been directed to rectify all reported failures and 
defects at its own cost, as per contractual obligations, and is also responsible for 
maintaining the project for a period of 15 years post-construction” 
90. To a specific query regarding a detailed report on recent road collapses in Kerala 
and damage control initiatives, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“A detailed report on the recent road collapses and related incidents on NH-66 
in Kerala is furnished below, along with the status of damage control and 
remedial actions initiated by NHAI through its respective Project Implementation 
Units (PIUs): 
1. PIU-Kannur: 
A localized soil failure occurred at NH-66 Ch. 98+750. An Expert Committee 
comprising Dr. Kishor Kumar, Chief Scientist (Retd), CRRI, and Dr. Ajay Kumar 
Naithani, HoD, Engineering Geology, NIRM, was engaged to investigate the 
cause of failure. As suggested by the committee , the rectification of slope 
protection measures has been taken up.. 
Additionally, a soil nailing collapse was reported in the Chengala–
Neeleshwaram stretch, and the investigation report is being examined for 
implementation of appropriate remedial actions. 
2. PIU-Cochin-I: 
 
On 19.05.2025, a failure of the embankment and retaining structures occurred on 
the LHS main carriageway and LHS service road between km 276+780 and 
277+160 near Kooriyad in Malappuram district. As an immediate measure, 
restoration of traffic on the RHS service road was taken up by the 
Concessionaire as per the preliminary suggestions of the Expert Committee. The 
final expert report is awaited. 
3. PIU-Cochin-II: 
 
A structural incident occurred on the viaduct at Alappuzha in the Thuravoor–
Paravoor stretch, where four girders collapsed. The EPC contractor has initiated 
remedial measures as directed by the Expert Committee appointed by the 
Competent Authority. Representatives of both the EPC Contractor and the 

40 
 
 
 
Authority’s Engineer were suspended, and a penalty was imposed on the 
contractor for the incident. 
4. PIU-Kollam: 
 
No major structural or road collapse incidents have been reported under the 
jurisdiction of this PIU. However at Chavara, in the Kottukulangara–Start of 
Kollam Bypass section, a settlement was observed in the existing bridge 
embankment due to ongoing excavation for a new bridge foundation. The 
Concessionaire has implemented interim protective measures, including MS 
channels, MS sheets, sandbag packing, and covering the embankment with 
polythene sheets. Although protection is in place, the risk of erosion remains 
during heavy rains, and the Concessionaire and Independent Engineer's 
technical teams are regularly monitoring the site. 
5. PIU-Trivandrum: 
 
On 28.11.2024, the shuttering of a minor bridge collapsed at Ayathil Junction (Km 
497+370). A penalty of ₹9.55 lakh was imposed on the Concessionaire for the 
lapse. 
6. PIU-Kozhikode: 
No major structural or road collapse incidents have been reported under the 
jurisdiction of this PIU.” 
 
91. During the evidence while informing about the incidents which took place on 
NH66 in Kerala, the Chairman NHAI informed as under; 
‘Sir, regarding Kerala, let me talk about NH-66. NH-66 in Kerala is divided into 17 
packages. As many as 10 contractors are working on those packages, and the 
packages are from the size of 30 kilometres to 40 kilometres. And roughly, the 
lowest progress is 39 per cent, and the highest progress is 99 per cent. The 
debacle which happened, the progress was 99 per cent in that package. If the 
incident would not have happened, by May 2026, we would have opened the 
whole of this stretch of NH-66 in Kerala. But because of this incident, now at the 
Valanchery bypass, the structure was collapsed. KNR was doing the work. Now, 
they will be constructing a viaduct, and this will slip to December 2026. After 
monsoon, the work will start, and it will take a year. The moment this incident 
happened, we dispatched immediately a team of experts from IIT Delhi. They 
visited the stretch. Yesterday, they gave the report as to what has been the 
reasons primarily, and what is the solution. Based on this, we are going to work. 

41 
 
 
 
As the whole stretch is vulnerable, so as per instructions of Ministry, we have 
constructed a detailed team of IIT Palakkad, ex-scientists of CRRI, and 
Geological Survey of India. They will revisit this before opening these 17 
packages.’ 
92. When asked about cracks appearing in highways in Kooriyad in Kerala, the 
Chairman NHAI informed as under; 
‘It is true that there has been a design failure. At least I do not have any problem 
in admitting that fact.’ 
93. Chairman, NHAI, while informing about the places affected by design failure, 
informed as under:- 
‘No, Sir. It was only in Kasargod, Malappuram and Coonoor areas in Kerala.’ 
94. While elaborating further on the reasons for the road collapse, the Secretary of 
the ministry during the course of evidences stated as under:- 
‘Sir, it was because in Kerala we got the right for only 45 metres. Generally, for 
making six-land road and service road we need 60 metres. But here we could not 
get that because this area is densely populated. So, we made all the drains load-
bearing. The service road acts as a drain also at many points. This drain could 
not be completed because some local hindrances were there. The Collectors are 
helping us.’ 
95. When enquired about the use of local expertise in construction of highways in 
Kerala, Chairman, NHAI during the course of evidence, stated as under; 
‘Sir, in Kasaragod, Collector Kasaragod, GSI was there as early as September 
2024. GSI pointed out certain things. The Collector Kasaragod wrote to us. they 
suggested five and six measures. The concessionaire deliberated the measures 
were like soil nailing at some point, at some point slope protection, retaining wall 
etc. In any case, the concessionaire was supposed to do that. You are asking 
why local unit was not taken into consideration. Based on their observation, 
during the work, these observations of GSI are being complied with. So this is 
what I am trying to submit.’ 
96. On the issue of Concessionaire responsibility, the representative from the 
Ministry during the course of evidence stated as under:- 
‘He is responsible fully because he has not only to construct, but he has to 
maintain it for 15 years. So whatever assumptions he has made, now those 
assumptions in the primary investigation, found to be incorrect as per the site 

42 
 
 
 
conditions like groundwater table was assumed below the ground level, whereas 
it is submerged condition to be considered. That is one.  
Second thing is, there has to be some ground improvement to take place. We 
have to increase the bearing capacity. It is not that we are constructing the 
embankments at other places. We are also constructing the embankments at 
other coastal regions by properly doing the ground improvements. That you have 
seen several times. We put stone columns. We put PVD pipes and then after 
consolidation is over, then ground capacity increases, then we put the loads. 
Now, here what happened?  The embankment was constructed without ground 
improvement. Considering that it is not a submerged condition, whereas it is 
under the submerged condition, the factor of safety comes down, if it is under the 
submerged condition. Now, if you see the typical failure also, there is right-hand 
side and left-hand side. Left-hand side failed. Why? Right-hand side is the 
existing carriageway. Now, that embankment was stable and this right-left side 
moved, and even the slip circle went outside the right-of-way also, and hewed the 
adjoining fields. So, as per preliminary investigation, it is a clear failure of design. 
Now, to see that this design is undertaken properly is the responsibility of the 
concessionaire. It is not any wrong design or unscientific design. It is not like that. 
It has to be properly designed and constructed after proper ground improvement.’ 
97. When asked to furnish any other information of interest to the Committee, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Over 600 km of NH-66 is currently under widening, most of which is being 
carried out within a constrained Right of Way (RoW) of 45 metres—a significant 
deviation from the IRC-recommended 60 metres. These works span the entire 
stretch from North to South Kerala, including densely populated and 
ecologically sensitive areas, requiring meticulous planning and 
execution.Thedevelopment of NH-66 is mostly along the brown field alignment 
and the existing traffic has to be diverted onto the Service Roads and although 
these Service Roads are designed for bi directional traffic, the restricted ROW 
of 45m posed a major constraint. However, NHAI is striving to ensure 
continuous safe traffic movement alongside active construction zones, posing 
considerable logistical and safety challenges. Further, due to level difference 
during construction and water stagnation, damages to Service Roads have 
taken place. These are being attended to from time to time and maintained in 
traffic worthy condition. 
The Government remains fully committed to upholding the highest standards of 
safety, engineering, and professionalism. The organisation continues to evolve 

43 
 
 
 
its processes and systems to meet the growing demands of modern 
infrastructure while ensuring public safety, long-term sustainability, and minimal 
disruption. The lessons from recent events are being used constructively to 
further strengthen institutional resilience and technical rigour in all ongoing and 
future projects.” 
 
 
F) PROJECT FINANCING AND TOLL UTILISATION 
98. To a specific query regarding the various fees, tariffs and user charges levied by 
the Ministry, NHAI and other organisations for use of roads, sale of vehicles and related 
utilities, and how such funds are utilised, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“User fee is levied for the use of any section of National Highway, Permanent 
Bridge, Bypass or Tunnel forming part of the National Highway, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the provisions of the NH Fee Rules.  
The revenue generated from toll collections is deposited in Consolidated Fund of 
India (CFI) and cannot be utilised directly. The utilization of budget provided 
through the Consolidated Fund of India is through budgetary provisions with the 
normal checks and balances. The funds for implementation of highways and 
expressways projects approved by the competent authority and for maintenance 
activities, besides payment of annuities for projects undertaken on the HAM 
model and other sundry expenses flow from the budget provisions made with the 
approval of Parliament. 
With regard to taxes on vehicles, it is to mention that List II in Schedule 7 of the 
Constitution of India , states at Sr. No. 57 that “taxes on vehicles, whether 
mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including tramcars 
subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III”. Therefore, taxes on vehicles fall 
within the purview of the States. Furthermore, Rule 81 of Central Motor Vehicle 
Rules, 1989 specifies the fee for registration of motor vehicles and other 
Transport related services. However, such proceeds are realized in the accounts 
of concerned States/ UTs.” 
99. On being asked how various projects are financed by NHAI and for details of 
different modes of financing adopted, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
i.“It is submitted that Modes of financing of the project varies based on 
payment modes i.e. Item rates/EPC /BOT (HAM)/BOT (Toll) etc. 

44 
 
 
 
ii. Projects under item rates/EPC are totally funded by NHAI. The revenue 
collection is also done by NHAI. 
iii. In BOT (HAM) Projects, Pre-Construction Activities like Land Acquisition, 
Utility Shifting, DPR expenditure is financed by NHAI and Construction 
Expenditure @ 40% is financed by NHAI and balance 60% of construction 
cost financed by Private Sector. The revenue collection is also done by 
NHAI. 
iv.In BOT (Toll) projects, Pre-Construction Activities like Land Acquisition, 
Utility Shifting, DPR expenditure is financed by NHAI and total Construction 
expenditure financed by the Private Concessionaire. Revenue collection is 
the responsibility of the Concessionaire to recoup their expenditure. 
NHAI finances its projects primarily through a combination of budgetary support 
from Government of India, Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and 
other internal resources. 
Budgetary Support is from Government of India, through Demand for Grant of 
the MoRTH to finance the projects undertaken by National Highways Authority 
of India. 
IEBR is also allotted through Demand for Grant of Government of India which 
allows NHAI to borrow funds from multilateral agencies as well as through Bonds, 
Term loans etc. It is submitted that, since 2022-23, NHAI has not raised any loan 
or issued by Bond as per Govt direction under IEBR. Since then, all projects of 
NHAI are financed through Govt. Budgetary allocation.” 
100. To a specific query regarding any relation between fixation of tolls/user fees and 
project costs, and the principles for toll rate fixation, the Ministry in a written reply stated 
as under: 
“The levy of user fee is based on the base rates fixed under the NH Fee Rules 
across the country and is not related to the cost of construction or its recovery. 
User Fee at NH fee plazas is collected for use of completed section of national 
highway as per the provision of National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates 
and Collection) Rules, 2008.  Fee Rates are fixed as per Base rates of 2008 
specified under Rule 4 and rates are revised annually on 1st April each year by 
increasing the base rate with fixed three percent per year without compounding 
along with forty per cent of the increase in Wholesale Price Index (WPI). 
Various other factors such as Lane configuration i.e., 2 Lane with paved 
shoulders/ 4 or more lane, Length of Section, Length of Bypasses /Structures 
/Tunnels and Type of Vehicle (Car, Bus, Multi Axle Trucks, etc.) are considered 

45 
 
 
 
in determining the rate of user fee at a fee plaza for use of a particular section of 
National Highway.” 
101. To a specific query regarding loss of Rs. 133.36 crore due to lack of revenue 
sharing provisions in concession agreements for two sections of NH-44 in Tamil Nadu, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Lost revenue of Rs. 133.36 Cr. was noted by the Audit, to which appropriate 
reply has already been given by NHAI/ MoRTH. Based on which, Audit has 
remarked that the corrective action taken to avoid revenue loss will be reviewed 
in future audits. 
The following under mentioned stretch were accounted for loss. NHAI took action 
as per bidding criteria and provision of agreement and there was no loss to the 
exchequer. Brief of matter is as under : 
1. Krishnagiri to Thumbipadi NH-44 (Tamil Nadu) (loss of revenue of ₹78.88 
crore (July 2010 to March 2021)): 
 The project consists of three sections: 
o S1: 62 km construction and O&M from Krishnagiri to Thoppur. 
o S2: Improvement and O&M of the 7.4 km Thoppur to Thoppur Ghat. 
o S3: O&M of 16.6 km from Thoppur Ghat to Thumbipadi. 
 The 7.4 km stretch (S2) was combined with S1 (62 km) in a single tender. The 
bidding was based on Negative Grant/VGF for the entire 69.4 km stretch. The L1 
bidder quoted a Negative Grant, considering the 7.4 km improvement and the 62 
km construction. The total amount, Rs. 360.59 Cr, was received by NHAI by 
15.10.2018. 
 The comparison between S3 (no improvement) and S2 (which involved 
improvement) is incorrect, as the financial bid accounted for the costs and 
revenue of both S1 and S2. There was no loss to the exchequer. 
2. Thumbipadi to Namakkal NH-44 (Tamil Nadu) (loss of revenue of ₹54.48 
crore (June 2010 to March 2021)): 
 The project consists of: 
o S1: 41.575 km construction and O&M from Salem Bypass to Namakkal. 
o S2: Improvement and O&M of 7.85 km Salem Bypass. 
o S3: O&M of 19.2 km from Thumbipadi to Salem. 
 Similar to the Krishnagiri-Thumpipadi project, S1 and S2 were awarded together 
under a Negative Grant bidding process. The L1 bidder quoted a Negative Grant 
for the entire 49.425 km stretch, factoring in both upgradation and improvement. 

46 
 
 
 
 The comparison of S3 (no improvement) with S2 (improvement section) is not 
correct. The financial bid, which included improvement costs for S2, was 
accurately accounted for. There was no loss to exchequer /NHAI. 
Furthermore, it is to mention that BOT projects are awarded on the basis of 
Premium/ Grant (VGF) / Revenue Sharing mechanism based on model 
concessionaire agreements. Suitable clauses for revenue sharing by BOT 
Concessionaires have already been included in the respective Concession 
Agreement documents while awarding the contracts for National Highway 
stretches built by NHAI. Applicable Fee rules for User Fee Collection in BOT 
projects for respective Concession Agreements are strictly adhered to by NHAI/ 
NHAI Concessionaire.” 
102. On being asked about the earnings from toll revenue and non-toll sources such 
as amenities, and their percentage share, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“Advertisement and billboards are not permitted on the ROW of National 
Highways and no revenue is earned in this account  
  
User fee revenue generated for last 3 Financial Years are as below-  
Financial Year User fee revenue (in crore Rupees) 
2021-22 33,929 
2022-23 48,032 
2023-24 55,882 
 
The total Revenue generated from the Wayside Amenities (WSA) in last three 
financial years are as under:  
Financial Year Revenue generated from the Wayside 
Amenities (in crore Rupees) 
2021-22 5.43 
2022-23 7.00 
2023-24 14.57 
 
NHLML is governing the revenue collection of WSA since September 2021.  
 
Therefore percentage share of toll revenue and non-toll revenue is- 
  
FY Percentage share of toll 
revenue 
Percentage share of non-toll 
revenue 

47 
 
 
 
21-22 99.984% 0.016 % 
22-23 99.9854% 0.015 % 
23-24 99.974% 0.026 % 
103. When asked how much funds are received annually by the Ministry from CRF, 
toll revenue and budgetary support, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Details of funds allocated to MoRTH under budgetary outlay, including from 
various sources of funding like CRIF, GBS, NIF, TOT & Toll Remittances, along 
with corresponding expenditure during the last five years are as under”:- 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
S. 
N. Fund Source 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Alloc. Exp. Alloc. Exp. Alloc. Exp. Alloc. Exp. Alloc. Exp. 
1 CRIF Cess 54,539 52,809 69,622 69,139 89,147 88,928 175,706 173,824 22,808 22,456 
2 Gross Budgetary 
Support 1,797 1,452 7,433 7,361 7,902 7,847 2,615 2,578 207,978 207,869 
3 National 
Investment Fund 6,070 5,986 3,000 2,992 8,430 8,386 10,700 10,449 10,565 10,562 
4 Toll Remittances 10,610 10,610 11,518 11,518 12,670 12,670 18,006 18,006 25,000 25,000 
5 TOT 10,000 5,000 10,250 7,262 13,000 5,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 
  83,016 75,857 101,823 98,271 131,149 122,830 217,027 214,857 276,351 275,887 
 
104. When the Committee sought to know how highway monetisation is being carried 
out and funds raised in the last five years, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“NHAl monetizes Assets through three modes - Toll Operate & Transfer (ToT), 
InvIT, and Securitization (Project based Financing through SPV). Under ToT and 
InvIT, operational assets with stable cashflow are offered to Investors, freeing 
them from pre-construction and construction risks.  
Status of Resources raised by NHAI from TOT and InvIT is- 
  
Financial Year TOT (Amount Rs. 
In Crores) 
InvIT (Amount Rs. 
In Crores) 
Project Based 
Financing(Amount 
Rs. In Crores) 
2018-19 9,682   
2019-20 0   

48 
 
 
 
2020-21 5,011  9,731 
2021-22 1,011 7,350 14,006 
2022-23 10,662 2,850 9,824 
2023-24 15,968 15,700 8,646 
Total ---> 42,334 25,900 42,207 
 
105. When asked about the average cost of constructing one km of National Highway 
under different modes or design specifications, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“The civil construction cost of highway development is independent of the mode 
on which the project is executed. The cost of construction of the defined 
highway depends on various factors such as the terrain type, site requirement, 
height of embankment, number of structures planned in the project, SOR of the 
State, lead considered for aggregates, cement, bitumen etc. 
 
As various factors involved to work out the cost of construction of NH, Ministry 
has issued circulars vide letter no. RW/NH/24036/55/2021- BP&SP dated 19th 
Jan 2022 (Annexure IX) and introduced an interactive cost-analysis Excel tool, 
where project inputs like terrain, embankment height, structural type, aggregate 
lead, traffic loading, and pavement design are used to calculate component-wise 
normative costs.” 
106. On being asked for year-wise toll collections under EPC, BOT, TOT, InvIT, and 
HAM projects since FY 2020–21, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
The revenue generated from toll collections from all kinds of toll 
plazas including BOT projects where toll receipts are retained by 
the Concessionaire during last five year is –  
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
User fee collection (in Crore 
Rupees) 
1. 2020-21 27,926.67 
2. 2021-22 33,928.66 
3. 2022-23 48,032.40 

49 
 
 
 
4. 2023-24 55,882.12 
5. 2024-25 61,408.15 
  
 
107. When asked how toll revenue from InvITs is audited, publicly accounted for, and 
safeguarded against leakages, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Governance Framework. 
As per the prevailing SEBI InVIT Regulations, Concession Agreements are 
signed between the SPV (fully owned entity/subsidiary of the Infrastructure 
Investment Trust, herein after referred as Trust) and NHAI. 
The conduct of business by such SPV is as per the terms of Concession 
Agreement and statutory requirement applicable for Private Limited Company. 
As regard the revenue, it may be noted that the revenue is monitored and 
reported to the Authority i.e., NHAI on a monthly as well as annual basis, as per 
the terms of Concession Agreement. 
The accounts of the SPVs are audited on periodic basis including annual audit 
by statutory auditor. It is pertinent to state that as per the terms of Concession 
Agreement, the SPV is obligated to engage only those agencies as statutory 
auditor, who are empanelled and approved by NHAI. 
Further, the accounts of SPVs under the Trust are consolidated and post audit 
of the same by the statutory auditor of the Trust, the financial statements of the 
Trust including that of respective SPVs under the Trust are published on the 
website of the Trust and print media (leading English daily) and reported to 
stock exchanges. 
Investors Payout Framework 
As per the SEBI InVIT Regulations, Investors invest their monies by way of 
buying units of the Trust either by subscribing to the primary issue or buying the 

50 
 
 
 
same in secondary market of stock exchanges (BSE/NSE) from existing 
unitholders. 
The investors get returns on their investments by way of quarterly and annual 
distributions approved by the Board of Investment Managers to the Trust, in 
proportion to their unitholding, at the time of declaration of distribution. 
Unclaimed distribution if any, is updated on a regular basis on the website of 
NHIT (www.nhit.co.in), under Investor Relations tab. 
Investor Protection 
Investors’ interests are protected as per SEBI InVIT Regulations. Compliance to 
the said regulations is checked and verified at multiple levels, such as, Internal 
Compliance Team, Internal Financial Control Framework of the Company, 
Internal Audit Framework of the Company, Third Party Secretarial Audit and 
periodic inspection of Regulator – SEBI. 
It is also pertinent to state that since inception no instance of non-compliance has 
been reported at any of the above-mentioned levels, which demonstrate the 
robust compliance framework which exists in NHIT.” 
108. As regards rationale for continued reliance on asset monetisation and private 
financing for NH projects despite long-term fiscal liabilities, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
i.Unlocking of Value: Economic value of completed road assets is unlocked, 
leading to generation of funds that can be invested in new projects 
ii.Attracting Alternate Sources of Capital: Alternate source of attracting capital, 
in addition to traditional sources of funds such as budgetary allocation and toll 
revenues ensures adequate and efficient funding for the development of NH 
network aiming at reduction of logistics cost. 
Efficiency Improvements: Through monetization, there is greater participation 
in Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of private players, who ensure higher 
standards of project management and use of innovative technologies for upkeep 
of the road asset. This leads to efficiency gains in management of road 
infrastructure. Asset monetization has thus become an important means to 
finance the infrastructure commitments made to the nation.” 
109. To a specific query regarding whether NHAI provides financial support in the 
form of advances to concessionaires and for details thereof, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 

51 
 
 
 
“It is submitted that as per Modal Concession Agreement for BOT (Toll) and 
BOT (HAM) projects, NHAI provides financial support in the form of advance to 
concessionaire under the following provisions:- 
i. Mobilization Advance under Clause 23.8 of CA in BOT (HAM) Projects:  On 
the request of the Concessionaire, advance payment in a sum not exceeding 
10% (ten per cent) of the Bid Project Cost (the "Mobilization Advance") is 
granted by NHAI in two equal instalments. The advances are released after 
submission of the requisite Bank Guarantee by the Concessionaire. The rate 
of interest on the Mobilization Advance is equal to the Bank Rate, 
compounded annually. The Mobilization Advance is recovered by the 
Authority in 4 (four) equal instalments from each of the payments to be made 
by the Authority to the Concessionaire in accordance with the provisions of 
Clause 23.4 and the interest thereon shall be recovered as the 5th(fifth) and 
final instalment upon expiry of 120 (one hundred and twenty) days 
commencing from the date of recovery of the 4th (fourth) instalment. 
Advance payment for Change of Scope Clause 16.3 of CA for BOT (Toll) and 
BOT (HAM) Projects:  For execution of work which was not covered in the Scope 
of work of the Concessionaire, Change of Scope Order is issued and NHAI make 
an advance payment to the Concessionaire in a sum equal to 20% per cent of 
the cost of Change of Scope as assessed by the Independent Engineer. The 
advance payment is recovered from the claims of the Concessionaire on 
execution of such work on change of scope.” 
110. As regards asset monetisation undertaken by the Ministry/NHAI during the last 
five years with year-wise data, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Details are enclosed in Annexure X.” 
111. On being asked about efforts by MoRTH/NHAI to reduce construction cost and 
time for National Highways, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and the National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) have undertaken several focused initiatives 
to reduce the cost of construction and time required for completion of National 
Highways across the country. A major thrust has been on the adoption of 
modern construction technologies, including the use of precast concrete 
elements, mechanized construction, soil stabilization techniques, and recycled 
pavement materials, which have significantly expedited on-site execution and 
reduced overall costs.  

52 
 
 
 
Additionally, the use of digital tools and platforms such as Project Management 
Information Systems (PMIS), drone surveys, LiDAR, and Network Survey 
Vehicles (NSV) have enhanced real-time monitoring, improved project tracking, 
and enabled faster decision-making. 
To address procedural delays, MoRTH and NHAI have streamlined land 
acquisition processes through the BhoomiRashi portal, which is integrated with 
PFMS for efficient and transparent disbursal of compensation. Powers have 
also been delegated to field offices for quicker clearances and approvals. 
MoRTH has also pushed for parallel processing of activities such as utility 
shifting and environmental clearances to compress pre-construction timelines. 
State-level coordination mechanisms and single-window systems for approvals 
have improved responsiveness and accountability. These combined efforts 
have led to noticeable improvements in the pace and efficiency of highway 
development, enabling faster delivery of infrastructure while ensuring cost-
effectiveness and high-quality standards.” 
 
G) ENVIRONMENTAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL CONCERNS 
112. To a specific query regarding the use of AI-driven traffic management and smart 
tolling systems, and increase in toll revenue over three years, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under:- 
“NHAI has issued Policy Circular No. 11.53 on 10.10.23 to implement the 
Advanced Traffic Management System (ATMS) on National Highways and 
Expressways. The Policy includes management of the entire Highway stretch 
and AI based Video Incident Detection and Enforcement System which will also 
facilitate generation of E-challans by Police and other Enforcement Agencies. 
The Policy document aims to reduce accidents identify traffic violations and 
incident response time. NHAI envisages to implement the ATMS solution in 
Highways and Expressways in phased manner. In order to implement the said 
ATMS Policy. 
 
Ministry is envisaging to adopt advance Tolling Technologies like barrier free 
tolling on Highways to test the efficacy in Indian ecosystem. Request for 
Proposal (RFP) to implement barrier-free tolling system on the fee plazas of 
“Gharonda, Choryasi, Nemili, UER-II and Dwarka Expressway” has been 
invited/floated, with the possibility of implementing it on other fee plazas in a 

53 
 
 
 
phased manner depending upon the outcomes and efficacy of the 
implementation on these projects.  
  
The year-on-year ETC Collection is as under: 
 
Financial Year ETC Collection (in Rs. Cr.) 
FY 21-22 33,893 
FY 22-23 46,821 
FY 23-24 54,740 
113. To a specific query regarding the Multi-Lane Free Flow (MLFF) system, its pilot 
projects and success, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“… It is expected that the cost of running physical user fee plaza could be 
lowered by using barrier-free user fee collection system.” 
 
114. During the course of evidence before the Committee, the representative of the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
 
‘As Secretary Sir has said, there was an Apex Committee to look into this whole 
affair of how we can make convenient tolling experience for the citizens. The 
Apex Committee consists of IIT Professors, industry experts, and IT experts. 
They suggested that a Multi-Lane Free Flow mechanism is a better mechanism 
in view of the security aspects also. Now, we are working for the Multi-Lane Free 
Flow concept.  
 Now, three bids have been out -- One at the Gharaunda Toll Plaza at Panipat-
Jalandhar section; one at the Choryasi Fee Toll Plaza at Surat Bharuch section; 
and one at the Dwarka Expressway also. And there are some more bids which 
are also out. But these two bids have been received -- Gharaunda and Choryasi. 
In these bids, only banks were authorised to participate. Our toll plazas will now 
be managed by banks with the help of a technology provider. We will deal with 
the banks and banks are going to be the player as far as the toll collection is 
concerned. So, in that case, our toll plazas will be free from human interferences 
and technology will capture the collections.  
 So, based on the experience of these three or four bids, we will further issue 
some more bids and then, we will go for a large-scale implementation of Multi-
Lane Free Flow.’ 
 

54 
 
 
 
115. When asked about protocols ensuring national highways near sensitive borders 
are resilient, dual-use, and militarily deployable, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“All roads constructed adhere to standards, specifications and guidelines 
prescribed by this Ministry and relevant IRC codal provisions. These roads are 
structurally capable and may be utilized for ground movement by the Military, if 
required.” 
 
116. To a specific query regarding how many expressways have been designed with 
airstrip-grade infrastructure for defence use, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“Expressways are designed as per IRC SP-99. NHAI has been mandated to 
provide Emergency Landing Facility (ELF) in consultation with IAF after 
conducting a joint site visit. 07 no. of ELF have been constructed on National 
Highways according to the standard layout and specifications of IAF. However, 
none is currently on the Expressway.” 
 
117. On the issue of green highways, the representative of the Ministry, during the 
evidence, informed as under:- 
‘The civil contracting agencies are not expert as far as the plantation is 
concerned. So, we are also contemplating an idea that it should be done by a 
separate agency who has an expertise over the plantation rather than the civil 
contractor. So, these are some of the initiatives that we have taken. This year, we 
target to do 50 lakh plantations.’ 
118. On being enquired about the survival rate of 322.68 lakh saplings planted under 
Green Highways initiative in 2024 and independent verification mechanisms, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Since the promulgation of the Green Highways (Plantation, Transplantation, 
and Beautification & Maintenance) Policy, 2015, NHAI has planted 469.75 lakh 
saplings (Avenue & Median) along National Highways during the period 2015-
16 to 2024-25. 
State-wise survival rates of saplings planted under the Green Highways Policy, 
as per the reports received from regional offices of NHAI during 2024, are 
provided in Annexure XI. 

55 
 
 
 
Monitoring for assessing sapling survival rates is conducted through field offices. 
However, broad verification is conducted through drone-based high-resolution 
imagery process.” 
119. When the Committee sought to know whether drone/satellite monitoring has 
been made mandatory for plantation contracts and actions on contractor failures, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Yes. As per NHAI Policy Circular No. 18.98/2024 dated 01st October 2024, 
drone-based high-resolution imagery is now mandatory for all projects from the 
date of commencement till completion, and also during O&M stages. This 
includes plantation monitoring. The circular is attached as Annexure XII. 
In case of default by the Contractor/Concessionaire with respect to plantation or 
maintenance, action is taken as per the provisions of the respective Concession 
Agreement, Contract Agreement, or Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
the implementing agency.” 
 
120. As regards systematic use of geotextiles in erosion- or flood-prone NH segments 
as mandated, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“NHAI, in adherence to the guidelines issued by MoRTH in 2018 and 2020, 
has been incorporating the use of geotextiles in erosion-prone and flood-
prone segments of National Highways as part of its commitment to sustainable 
and 
resilient infrastructure. These materials are systematically integrated during 
the planning, design, and construction stages of new projects, and are also 
deployed in 
existing stretches wherever site conditions necessitate 
geotechnical interventions. The use of geotextiles for slope stabilization, 
drainage, filtration, and reinforcement is being progressively implemented 
through the respective 
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to ensure long-term durability 
and performance of highway assets.” 
121. On being asked whether an AI-enabled monitoring system for traffic and toll fraud 
detection is being piloted, and reasons if not, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“NHAI is considering the installation of audit cameras at high value toll plazas to 
independently monitor the accurate count and classification of passing vehicles 
using Artificial Intelligence (AI).” 

56 
 
 
 
 
H)   GENERAL ISSUES 
122. When the Committee enquired how many concessionaires have been declared 
ineligible for new highway projects and what monitoring system is in place for such 
agreements, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“As on date there are 13 nos Firms (Concessionaires) have been debarred from 
NH projects. Further, in order to ensure construction of National Highway as per 
standards and specifications laid down in the concession agreements and to 
avoid project delays, Ministry vide letter dated 06.10.2021 has issued detailed 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to debar/penalize/declare the 
Concessionaire as Non- Performer in National Highways and other centrally 
sponsored road projects.  
Debarment of Contractor/ Concessionaire is governed by the terms outlined in 
the respective agreements, considering the type and nature of the default.  
Furthermore, NHAI has also implemented a comprehensive rating system to 
assess performance of Concessionaires/Contractors. NHAI monitors and 
ensures due diligence of the performance of the Agreement through digital 
monitoring on the data lake portal and further assessments. 
The monitoring of the projects is being supervised through consultant (Authority 
Engineers/ Independent Engineers) under their contractual provisions. Necessary 
quality tests, as per IRC specifications and at defined frequencies, are carried out 
during the construction phase to ensure material and workmanship quality. 
Regular, random, independent quality checks are also done by the team deputed 
by higher authorities. In addition, frequent review meetings are held with all 
relevant stakeholders to monitor progress and resolve critical project issues. 
Penal action is also taken in case of non-fulfilment of conditions stipulated in 
concession/ Contract agreement.” 
123. When asked whether the Ministry has any proposal to revise the base rate for toll 
fee determination fixed in 2008, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Presently, Ministry is considering to initiate a comprehensive study of factors, 
that impinge upon user fee determination such as vehicle operating costs, 
vehicle damage factor & willingness to pay.” 
124. When the Committee enquired about the share of Indian versus foreign 
companies in toll plaza construction, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 

57 
 
 
 
“As per the latest exercise done in FY 2023-24, percentage share of foreign 
companies is around 3.0 % in the awarded Contracts whereas share of Indian 
Companies is around 97.0 %.” 
125. When the Committee sought details of upcoming bids for new highway projects 
over the next three years, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Award of projects under Ministry including its agencies in FY 24-25 was 7534 
km.Target for award in subsequent FY 2025-26 and 2026-27 is yet to be 
finalised.” 
126. When the Committee enquired about the process of tax collection under EPC, 
BOT, HAM, and monetization models, and sought a comparative analysis, the Ministry 
in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Under EPC and HAM projects, user fee is collected by Government through 
NHAI directly through User Fee collection Agency through auction/open bidding. 
  
In BOT projects, construction cost is borne by Concessionaire as per respective 
Concession Agreement and toll is collected by Concessionaire for the 
Concession period. 
  
Toll tax/user fee rate is determined as per applicable NH fee rule and revised 
annually. 
  
In monetization model, after auctioning of completed projects/NH section by 
NHAI, toll is collected by InVIT/TOT Concessionaire as per respective 
Concession Agreement for the entire concession period. 
  
Toll tax/user fee rate is determined as per applicable NH Fee Rules and revised 
annually.” 
 
127. As regards the number of projects completed under Build-Operate-Transfer 
(BOT) and Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) categories so far, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“Projects completed under BOT and HAM category is enclosed in Annexure 
XIII.” 
128. When asked the reasons for the shift from BOT to HAM model and the current 
preferred model for highway projects, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 

58 
 
 
 
“The BOT (Toll) mode experienced limited participation from concessionaires 
due to higher risk on concessionaires including traffic risk, toll collection risks 
and construction risks, difficulty in raising capital for projects with revenue risk 
and delays in project execution due to availability of encumbrance-free land and 
permissions. Due to this, HAM gained popularity as a mode of construction and 
saw massive participation from contractors. HAM offers several benefits to the 
authority: 
•        Reduced Immediate Burden on Budgetary Resources: Unlike EPC 
mode, where authority bears the entire investment, HAM enables private 
investment. This allows award and construction of higher number of NH 
projects with limited pool of budgetary resources. 
•        Risk Sharing: HAM divides the risk between private developers and the 
government. By contributing to 40% of the project cost during construction, the 
government shares the financial burden with private players, while traffic/ 
revenue risks are with authority. 
Additionally, MoRT&H has introduced several reforms in the BOT(T) MCA to 
make the mode more viable and attractive to concessionaires like adding 
provision to adjust the concession period in case the traffic variation is beyond 
±5%; compensating concessionaire for gap in projected and realized revenue in 
the event of a competing road coming on the BOT(T) stretch, introducing 
“Equivalent Vehicle Unit” factor for accurate measurement of tollable traffic on 
stretch etc. 
MoRT&H has already published the revised MCA for 4-lane to 6-lane 
upgradation projects and is in the final stages of completing the 2-lane to 4-lane 
upgradation MCA. 
In addition to changes in MCA, MoRT&H is taking efforts to improve viability of 
the project by initiatives such as bundling of existing National Highways having 
toll history with greenfield alignments connecting the same Origin and 
Destination such as in Agra-Gwalior corridor and permitting the sale of 
concession rights with complete exit of concessionaire post lock-in period of 1 
year. 
To engage with industry stakeholders, MoRTH has conducted multiple events 
such as conference on BOT Projects (Jan 2024) focused on promoting PPPs 

59 
 
 
 
and easing business hurdles and International Outreach Program in the Middle 
East aimed to attract both national and global private sector partners. 
Mode of implementation for projects is selected based on the financial viability of 
the project.” 
 
129. On being enquired whether the road tax collected by State Governments is 
divided between Central and State Governments and for details thereof, the Ministry in 
a written reply stated as under: 
“According to the Constitution, levy of Road Tax is State subject.  List II in 
Schedule 7 of the Constitution of India , states at Sr. No. 57 that “taxes on 
vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, 
including tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III. 
Therefore, taxes on vehicles fall within the purview of the States and are levied, 
colelcted and retained by the States.” 
130. When the Committee sought data on the number of vehicles registered in the 
country during the last five years, category-wise, and on vehicles going out of use due 
to vehicle scrapping policy, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“List having details of category wise vehicle registrations year-wise from 2020 to 
2025 is at Annexure XIV. 
As on 15.06.2025 the total No. of vehicles scrapped at RVSFs is 2,45,529 
(127,048 Govt. Vehicles  and 118,481 Pvt. Vehicles)” 
131. On being asked whether any revenue is generated from Right of Way (RoW) by 
NHAI and details thereof or if any proposal is under consideration, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
“The licence fee for laying utilities and granting access to National Highways is 
being collected in accordance with the applicable norms and guidelines set by 
MoRT&H under the provisions of the Control of National Highways (Land and 
Traffic) Act, 2002.” 
 
132. When the Committee enquired for a detailed note on provisions in concession 
agreements to take action against concessionaires and details of cases where penal 
provisions have been invoked in the last five years, the Ministry in a written reply stated 
as under: 

60 
 
 
 
“Ministry of Road Transport and Highways vide circular No.RW/NH-
33044/76/2021-S&R(P&B) dated 06.10.2021 has issued SOP to 
debar/penalize/declare as Non-Performer the Contractor/Concessionaire in 
National Highways and other centrally sponsored road projects. The circular 
contains the actions to be taken against the Contractor/ Concessionaire for the 
different type of deficiencies. NHAI has implemented the same vide Policy 
Circular no. 16.11/2021 dated 16.11.2021. The circular also contains provision 
for requisite amendments to be made in the Model RFP and MCA documents 
for EPC, HAM and BOT(Toll) projects. 
Regarding furnishing the details of the cases where NHAI has invoked penal 
provisions against concessionaires or contractors during the last five years, the 
same is being complied and will be sent separately.” 
133. As regards penal measures enforced under concession agreements and 
changes initiated to prevent issues related to incomplete or overlooked geotechnical 
investigations, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“i) Clause 4(i) of Annex-1 of Schedule-N of Standard EPC Agreement issued by 
MoRTH on 05.03.2019, stipulates as follows: 
‘During the Construction Period, the Authority’s Engineer shall review and 
approve the Drawings furnished by the Contractor along with supporting data, 
including the geo-technical and hydrological investigations, characteristics of 
materials from borrow areas and quarry sites, topographical surveys, and the 
recommendations of the Safety Consultant in accordance with the provisions of 
Clause 10.1 (vi). The Authority’s Engineer shall complete such review and 
approval and send its observations to the Authority and the Contractor within 15 
(fifteen) days of receipt of such Drawings; provided, however that in case of a 
Major Bridge or Structure, the aforesaid period of 15 (fifteen) days may be 
extended upto 30 (thirty) days. In particular, such comments shall specify the 
conformity or otherwise of such Drawings with the Scope of the Project and 
Specifications and Standards.’ 
ii) Similarly, in case of HAM and BOT Projects, Para 4(i) of Schedule-N and 
Schedule Q of MCA of HAM and BOT Projects respectively stipulate as follows: 
‘During the Development Period, the Independent Engineer shall undertake a 
detailed review of the Drawings to be furnished by the Concessionaire along 
with supporting data, including the geo-technical and hydrological 

61 
 
 
 
investigations, characteristics of materials from borrow areas and quarry sites, 
topographical surveys and traffic surveys. The Independent Engineer shall 
complete such review and send its comments/observations to the Authority and 
the Concessionaire within 15 (fifteen) days of receipt of such Drawings. In 
particular, such comments shall specify the conformity or otherwise of such 
Drawings with the Scope of the Project and Specifications and Standards.’ 
iii)  In case of any lapses/failure identified in a project, including those related to 
failure to detect design/ quality deficiency in Key/ Non-key Components, failure 
to detect deficiency/ not reviewing drawings etc., NHAI vide Policy Circular 
dated 18.01.2022 issued SOP to debar/penalize/declare as Non-Performers the 
Authority's Engineer/Independent Engineer/Construction Supervision 
Consultant/Project Management Consultant in National Highways and other 
centrally sponsored road projects. 
iv) Further, NHAI vide Policy Circular dated 16.11.2021 issued SOP to 
debar/penalize/declare as Non-Performers the Contractor/Concessionaire in 
case of any failure or lapses identified in a project. The SOP also provides for 
rectification of defects or failures at the risk and cost of the 
Contractor/Concessionaire. 
v) The provisions of above policy circulars are aimed at improving accountability 
and ensuring any lapses in the project are addressed and prevented in future 
projects. The provisions of the above policy circulars dated 18.01.2022 and 
16.11.2021 have also been incorporated into the Model RFP for AE/IE and 
Standard RFP of EPC/ HAM/ BOT(Toll) Projects. A Copy of the Policy Circular 
dated 16.11.2021 is attached in Annexure XV.” 
 
  

62 
 
 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The following are the interim recommendations of the Committee touching upon 
critical issues concerning the planning, execution, safety, tolling, and user 
services associated with National Highway projects. The Committee have 
examined various matters ranging from design accountability, sub-contracting, 
pavement failures, and emergency response mechanisms to toll reforms, service 
quality, and stakeholder consultations etc. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Performance Assessment of NHAI 
1. The Committee note that since its inception, the National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) has played a pivotal role in transforming the road 
infrastructure landscape of the country. With the substantial completion of 
the Golden Quadrilateral, major phases of the National Highways 
Development Project (NHDP), and subsequent flagship programmes such 
as Bharatmala, the national highway network has expanded significantly—
from approximately 50,000 kilometres in the early 2000s to over 1.45 lakh 
kilometres at present. As a result, highway connectivity, travel times, and 
access to remote regions have improved considerably, and users are 
increasingly experiencing the benefits of a modern road network. 
However, the Committee also observe that this rapid expansion has 
brought new challenges and systemic gaps to the fore. Persistent issues 
such as inconsistent design quality, inadequate safety features, irrational 
toll charges, delays in land acquisition, slackconcession agreements, and 
weak enforcement of contractual obligations are some of them. The 
institutional response to such challenges has often been fragmented and 
reactive, indicating the lack of a structural response mechanism. 
 
In light of the above, the Committee are of the considered opinion that 
NHAI must undergo assessment to determine whether the planning and 
execution of highway projects have achieved the intended outcomes in 

63 
 
 
 
terms of cost, time, and quality. This assessment should also examine 
whether institutional mechanisms are in place to ensure transparency, 
value for public money, and user satisfaction. 
The Committee are of the view that NHAI must now transition from being 
primarily a tender-awarding construction agency to a mature infrastructure 
authority with a focus on asset creation and management, user-centric 
service delivery, and long-term sustainability. The Committee desire that 
NHAI reorient itself accordingly and remain alive and aware of the 
expectations of all stakeholders. To facilitate this shift, the Committee 
recommend that NHAI undertake a comprehensive review of its 
organisational structure and internal functioning through a credible third-
party assessment, aimed at evaluating its performance, governance 
systems, vertical alignment, and operational efficiency. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Performance Audit of National Highway Projects 
2. The Committee note that the road network in India has undergone 
rapid expansion, with NHAI evolving into a multi-layered institution 
comprising several verticals responsible for planning, implementation, 
asset monetisation, tolling, maintenance, and digital integration of national 
highways. This transformation has been largely driven by National 
Highways Projects undertaken by NHAI, which aimed to expand the 
country’s highway infrastructure. While this institutional growth reflects 
the importance, it has also given rise to significant challenges. 
The Committee further note that grievances have been consistently 
received from a wide range of stakeholders—including road users, 
concessionaires, and state governments—highlighting issues such as 
project delays, suboptimal service delivery, inadequate tolling rationale, 
poor grievance redressal, and lack of transparency in decision-making. 
These recurring concerns, point to systemic and institutional shortcomings 
warrant a deeper, independent examination of the structural and 
operational dimensions of NHAI's functioning, particularly in the context of 
the National Highway Projects. 

64 
 
 
 
The Committee also note that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
have conducted audit on different aspects of NHAI during the last few years 
such as Report No. 12 of 2024 (Union Government – Commercial) and 
Report No. 7 of 2023 (Compliance Audit on Toll Operations in Southern 
India), which underscore concerns in the functioning of the National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI). 
Given the complexity and scale of NHAI’s operations, the Committee are of 
the view that an external, independent audit is necessary to complement 
internal assessments. Such an audit should evaluate the effectiveness of 
NHAI’s organisational structure, the functioning of its different verticals, 
the adequacy of internal controls, and the degree of compliance with 
statutory and regulatory frameworks. 
The Committee are of the opinion that such an audit is required to 
strengthen institutional integrity, and ensure that NHAI remains aligned 
with its core mandate of delivering efficient, safe, and accountable highway 
infrastructure across the country. Considering these issues, the Committee 
recommend that the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India take 
up a comprehensive performance audit of the National Highway Projects 
being undertaken by NHAI. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
DPR preparation  
3. The Committee note that several National Highway projects have 
suffered delays, redesigns, and avoidable public dissatisfaction due to 
insufficient consultation during the DPR stage. The Committee find that 
despite the crucial role DPRs play in finalising alignment, land acquisition, 
service road layout, and access points, there is no formal consultation with 
local stakeholders, Members of Parliament, MLAs/MLCs, and local 
bodies.In several cases, essential structures like underpasses and culverts 
were added only after repeated demands by local stakeholders, indicating 
systemic oversight in the planning process. 
The Committee note that several highway stretches have failed as some of 
them were constructed using high earthen embankments over unstable 
soils, without reinforced structures or geo-grids, and that land acquisition 

65 
 
 
 
constraints were not adequately reconciled with design feasibility, leading 
to unsafe or compromised alignments. The Committee find that recurring 
deficiencies in national highway construction highlight the failure to 
integrate local technical expertise and site-specific inputs during the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and design stages. Diverse terrain and 
environmental sensitivities across India call for routine consultations with  
Geological Survey of India (GSI) or the Central Road Research Institute 
(CRRI), State-level Public Works Departments, revenue authorities, or 
district-level engineering officials. Customised designs have to be applied 
in fragile zones such as waterlogged areas, paddy fields etc. with adequate 
consideration of soil stability, drainage needs, and hydrological conditions. 
 The Committee  observe that the absence of structured, more inclusive, 
and documented consultations often results in designs that fail to address 
local realities, particularly in ecologically sensitive or densely inhabited 
regions. The Committee also find that expertise from engineers of local 
bodies, revenue, public works departments and State Highways is not 
consistently incorporated at the DPR preparation stage,where terrain 
complexities demand contextual solutions. 
 The Committee desire that there should be a mechanism that  includes (i) 
formal engagement with respective Members of Parliament, MLAs/MLCs, 
Urban Local Bodies, and Town and Country Planning bodies, Panchayati 
Raj Institutions and (ii) technical consultations with State-level Public 
Works, Revenue, Irrigation, and Disaster Management departments. 
Relevant suggestions must be documented, evaluated, and incorporated 
into DPRs, with written justification provided for any exclusion. 
The Committee therefore recommend that NHAI should evolve an effective 
mechanism to institutionalise a mandatory, structured, and time-bound 
consultation framework, at the state level, during DPR preparation, to be 
overseen by an Empowered Committee comprising representatives from 
MPs/MLAs Urban Local Bodies, concerned State Authorities like  PWDs etc. 
to ensure both technical feasibility and local responsiveness in project 
design. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Design Oversight in Highway Construction 
 
4. The Committee note that National Highway projects in Kerala have 
encountered repeated instances of slope failure, pavement cracking, poor 

66 
 
 
 
drainage, and waterlogging. They also note the claims that NHAI have 
executed several highway widening and upgradation projects across 
Kerala, including in Kasaragod, Kannur, Palakkad, Thrissur, Ernakulam, 
and Thiruvananthapuram—districts that receive heavy rainfall and share 
similar geotechnical characteristics. In many of these locations, 
construction of reinforced earth (RE) walls has been undertaken. However, 
as per the Ministry, the incident of slope failure at Kooriyad occurred due 
to lapses by the Concessionaire and Independent Engineer. For instance, 
the Committee find that at Kooriyad in Malappuram district, the slope 
failure on a 10 m high embankment constructed over saturated clay silt led 
to severe damage and risk to public safety. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has admitted that “design parameters were wrongly assumed” and 
“actual site conditions at the location were wrongly assessed.” 
The Committee further observe that action was taken against the 
Independent Engineer and consultants for negligence, and that a revised 
design involving reinforced earth walls was approved only after the failure. 
A review Committee had suggested corrective course of action which is 
being implemented. 
The Committee also note that the initial DPR did not reflect actual ground 
conditions, and that pavement designs using PQC layers over poor 
subgrade soils without sufficient drainage led to premature failures. The 
Committee note the persistent and systemic lapses in project planning, 
design validation, and site assessment that have led to engineering 
failures, safety hazards, and loss of public resources in hilly and 
geologically sensitive States and elsewhere. 
In this regard, the Committee desire that accountability must be enforced 
not merely post-failure but through independent pre-construction audits, 
and penal provisions should be invoked against errant consultants, 
engineers, and officials who negligently approve flawed designs. The 
Committee desire that accountability should also be fixed on the officers of 
NHAI responsible for the approval and oversight of such projects. The 
Committee recommend that in cases of gross negligence or repeated 
failure, the defaulting concessionaire be blacklisted from undertaking 
future projects under NHAI or the Ministry. 
 

67 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Sub-contracting in Highway Projects 
5. The Committee note that in the Ministry’s own submissions, much of 
the road infrastructure is executed by sub-contractors, who might not be 
accountable under the primary contract framework. The Committee note 
that this unchecked layering of contractors and sub-contractors, 
particularly in EPC, BOT, and HAM projects, has led to diffusion of 
accountability, where the Authority has limited leverage to enforce quality 
standards or timely delivery. 
The Committee observe that while sub-contracting is not explicitly defined 
or regulated in the statutory or contractual framework governing NHAI 
projects, it is indirectly permitted through a broad enabling clause under 
Section 16(2)(h) of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988, as 
amended. This provision empowers the Authority to “engage, or entrust 
any of its functions to, any person on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed”. However, this discretion appears to have resulted in multi-tier 
sub-contracting, with severe consequences for project quality and 
timelines.The Committee observe that in many highway projects along NH-
66 in Kerala, there is a big difference between the amount approved by the 
government (sanctioned cost) and the actual cost at which the project was 
awarded. For example, the project from Kadambattukonam to Kazhakuttom 
was approved at ₹3684.98 crore, but the contract was awarded for just ₹795 
crore—only about 22% of the approved amount. On average, for all 20 
packages of the NH-66 project, the awarded cost is only around 54% of 
what was sanctioned. The Committee are concerned about such a large 
difference, as it raises questions about whether these projects are being 
carried out as originally specified in the DPR and whether subcontracting 
at lower costs is affecting the quality and scale of the work. 
The Committee are also concerned that this cost difference may be closely 
related to sub-contracting practices adopted by main concessionaire. 
Instead, these main concessionaires pass on the work to sub-contractors 
at a lower cost thereby making a clear profit without executing any work or 
any responsibility. This can lead to delays, lower quality, and weak 
accountability, especially if these sub-contractors are not properly 
monitored. 

68 
 
 
 
Due to these reasons, the Committee are inclined to believe that sub-
leasing of work beyond one level (i.e. contractor to one sub-contractor) 
should be discouraged. They feel that, if further sub-contracting is 
absolutely necessary, it should only be allowed with special approval from 
NHAI. NHAI must ensure that all sub-contractors are registered, get prior 
approval, and be clearly documented.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry do a detailed review of all NH-
66 projects, especially where the gap between the sanctioned and awarded 
cost is unusually large. The Committee feel that such large gaps are one of 
the first red flags and pointers to check if this cost gap is leading to poor 
quality due to on sub-contractors. In every case, the main contractor must 
remain fully responsible for completing the work, even if they engage sub-
contractors.The Committee therefore desirethat the Ministry take strong 
steps to stop contractors from quoting abysmally low prices just to win 
tenders.  
The Committee, in this regard, also recommend that standard contract 
formats, such as Model Concession Agreements, be revised to make sure 
that sub-contractors can also be held legally responsible—along with the 
main contractor, for any delays, safety problems, or quality failures. The 
Committee desire that if any work is carried out by an unauthorised sub-
contractor and if NHAI finds any quality issues, then both the main 
contractor and that sub-contractor should be blacklisted.The Committee 
also recommend that NHAI should consider putting a limit on how much of 
the work or contract value can be sub-contracted and standard contract 
formats should include clear rules that make all contractors, main and sub, 
jointly and severally responsible for the quality, safety, and timely 
completion of the work.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
Institutional Strengthening of Design Reviewby NHAI 
6. The Committee note that a significant proportion of National 
Highway projects are implemented through EPC contracts or PPP modes 
such as BOT, HAM, and TOT, where the responsibility for detailed 
engineering design is delegated to the concessionaire. As per the 
Ministry’s submission, concessionaires are required to translate the 

69 
 
 
 
conceptual designs in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) into executable 
construction drawings, including those for geometric, pavement, 
structural, and drainage systems, by engaging a design consultant, a proof 
consultant, and a safety consultant. These designs are reviewed by an 
Independent Engineer and vetted by the Authority's safety consultants. 
 The Committee note that DPR consultants, design consultants, and safety 
consultants are all engaged by the Concessionaire or EPC contractor, and 
that NHAI’s internal role is limited to formal approvals. The Committee 
observe that this delegation of responsibility weakens accountability, 
especially when Independent Engineers also fail to flag design 
deficiencies—as seen in the Kooriyad collapse case which was attributed 
to inaccurate geotechnical assessments and poor oversight by both the 
concessionaire and the Independent Engineer, as acknowledged by the 
Ministry.The Committee are of the view that  the methodology  being 
followed by NHAI could help it escape responsibility but this brings bad 
repute to NHAI as an organization.While design scrutiny is important, 
implementation of approved design should also be ensured and no short 
cut measures to reduce costs by the concessionaire/ sub contractors may 
be permitted. 
 The Committee find that in the roadway projects, the  critical design 
elements such as embankment stability, drainage channels, pavement 
layering, and slope protection are being handled in a fragmented and 
contractor-friendly manner without formal centralized scrutiny.As these 
highways are used by lakhs of vehicle users, any lapse or oversight or 
laxity can cause loss of life and property.The Committee observe that this 
multilayered delegation does not absolve the Authority of its ultimate 
accountability for project quality and safety. 
The Committee desire thatNHAI must ensure that its own approvals are not 
reduced to procedural formalities, with full accountability fixed on 
approving officers and NHAI shall have final and effective authority for the 
review and approval of all critical design elements, included in the original 
DPR or introduced later by the concessionaire.The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that NHAI institutionalise in-house technical review 
mechanism for the vetting and approval of all critical design components of 
the project. 
 

70 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Design and Utility of Service Roads 
7. The Committee note that NHAI constructs service roads alongside 
National Highways, particularly in areas where the highways pass near 
small towns and cities. Service roads are critical for providing local access 
and ensuring the safe coexistence of highway and non-highway traffic. 
They are especially vital in densely populated or industrial areas, where 
local vehicles, pedestrians, and slow-moving traffic must be segregated 
from the main carriageway to avoid congestion and accidents. However, 
the Committee find that service roads are frequently either omitted from 
project design, implemented in a fragmented manner, or left poorly 
maintained. In many projects, their construction is deferred or treated as an 
afterthought, and such practices not only cause inconvenience to local 
populations but also defeat the fundamental purpose of access control and 
safe highway usage. The Committee also note that poor drainage design 
along service roads leads to recurring waterlogging, and in some cases, 
submerging homes and businesses in adjacent areas. 
The Committee have also been informed that service roads are of 
insufficient and inconsistent width, which does not cater to the vehicular 
traffic and is often found inadequate, causing traffic snarls/jams. The 
Committee therefore urge that NHAI adopt a uniform minimum standard for 
the width and construction quality of service roads, proportionate to the 
expected local traffic load, and ensure that they remain durable and 
navigable throughout the project life cycle. 
The service roads are an important requirement to cater to the local 
populace alongside National Highway roads for the towns and villages 
through which they pass. The Committee desire that toll should not be 
levied unless service lanes along completed stretches are constructed and 
made operational for public use. The Committee therefore recommend that 
service roads be designed and treated as an essential component of 
National Highway infrastructure, and NHAI must ensure that the service 
road alignment, standardised width, structural integrity, connectivity, 
signage, and drainage features are finalised at the DPR stage itself. It 
should be ensured that the quality of service roads is similar to that of the 
National Highway. 

71 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Review of Pavement Failures  
8. The Committee note with concern that the quality and durability of 
concrete pavements on several National Highway stretches have been far 
from satisfactory. Specific instances were brought to the Committee’s 
attention, including the key stretches along the Delhi–Vadodara 
Expressway. These roads, which were expected to offer long-term service 
with minimal maintenance are found to have developed premature cracks, 
surface distress, and failures in pavement quality concrete (PQC), often 
within a short period of completion. 
 The Committee note the Ministry’s admission of design failures, weak 
quality assurance, and over-reliance on concessionaires for critical 
decisions. Owing to the repeated and serious failures of concrete 
pavements on National Highways—particularly in rain-prone and low-lying 
areas such as Kerala—and the admission by the Ministry and NHAI of 
design failures and suboptimal construction practices, the Committee find 
that the indiscriminate shift from bituminous to concrete roads without 
adequate assessment has resulted in poor quality outcomes, delays, and 
potential wastage of public funds.  
 The Committee also note that in response to a specific query, the Ministry 
has admitted that no forensic audit has been conducted in such cases and 
without which  it would be difficult to identify whether the failures stem 
from design flaws, material quality issues, construction lapses, or 
environmental conditions. 
 The Committee thereforeconclude that the problem appears systemic. In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry and NHAI adopt a 
mandatory, evidence-based framework for selecting pavement 
materialbituminous, concrete or otherwise based on site-specific technical 
and environmental assessments and included  at the DPR stage, 
itself.Further, the Committee recommend a third-party technical audit of all 
concrete pavement projects undertaken in the last five years, with results 
submitted within six months to them . 
  

72 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
Tolls and ongoing works on highways 
9. The Committee note that toll is meant to be charged only when the 
road is fully developed, safe, and usable as per approved standards. The 
road users pay toll to travel fast, safe and comfortable. However, they find 
that in several cases, toll is being collected even when the road is 
incomplete or under expansion, or when lanes are closed due to ongoing 
widening, upgradation, or maintenance works. This implies that the road 
user is not getting the full benefit for which the toll is being paid. 
  The Committee desire that MoRTH&NHAI must ensure strict 
monitoring of the highways in this respect before allowing toll collection. In 
cases where toll is collected in violation of these norms, strong penalties 
should be imposed on the concerned contractor or concessionaire, 
including fines and debarment from future projects. Until such time as the 
road is complete and fully functional, toll collection should be 
suspended.TheCommittee,therefore recommend, that toll must not be 
collected on any highway stretch where road works are ongoing and users 
are not getting full and safe access to the complete carriageway and related 
facilities like service roads and drainage.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
Rationalisation of Toll Charges  
10. The Committee find that toll charges on National Highways are linked 
to base rates first fixed in 2008 and annually revised, with a 3% annual 
escalation, irrespective of road quality, traffic volume, or user affordability. 
However, the Committee observe that the concept of tolling in perpetuity 
was first introduced through an amendment to the Fee Rules in 2008, 
allowing continued collection of user fees even after the recovery of project 
costs. This provision was further clarified and codified through the 2023 
amendment to the Fee Rules, which explicitly permits tolling to continue 
beyond the end of the concession period, thereby formalising a regime of 
perpetual tolling. 
 Once the concession period of a BOT-toll project is over, the asset is 
handed over to NHAI, after which it is operated as a publicly funded toll 

73 
 
 
 
plaza, with toll revenues credited directly to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
While toll rates are revised annually through a formula combining a fixed 
3% increment with partial indexation to the Wholesale Price Index, the 
Committee find that there is no institutional mechanism to independently 
evaluate whether toll charges are justified in relation to actual operation 
and maintenance costs or future service requirements. 
The Committee note that the Ministry have acknowledged this and initiated 
a study with NITI Aayog to revise the user fee determination framework, 
including base rates, inflation indexing, and concession structures. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry pursue the proposed study—being 
initiated through NITI Aayog in collaboration with reputed academic 
institutions—and ensure that it is time-bound and result-oriented. 
The Committee desire  that toll collection on any highway stretch must be 
rationalised and substantially reduced once capital and routine 
maintenance costs have been recovered. Any continuation of tolls beyond 
this point should be permitted only if clearly justified and approved by the 
proposed independent oversight authority. The Committee also urge that 
all existing contracts and publicly funded toll plazas allowing tolling 
beyond cost recovery must be reviewed in light of these principles to 
safeguard user interest and uphold the principle of equity in public 
infrastructure usage. While higher toll charges are justified during the 
period of concession agreement, continuation after that needs to be 
justified. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry establish an tariff 
authority, on the lines of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
(AERA) in the civil aviation sector, to ensure transparency and fairness in 
toll fixation, collection, and regulation. This authority, should be mandated 
to review and determine periodicity of toll revisions are based on certain 
parameters. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
Toll Refund 
11. The Committee note that under Section 7 of the National Highways 
Act, 1956, the Central Government is empowered to levy user fees in 

74 
 
 
 
consideration of services or benefits rendered on National Highways. The 
Ministry submitted that toll is presently collected under the National 
Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, and is 
explicitly levied for the provision of highway-related services to users. The 
Committee also note the Ministry’s admission that user convenience 
remains a challenge and that efforts are underway to implement barrierless 
free-flow tolling systems to enhance service delivery. 
The Committee further draw attention to Section 10 of the National 
Highways Authority of India Act, 1988, which mandates that NHAI must 
discharge its functions in accordance with sound business 
principles.However, the Committee find it unacceptable that toll continues 
to be collected even in situations where the essential service—namely, 
safe, uninterrupted, and timely travel—is not available. This includes 
highway stretches that are incomplete, under prolonged construction, or 
marked by serious deficiencies in safety and traffic flow.  Continuing to 
levy toll without delivering the promised level of service violates both the 
user-pay principle embedded in Section 7 of the National Highways Act and 
the norms of fair commercial conduct envisaged under Section 10 of the 
NHAI Act. 
 
The Committee are particularly concerned by the absence of any 
institutional mechanism for refunding or waiving toll in such cases, despite 
the service not being rendered. Charging toll under these conditions not 
only violates the principle of quid pro quo but also undermines public 
confidence in the legitimacy of user charges.In this context, the Committee 
wish to draw a parallel with the income tax framework, where the 
Government has institutionalised a transparent and automated mechanism 
to process refunds to taxpayers in cases of excess deduction or payment. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways and the National Highways Authority of India establish a 
clear, technology-driven, and transparent mechanism for automatic toll 
refund or waiver in cases where the highway is incomplete, unfit, or 
unavailable fully or under maintenance for use. This system should be fully 
integrated with the electronic toll collection framework (e.g., FASTag) and 
designed to function without the need for user intervention, just as income 
tax refunds are processed and paid directly to taxpayers. 

75 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
Tolling to be paired with operational safeguards 
12. The Committee note that the Ministry is in the process of rolling out 
Multi-Lane Free Flow (MLFF) tolling using AI-based Automatic Number 
Plate Recognition (ANPR) and Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 
technologies. While pilot projects have reportedly demonstrated potential 
revenue gains, the Committee find that serious unresolved issues persist 
with the existing FASTag-based tolling system, which undermine the very 
purpose of electronic toll collection. 
Despite the reported widespread adoption of FASTag—with over 5.54 crore 
active tags and daily toll collections exceeding ₹193 crore—the Committee 
observe that the system continues to suffer from major operational and 
user-level deficiencies. Malfunctioning FASTag scanners at toll plazas 
frequently result in failed reads and vehicle pile-ups. Although nearly all 
lanes are technically ETC-enabled, inconsistent ground-level enforcement 
and lack of uniformly functional RFID infrastructure result in avoidable 
congestion and user dissatisfaction. 
The Committee further note that toll plazas often lack on-site facilities for 
users to recharge, purchase, or replace their FASTags. This compels users 
to rely on issuer bank websites or third-party applications, which vary 
widely in reliability and user interface quality. In the event of queue delays 
or wrongful deductions, commuters are often left helpless. The Committee 
find that grievance redressal mechanisms remain weak. Most users are 
unaware of the procedure to lodge complaints, and only a small fraction 
follow up. Physical enforcement is also inadequate, especially at high-
traffic locations. 
In view of these persistent operational shortcomings, the Committee 
emphasise that effective toll management must be grounded in real-time 
monitoring and data-driven decision-making. They, therefore, recommend 
that NHAI develop a real-time toll plaza performance dashboard that 
integrates live traffic flow, queue lengths, lane-wise usage, and estimated 
waiting times. The dashboard should flag congestion-prone lanes and 
enable timely corrective action, including staff deployment and lane 
reallocation. 

76 
 
 
 
The Committee further desire that the implementation of MLFF tolling be 
supported by a regulatory framework to ensure data integrity, correct 
billing errors, and safeguard user privacy. To mitigate on-ground 
difficulties, the Committee also recommend NHAI to coordinate with banks 
and financial institutions to ensure that they provide on-site FASTag 
recharge and replacement facilities at toll plazas. 
The Committee also observe that during situations involving large crowd 
movement—such as religious congregations (e.g., Mahakumbh), natural 
disasters, or large public events—rigid toll collection protocols may 
aggravate traffic congestion and pose safety risks. In such cases, 
decentralised and timely decision-making becomes essential. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that appropriate amendments be made to the 
NHAI Act and relevant rules to empower the District Magistrate or other 
competent local authority to manage traffic flow and, where necessary, 
temporarily suspend toll collection in the public interest. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
Unauthorised Toll Plazas 
13. The Committee are concerned to note reported instances of 
unauthorised toll collection on National Highways, where private 
individuals illegally diverted traffic through a defunct industrial premises 
and collected tolls without any authority. Although the illegal operation was 
eventually dismantled and legal action initiated, such incidents point to 
serious enforcement and monitoring deficiencies. They not only result in 
potential revenue loss to concessionaires and the exchequer but also 
undermine public trust in the legitimacy of the tolling system and expose 
users to fraudulent practices. 
The Committee are of the opinion, that real-time GPS-based mapping and 
geofencing of all authorised toll plazas, deployment of CCTV and drone 
surveillance on vulnerable stretches, and periodic joint inspections by 
NHAI, State authorities, and law enforcement agencies, can help road users 
to identify the correct toll plaza location. A clear and time-bound protocol 
must also be established for identifying, reporting, and initiating legal 
action against unauthorised tolling operations. The Committee also desire 
that toll concession agreements include specific obligations for the 

77 
 
 
 
prevention of unauthorised tolling and diversion, with appropriate penalties 
for non-compliance. Further, details of all authorised toll plazas should be 
published and regularly updated on public platforms such as the 
RajmargYatra app to enable verification by users. Noting the need for 
transparency in toll operations, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI urgently develop and 
implement a Toll Integrity and Enforcement Framework. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
Emergency and Safety Mechanisms 
 
14. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the incidence of accidents on 
National Highways and the absence of a fully institutionalised mechanism 
to ensure timely and effective emergency response. Field observations and 
submissions before the Committee confirm that in the event of serious 
accidents or collisions, particularly on high-speed or remote highway 
stretches, victims are often deprived of prompt medical attention, roadside 
assistance, or coordinated rescue support. The absence of a structured 
framework for real-time emergency response—including ambulances, 
trauma care, centralised dispatch, and coordination with law 
enforcement—continues to result in preventable loss of life and grievous 
injuries. 
The Committee note with particular concern that, despite express 
provisions in project guidelines and concession agreements, many 
National Highway stretches lack dedicated emergency response vehicles, 
trauma management protocols, or fully functional highway patrol services. 
Where ambulances are provided by concessionaires or EPC contractors, 
they are often inadequate in number, ill-equipped, or operate without GPS 
tracking and central command integration. The current model, which relies 
on project-specific arrangements without uniform national standards, has 
created a fragmented and adhocemergency response ecosystem across 
the highway network. 
The Committee further observe that the absence of clear institutional 
accountability, whether with the concessionaire, the project 
implementation unit, or State authorities, has led to a systemic vacuum in 

78 
 
 
 
handling accidents, particularly at identified blackspots, which continue to 
remain accident prone zones due to continued inaction. Despite the 
identification of thousands of blackspots by various agencies, there is no 
consistent framework for their rectification, real-time monitoring, or 
prioritisation of emergency services in these high-risk areas.  
The Committee emphasise that accident response mechanisms must also 
encourage Good Samaritan intervention. In this regard, the Committee urge 
the Ministry and NHAI to promote Good Samaritan participation through 
structured awareness campaigns, dedicated helplines, and improved on-
ground coordination. The Committee further recommend that the role of 
Good Samaritans be formally recognised and supported as an integral part 
of highway safety protocols. In doing so, the Committee emphasise that the 
protections notified by the Central Government under the 2016 Good 
Samaritan guidelines must be operationalised on the ground in letter and 
spirit, ensuring that no Good Samaritan is harassed, compelled to disclose 
identity, or detained beyond what is legally permitted. The Committee is of 
the considered view that individuals acting as Good Samaritans, ought not 
to be subjected to legal proceedings or held liable for any unintended 
consequences arising therefrom. They, therefore, earnestly recommend 
that, in the interest of justice and public welfare, such individuals should be 
accorded due legal protection and immunity. 
In addition to the above, the Committee desire that tolling infrastructure 
such as FASTag systems, Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) 
cameras, and surveillance networks be mandatorily integrated with 
automated incident detection systems capable of rapid identification of 
crashes, obstructions, and blackspot activity. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend that an integrated emergency response system on National 
Highway be put in place along with GPS-enabled ambulances, highway 
patrol and recovery vehicles for immediate trauma response and the same 
may be monitored through a Control Room.  
******* 
NEW DELHI  
11 AUGUST 2025 
20, Sravana, 1947 
 
K. C. VENUGOPAL                                                                                                  
Chairperson, 
  Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

79 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 12 FEBRUARY, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Wednesday, the 12 February,2025 from 
1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
4. Dr. Amar Singh 
5. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
8. Shri T. R. Baalu 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. K. Laxman 
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

80 
 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Sh. Rebecca Mathai  -  Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
3. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
4. Sh. Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
Sl. 
No. Name Designation 
1. Shri V. Umashankar Secretary, MoRT&H 
2 Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav Chairman, NHAI 
3. Shri B.K. Sinha ADG, MoRT&H 
4. Shri K. Venkata Ramana Member (PPP), NHAI 
5. Shri Vishal Chauhan Member (Admin), NHAI 
6. Shri Anil Choudhary Member (Project), NHAI 
7. Shri V.K. Rajawat Member (Projects), NHAI 
8. Shri Alok Deepankar Member (Technical), NHAI 
9. Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi JS (Toll), MoRT&H 
10. Shri Abdul Basit CGM (CO), NHAI 
11. Shri Rohit Singh SE (Toll), MoRT&H 
12. Shri A.R. Chitranshi DGM, NHAI 

81 
 
 
 
PART A 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officials of 
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) to the Sitting of 
the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways Authority of India  
and other concerned organisations on the subject "Levy and regulation of fee, 
tariff, user charges etc. on public infrastructure and other public utilities." 
2. The Chairperson requested the officers of the C&AG to give the input on 
the subject to the Committee. Subsequently, issues arising from CAG Report no. 7 
of 2023 related to maintenance of the highways, roadside amenities on highways, 
identification of black patches and black spots etc. were discussed. 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, National Highways Authority of India and other concerned 
organisations were called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the Sitting. 
The Committee raised concern over faulty implementation of NH Fee Amendment 
Rules, 2013, reduction in toll tax during upgradation of highways, loss of revenue 
due to lack of revenue sharing in Concession Agreements, toll collection using the 
Global Navigation Satellite System, etc. The Committee also raised queries on 
excess collection of toll, comprehensive rating system for performance 
assessment of concessionaires, challenges faced in the determination and 
collection of toll, etc. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry presented their views on performance of 
FASTag, Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), performance of Rajmarg 
App, etc. 
5. The Members raised various issues viz. lack of amenities on highways especially 
for women , various business models like HAM, EPC, BOT, AI driven smart tolling 
systems, waiting time on toll plazas, inconvenience caused to local residents and 
everyday commuters due to lack of alternate routes, leakages in collection of toll 

82 
 
 
 
tax on highways, increase in speed limit on highways, monitoring mechanism for 
the contractors, grievance redressal mechanism, budgetary support for the 
Ministry, annual passes for highway users, etc. 
6. The representatives of the Ministry further highlighted the efforts made by the 
Ministry regarding multi-lane free flow tolling, rationalisation of rates of toll tax, 
launch of new highway projects, behavioural training of toll booth employees, 
monitoring of excess tolling, etc. 
7.   The Ministry was directed to provide the detailed replies to the points 
raised during the discussion along with a reply to the List of Points within fifteen 
days. 
PART B 
XXXXX    XXXXX     XXXXX  
XXXXX    XXXXX     XXXXX  
XXXXX    XXXXX     XXXXX  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 

83 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025–26) 
HELD ON THURSDAY, 29TH MAY 2025, FROM 1100 HOURS TO 1315 HOURS IN THE 
MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM, PHA. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, 29th May 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1315 
hrs. in  Main Committee Room, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jai Parkash  
3. Prof. Sougata Ray  
4. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
5. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
7. Dr. K. Laxman 
8. Shri Praful Patel  
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan P – Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi – Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma – Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Malvika Mehta – Deputy Secretary 

84 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri – Deputy C&AG 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS AND NHAI 
1. Shri V. Umashankar – Secretary, MoRTH 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav – Chairman, NHAI 
3. Shri Vishal Chauhan – Member, NHAI 
4. Shri K. Venkata Ramana – Member, NHAI 
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officers of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and the National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI) on the subject “Levy and Regulation of Fees, Tariffs, User Charges, etc. on 
Public Infrastructure and Other Public Utilities”. 
2.  Hon’ble Chairperson made a reference to oral evidence of the Ministry and 
NHAI held before the previous Committee on 12th February, 2025, on the subject and 
then drew attention to the alarming condition of National Highway-66 in Kerala, where 
serious incidents of road collapse, cracks, and substandard construction had been 
reported. It was observed that the situation could have led to tragic casualties had 
the failures occurred after public opening. Audit officers, thereafter, presented a 
detailed overview of past audit findings, highlighting irregularities in toll collection, 
non-compliance with fee rules, toll revenue leakages, and failure to enforce penalties. 
3.  Representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and 
the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) were then called in. In his opening 
remarks, Hon’ble Chairperson expressed serious concern over the current system of 
determination, levy, and collection of user charges on national highways, describing 
it as being in a state of confusion and lacking alignment with modern technologies 
and stakeholder expectations. He noted that despite previous deliberations, many 
questions remained unresolved, particularly regarding the rationale behind toll rate 

85 
 
 
 
hikes and deficiencies in tolling infrastructure. The representatives made a power 
point presentation, focusing on tolling practices, the basis for fee determination, the 
structure of concessions for different vehicle classes, and the regulatory framework 
under which tolls are levied. They elaborated on the National Highways Fee Rules, 
2008, and the structure of annual toll revisions based on a fixed formula. The Ministry 
further apprised the Committee of new initiatives, including the One Vehicle-One 
FASTag initiative, pilot projects for Multi-Lane Free Flow (MLFF) tolling, the use of 
automatic number plate recognition (ANPR), and steps to address multiple deduction 
issues and grievance redressal through mobile applications. However, concerns 
were raised by Members regarding the practical inefficacy of FASTag at congested 
toll plazas and long waiting lines, despite automation. 
4.  The Committee expressed concern on the infrastructure failures along NH-66 
in Kerala, viz. repeated cracks, collapses of service roads, caving in of embankments, 
and inundation of adjacent homes that occurred in several districts, including 
Malappuram, Kasaragod, Kannur, and Alleppey. Members expressed dissatisfaction 
with NHAI’s failure to adopt site-specific engineering designs despite early warnings 
from the Geological Survey of India (GSI) and inputs from local authorities. The 
Committee raised serious questions about institutional accountability and public 
interest. In light of these issues, the Committee directed the audit officials to initiate 
an audit of NHAI’s construction practices, contracts, and oversight mechanisms, 
including the shortcomings in construction of NH66, in the state of Kerala. 
5. The Committee, further raised concern of the lack of preventive oversight and 
poor integration of state-level expertise, including PWD and district administration. It 
was noted that many requests for corrections had only been taken seriously after 
public representatives raised them, indicating a reactive rather than proactive 
approach. The Members also raised serious concern on poor drainage design, 
frequent failure of concrete pavements, uneven road surfaces, and lack of culverts, 
and passages to link the highways with villages. The Committee questioned the 
rationale behind shifting from bitumen to concrete roads without adequate readiness 
and quality assurance mechanisms. 
6. On the financial front, the Committee enquired about the basis of the recent 
nationwide toll hike, the impact on commuters, and sustainability of long-term asset 
monetization models.  

86 
 
 
 
7. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for their free and frank views on the 
subject and the Ministry was directed to submit written replies to all queries, along 
with a response to the list of points being sent by the Secretariat, within fifteen days.                                    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record.  
 
 
  

87 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-
26) HELD ON 11 AUGUST, 2025 
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, 11th August, 2025 from 1000 hrs 
to 1045 hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
3. Shri Jai Parkash 
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
5. Dr. Amar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
7. Dr. K Laxman 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

88 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj Dy. C&AG 
2.  Shri Pramod Kumar Addl. Deputy C&AG 
3.  Ms. Ritu Dhillon Director General 
 
  At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
officials of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) to 
the Sitting of the Committee. He invited suggestions of the Members on the Draft 
Report on the subject “Levy and Regulation of Fees, Tariffs, User Charges etc. on 
Public Infrastructure and Other Public Utilities”. 
2. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Report with minor modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the 
Reports in the light of factual verification. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

PD RO HQ 
1 6-laning of Thalappady to Chengala on NH-66 39 1154.05 683.09 131.7 1968.84 1704.12 ULCCS Kasaragod Expressway Private Limited 18.11.2021 15.05.2024 15.07.2025 96.4 M/s Uralungal Labour Contract Co- 
Operative Society Ltd Nil 
2 6-laning of Chengala to Neeleshwaram on NH-66 37.27 1132.05 509.52 126.008 1767.578 1799 Megha Engineering and Infrastructure Ltd. - 
Navyuga Engineering Co. Ltd. (Consortium) 15.10.2021 11.04.2024 31.03.2026 82 M/s Megha Engineering and 
Infrastructure Nil 
3 6-laning of Neeleshwaram to Thalipparamba on NH-66 40.11 1414.41 1496.66 142.08 3053.15 2251 Megha Engineering and Infrastructure Ltd. - 
Navyuga Engineering Co. Ltd. (Consortium) 15.10.2021 11.04.2024 31.03.2026 82.1 M/s Megha Engineering and 
Infrastructure Nil 
4 6-laning of Thalipparamba to Muzhapilangadu on NH-66 29.95 1428.94 1234.8 57.78 2721.52 2038 Vishwa Samudra Engineering Pvt. Ltd. 29.11.2021 26.05.2024 31.05.2026 73 M/sVishwa Samudra Engineering 
Pvt. Ltd. Nil 
5 6-laning of Azhiyur to Vengalam on NH-66 40.8 1312.76 1815.86 90.85 3219.47 1838.1 M/s Adani Enterprises Ltd 30.10.2021 26.04.2024 31.03.2026 57.9 M/s Adani Road Transport Ltd Nil 
6 6 laning of  Kozhikode Bypass (i.e. Vengalam Jn. to Ramanattukara 
Jn. 28.4 1215.29 75.73 133.754 1424.774 1710 M/s KMC Constructions Ltd 22.02.2021 21.02.2023 30.06.2025 95.01 M/s KMC Constructions Ltd Nil 
7 Balance work of widening of 4 nos existing 2 Lane major Bridge of 6- 
laning of Kozhikode Bypass 1.9 102.02 0 0 102.02 106.2 NA 05.09.2024 05.03.2026 05.03.2026 30.34 M/s KMC Constructions Ltd Nil 
8 Construction of an underpass at km 184.85  & Misc works in 
Thalassery Mahe bypass 1.13 46.5 0 0 46.5 40.4 NA 21.05.2025 20.05.2026 20.05.2026 0 M/s Irikkur construction Company Nil 
9 6-laning of Ramanattukara to Valanchery on NH-66 39.68 1842.96 2286.01 127.163 4256.133 2367.5 M/s KNR Constructions Ltd 21.01.2022 19.07.2024 31.12.2025 99.1 M/s KNR Constructions Ltd Nil 
10 6-laning of Valanchery to Kappirikkad on NH-66 37.35 1619.72 1641.01 105.41 3366.14 2140 M/s KNR Constructions Ltd 21.01.2022 19.07.2024 30.06.2025 98.3 M/s KNR Constructions Ltd Nil 
11 4/6-laning of Kappirikkad-Thalikulam of NH-17 (New NH-66) 33.17 1115.58 2408.15 67.32 3591.05 1258 M/s Shivalaya Construction Co. Pvt. Ltd. 01.09.2022 26.02.2025 31.03.2026 71.59 M/s Shivalaya Construction Co. Pvt. 
Ltd. Nil 
12 4/6-laning of Thalikulam-Kodungallur of NH-17 (New NH-66) 28.74 1303.23 2221.03 88.47 3612.73 1420 M/s Shivalaya Construction Co. Pvt. Ltd. 17.09.2022 14.03.2025 31.03.2026 64.07 M/s Shivalaya Construction Co. Pvt. 
Ltd. Nil 
13 6-laning of Kodungallur- Edapally of NH-66 26.03 1488.7 1930.3 46.82 3465.82 1617.2 M/s. Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd 25.10.2022 22.04.2025 31.05.2026 62 M/s. Oriental Structural Engineers 
Pvt. Ltd Nil 
14 6 lane Elevated Corridor  from Aroor to Thuravoor Thekku section of 
NH 66 12.75 2353.21 222 352 2927.21 1668.5 M/s Ashoka Buildcon Limited 01.02.2023 30.01.2026 30.06.2026 59.91 M/s Ashoka Buildcon Limited Nil 
15 6 Laning of Thuravoor Thekku – Paravoor section of NH-66 38.39 1469.15 1412.94 5.61 2887.7 1118 NA 17.03.2022 12.09.2024 31.05.2026 43.79 M/s KCC Buildcon Pvt. Ltd. Nil 
16 6 laning of Paravoor to Kottukulangara section of NH 66 37.5 1393.97 1909.04 203.15 3506.16 1152 NA 29.08.2022 24.02.2025 31.03.2026 61.01 M/s.SEW Infrastructure Ltd. 
Vishwa 
Samudra 
Private Ltd 
17 6 laning of Kottukulangara to start of Kollam bypasssection of  NH- 
66 31.5 1124.56 1645.83 64.85 2835.24 1580 Vishwa Samudra Engineering Pvt. Ltd. 12.04.2022 08.10.2024 25.03.2026 70.95 Vishwa Samudra Engineering Pvt. 
Ltd. - 
18 6 Laning of Start of Kollam Bypass to Kadambattukonam of NH-66 31.25 1220.3 1409.68 74.66 2704.64 1385 M/s Shivalaya Construction Pvt Ltd 01.10.2022 29.03.2025 28.02.2026 76.05 M/s Shivalaya Construction Pvt Ltd _ 
19 6 Laning of Kadambattukonam to Kazhakuttom of NH-66 29.83 856.3 2584.5 244.18 3684.98 795 NA 23.07.2022 18.01.2025 30.04.2026 38.97 M/s. RDS Project Ltd 
M/s. R K 
Chavan 
Infrastructure 
Pvt Ltd 
20 Rectification of 4 Blackspots of NH-66 2.42 98.05 0 32.5 130.55 93.12 NA 2/22/2024 8/22/2025 3/31/2026 16.81 M/s Cherian Varkey Construction 
Company Pvt Ltd NA 
567.17 23691.75 25486.15 2094.305 51272.205 28081.14 
Schedule 
Completion 
Likely 
Completion 
Progres 
s upto 
May 
2025 
Grand Total 
Sh.Prash 
ant 
Dubey 
(A/C) 
Cochin-II Sh. P. 
Pradeep 
Kollam Sh. Bipin 
Madhu 
Trivandr 
um 
Sh. 
Debapras 
ad Sahoo 
Kannur 
Sh. 
Umesh 
Garg 
Sh. B. L 
Meena 
(under 
transfer) 
Sh. 
Venakata 
Ramana, 
Sh. W. 
Blah, Sh 
Naveen 
Mishra & 
Sh. 
Dinesh 
Singh 
Fageria 
Kozhiko 
de 
Sh. 
Prashant 
Dubey 
Cochin-I 
Annexure VIIIA 
Public Accounts Committee-"Levy and Regulation of Fees, Tariffs, User Charges etc. on Public Infrastructure and other Public Utilities" 
No.of 
Package Name of the Project PIU 
Total 
Length (in 
Km) 
CWC 
( ₹  crores) 
LA cost 
( ₹  crores) 
Other Cost 
( ₹  crores) 
Sanctioned 
Capital Cost 
( ₹  crores) 
Name of EPC Contractor Name of Sub 
Contractor 
Names of NHAI Officers 
Awarded Cost 
( ₹  crores) Promoters of Concessionaire Appointed Date 
107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173