 
 
09 
LOSS OF OPPORTUNITY TO EARN 
ADDITIONAL FREIGHT AND EXTRA 
EXPENDITURE ON HAULAGE : SWR 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One 
Hundred and Second Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                     
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
 
PAC No. 2392 
 
N I N T H  R E P O R T  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
     
                       
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One 
Hundred and Second Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
                                                                                       
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  17.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  17.12.2024 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
  
LOSS OF OPPORTUNITY TO EARN 
ADDITIONAL FREIGHT AND EXTRA 
EXPENDITURE ON HAULAGE : SWR 
           

i 
 
Contents 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government…………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration…………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies………………………………………………………… 
 
 APPENDIX   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024- 
25) held on 12.12.2024 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their One Hundred and Second  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
                  Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           -                  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P       -                  Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi       -                  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh        -                  Committee Officer 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2024-25), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their One Hundred and Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on “Loss of Opportunity to Earn Additional Freight and Extra Expenditure on 
Haulage : SWR” relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
 
2. The One Hundred and Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024. The Committee considered the draft Action 
Taken Report on the subject and adopted the same at their sitting held on 
12.12.2024. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee form appendix to the Report.  
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 102nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 December, 2024               Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                        Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their One Hundred Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on “Loss of Opportunity to 
Earn Additional Freight and Extra Expenditure on Haulage:SWR” relating to the 
Ministry of Railways. 
 
2. The One Hundred Second Report (17th Lok Sabha), which was presented to 
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 07 February, 2024, contained three 
Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry 
of Railways have been broadly categorized as under : 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1-3 
 
                  Total:      03      
Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
   Total:         0 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
             NIL 
Total:  0  
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            NIL  
Total:      00 
Chapter - V 

 
 
2 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed 
certain shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Railways.  The Committee had 
accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their One Hundred Second 
Report.   
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One Hundred 
Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of 
this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government 
on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which 
require reiteration/merit comments.  
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish Action Taken Notes 
in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of the report, 
positively within three months of the presentation of the report to the Parliament.   
6. The expanded forms of abbreviations used in this report are as under: 
SN Abbreviation Expanded Form 
1 TNGL Tornagallu, UBL-Div, SWR 
2 RNJP Ranjitpura, UBL-Div, SWR 
3 SWR South Western Railway 
4 BOBSNS Bogie Hopper Wagon with side discharge 
5 HPT Hosapete UBL-Div, SWR 
6 BAY Ballari UBL-Div, SWR 
7 SMLI Swamihalli, UBL-Div, SWR 
8 RDG Rajgir, DNR-Div 
9 JRU Chikjajur Jn. ,MYS- Div 
10 SLU Sasalu , MYS- Div 
11 MMEC M/s Mineral Enterprises Ltd. MYS- Div 
12 BOXNHA Open Bogie Wagon with higher axle load 
13 BOXNEL Open Bogie Wagon with enhanced load 
14 BOXNHS Open Bogie wagon with high speed 
15 BOXNHL Open Bogie wagon with higher pay load 
16 JSWT JSW Steel Ltd. 
17 GPWIS General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme 
18 FOIS Freight Operations Information System 
 
          
7. Recommendation at Para No. 2 
 The Committee noted from audit observation that due to failure in supply of 
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons on the Torangullu (TNGL) – Ranjitpura 
(RNJP) route, South Western Railway (SWR) missed an opportunity to earn 
additional freight of Rs. 48.24 crore for the period, 2013-14 to 2020-21. SWR 
Administration also did not make concerted efforts to include BOXNHA rakes with 
BOXNEL wagons or wagons of similar Permissible Carrying Capacity (PCC) in 

 
 
3 
 
Wagons Holding of SWR for arranging supply of the appropriate rakes at RNJP. 
From the submission of the Ministry, the Committee noted that high capacity wagons 
(BOXNHA) were not available with SWR, and the wagons available, such as 
BOXNHS and BOXNHL were supplied for loading to meet the customer demand. 
Besides, in 2011, JSWT (JSW Steel Ltd.) commissioned track hopper infrastructure 
for unloading iron ore for BOBSN (Bogie Hopper Wagon with side discharge) type of 
rakes. This infrastructure enabled efficient unloading and turn-round of BOBSN 
rakes on an average of 1.5 rakes per day. JSWT siding free time notified for BOXN 
rake is 8 hours and BOBSN rake is 2.5 hours. Hence to optimize freight loading in 
RNJP-JSWT section BOBSN type of rakes are fit to be chosen for loading and 
unloading. Subsequently, two BOBSN rakes were supplied for loading during 2013-
14 (First rake) & 2016-17 (second rake) in SWR, which had higher capacity for 
loading in 25T Axle route between RNJP-JSWT.  
Observing the above facts, the Committee inferred that BOXNHA rakes with 
BOXNEL wagons should have been procured well in time and supplied in order to 
ensure that losses were not incurred in the first instance. The loss of opportunity to 
earn  additional  freight  amounted  to  loss  of  prospective  revenue   to  the tune   
of Rs. 48.24 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry 
needed to make an estimate of requisite number of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL 
wagons with maximum carrying capacity to ensure that non-availability of such 
rakes/wagons did not affect Railway’s operational requirements in any manner. The 
Committee were also of the view that their rolling stock allocation and utilization 
strategies are rationalized in such a way that freight operations are optimized and 
basic economic concept of ‘cost-benefit ratio’ is fulfilled. The Committee were of the 
view that the argument, ‘No loss in totality’ put forward by the Railway’s on the one 
hand and ‘Non- availability of high capacity BOXNHA wagons with the SWR’, on the 
other, as put forth by the Ministry in their written reply were not acceptable. The 
Committee also desired to be apprised of the current status in this regard. 
8. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
  “ Presently TNGL-RNJP (Total 22.92 kms) is the only route on SWR notified 
by Railway Board for 25T Axle load running.  
          For effective utilization of above 25T Axle load route, it has been approved for 
procurement of 12 high capacity BOBSNS rakes by JSW Minerals Rail Private 
Limited under General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS). 
         Presently these rakes are at under production stage and first rake is expected 
to be available for iron ore loading by April, 2024. Apart from TNGL-RNJP circuit, the 
following routes over SWR have been identified for conversion to 25 T Axle load and 
are in various stages of completion” 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
 
SI. 
No. 
 
Routes 
 
 
Total Km 
From To  
1. HPT TNGL 32.77 
2. TNGL BAY 32.55 
3. HPT SMLI 58.87 
4. BAY RDG 53.40 
5. JRU RDG 131 
6. JRU SLU 9.82 
7. JRU (MMEC) 18.22 
 
9. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments: 
 “MoR has not taken any action on the recommendation of the committee “to make 
an estimate of requisite number of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons with 
maximum carrying capacity to ensure that non-availability of such rakes/wagons 
does not affect Railway's operational requirements in any manner”. 
 
10. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated 
as under: 
 “The Section TNGL-RNJP is 23.6 Kms stretch and it is the only 25T axle load 
capacity section over SWR. The Iron Ore is loaded from RNJP to various 
destinations beyond 25T axle load, i.e. (carrying capacity) CC+8 and also CC+6. 
The loading in 25T is restricted only to JSWT and the last year loading particulars 
are as under: -  
SI. No. Type of Wagon Total Rakes 
1. BOXN 913 
2. BOXNEL 1 
3. BOXNHL 678 
4. BOXNHL (25T) 16 
 
Also, BOBSN made 242 trips (rakes) without any shortage or indents waiting for 
rake. Loading particulars of BOBSN rakes for the last 4 years is as under: 
BOBSN Rakes during the 
Year 
No. of BOBSN rakes 
loaded 
2020-21 71 
2021-22 395 
2022-23 409 
2023-2024 242 
Total BOBSN Rakes 
Loaded 
1117 
 

 
 
5 
 
        RNJP-TNGL is the only route in SWR notified for 25T Axle load. There is 
loading of average 4.5 rakes/day from RNJP-JSWT of the BOXN in financial year 
2023-24 and 242 rakes of BOBSN were loaded in the same period. Thus, an 
average loading is 5.4 rakes per day in this route. With running time and turn-round 
time of 24hours, with increase in production capacity of JSWT, there is likelihood of 
an increase of 20% in the requirement to cater to the loading average of 6.6 rakes 
per day. Keeping in view, the peak loading may go up to 8 rakes in a day. The final 
requirement would be 9 rakes. No further increase in traffic is possible due to line 
capacity constraints. The requirement of High-Capacity wagons would be 9 rakes for 
peak demand and 8 rakes for usual demand taking into consideration the 
turnaround, line capacity and maintenance reserve. 
         However, under PPP model due to the efforts of SWR, it has been approved 
for procurement of 12 high capacity BOBSNS rakes by JSW Minerals Rail Private 
Limited under General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS). The 
requirement of rakes will be reassessed as these rakes are inducted in the system”. 
        
11. The Committee in their Report had inferred that there was loss of 
prospective revenue to the tune of 48.24 crore due to non-procurement and 
non-supply of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons well in time. The 
Committee, therefore, had recommended to the Ministry to make an estimate 
of requisite number of such rakes with wagons, so that Railway’s operational 
requirements are not affected in any manner.  The Committee also called for 
rationalisation of rolling stock allocation and utilization strategies so that 
freight operations are optimized. The Ministry in their action take note have 
provided detailed data for the average loading per day on RNJP—JSWT 
section, indicating a current average of 5.4 rakes per day with potential to 
increase to 8 rakes per day during peak periods. 
The Ministry have also estimated a requirement of 9 rakes to cater to 
peak demand.  This reflects a comprehensive assessment of the needs based 
on operational data. The procurement of 12 BOBSNS rakes is further projected 
to meet this demand. However, the Committee is of the opinion that the 
Ministry should continue to monitor and reassess the requirements, especially 
once these rakes are operational. The Ministry should also enhance its 
forecasting and planning capabilities for future rolling stock requirements 
which should further involve using predictive analytics and demand 
forecasting tools to anticipate future needs accurately and avoid similar 
revenue losses. The Committee further reiterate their recommendation and 
expect the Ministry of Railways to reshape its planning approach and 
transform the landscape of transportation by optimising its capacity and 
enhancing overall operational efficiency.  
 The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated that apart from TNGL-
RNJP circuit, seven routes over South Western Railway have been identified 

 
 
6 
 
for conversion to 25 T Axle load and are in various stages of completion. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress of these routes. 
12. Recommendation at Para no.3 
The Committee noted from audit observation that SWR Administration 
incurred an extra expenditure amounting to Rs 5.22 crore towards haulage of 781 
rakes in excess and this would continue till Railway Administration deploys BOXNHA 
rakes for operation on RNJP to JSWT route. From the submission of the Ministry, the 
Committee found that SWR was given BOBSNM wagons which have payload of 69T 
on 25T Axle load and better turn round time because of loading time of 2.5hrs only 
against 8 hrs of BOXNEL wagons. With Engine on Load unloading facility in 
BOBSNM1, the Rolling Stock detention was further reduced by saving time in 
bringing loco and the attachment, pressure ready, BPC validation, etc. BOBSNM1 
wagons were introduced because the customer, JSW (T) had constructed and 
installed the necessary infrastructure for unloading of BOBSNM1 on the basis of 
better efficiency in operation. Hence, there was no revenue loss to the Railways. The 
Committee were of the view that SWR should take care that line capacity of notified 
route was optimally utilized. The Committee also recommended that the Ministry of 
Railways needed to ensure that appropriate rakes with higher PCC are supplied on 
the Tornagallu – Ranjitpura route to ensure that continued loss of revenue due to 
excess haulage is checked forthwith. This would also result in fulfilling the basic 
financial logic of ‘Money saved is money earned’. The Committee were also of the 
view that the Ministry needed to examine the possibility of adoption of ‘Enterprise 
Resource Planning’ software system to streamline collection of real time data on 
wagon availability, wagon allocation, and tracking and management of cargo trains. 
The software would empower the Railways in bringing about a holistic improvement 
in resource management which will, in the long run, provide enhanced service 
reliability, sustainable growth, and increased profitability for Indian Railways.  
13. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
“The following BOBSN rakes loaded from 2020-21 to 2023-24 (Upto 21 st February, 
2024) as per the demand of JSW: 
BOBSN Rakes during the 
year 
No. of BOBSN rakes 
loaded 
2020-21 71 
2021-22 395 
2022-23 409 
2023-2024 upto 21st Feb. 
2024 
220 
Total BOBSN Rakes Loaded 1095 
 
    To streamline collection of real time data on wagon availability, wagon allocation 
and tracking and management of cargo trains, there is already a software-based 
system – FOIS (Freight Operations Information System) which is presently being 
used all over Indian Railways. 

 
 
7 
 
14.   While vetting the above ATNs, Audit made the following comments: 
“No comments” 
15. Observing the fact that the South Western Railway (SWR) Administration 
incurred extra expenditure amounting to Rs.5.22 crore towards haulage of 781 
rakes in excess, the Committee had recommended to the Ministry of Railways 
for supply of appropriate rakes with higher Permissible Carrying Capacity 
(PCC) on the Tornagallu-Ranjithpura route and to examine the possibility of 
adoption of ‘Enterprise Resource Planning’ software system to streamline the 
collection of real time data on wagon availability, wagon allocation and 
tracking and management of cargo trains.  In response, the Ministry have 
submitted that a software based system – FOIS (Freight Operation Information 
System) is presently being used to streamline the collection of such data. The 
Committee while appreciating the fact that a software based system for 
collecting real time data on wagon availability, wagon allocation and tracking 
and management of cargo trains is being used by the Ministry, opine that 
Railways should adopt best practices available at present so that remarkable 
improvement in asset management wing for Rolling Stock like coaches, 
wagons and locomotives is recorded and monitoring mechanism be 
strengthened so that there is overall improvement in management of 
resources. 
From the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry, it has been observed by 
the Committee that in 2022-23, 409 BOBSN rakes were loaded while during 
2023-24, only 220 rakes were loaded. The Committee note that lesser number 
of rakes were loaded during 2023-24 while the Ministry is making estimates for 
procurement of more rakes anticipating that the demand will grow in future. IN 
this regard, while BOBSN rakes offer faster turnaround time and better 
efficiency, the Committee had recommended BOXNHA rakes with higher 
Payload Carrying Capacity (PCC) to ensure optimal resource utilization and 
cost savings. In the ATN furnished by the Ministry, the explicit information on 
the feasibility of deploying BOXNHA rakes or alternatives with similar capacity 
has not been furnished. Hence, the Committee would like to recommend the 
Ministry to conduct a feasibility study on deploying BOXNHA or other high-
capacity rakes on the RNJP-JSWT route. The Ministry should also submit a 
time-bound plan for optimizing wagon deployment to ensure that future 
excess haulage costs are minimized. The Ministry should also track and report 
line capacity utilization data for the RNJP-JSWT route regularly. This will 
ensure that the deployment of BOBSN rakes is aligned with the Committee’s 
earlier recommendation of optimizing line capacity. 
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation 
         The committee learn that South Western Railway (SWR) Administration failed 
to supply BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons on Tornagallu – Ranjitpura (TNGL - 
RNJP) route resulting in loss of opportunity to earn additional freight of Rs.48.24 
crore for the period from2013-14to2020-21.  Besides, SWR also incurred an extra 
expenditure of Rs.5.22 crore on haulage of excess number of rakes during this 
period. Issues highlighted in the Audit Report have been examined by the Committee 
and commented upon suitably in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 102nd Report of  
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Introductory:  No comments. 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
“No comments.” 
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. 
No.243/Rly/SWR/12-44/2021 dated 15.04.2024 . 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee note from audit observation that due to failure in supply of 
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons on the TNGL-RNJP route, SWR missed an 
opportunity to earn additional freight of Rs. 48.24 crore for the period, 2013-14 to 
2020-21. SWR Administration also did not make concerted efforts to include 
BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons or wagons of similar PCC in Wagons Holding 
of SWR for arranging supply of the appropriate rakes at RNJP. From the submission 
of the Ministry, the Committee note that high capacity wagons (BOXNHA) were not 
available with SWR, and the wagons available, such as BOXNHS and BOXNHL 
were supplied for loading to meet the customer demand. Besides, in 2011, JSWT 
(JSW Steel Ltd.) commissioned track hopper infrastructure for unloading iron ore for 
BOBSN type of rakes. This infrastructure enables efficient unloading and turn-round 

 
 
9 
 
of BOBSN rakes on an average of 1.5 rakes per day. JSWT siding Free time notified 
for BOXN rake is 8 hours and BOBSN rake is 2.5 hours. Hence to optimize freight 
loading in RNJP-JSWT section BOBSN type of rakes are fit to be chosen for loading 
and unloading. Subsequently, two BOBSN rakes were supplied for loading during 
2013-14 (First rake) & 2016-17 (second rake) in SWR, which has higher capacity for 
loading in 25T Axle route between RNJP-JSWT.  
Observing the above facts, the Committee infer that BOXNHA rakes with 
BOXNEL wagons should have been procured well in time and supplied in order to 
ensure that losses were not incurred in the first instance. The loss of opportunity to 
earn additional freight amounted to loss of prospective revenue to the tune of Rs. 
48.24 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry need to make 
an estimate of requisite number of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons with 
maximum carrying capacity to ensure that non-availability of such rakes/wagons 
does not affect Railway’s operational requirements in any manner. The Committee 
are also of the view that their rolling stock allocation and utilization strategies are 
rationalized in such a way that freight operations are optimized and basic economic 
concept of ‘cost-benefit ratio’ is fulfilled. The Committee are of the view that the 
argument, ‘No loss in totality’ put forward by the Railway’s on the one hand and 
‘Non- availability of high capacity BOXNHA wagons with the SWR’, on the other, as 
put forth by the Ministry in their written reply are not acceptable. The Committee also 
desire to be apprised of the current status in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 102nd Report of  
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Presently TNGL-RNJP (Total 22.92 kms) is the only route on SWR notified by 
Railway Board for 25T Axle load running.  
          For effective utilization of above 25T Axle load route, it has been approved for 
procurement of 12 high capacity BOBSNS rakes by JSW Minerals Rail Private 
Limited under General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS). 
         Presently these rakes are at under production stage and first rake is expected 
to be available for iron ore loading by April, 2024. Apart from TNGL-RNJP circuit, the 
following routes over SWR have been identified for conversion to 25 T Axle load and 
are in various stages of completion: 
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
 
SI. 
No. 
 
Routes 
 
 
Total Km 
From To  
1. HPT TNGL 32.77 
2. TNGL BAY 32.55 
3. HPT SMLI 58.87 
4. BAY RDG 53.40 
5. JRU RDG 131 
6. JRU SLU 9.82 
7. JRU (MMEC) 18.22 
 
 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
 
 “MoR has not taken any action on the recommendation of the committee “to make 
an estimate of requisite number of BOXNHA rakes with BOXNEL wagons with 
maximum carrying capacity to ensure that non-availability of such rakes/wagons 
does not affect Railway's operational requirements in any manner”. 
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. 
No.243/Rly/SWR/12-44/2021 dated 15.04.2024 . 
Updated Action Taken Reply of Ministry 
 
 The Section TNGL-RNJP is 23.6 Kms stretch and it is the only 25T axle load 
capacity section over SWR. The Iron Ore is loaded from RNJP to various 
destinations beyond 25T axle load, i.e. CC+8 and also CC+6. 
 
The loading in 25T is restricted only to JSWT and the last year loading particulars 
are as under: -  
SI. No. Type of Wagon Total Rakes 
1. BOXN 913 
2. BOXNEL 1 
3. BOXNHL 678 
4. BOXNHL (25T) 16 
 
Also, BOBSN made 242 trips (rakes) without any shortage or indents waiting for 
rake. Loading particulars of BOBSN rakes for the last 4 years is as under: 
 

 
 
11 
 
BOBSN Rakes during the 
Year 
No. of BOBSN rakes 
loaded 
2020-21 71 
2021-22 395 
2022-23 409 
2023-2024 242 
Total BOBSN Rakes 
Loaded 
1117 
 
        RNJP-TNGL is the only route in SWR notified for 25T Axle load. There is 
loading of average 4.5 rakes/day from RNJP-JSWT of the BOXN in financial year 
2023-24 and 242 rakes of BOBSN were loaded in the same period. Thus, an 
average loading is 5.4 rakes per day in this route. With running time and turn-round 
time of 24hours, with increase in production capacity of JSWT, there is likelihood of 
an increase of 20% in the requirement to cater to the loading average of 6.6 rakes 
per day. Keeping in view, the peak loading may go up to 8 rakes in a day. The final 
requirement would be 9 rakes. No further increase in traffic is possible due to line 
capacity constraints. The requirement of High-Capacity wagons would be 9 rakes for 
peak demand and 8 rakes for usual demand taking into consideration the 
turnaround, line capacity and maintenance reserve. 
         However, under PPP model due to the efforts of SWR, it has been approved 
for procurement of 12 high capacity BOBSNS rakes by JSW Minerals Rail Private 
Limited under General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS). The 
requirement of rakes will be reassessed as these rakes are inducted in the system. 
        
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee note from audit observation that SWR Administration incurred 
an extra expenditure amounting to Rs 5.22 crore towards haulage of 781 rakes in 
excess and this would continue till Railway Administration deploys BOXNHA rakes 
for operation on RNJP to JSWT route. From the submission of the Ministry, the 
Committee find that SWR was given BOBSNM wagons which have payload of 69T 
on 25T Axle load and better turn round time because of loading time of 2.5hrs only 
against 8 hrs of BOXNEL wagons. With Engine on Load unloading facility in 
BOBSNM1, the Rolling Stock detention is further reduced by saving time in bringing 
loco and the attachment, pressure ready, BPC validation, etc. BOBSNM1 wagons 
were introduced because the customer, JSW (T) has constructed and installed the 
necessary infrastructure for unloading of BOBSNM1 on the basis of better efficiency 
in operation. Hence, there was no revenue loss to the Railways. The Committee are 
of the view that SWR should take care that line capacity of notified route is optimally 
utilized. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Railways need to 

 
 
12 
 
ensure that appropriate rakes with higher PCC are supplied on the Tornagallu – 
Ranjitpura route to ensure that continued loss of revenue due to excess haulage is 
checked forthwith. This would also result in fulfilling the basic financial logic of 
‘Money saved is money earned’. The Committee are also of the view that the 
Ministry need to examine the possibility of adoption of ‘Enterprise Resource 
Planning’ software system to streamline collection of real time data on wagon 
availability, wagon allocation, and tracking and management of cargo trains. The 
software will empower the Railways in bringing about a holistic improvement in 
resource management which will, in the long run, provide enhanced service 
reliability, sustainable growth, and increased profitability for Indian Railways.  
Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 102nd Report of  
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
                                                             
Action Taken 
The following BOBSN rakes loaded from 2020-21 to 2023-24 (Upto 21 st February, 
2024) as per the demand of JSW: 
BOBSN Rakes during the 
year 
No. of BOBSN rakes 
loaded 
2020-21 71 
2021-22 395 
2022-23 409 
2023-2024 upto 21st Feb. 
2024 
220 
Total BOBSN Rakes 
Loaded 
1095 
 
    To streamline collection of real time data on wagon availability, wagon allocation 
and tracking and management of cargo trains, there is already a software-based 
system – FOIS (Freight Operations Information System) which is presently being 
used all over Indian Railways. 
Vetting Comments of Audit: 
 “No further comments.”  
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. 
No.243/Rly/SWR/12-44/2021 dated 15.04.2024 . 
 
 
  

 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
            NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
            
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                              K. C. VENUGOPAL 
12 December, 2024               Chairperson, 
21Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
16 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 9th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 12th DECEMBER 2024 FROM 1530 HRS. ONWARDS 
The Committee met on Thursday from 1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 12th December, 
2024 in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6. Prof. Sougata Ray 
7. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
10. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
11. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12.   Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
13.   Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
14.   Dr. K. Laxman 
15.   Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
16.   Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pankaj Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Atul Bhave  - Deputy Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Mehta  - Deputy Secretary 
7. Dr. Faiz Ahmad  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Ms. Atreyee Das   - Dy. CAG 
2. Ms. Smita S. Chaudhari   - Dy. CAG 
3. Shri Samar Kant Thakur - Director General 
4. Shri Gurveen Sindhu - Director General 
 
PART A 
XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
PART B 
 Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson stated that the following three draft reports 
may be taken up for consideration and adoption :-  
a) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; 
b) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX; and 
c) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 102nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on “Loss of opportunity to earn additional freight and extra expenditure on 
Haulage: SWR”. 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in 
the light of factual verification done by the Audit.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting 
has been kept on record. 
 
 
******** 
  

 
 
18 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 3 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos.  1, 2 and 3 
Total: 3 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 