36 
PUNCTUALITY AND TRAVEL 
TIME IN TRAIN OPERATIONS IN 
INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
PAC NO. 2430 
 
T H I R T Y  S I X T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PUNCTUALITY AND TRAVEL TIME IN TRAIN 
OPERATIONS IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
  
 
Pr es e nt ed to Lok  S abha  on: 0 4. 02. 2026 
Lai d i n Raj ya S abha on:  1 9. 12. 2025 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
 
 
 
 
December 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


i 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2024-25) (ii)  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (2025-26) (iii)  INTRODUCTION (iv)  REPORT  
 
 PART – I  
I Introductory 1 
II Punctuality and Travel Time in Train Operations in Indian Railways  1 
 
 
 PART – II   
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 38 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
* Minutes 
 
1. Minutes of sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024-25) held on 24.09.2024. 
 
2. Minutes of sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) held on 02.12.2025. 
 
* To be appended later. 
  

ii 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2024-25) 
 
            Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baa lu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shan kar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita  Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmend ra Yadav  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 
  

iii 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2025-26) 
 
             Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baa lu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shan kar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta S reenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita  Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmend ra Yadav  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva   
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash           -               Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania          -               Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad                    -               Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26), having been authorized by the 
Committee, do present this Thirty-sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Punctuality and 
Travel Time in Train Operations in Indian Railways” based on Para 2.1 of C&AG Report 
number 22 of 2021 relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid in the Parliament on 06 
April, 2022. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2024-25) selected the subject for detailed examination 
and report. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) at their sitting held on 24.09.2024. The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) 
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 02nd December 2025.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of the Report.   
 
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite 
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                    K. C. VENUGOPAL 
02 December , 2025                             Chairperson 
11 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)          Public Accounts Committee 
 

PART-I 
Introduction 
 
1. The Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) selected the subject “Punctuality and 
Travel Time in Train Operations in Indian Railways” based on Chapter 2 of C&AG 
Report No. 22 of 2021 in view of perennial issue of delays and issues arising from 
average travel time leaving enough scope for improvement in the operational 
framework.  
 
2. The C&AG Report No. 22 of 2021 for the year ended March 2020 contains 
significant results of the compliance audit of the Ministry of Railways of the Union 
Government in Chapter 2 of the said report, Audit reviewed the policy adopted by Indian 
Railways in relation to two mobility outcomes- Punctuality and Travel Time and in their 
overview have stated that there has been 0.18 per cent improvement in punctuality 
performance of Express trains, 0.61 per cent improvement in the average speed of 
Express trains and decrease of 9.72 per cent in the average speed of Goods trains.  
Further, the target for achieving speed of 160 Kmph is getting revised from 1960 
onward. 
 
3. The Committee considered the subject for detailed examination, took oral 
evidences of  the  representatives  of  Ministries  of  Railways on 24 September, 2024 
and  obtained written  replies  on  the  same.  Based on the oral evidence and written 
replies, the comprehensive examination of the subject is discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
Punctuality and Travel Time in Train Operations 
 
4. Indian Railways (IR), which is also known as the lifeline of the nation is one of the 
world’s largest rail networks with 68,103 route Kilometers as on 31 March, 2021.  It 
traverses the entire length and breadth of our nation connecting different regions and 
States.  The Indian Railways system carries both freight and passenger carrying trains 
on the same track. The Indian Railways has become the 4th Railways to carry 1 Billion 
tonnes freight traffic in terms of originating loading. This has caused considerable 
increase in the number of freight trains. Also, due to persistent & burgeoning demands 
from all quarters, additional passenger carrying trains are to be introduced year on year.  
The inclusion of additional freight and passenger carrying trains with speed differentials 
has further crammed the existing congested system taking its toll in the form of loss in 
punctuality of passenger carrying trains and difficulty in smooth and faster movement of 
freight trains thus affecting the throughput. 
 
5. Punctuality in train operations is an important element in the quality of service for 
both passenger and freight transport on IR.  IR has been making efforts to improve the 
punctuality of passenger and freight transport on IR.  IR has been making efforts to 
improve the punctuality of train services and also reducing the running time between 
two pairs of stations by way of better time tabling, improved infrastructure and rolling 

2 
 
stock.  The punctuality performance of Indian Railways during the year 2021-22 was 
recorded at 90.48% as compared to 75.6% recorded in 2019-20. 
 
 
Measuring Punctuality benchmark 
 
6. The Ministry in its background note on punctuality performance has stated further 
as under: 
 
“The constant endeavor of the Indian Railways is to become the leader in the 
nation's transportation sector by providing modern, reliable, safe, customer-led 
and customer -focused services to the nation. Punctuality is an important 
element in the quality of service for both passenger and freight transport on IR.  
IR has been making efforts to improve the punctuality of train services and also 
reducing the running time between two pairs of stations by way of better time 
tabling, improved infrastructure and rolling stock. The punctuality performance of 
Indian Railways during the year 2024-25 (upto August) was recorded at 78.67% 
as compared to 73.62% recorded in 2023-24. Indian Railways measures 
punctuality on terminating basis. However, punctuality monitoring is done at 
originating point and also at en-route stations at Divisional and Zonal levels 
using real-time on line Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS). Indian 
Railways regularly monitors and takes corrective action for cases of punctuality 
loss at Divisional, Zonal and Railway Board levels. Digitalized electronic 
systems like Data loggers, Real Time Information Systems (RTIS) fitted 
locomotives etc.  are being proliferated on Indian Railways for prompt and 
reliable reporting of punctuality.  Time-Tabling is now done on a more scientific 
manner to run Passenger trains punctually in the most organized way. However, 
there are unforeseen factors like equipment failure and external factors like 
weather, alarm chain pulling, cattle run over, law and order cases etc. which are 
spontaneous and beyond the control of operations besides trains detained due 
to safety and infrastructure improvement works.  All these have bearing on the 
punctuality.” 
 
7. As per Audit, the IR measures the punctuality of trains at the terminating stations. 
In other countries, it is measured at the originating point, intermediate station, and at 
terminating stations. In addition, for measuring punctuality, IR provides an allowance of 
15 minutes delay with reference to the scheduled time. Other countries have a much 
stricter threshold as shown in Table 2.3. 
 
Table 2.3: Yardstick for measuring punctuality in different countries 
Country Punctuality Yardstick 
Japan In seconds 22 

3 
 
Netherlands 3 minutes 
Germany and Russia 5 minutes 
Great Britain 10 minutes 
India 15 minutes 
 
Audit also analyzed the data for Mail/Express trains for 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 
from ICMS report number 201 and noticed that on an average 13,15,456 trains are 
reported through ICMS per annum. Of these, only 29.64 per cent of trains (3,89,877 
trains) reached on time (RT) and 20.17 per cent of trains (2,65,391 trains) arrived before 
time (BT). Remaining 50.19 per cent of trains (6,60,188 trains) are delayed. Before time 
cases indicates poor timetabling by provision of extra running time.  
 
8. When asked about the reason for the Ministry to measure punctuality only at the 
terminating stations, contrary to global best practices that also measure at originating 
and intermediate stations and any plans to revise this methodology to align the 
measurement of punctuality with international standards and practices, the Ministry 
stated as under: 
 
“On Indian Railways, though, punctuality is measured on terminating-basis, its 
monitoring is done at originating point and en-route stations at Divisional and 
Zonal level using real-time on-line system of Integrated Coaching Management 
System (ICMS).Thus, the monitoring of running is done on a continuous and  
real-time basis, and efforts are made to ensure punctual running at every leg of 
journey. Besides, adoption of Global best practices/ methodologies is an                   
on-going process.” 
 
9. When asked about the reason for decline in punctuality from 79% in 2012-13 to 
69.23% in 2018-19 despite allowance of a 15-minute delay when measuring punctuality 
and the measures the Ministry are implementing to improve punctuality performance, 
particularly in zones with the poorest punctuality records, such as NCR, the Ministry 
gave the following reply: 
 
“Owing to the consistent endeavour made by Indian Railways there has been a 
significant improvement in the punctuality performance of trains which was 
75.69% during 2019-20 and 90.48% during 2021-22. The punctuality 
performance of NCR for the corresponding periods stood at 55.12% and 80.24% 
respectively. Moreover, effort for improvement in punctuality performance is a 
continuous and ongoing process over Indian Railways.” 
 
10. On being asked whether the Ministry justify the increase in the number of train 
services (by 20%) as a factor for the decline in punctuality and If so, does it not run in 

4 
 
conflict with the developmental aspirations and parameters and the steps being taken to 
balance the introduction of new services with maintaining punctuality, the Ministry made 
the following submission: 
 
“In a vast country like ours, there is an ever increasing demand for travel and 
Indian Railways have to meet the travelling demands, within the limited resources 
available. The demand far exceeds the resources. The increase in the number of 
services from various stations to the prominent destinations, adds to the 
saturation/over-saturation of the sections, thereby impacting throughput and 
punctuality. The consistent demand for connectivity in the form of provisions of 
stoppages, which are received/reflected by the large number of requests for 
provision of stoppages, received from Public representatives including Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament, Members of State Legislative Assemblies/Councils, etc.  
It is pertinent to mention that not only has there been an increase in the number 
of passenger carrying services but also the number of Freight services. 
Increased economic activities and loading/carrying of Goods/Commodities by 
Freight Trains, in the absence/very limited availability of dedicated freight 
corridors, affect the level of saturation and thus punctuality as well. Operating 
within the given constraints and continuously striving to meet the aspirations of 
the passengers, consistent efforts are being made to ensure punctual running.” 
 
11. The Ministry representative made the following submission in this context: 
 
‘I have personally seen how difficult it is even to give a five-minute stop at one 
station. It is not a question of giving a stop of one minute to a train. It has a 
cascading effect. A large number of trains get affected. Only the need is, as you 
suggested, to increase the speed that we have committed. We will be able to do 
that once more and more trains go on DFC and we segregate that. We are also 
doing more and more tripling and quadrupling. The DFC will be the end of it.’ 
 
12. When the Committee enquired about the corrective actions been taken by the 
Ministry to address these delays in view of the increase in the number of delayed trains 
from 1.27 lakh in 2015-16 to 1.82 lakh in 2018-19, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The punctuality of trains during 2015-16 was 77.51% while it was 69.23% during 
2018-19.  However, owing to the consistent efforts and round the clock 
monitoring at all levels viz. at the Divisional, Zonal and Railway Board level, there 
has been a significant improvement in the punctuality performance of trains and it 
rose to  90.48% during 2021-22 and only 45.9 thousand trains showed loss of 
punctuality.  
With a view to improve punctuality, Indian Railways undertakes the assessments 
of factors impeding the punctual running of trains and initiated remedial 
measures which are both short term and long term. High priority is accorded to 
making resources available for speedy execution of critical capacity 

5 
 
augmentation as these on completion inter-alia facilitate improved efficiency and 
reliability in train operations. 
Root cause analysis is being done on a daily basis at Divisional and Zonal 
regarding the failures affecting punctual running of trains. Based on the analysis 
immediate corrective action is being done. Further, Railways have initiated 
various measures such as launching of Punctuality drives, sensitizing staff 
involved in train operations and having better co-ordination with State 
Governments and civil authorities to deal with law & order problems effectively.” 
 
13. When asked to provide detailed results from the computerized timetabling, 
grouping of trains, conflict resolution, and integrated maintenance, which were 
mentioned as potential ways to improve punctuality and the complete timelines for the 
full implementation of these initiatives, and how are their impacts planned to be 
measured, the Ministry responded as under: 
 
“The exercise of rationalization of Time Table, undertaken with the assistance of 
IIT Bombay using their traffic simulator, has concluded and since November-
2021, trains are being operated as per the rationalized time table. The major 
outcomes of the exercise included provision of integrated maintenance corridor 
blocks of 3 hours on all busy routes which help operate trains as per schedule 
and punctually.” 
 
Average speed of Trains 
 
14. Indian Railway introduced “Mission Raftaar” in 2016-17 aiming to double the 
average speed of freight trains from 25 Kmph to 50 Kmph and to increase the average 
speed of Mail/Express trains from 50 Kmph to 75 Kmph by the end of 2021 22.However, 
the average speed of Mail/Express trains and Goods trains in 2019 20 were only 50.6 
Kmph and 23.6 Kmph, respectively. Thus, the targets in respect of average speed are 
yet to be achieved by IR.IR has adopted rolling stock with the rated capacity of 100 to 
160 Kmph and tracks with Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) of 100-130 Kmph in 
certain sections of its network. However, audit analysis revealed that scheduled speed 
of 97.9 per cent Mail/Express trains was below 75 Kmph.   
 
Table 2.1: Average Scheduled speed of 2951 Express trains – ‘Trains at a 
Glance 2019’ 
Range of average speed (Kmph) Number of Express trains 
Below 30 60 (2.0 per cent) 
30 to 40 219 (7.42 per cent) 
40 to 50 933 (31.61 per cent) 
50 to 55 578 (19.58 per cent) 
55 to 75 1099 (37.42 per cent) 
Above 75 62 (2.1 per cent) 

6 
 
 
15. As against the objective of Mission Raftaar, the average scheduled speed of 
Mail/Express trains in East Central Railway (ECR), Eastern Railway (ER), North Eastern 
Railway (NER), Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR), Northern Railway (NR) and South 
Western Railway (SWR) remained below 50 Kmph. The minimum average schedule 
speed was 44.85 Kmph for NER and maximum was 62.04 for NCR. 
 
Annexure 2.2  
Zone wise scheduled speed summary for Mail/Express  
(Reference Para 2.1.8.2.(a)) 
Zone Average scheduled speed Zone Average scheduled speed 
CR 54.86 NWR 55.12 
ECOR 53.48 SCR 54.9 
ECR 45.62 SECR 56.01 
ER 49.72 SER 56.71 
KR 53.55 SR 51.44 
NCR 62.04 SWR 47.55 
NER 44.85 WCR 59.11 
NFR 46.45 WR 54.44 
NR 47.5 IR 52.98 
Source: ICMS COIS REPORT NO.704 
 
16. What specific measures has the Ministry undertaken to achieve the 
objectives of "Mission Raftaar" in light of the shortfall in the targeted speeds for 
Mail/Express and Goods trains as found in the Audit para? 
“In order to achieve the optimum speed of the passenger carrying trains, 
Indian Railways (IR) have taken a number of steps including 
rationalization of Time Tabling, with the assistance of IIT Mumbai using 
their traffic simulator, and has been able to enhance the speeds of over 
2000 trains. In addition to this, IR has been replacing conventional 
coaches (ICF coaches) by modern light weight LHB coaches having state-
of-the art technology. At the end of 2023-24, more than 50% of the stock 
holding of IR constitutes LHB stock. IR has also been proliferating Vande 
Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains.” 
17. On being asked whether the Ministry can provide a timeline or roadmap for 
achieving the targets of doubling the speed of freight trains to 50 kmph and increasing 
the speed of Mail/Express trains to 75 kmph, the Ministry made the following 
submission: 

7 
 
 
In respect to infrastructural upgradation, emphasis is being given to enhance 
sectional speed upto 160 Kmph for Delhi-Howrah and Delhi-Mumbai route and 
upto 130 Kmph for remaining routes. Further, 100% electrification of the routes 
have been done, multi-tracking is being done to ease congestion and elimination 
of level crossings on Golden Quadrilateral and Golden Diagonal routes are also 
being done. It would be appreciated that the adoption/upgradation of technology, 
induction of rolling stock like LHB having high speed potential, multitracking 
works, introduction of services like Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and 
Amrit Bharat trains would help Indian Railways speed up train services in a 
significant way. 
It is submitted that allotment of rakes and their movement over Indian Railways 
are dynamic in nature, and the freight movement on Indian Railways depends on 
a complex interplay of various factors. In order to ensure seamless and fast 
freight movement, Indian Railways has been taking many measures including 
infrastructure projects such as Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) and 
Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) to create dedicated freight path to 
give exclusive access to freight trains. Completion of targeted super critical and 
critical doubling, multi - tracking and other traffic facility works will lead to higher 
speed of freight trains. Completion of rail flyover and bypass works is being 
planned and ensured so that congested junctions are bypassed, leading to 
higher freight train speed. Higher horsepower locomotives are being inducted. 
Likewise terminals and their connectivity is being improved as well. Moreover, 
Ministry of Railways has been approaching the issue of freight movement in a 
holistic manner and has been addressing the issue through multiple 
synchronized strategies – both short term and long term. All these strategies will 
have a positive impact on average speed of freight trains and transit times in 
railways transportation.” 
 
18. As regards maximum permissible speed (MPS) Audit in its report has stated that 
the target of achieving 160 Kmph speed of Coaching trains and 100 Kmph speed of 
Freight trains, were fixed on several occasions between 1960 to 2016-17. The timeline 
to increase the speed was constantly revised. However, the same has not been 
achieved until 2019-20. Thus, even after many years of planning and targeting, there 
has been no change in the MPS of Rajdhani and Shatabdi trains since their induction. 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains and other Mail/Express trains have a maximum permissible 
speed (MPS) of 130 Kmph and 110 Kmph respectively in India. As of March 2020, the 
top speed in India is 160 Kmph and that too for a few special trains in limited segments.  
At the end of December 2019, out of 9890 RKMs of Golden Quadrilateral Golden 
Diagonal routes over the IR network, only 3030 RKMs (30.6 per cent) are fit for train 
operation at the speed of 130 Kmph. 
 
19. On being enquired as to how the Ministry proposes to address the significant gap 
between the rolling stock's rated speed capacity (100-160 kmph) and the current 
average operational speeds, the Ministry stated as under: 

8 
 
 
“As has been submitted earlier also, the average speed of passenger carrying 
trains depends upon various factors which include Maximum Permissible Speed 
(MPS) of a section, number of stoppages, condition/type of the coaching stock 
being used, traction used, Speed restrictions, Gradients and curves, etc.   It 
would be appreciated that to ensure optimal utilization of the speed potential of 
rolling stocks, all passenger carrying trains are charted at Maximum Permissible 
Speed (MPS) of the sections over which they operate. The existing gap between 
the operational speeds and the rated speeds of the rolling stock would narrow 
down gradually with the enhancements of sectional speeds for which works are 
being undertaken by the Indian Railways as a continuous and on-going 
exercise.” 
 
20. When enquired about the primary reasons for underutilization of existing 
infrastructure and challenges hindering the expansion of track sections to support 
speeds of 130 kmph or higher and the steps being proposed to be taken by the 
Government to enhance infrastructure commensurately with the increase in the number 
of passenger services in order to achieve the targeted speed, the Ministry stated as 
below: 
 
“The sectional speeds on IR are 110 kmph & 130 kmph and to ensure optimal 
utilization of the speed potential of rolling stocks and the sectional speeds, all 
passenger carrying trains are charted at Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) of 
the sections over which they operate. Speeding up train services and 
rationalizing the allowance were also part of rationalization exercise. This in turn 
helped minimize conflicts in the existing time table and helped in optimal 
utilization of the existing infrastructure.” 
 
21. On being enquired as to why has there been an exponential increase in 
introduction of new trains in recent without commensurate enhancement of the 
infrastructure, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
“IR has taken/is taking up all critical infrastructure enhancement works to enable 
meet the demand of both the Passenger and the Freight segments.  However, in 
a vast country like ours, there is an ever increasing demand for travel and Indian 
Railways have to meet the travelling demands, within the limited resources 
available. The demand far exceeds the resources. The increase in the number of 
services adds to the saturation/over-saturation of the sections, thereby impacting 
throughput and punctuality. The consistent demand for connectivity is also to be 
taken care of by the provisions of stoppages.  It is pertinent to mention that not 
only has there been an increase in the number of passenger carrying services 
but also Freight services. Increased economic activities and loading/carrying of 
Goods/Commodities by Freight Trains, in the absence/very limited availability of 
dedicated freight corridors, affect the level of saturation. Operating within the 

9 
 
given constraints, IR is continuously striving to meet the aspirations of the 
passengers.” 
 
22. When asked about further actions planned by the Ministry to sustain and 
enhance these improvements in train speeds and the criteria for selecting the 2000 
trains whose speeds were enhanced and whether there are any plans to extend this 
exercise to other trains, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The exercise was undertaken on the entire Indian Railways encompassing all 
trains. Trains were speeded up inter alia by removal of excess time allowances, if 
any, rationalization of stoppage time at stations enroute and by compaction of 
trains. Indian Railways (IR) constantly strives and would continue with its 
endeavour to enhance the speed of passenger carrying trains and rationalize 
time tables of passenger carrying trains.  
In view of the fact that introduction of new services, extension and increase in 
frequencies of existing trains being an on-going and regular exercise, Indian 
Railways undertakes time tabling exercise every year and accordingly launches 
new time tables, incorporating all these changes. IR also undertakes Zero Base 
time tabling, as per requirement.” 
 
23. When asked as to why has there been no significant change in the Maximum 
Permissible Speed (MPS) of Rajdhani, Shatabdi, and other Mail/Express trains since 
their induction and steps being taken by the Ministry to ensure that all trains with LHB 
coaches are scheduled at maximum permissible limit and what are the safety concerns 
and standards that need to be addressed to increase MPS across more segments of 
the network, the Ministry gave the following reply: 
 
“Acquisition of new coaches for replacement of over-aged stock is a continuous 
process on lndian Railways. Coaches are replaced after attaining their prescribed 
codal life or prematurely in case of heavy damage to structural members.  
lR has proliferated LHB coaches which are technologically superior with features 
like Anti climbing arrangement' Air suspension (Secondary) with failure indication 
system and less corrosive shell. These coaches have better riding and aesthetics 
as compared to the conventional ICF coaches and have design/operating speed 
of 180/160 kmph. The Production units of Indian Railways are producing only 
LHB coaches from April 2018 onwards. The production of LHB coaches has 
continually increased during the years and more than 35700 LHB coaches have 
been turned out. 
ln addition, Vande Bharat trains introduced over the lR network are Semi-High 
speed train services with higher acceleration and deceleration, design/operating 
speed of maximum 180/160 kmph. These trains have state of the art facilities 
and enhanced safety features such as Automatic Train Protection System 
(KAVACH), Jerk free semi-permanent couplers, Automatic Plug and lC Doors, 
Fully Sealed Gangways, Ergonomic seats, CCTVs, Coach condition monitoring 
System (CCMS), Special lavatory in DTC for Divyangjan passengers, Emergency 

10 
 
Alarm Push buttons and Talk Back Units, Platform side cameras including front & 
rear view cameras outside the Driving coach, lmproved Fire safety provisions etc. 
Enhancement of speed of trains is a continuous and an ongoing process over 
lndian Railways. 
Further, for catering to wider population, 2 Amrit Bharat trains have been 
introduced over lR network and running in regular service in ER (MLDT-SMVB) & 
ECR (DBG-ANVT). It has been decided to further proliferate these Amrit Bharat 
Trains.  
Maintenance, Renewal and Upgradation of track on any section are taken up 
based on the speed potential of section decided by classification of route.  
Indian Railway Broad Gauge track has been classified in different groups based 
on future maximum permissible speeds as under: 
Group A: Speed upto 160 kmph. 
Group B: Speed upto 130 kmph.  
Group C: Suburban sections of Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata. 
Group D: Speed upto 110 kmph. 
Trains are introduced at maximum permissible speed (MPS) based on the 
sectional speed of the section depending upon classification. 
Sectional speed over 23000 track kms covering Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) & 
Diagonal routes and other ‘B’ routes has been raised to 130 kmph. Further, 
works for raising of sectional speed to 160 kmph on existing New Delhi-Mumbai 
and New Delhi-Howrah routes are in progress. For movement of freight trains at 
100 kmph, rails of higher grade (R260 and above) are required to sustain the 
increased dynamic loads. Indian Railway has already started using R260 rails at 
its network for renewal/construction works since 2021. Once these rails are laid 
on the required routes, the goods train can be permitted at 100 kmph, subject to 
observance of other protocols. 
Presently, the trains operating with LHB stocks are being charted at Maximum 
Permissible Speed (MPS). However, there are limiting factors like level of 
sectional utilization, use of mixed stock, operation of mixed traffic, etc. Continuing 
with its plan for induction and proliferation of LHB coaches, Indian Railways, 
during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, have converted 886 rakes, which were 
being used for operating around 572 pairs of trains, into LHB rakes. Going 
ahead, during 2024-25 (upto September-2024), 58 rakes have additionally been 
converted.” 
 
24. When asked about the slow progress in conversion of ICF coaches into LHB 
coaches, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Replacement of coaches is a continuous process and is carried out based on 
condition/completing codal life etc. The Production units of Indian Railways are 
producing only LHB coaches from April 2018 onwards. The production of LHB 
coaches has continually increased during the years and more than 35,700 LHB 
coaches have been turned out.” 
 

11 
 
25. When asked about the concrete action taken to address the critical issues 
affecting the punctuality and travel time in train operations across India, especially for 
conversion of ICF coaches into LHB coaches and the target date for achieving the 
ambitious speed of 160 kilometre per hour, following submission has been made by the 
Ministry: 
 
“Enhancement of speed of Trains is a continuous and ongoing process over 
Indian Railways. With a view to enhance the speed of the trains and their 
punctuality , IR is adopting a two prong approach- (a) making efforts to enhance 
capacity & adoption of modern technology (b) ensure optimal utilization of existing 
resources.  
Accordingly, in respect to infrastructural upgradation, emphasis is being given to 
enhance sectional speed upto 160 Kmph for Delhi-Howrah and Delhi-Mumbai 
route upto 130 Kmph for remaining routes. Further, 100% electrification of the 
routes have been done, multi-tracking is being done to ease congestion and 
elimination of level crossings on Golden Quadrilateral and Golden Diagonal 
routes are also being done.  
IR are replacing conventional coaches (ICF coaches) by modern light weight LHB 
coaches having state-of-the art technology.  At the end of 2023-24, more than 
50% of the stock holding of IR constitutes LHB stock.  IR is also  proliferating 
Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains, which are faster 
services and have state-of-the art technology. 
For better utilization of existing resources and to achieve the optimum speed of 
the passenger carrying trains, Indian Railways (IR) have undertaken  
rationalization of Time Table, with the assistance of IIT Mumbai using their traffic 
simulator. Standardization of rakes has helped in better utilization of assets and 
also helped improve punctuality of services.” 
 
26. When asked about the reasons for the regional disparities in train speeds, with 
certain zones like NCR achieving higher average speeds and others like NER lagging 
behind and the specific actions being planned to address these disparities and ensure a 
more uniform speed enhancement across all zones, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Average speed of passenger carrying trains being dependent on various factors 
like Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) of a section, condition/type of the 
coaching stock being used, traction used, Speed restrictions, Gradients and 
curves, number of stoppages etc. As the sectional speeds on IR are generally 
below 130 kmph, and extent of such sections is not uniform over all the zonal 
railways, the thus average speeds are also not uniform. Besides, the number of 
stoppages, traffic mix and its volume, level of congestion etc. also have a bearing 
on the average speed of trains.    
Average speed is governed by sectional speed of the routes, which depend upon 
route classification irrespective of boundaries of railway zones. Zonal Railways 
which contain major parts of Group A & B routes and are having favourable 
terrains will have higher average speeds.” 

12 
 
 
27. When the Committee asked as to what concrete outputs have been achieved till 
date and what limitations have been faced, the Ministry replied as below: 
 
“In January, 2020, the manual capturing of arrival/departure of Mail/Express 
trains was around 48% and the remaining 52% was automatic which has 
increased upto 95%, at present. The percentage of automatic updating of timings 
is monitored on a daily basis as an index of efficiency of punctual operation and 
monitored through ICMS reports. Moreover, the integrity of the data relayed is 
very important as it is in public domain through NTES. The limitations include 
non- availability of automatic data capture facilities at some stations, occasional 
RTIS failures and lack of RTIS in some Locos which are not so equipped. 
However, efforts to reduce failures and proliferation of Real Time Information 
Systems (RTIS) fitted locomotives is an on-going process.” 
 
28. When the Committee enquired about the steps contemplated to overcome the 
unforeseen factors like equipment failure and external factors like weather, alarm chain 
pulling, cattle run over, law and order cases etc. which are spontaneous and beyond the 
control of operations besides trains detained due to safety and infrastructure 
improvement works and have a bearing on the punctuality, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
 
“Some of the external factors viz. weather (fog, excessive rains resulting in line 
wash out, heavy storms damaging electrical poles / wires), state law & order 
problem like sitting on dharna on the tracks (resulting in cancellation / diversion of 
trains) have direct bearing on punctuality of trains, which are completely 
unforeseen and beyond the control of Railway administration. However, to the 
extent possible, IR takes steps like coordinating with the State Authorities, to 
mitigate the impacts of such events on punctual running of trains. While 
undertaking infrastructural improvement and safety related works, IR has to strike 
a balance between Passenger Safety & Passenger Convenience (i.e. 
punctuality), and Safety takes precedence.”  
 
Table 2.3: Yardstick for measuring punctuality in different countrie 
Country Punctuality Yardstick 
Japan In seconds 22 
Netherlands 3 minutes 
Germany and Russia 5 minutes 
Great Britain 10 minutes 

13 
 
India 15 minutes 
 
29. On being enquired whether any comparison had been made with the 
achievements made by China in the field of improvement in average speed where in the 
two decades since 1990, average passenger speed has increased by 60% against their 
achievement of 5%, the Ministry gave the following reply: 
 
“While Indian Railways is always open to adoption of new technologies & 
practices, it may be appreciated that the operating conditions as well as socio-
political conditions in India are different from the conditions prevailing in China. 
As such, a comparison of speeds between the two countries will not be justified. 
However, speeding up of trains is a constant endeavour and continuous process 
on Indian Railways.” 
 
30. When asked about the steps taken and achievements made by Indian Railways 
to reduce the travel time and improve the punctuality and overall performance to the 
level of best global practices that measure the punctuality and travel time at originating 
and intermediate stations, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“In its constant endeavour to maintain/ensure punctual running of  passenger 
trains, Indian railways takes corrective measures w.r.t. the causes affecting 
punctuality.  Indian Railways have an integrated digital platform for monitoring of 
train operations comprising Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) 
and Control Office Application (COA) which are integrated with National Train 
Enquiry System (NTES).  Progressive advancement for automatic uptake of 
timings by the train movement itself, is being achieved through GPS devices 
fitted locomotives {Real-Time Train Information System (RTIS) and Remote 
Monitoring and Management of Locomotives and Trains (REMMLOT)} and Data 
loggers integrated with the station signaling system. Accordingly, the automatic 
data capturing of arrival/departure of Mail/Express trains has been increased 
upto 95%. Furthermore, the percentage of automatic updating of timings is 
monitored on a daily basis as an index of efficiency of punctual operation and 
monitored through ICMS reports.” 
 
31. When asked as to why the desired improvement in critical areas like rakes 
standardisation, modernisation, use of advanced technology, time bound completion of 
maintenance operations, signalling system, emergency response system etc. could not 
be achieved to improve the passenger experience in relation to the travel time and 
punctuality despite the fact that there has been significant investments of Rs.22.5 lakh 
crore in railway infrastructure over the past decade, the following submission has been 
made by the Ministry: 
 
“With a view to provide better safety and travel experience, Indian Railways have 
inducted LHB coaches and have also undertaken the standardization of LHB 

14 
 
rakes for  better utilisation of coaching assets. The extant policy on 
Standardization of LHB rakes, issued in October, 2023,  provide for 12 (Twelve) 
General  class & Sleeper class non- AC coaches and 08(eight) AC-Coaches, in a 
train of 22 coaches, thereby providing greater accommodation for the passengers 
using General and non-AC Sleeper Coaches.  
 
As a part of its modernisation, Indian Railways (IR) are replacing conventional 
coaches (ICF coaches) by modern light weight LHB coaches having state-of-the 
art technology.  At the end of 2023-24, more than 50% of the stock holding of IR 
constitutes LHB stock. Continuing with its plan for induction and proliferation of 
LHB coaches, Indian Railways, during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, have 
converted 886 rakes, which were being used for operating around 572 pairs of 
trains, into LHB rakes. Going ahead, during 2024-25 (upto September-2024), 58 
rakes have additionally been converted. 
 
Further, as a part of the adoption/upgradation of modern technology, faster 
services like Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains are 
being introduced.  Introduction and proliferation of Vande Bharat services, which 
are faster services having better speed potential,  is a major milestone in the 
developmental history of IR. Presently, 136 Vande Bharat services, 2 Namo 
Rapid Rail and 4 Amrit Bharat services are operational over the IR network. 
Introduction of more such services would help Indian Railways speed up train 
services in a significant way.  
With a view to improve the punctuality of trains, IR has taken a number of steps 
which include rigorous monitoring, standardization of rakes and provision of 
spare rake, removal of infrastructure bottlenecks in a planned manner, 
rationalization of Time Table in a scientific manner, provision of Bye-pass at 
stations to avoid engine reversal etc.  Use of an integrated digital platform for 
monitoring of train operations comprising the Integrated Coaching Management 
System (ICMS) and Control Office Application (COA) and their integration with 
National Train Enquiry System (NTES), used by passengers is a major way 
forward.  Progressive advancement for automatic uptake of timings by the train 
using  GPS fitted locomotives {Real-Time Train Information System (RTIS) and 
Remote Monitoring and Management of Locomotives and Trains (REMMLOT)} 
and use of Data loggers in an integrated manner with the station signaling 
system, are helping in realistic monitoring and reporting of Punctuality of 
Passenger carrying trains.”  
 
 
32.  When the Committee enquired as to how does the Ministry plan to balance the 
introduction of new train services with maintaining the punctuality of existing services 
and whether there were any plans to upgrade signaling systems or use advanced 
technology to better manage increased traffic, the Ministry responded as under: 
 

15 
 
“In view of increasing demand of train service, Indian Railways regularly 
introduces new train services; at the same time making all efforts to ensure 
punctuality of existing services by taking measures like regular monitoring of 
passenger carrying trains at Divisional, Zonal and Railway Board levels and 
taking corrective actions for cases of punctuality loss. Necessary time table 
changes, as and when required are also undertaken, so as to minimize/eliminate 
conflicts.  
Upgradation of Signalling System is a continuous process and Relay/Electronic 
interlocking, Digital  Axle counters, Electric Point machines, LED signals, Electric 
lifting barrier, data logging and failure alert system etc have been provided for 
safe and efficient operations.  For dealing with more train services on existing 
network provision of Intermediate Block Signals (IBS) and Automatic Block 
Signalling (ABS) are implemented on busy sections.  
So far, Relay/Electronic interlocking on 6608 stations (99.4%), 4813 Rkm ABS 
and 770 IBS have been provided on BG network on IR.” 
 
 
33. When the Committee asked as to how does the Ministry assess the effectiveness 
of its monitoring measures to address punctuality issues and corrective actions taken by 
the Ministry based on monitoring data and their impact on reducing delays, and steps 
being taken to address primary internal factors and a detailed breakdown of external 
factors and their specific impact on train operations, the Ministry gave the following 
reply: 
“During 2024-25 train delays have been reduced by 5% as compared to that of 
2023-24. During 2023-24, the percentage of train delays was 26% and in 2024-
25 the delay of trains is 21%.  The steps takenfor improvement in punctuality are 
as under: 
● Impetus on infrastructural works such as laying of third, fourth and fifth 
lines for creation of additional paths. 
● Early commissioning of Dedicated Freight Corridors. 
● Electrification of all the BG routes. 
● Right powering of trains by utilising new generation High capacity 
locomotives. 
● Advanced new generation Vande Bharat trains quick acceleration and 
deceleration. 
● Raising sectional speeds and speed of loop lines. 
● Station yard redevelopment. 
● Provision of fixed maintenance blocks on all sections  
● Removal of Permanent speed restrictions. 
● Time-tabling through simulation software.” 
 
Besides, “The External factors include Alarm Chain Pulling, Miscreant Activity, 
Agitation, Run Over, Law & Order, Incident, Bad Weather, Level crossing Gate 
etc., while the internal factors include- 

16 
 
● Asset failures include Diesel Loco, Electric Loco, Carriage & Wagon, 
Signal & Telecom, OHE/Grid Failure, Electric defect, Accident etc. 
● Infrastructural and maintenance work includes Construction, Engineering, 
Non Interlocking, Planned Block, Railway Electrification etc. 
● Congestion-Traffic, Out of Path, Line not clear etc. 
Based on assessments of factors impeding the punctual running of trains, 
remedial measures both short term and long term are initiated. High priority is 
accorded to making resources available for speedy execution of critical capacity 
augmentation as these on completion inter-alia facilitate improved efficiency and 
reliability in train operations. 
Root cause analysis is being done on a daily basis at Divisional and Zonal level 
regarding the failures affecting punctual running of trains. Based on the analysis 
immediate corrective action is being done. Further, Railways have initiated 
various measures such as launching of Punctuality drives, sensitizing staff 
involved in train operations and having better co-ordination with State 
Governments and civil authorities to deal with law & order problems effectively.” 
 
Steps towards increasing Average speed 
 
34. Audit noticed that before implementation of Mission Raftaar, the average speed 
of EMU (Electric Multiple Unit) trains in 2015-16 was 41 kmph. Despite induction of fast 
moving EMU services, the average speed decreased to 37.9 kmph during 2019-20. 
Thus, no appreciable improvement in the average speed of EMU trains was achieved 
despite conversion of trains into MEMU (Mainline Electric Multiple Unit)/ and DEMU 
(Diesel Electric Multiple Unit). 
 
35. When the Committee asked as to why has there been no significant improvement 
in the average speed of EMU services, which decreased from 41 kmph in 2015-16 to 
37.9 kmph in 2019-20 despite the introduction of MEMU/DEMU services and the 
conversion of trains to superfast categories, the Ministry in their written reply have 
stated as under: 
“As a part of "Mission Raftaar" and during the period 2015-16 and 2021-22, 414 
Passenger train services running with conventional coaches were converted into 
MEMU services. This has helped speeding up passenger trains. The speed of 
Passenger trains have increased from 33.9 kmph during 2015-16 to 37.4 Kmph 
during 2022-23. During 2015-16, on an average daily basis, 5128 sub-urban 
services were operational. This number rose to 5396 during 2019-20, impacting 
the speed of EMU services. The capacity creation and augmentation of 
infrastructural facilities, presently underway, would help improve speed of sub-
urban services.” 
In this regard, the Ministry representative submitted during evidence as under: 
‘So far as passenger trains are concerned, we are converting them more and 
more into DEMU and MEMU. Its advantage is that both sides of it have engines. 

17 
 
So, engine reversal does not take time. It saves a lot of time. The station capacity 
gets improved, and we are able to run more trains.’  
 
36. When asked about the reasons for the wide gap between the potential and actual 
speeds despite adopting rolling stock with rated capacity of 100-160 kmph and tracks 
with MPS of 100-130 kmph and the scheduled speed of 97.9% Mail/Express trains 
being below 75 kmph, the Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“As has been submitted earlier also, the average speed of passenger carrying 
trains depends upon various factors which include Maximum Permissible Speed 
(MPS) of a section, condition / type of the coaching stock being used, traction 
used, Speed restrictions, Gradients and curves, number of stoppages, etc, which 
are the limiting factors.  It would be appreciated that to ensure optimal utilization 
of the speed potential of rolling stocks, all passenger carrying trains are charted 
at Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) of the sections over which they operate. 
However, the existence of limiting factors has a bearing on the gap between the 
Potential/rated speed and the actual speed.”  
   
Decline in average speed of trains 
 
37. Audit randomly test checked travel time (Originating to Destination basis) of 300 
trains for the year 2012 and 2019. It was observed that there has been an overall 
average increase of 15 minutes in travel time for these trains. 
 
38. Referring to the Audit, when the Committee asked as to how did the Ministry 
respond to it and what were the plans to meet the benchmark, the Ministry made the 
following submission: 
 
“In order to achieve the optimum speed of the passenger carrying trains, Indian 
Railways (IR) have taken a number of steps including rationalization of Time 
Tabling, replacement of conventional coaches (ICF coaches) by modern LHB 
coaches. Accordingly, Indian Railways have speeded up over 2000 trains. 
Further, at the end of 2023-24, more than 50% of the stock holding on IR 
constitutes LHB stock. IR has also been proliferating Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat 
Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains.  
In respect to infrastructural upgradation, emphasis is being given to enhance 
sectional speed upto 160 Kmph for Delhi-Howrah and Delhi-Mumbai route upto 
130 Kmph for remaining routes. Further, 100% electrification of the routes has 
been done, multi-tracking is being done to ease congestion and elimination of 
level crossings on Golden Quadrilateral and Golden Diagonal routes are also 
being done.   
The adoption/upgradation of technology, induction of rolling stock like LHB 
coaches, multitracking works, introduction of services like Vande Bharat, Namo 
Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains would, help Indian Railways speed up 
train services in a significant way.” 

18 
 
 
39. When the Committee enquired about the trains like North East Express (12505), 
Kaifiat Express (12226) having zero per cent punctuality in 2018-19 and asked as to 
how does it match with their aspirations and the expectations of the travelers and how 
was it seen by them in the backdrop of VISION 2024, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The punctuality of 12225/26 Azamgarh-Delhi Kaifiyat Express & 12505/06 
Kamakhya-Anand Vihar (T) Express, during the year 2024-25, have improved 
and are 36%/75% and 83%/55% respectively. Further, Zonal railways have been 
asked to monitor the punctuality of the services and ensure their punctual 
running.” 
 
Criteria of Superfast trains in IR 
 
40. In May 2007, IR decided that if the average speed of a train, in both Up and 
Down directions, is a minimum 55 Kmph on Broad Gauge and 45 Kmph on Metre 
Gauge, it would be treated as a Superfast (SF) train. The benchmark of 55 Kmph for 
classifying a train as Superfast is itself low, given the MPS of rolling stock and sectional 
speed. There has been no change in the criteria of classification of SF trains since 
2007. Audit found that, out of 478 Superfast trains of IR, the scheduled speed of 123 
Superfast trains was less than 55 Kmph. 
 
41. When asked as to what measures are being taken by the Ministry to increase the 
average speed of freight trains, particularly in zones like Prayagraj division of NCR, 
where the speed is less than 30 kmph, the Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“In order to ensure seamless and fast freight movement, Indian Railways has 
been taking many measures including infrastructure projects such as Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor 
(WDFC) to create dedicated freight path to give exclusive access to freight trains. 
Completion of targeted super critical and critical doubling, multi - tracking and 
other traffic facility works will lead to higher speed of freight trains. Completion of 
rail flyover/bypass works is being planned and ensured so that congested 
junctions are bypassed, leading to higher freight train speed. Higher horsepower 
locomotives are being inducted. Likewise terminals and their connectivity are 
being improved as well. As regards Prayagraj division of NCR, yard remodeling 
of Prayagraj junction will also help in increasing freight train speeds. Work for 
doubling of connectivity between DFC and IR stations in Prayagraj division is 
under process to improve transit times over Prayagraj division.”  
 
42.  On being enquired as to how is the Ministry addressing operational conflicts in 
mixed traffic regimes where slower freight trains impede other train services and why 
has the Ministry not revised the criteria or taken corrective actions to meet the 
standards given that 123 trains categorized as Superfast are scheduled to run at 

19 
 
speeds below the minimum requirement of 55 kmph, the following submission has been 
made by the Ministry: 
 
“As per the current policy relating to categorisation of services into superfast 
trains,  the trains having an average end to end speed of above 55 Kmph are 
qualified as super fast service.  As regards the 123 trains  having speed below 
the criterion of 55 kmph of Superfast trains but still categorized as Superfast 
trains, a scrutiny of the list of 123 trains reveals as under:- 
 
S.l. Number of services in  
the list of 123 trains 
Reply 
1. 40 services  have speed over 55 kmph as per the 
current data available in ICMS 
2. 07 services  As per the existing guidelines in respect of 
trains in operation on Konkan Railway, a 
weightage of 30% on the actual average 
speed is given, to calculate the net 
average speed.   As such, the average 
speed of these trains is more than 55 
Kmph, as per data available.     
   
 Total- 47 services   
 
In respect of the remaining Superfast trains for which the speed has been found 
to be less than 55 Kmph, it is stated that at the time of introduction of these 
trains, the charting of these was done in line with the criteria fixed for Superfast 
trains and were operating well beyond 55 Kmph.  However, due to provision of 
additional stoppages after commencement of regular operation of these trains, 
the average speed of a few trains have got affected. Standing instructions are in 
place which stipulates that the extant rules regarding superfast categorization be 
strictly adhered to by the Zonal railways. The same has been reiterated in the 
month of August, 2024.” 
 
43.  When asked whether there are any plans by the Ministry to review and update 
the criteria for classifying trains as Superfast, considering that the benchmark has not 
changed since 2007, the Ministry stated as under: 
“At present, there is no proposal to review and update the criteria for classifying a 
train as Superfast train service.”  
 
44. On being asked about specific measures taken by the Ministry to improve the 
punctuality of the 23 trains that had consistently performed poorly in both 2015-16 and 
2018-19 and why did some trains, like the North East Express and Kaifiat Express, have 
zero percent punctuality in 2018-19, and what steps were taken by the Ministry made 
the following submission: 

20 
 
 
“With a view to improve punctuality, Indian Railways undertakes the 
assessments of factors impeding the punctual running of trains and initiated 
remedial measures which are both short term and long term. High priority is 
accorded to making resources available for speedy execution of critical capacity 
augmentation as these on completion inter-alia facilitate improved efficiency and 
reliability in train operations. 
Root cause analysis is being done on a daily basis at Divisional and Zonal 
regarding the failures affecting punctual running of trains. Based on the analysis 
immediate corrective action is being done. Further, Railways have initiated 
various measures such as launching of Punctuality drives, sensitizing staff 
involved in train operations and having better co-ordination with State 
Governments and civil authorities to deal with law & order problems effectively.  
The punctuality of 12225/26 Azamgarh-Delhi Kaifiyat Express & 12505/06 
Kamakhya-Anand Vihar (T) Express, during the year 2024-25, have improved 
and are 36%/75% and 83%/55% respectively. Further, Zonal railways have been 
asked to monitor the punctuality of the services and ensure their punctual 
running.” 
 
45. When asked as to why has there been an increase of only 3.5% in average 
speed over the last ten years despite investments in track infrastructure, rolling stock, 
and signaling systems and what are the main challenges preventing more substantial 
progress and what plans do the Ministry have for further infrastructure enhancements to 
meet the speed targets of Mission Raftaar, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Adoption/upgradation of technology, induction of rolling stock like LHB having 
high speed potential, multitracking works have enabled Indian Railways, 
introduce faster services like Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit 
Bharat trains. However, IR is still in the phase of transition with limiting factors 
like operation of mixed traffic, congestion at terminals, saturations of line-
capacity, etc. still persisting. Number of stoppages and introduction of new 
services etc. also have a bearing on the average speed. 
Conversion of conventional ICF coaches into LHB coaches is being done in a 
phased manner. The full functionality of the DFCs would help reduce congestion 
on IR network, although in a limited manner. However, it will help improve the 
speed and punctuality of passenger carrying trains. The on-going infrastructural 
works help improve train operations both in terms of speed and punctuality.” 
 
46. On being enquired about the detailed data on punctuality measured continuously 
and in real-time, as claimed in response to the Audit, and how it compares with the 
terminating station measurements and what specific steps are being taken by the 
Ministry to address the significant regional disparities in average train speeds and 
punctuality across different zones, the Ministry responded as below: 
 

21 
 
“The punctuality, on Indian Railways, is measured on terminating-basis. 
However, monitoring of punctuality is done at originating point and en-route 
stations at Divisional and Zonal level using real-time on-line system of Integrated 
Coaching Management System (ICMS). As such, monitoring of running is done 
on a continuous and real-time basis.  
The automatic data capturing of arrival/departure of Mail/Express trains has been 
increased upto 95%. The percentage of automatic updating of timings is 
monitored on a daily basis as an index of efficiency of punctual operation and 
monitored through ICMS reports.  Moreover, the integrity of the data relayed is 
very important as it is in public domain through NTES. 
The regional/zonal differences can be attributed to non-uniformity ofsectional 
speeds, territorial coverage under 110kmh/130 kmph, the differences in the 
volume of traffic handled, the traffic-mix, level of congestion etc.   All these have 
a bearing on the average speed of trains.” 
 
 Punctuality of Goods trains 
 
47. As against the target of IR to double the average speed of freight trains, the 
actual average speed of freight trains declined by 7.45 per cent. The slow moving 
freight trains reduce track availability, thereby impacting the passenger trains also. Most 
of the zones have not incorporated Goods paths (time window for operation of freight 
train) in their Working Time table. Also, the schedule of freight trains is largely not laid 
down/ fixed. As a result, punctuality in the running of freight trains cannot be measured. 
 
48. When the Committee asked as to why has the average speed of freight trains 
declined by 7.45% against the target of doubling the speed and why have most zones 
not incorporated Goods paths in their Working Time Tables and what actions are being 
taken by the Ministry to ensure the inclusion of freight train paths in all zones and how 
does the Ministry plan to establish fixed schedules for freight trains to allow for the 
measurement of their punctuality and fixed time of delivery for consignments,the 
Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“On IR network, both coaching and freight trains run simultaneously, and 
coaching/passenger trains are given priority over goods trains. Therefore, it is not 
possible to have enforceable time-tabled goods paths. Even in case of a few 
time-tabled freight trains, they are rarely able to run on their scheduled paths due 
to various reasons such as: 
(i) Aggregation of demand due to uncertainty in placement of indents along with 
timely supply of empty rakes and uncertainty in completion of loading time 
(ii) The challenge in matching the demand and supply at origin and destination 
points 
(iii) Network capacity and terminal handling constraints as well as congestions 
on-route/en-route junction and congestions due to freight terminal capacity, 
traction change due to incomplete electrification, engine reversals, out of path 
coaching trains and asset failures etc.   

22 
 
(iv) Heterogeneous traffic moving on common IR network as well as speed 
differentials due to different permissible speeds for different freight stock for 
loaded and empty stock and for weighted and unweighted trains. 
Indian Railways is working out freight corridors in time tables to streamline the 
running of freight trains. With capacity augmentation (multi-tracking) and junction 
easing (RORs and bypasses), freight traffic movement shall be seamless across 
various zones.” 
Further, “Ministry of Railways had started schedule-based Time table container 
train services on 25 streams. However, it is to be noted that on IR network, both 
coaching and freight trains run simultaneously, and coaching/passenger trains 
are given priority over goods trains. Therefore, it is not possible to have 
enforceable time-tabled goods paths. Moreover, Ministry of Railways has been 
approaching the issue of freight movement in a holistic manner and has been 
addressing the issue through multiple synchronized strategies – both short term 
and long term. All these strategies will have a positive impact on average speed 
of freight trains and transit times in railways transportation.” 
 
Table 2.8: Delay of Goods trains at interchange points 
Name of the interchange 
point 
Zones Range of detention 
during 2018-19 
Jharsuguda SER – SECR 2-11936 minutes 
BHC ECoR – SCR 151-248 minutes 
Odur SR – SCR 5-40 minutes 
NKJ SECR – WCR 171 -262 minutes 
Gudur SCR – SR 2-213 minutes 
ITR SECR 66-186 minutes 
Coaching train delayed in 2018-19 at Interchange point 
Gudur SR - SCR 1384 
Duvvada SCR - ECOR 758 
Nagpur CR-SECR 482 
 
 

23 
 
49. On being enquired as to why has there been a little improvement in reducing 
travel time, improving punctuality despite the significant increase in capital investments 
since 2015, the Ministry responded as under: 
 
“Since 2014, IR has made significant capital investments in increasing capacity. 
Various network capacity augmentation works of multi-tracking, ROR, bypasses 
etc are being undertaken by IR, with some of them.  These are at various stages 
of completion. The effect of these capital investments will be visible only after 
complete network wide capacity augmentation. Moreover, there has been a 
significant growth in traffic since 2014 in the number of trains: both goods and 
passenger. This is evident from the fact that freight loading has increased from 
1051.64 MT in FY 2013-14 to 1588.02 MT in FY 2023-24 (provisional) excluding 
loading on Konkan Railway Corporation Limited (KRCL). Maintenance corridors 
have been created to ensure smooth running of these increased number of 
trains, which has affected the speed of trains for the time being. As regards 
guaranteeing delivery times for freight trains, once separate corridors for goods 
and passengers trains are completed, fixing guaranteed delivery times will 
become operationally feasible. In this direction, Ministry of Railways has 
proposed 3 economic corridors namely Energy corridor, Mineral corridor and 
Cement corridor for exclusive freight train running. Completion of these will, over 
time, lead to increase in freight train speed.” 
 
50. Given the impact of freight services on passenger train operations, when the 
Committee asked as to what coordination mechanisms exist between freight and 
passenger service management to optimize track usage and ensure punctuality and 
how does the Ministry prioritize the scheduling of passenger and freight services, 
especially in high-traffic sections, the Ministry responded as below: 
 
“Indian Railways lacks a dedicated corridor for operation of freight services and 
in such a scenario both types of services viz. the freight and the passenger 
services are operated utilizing the same infrastructure. While passenger trains 
operate as per a charted schedule, the freight services are operated to open 
timings.  Thus, a delicate balance is maintained by the Indian Railways to ensure 
seamless supply of Goods and essential commodities across the country and 
operate passenger trains to time. Normally, precedence is given to passenger 
carrying trains.” 
 
51. On being asked as to what criteria are used to select freight trains for timetabling, 
and how are performance metrics established and tracked for these trains an whether 
there are any long-term strategies or projects planned to address the underlying issues 
affecting freight train speed and punctuality,  the Ministry made the following 
submission: 
 
“Dedicated freight path is required for time table freight services. Performance is 
measured on the basis of journey completion and terminal handling after the 

24 
 
periods of transit and loading, unloading, shunting and examination. Indian 
Railways have, however, approached the issue of low freight speeds in a holistic 
manner and is addressing the issue through multiple synchronized strategies 
which have an individual impact, but upon coming together, would work 
synergistically to have a healthy impact on average speed of freight trains and 
transit times in railways transportation. 
In order to increase average speed of freight trains, Ministry of Railways has 
been taking many measures. Dedicated freight paths are being created to give 
exclusive access to freight trains. The Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor 
(EDFC) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) are being executed. 
Completion of targeted super critical and critical doubling, multi - tracking and 
other traffic facility works will lead to higher speed of freight trains. Completion of 
rail flyover/bypass works is being ensured so that congested junctions are 
bypassed, leading to higher freight train speed. Higher horsepower locomotives 
are being procured. Terminals and their connectivity are being improved as well.  
Long term strategies to address freight train speed and punctuality are as under: 
 Capacity enhancement works e.g. new line, multi-tracking, terminal 
development works, Rail over Rail (ROR), bypass lines, flyovers etc.  
 Construction of Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) 
 Elimination of level crossings 
 Provision for corridors maintenance blocks (Rolling stock block 
programme)  
 Safety fencing along tracks 
 Regular monitoring of freight train through digital platforms e.g. Freight 
Operation and Information System (FOIS), Integrated Coach Management 
System (ICMS) etc.” 
 
52. On being asked as to how much freight has been transferred from road traffic to 
rail traffic after DFC, the Ministry stated as following: 
 
The details of Trucks on train service on WDFC are as under (till 20th Oct, 2024.) 
Financial Year Tonnage (T) 
2021-2022 136439 
2022-2023 55541 
2023-2024 196404 
2024-2025 (Till Oct, 2024) 159204 

25 
 
Total 547588 
 
 The details of NMGHS service on WDFC are as under (till Sept, 2024):- 
Financial Year Tonnage (T) 
2023-2024 6012.27 
2024-2025  12877.55 
Total 18889.82 
Note: 
(i) Containerized traffic from ICDs connected with DFCCIL has shown a significant 
growth to the tune of 59.12% as compared to pre-DFC traffic. 
(ii) Apart from through train operations, DFCCIL has generated 32.43 million tons 
outward traffic, generating revenue of 2,506.25 crores. 
 
 Factors impacting Punctuality 
 
53 .Out of 33 factors, major six factors caused 66 per cent of detention to trains over 
the IR network. These factors are Out of path, Engineering, Re scheduling of trains by 
various Zonal Railways (ZR), delay from other Railways, Planned block open line and 
Traffic. 
 
54. When the Committee enquired as to why has the Ministry not adequately 
addressed the top six internal factors, which contributed to 66% of train detentions over 
two years (2017-19), the Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“The top six internal factors (Out of path, Engineering, Rescheduling of trains, 
From other Railways, Planned block open line, Traffic) are the reasons which 
have reduced punctuality from 66% in 2017-19 to 47% in 2024-25. Signalling 
assets reliability improvement measures (technological upgradation, midterm 
rehabilitation and redundancy) are regularly undertaken.  Specific measures like 
power supply system (IPS); Earthing & lightening protection system; Data logging 
& failure alert generation, replacement of Signal filament lamps by LED signals, 
hardware redundancy in critical equipments & communication media diversity 
(Copper /OFC media etc) are being implemented. 
Impact of Signalling Asset failure on punctuality is less due to degraded mode for 
train operations such as “Calling-On Signal operations” in case of track circuit 
failures at stations. Moreover, Signalling failure still allows train operations on 
Paper Authority. Due to above reasons, the overall impact on punctuality of trains 
on account of signalling asset failures is limited to 4%- 6% of the total  on IR. 

26 
 
 
Signal  Punctuality Loss on Indian Railway 
Dept. 2022-
23 
2021-
22 
2020-
21 
2019-
20 
2018-
19 
2017-
18 
S&T 10667 5707 1346 17772 22261 12263 
IR total 255555 107805 23624 302405 376573 297107 
% of IR  4% 5% 6% 6% 6% 4% 
 
During 2017-19, signalling Asset failure impact on train punctuality was 5%.  
Acquisition of new coaches for replacement of over-aged stock is a continuous 
process on Indian Railways. Coaches are replaced after attaining their 
prescribed codal life or prematurely in case of heavy damage to structural 
members. 
 IR has proliferated LHB coaches which are technologically superior with features 
like Anti climbing arrangement, Air suspension (Secondary) with failure indication 
system and less corrosive shell. These coaches have better riding and aesthetics 
as compared to the conventional ICF coaches and have design/operating speed 
of 180/160 kmph. The Production units of Indian Railways are producing only 
LHB coaches from April 2018 onwards. The production of LHB coaches has 
continually increased during the years and more than 35700 LHB coaches have 
been turned out. 
 In addition, Vande Bharat trains introduced over the IR network are Semi-High 
speed train services with higher acceleration and deceleration, design/operating 
speed of maximum 180/160 kmph. These trains have state of the art facilities 
and enhanced safety features such as KAVACH, Jerk free semi-permanent 
couplers, Automatic Plug and IC Doors, Fully Sealed Gangways, Ergonomic 
seats, CCTVs, Coach condition monitoring System (CCMS), Special lavatory in 
DTC for Divyangjan passengers, Emergency Alarm Push buttons and Talk Back 
Units, Platform side cameras including front & rear view cameras outside the 
Driving coach, Improved Fire safety provisions etc. Enhancement of speed of 
trains is a continuous and an ongoing process over Indian Railways. 
 Further, for catering to wider population, 2 Amrit Bharat trains have been 
introduced over IR network and running in regular service in ER (MLDT-SMVB) & 
ECR (DBG-ANVT). 
 It has been decided to further proliferate these Amrit Bharat trains.  
Track modernization and improvement works have been taken up to enhance 
reliability of track and minimize the delays on Engg. Account as under: 
 
i.  Laying of track structure consisting of 60 kg longer rails on prestressed 
reinforced concrete (PSC) sleepers with modern fittings.  
ii.  Use of thick web switches and weldable Cast Manganese Steel (CMS) 
crossings etc.  
iii. Providing Long welded rails/Continuous welded rails to eliminate the 
joints.  

27 
 
iv.  Use of Flash butt welding in place of thermit welds by providing long rail 
panels and testing of Flash Butt welds by advanced technology of 
Phased Array Ultrasonic testing to enhance weld  
vii. Mechanization of track laying reliability.  
v.  Adoption of mechanized system for track maintenance using high 
output plain tampers and points & crossing tampers for improved 
maintainability & reliability of track.   
vi.  Deployment of state-of-the-art modern machines including Rail 
Grinding machines manufactured in India on Railway network to further 
improve asset reliability.  
vii. Mechanization of track laying activity through use of track machines like 
PQRS, TRT, T-28 etc. to improve progress of track renewal along with 
ensuring quality and to reduce human errors.” 
 
55. In the given background that more than 60% of detentions occurred in Northern 
Railway (NR), North Central Railway (NCR), and East Central Railway (ECR), when the 
Committee enquired as to why have these zones not adequately controlled the top 
internal factors causing delays and what targeted actions are being taken by the 
Ministry to specifically address the issues of "availability of path," "Engineering," and 
"Traffic" delays in these zones, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Indian Railways on regular basis instructs Zonal Railways, including Northern 
Railway, North Central Railway and East Central Railway, to monitor punctuality 
and improve punctuality. Besides, all efforts are made to avoid traffic delays. To 
ease out operational constraints and for capacity augmentation - Infrastructural 
and safety related works are being undertaken on priority basis.”  
 
56. Referring to the audit observation that the "Engineering" factor was identified as 
a critical cause of delays in both Northern and East Central Railways, when the 
Committee asked about specific engineering issues contributing to the said delays and 
the way they were being addressed and whether there is a proposal by the Ministry to 
invest in new technology or infrastructure to minimize engineering-related delays, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
“Factor related to Engg. mainly pertain to Traffic Block and Temporary Speed 
Restrictions which are required for execution of track maintenance and renewal 
activities. These are integral part of the train operation system to ensure safety 
and speed potential of the trains. Concept of Rolling Block Program has been 
introduced vide Gazette Notification G.S.R. 870(E) dated 29th November, 2023 
to enable integrated maintenance planning for all infrastructure in optimal and 
efficient manner.” 
 
57. With reference to the rescheduling of trains within different railways which has 
been cited by the Ministry as one of the top reasons for delays in Northern Railway, 
when the Committee enquired about the main reasons behind frequent rescheduling 
and the steps being taken by the Ministry to minimize this issue and adopting a more 

28 
 
dynamic and responsive scheduling system to mitigate the impact of rescheduling on 
train punctuality, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“There are several factors leading to rescheduling of trains.  Among the factors 
responsible for rescheduling of trains are: Non-Interlocking work for undertaking 
major infrastructural work on a section, bad weather (particularly foggy weather, 
leading to delay in arrival of the rake for its return journey in up /down direction), 
law & order problem in any particular area viz. Kisan Andolan in the recent past 
on the borders of Delhi leading to diversion of routes which resulted in delayed 
arrival /departure of the trains, accidents etc. In order to minimize the problem of 
rescheduling rakes, if available in reserve, are deployed in case of late arrival of 
rakes. In case of issues relating to law and order, coordination with State 
Authorities is done to mitigate the impact.”  
 
58. In the backdrop of the submission of the Ministry mentioning external factors 
beyond the control of Railway administration as a reason for performance decline and 
contention of the audit that these factors contributed only 12.89% to delays in the period 
2017-19, when the Committee enquired about the primary internal factors affecting 
punctuality and steps being taken to address them and a detailed breakdown of external 
factors and their specific impact on train operations, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“The External factors include Alarm Chain Pulling, Miscreant Activity, Agitation, 
Run Over, Law & Order, Incident, Bad Weather, Level crossing Gate etc., while 
the internal factors include- 
● Asset failures include Diesel Loco, Electric Loco, Carriage & Wagon, 
Signal & Telecom, OHE/Grid Failure, Electric defect, Accident etc. 
● Infrastructural and maintenance work includes Construction, Engineering, 
Non Interlocking, Planned Block, Railway Electrification etc. 
● Congestion-Traffic, Out of Path, Line not clear etc. 
Based on assessments of factors impeding the punctual running of trains, 
remedial measures both short term and long term are initiated. High priority is 
accorded to making resources available for speedy execution of critical capacity 
augmentation as these on completion inter-alia facilitate improved efficiency and 
reliability in train operations. 
Root cause analysis is being done on a daily basis at Divisional and Zonal level 
regarding the failures affecting punctual running of trains. Based on the analysis 
immediate corrective action is being done. Further, Railways have initiated 
various measures such as launching of Punctuality drives, sensitizing staff 
involved in train operations and having better co-ordination with State 
Governments and civil authorities to deal with law & order problems effectively.” 
 
59. As per the Audit, although external factors contribute only 12.89% to overall 
delays, the Ministry's response highlighted those factors as significant. In the light of 
this, when the Committee asked about the plan of the Ministry to distinguish and 

29 
 
address both internal and external factors effectively, given their varying impacts on 
punctuality, the Ministry responded as below: 
 
“While the external factors are beyond the control of Indian Railways, all efforts 
are made to address and minimize the issues related and contributing to the loss 
of punctuality of trains owing to internal factors. It may be appreciated that the 
cascading effect of these unforeseen factors/events is also quite significant on 
the punctuality of train services.  
The steps taken include assessments of factors impeding the punctual running of 
trains, and initiating both short term and long term remedial measures. High 
priority is accorded to making resources available for speedy execution of critical 
capacity augmentation as these on completion inter-alia facilitate improved 
efficiency and reliability in train operations. Root cause analysis is being done on 
a daily basis at Divisional and  Zonal level regarding the failures affecting 
punctual running of trains. Based on the analysis immediate corrective action is 
being done. Further, Railways also takes  measures such as launching 
Punctuality drives, sensitizing staff involved in train operations, undertaking 
preventive/periodic maintenance of assets to ensure asset reliability, etc.  
Signalling assets reliability improvement measures (technological upgradation, 
midterm rehabilitation and redundancy) are regularly undertaken.  Specific 
measures like power supply system (IPS); Earthing & lightening protection 
system; Data logging & failure alert generation, replacement of Signal filament 
lamps by LED signals, hardware redundancy in critical equipments & 
communication media diversity (Copper /OFC media etc) are being implemented. 
Impact of Signalling Asset failure on punctuality is less due to degraded mode for 
train operations such as “Calling-On Signal operations” in case of track circuit 
failures at stations. Moreover, Signalling failure still allows train operations on 
Paper Authority. Due to above reasons, the overall impact on punctuality of trains 
on account of signalling asset failures is limited to 4%- 6% of the total  on IR. 
During 2017-19, Signalling Asset failure impact on train punctuality was 5%. 
 
Inadequate Path availability 
 
60. Path i.e. occupancy free section, is the primary requirement for smooth running 
of trains. The trains starting on right time but get delayed due to non- availability of path 
indicate inefficient monitoring mechanism. 
 
61. When enquired about the strategic measures being taken by the Ministry to 
optimize path availability and reduce traffic congestion and whether there were any 
plans to expand or upgrade the existing track infrastructure to accommodate the 
increasing number of trains and improve path availability, the Ministry made the 
following submission: 
 
“Indian Railways have taken a number of steps including rationalization of Time 
Tabling, with the assistance of IIT-Bombay using their traffic simulator, to 

30 
 
accommodate the increasing number of trains and improve path availability. 
Functional operation of Dedicated Freight Corridor(DFC), completion of major 
infrastructural works are also aimed at reducing congestion and generating 
capacity. Further, electrification of the routes, multi-tracking are done to ease 
traffic congestion. However, in a vast country like ours, there is an ever 
increasing demand for travel and Indian Railways have to meet the travelling 
demands, within the limited resources available. The demand far exceeds the 
resources. The increase in the number of services from various stations to the 
Prominent destinations, adds to the saturation/over-saturation of the sections, 
thereby impacting throughput and punctuality. The consistent demand for 
connectivity is also to be taken care of by the provisions of stoppages. It is 
pertinent to mention that not only has there been an increase in the number of 
passenger carrying services but also the number of Freight services. Increased 
economic activities and loading/carrying of Goods/Commodities by Freight 
Trains, in the absence/very limited availability of dedicated freight corridors, affect 
the level of saturation and thus punctuality as well. Operating within the given 
constraints and continuously striving to meet the aspirations of the passengers, 
consistent efforts are being made to ensure smooth/punctual train operation.” 
 
62. Given the fact that the non-availability of path due to conflicts in the timetable is a 
major cause of train delays, when the Committee enquired as to why is there still 
reliance on manual methods for timetable preparation and why computerized 
timetabling systems to minimize conflicts and optimize train schedules were not fully 
implemented by the Ministry and what was the timeline for the adoption of a fully 
automated and integrated timetable preparation system across Indian Railways, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
 
“To address the major cause of train delays arising out of non-availability of path 
Indian Railways has undertaken the exercise of rationalization of Time Table, 
with the assistance of IIT Bombay using their traffic simulator, to accommodate 
the increasing number of trains and improve path availability. Besides, Indian 
Railways is also using and improving the SatSANG application for time-tabling 
exercise to optimize path and avoid conflict.”  
 
63. When the Committee asked as to what specific actions are being taken to 
expand capacity or reduce congestion at bottleneck points and how was the Ministry 
planning to balance the addition of new trains with the existing line capacity to prevent 
further congestion, the Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“To decongest major junctions like Kanpur, Prayagraj, Patna etc. and those 
junctions which have high traffic volume, Indian Railways, with a view to avoid 
terminal congestion, as a short term measure, undertake shifting of trains to 
satellite stations keeping in view operational feasibility and passenger 
convenience. Accordingly, train services have been/are shifted to satellite 
stations like Panki Dham for Kanpur; Rambagh, Allahabad City, Chheoki for 

31 
 
Prayagraj; Patliputra, Rajendra Nagar & Danapur for Patna; Madan Mahal for 
Jabalpur, Duvvada for Visakhapatnam, Anand Vihar and Brijwasan like stations 
for Delhi area, Narmadapuram for Bhopal, New Raipur for Raipur, etc. These 
efforts would help reduce congestion at these terminals and create spare 
capacity.  
To expand capacity and reduce congestion at bottleneck points, following efforts 
are being done: 
 Capacity enhancement works e.g. new line, multi-tracking, terminal 
development i.e. yard modifications, Rail over Rail (ROR), bypass lines, 
flyovers etc. 
 Signaling improvements works such as automatic signaling, 
Intermediate Block Huts (IBH), splitting of longer block section etc. 
 Elimination of level crossings, provision of Road over bridge, Road 
under bridge etc 
 Safety fencing along tracks.  
Aforementioned efforts will help in running of additional new trains and reduce 
congestion at bottleneck points.” 
 
Sectional Capacity 
 
64. Sectional capacity increased with doubling/tripling/automatic signaling, but the 
handling capacity of traffic nodes (Junction/yard) were not raised in proportion, resulting 
in bottlenecks.  There is higher line capacity utilization in the adjacent section of the 
major junctions due to receipt/dispatch and accumulation of multidirectional traffic; trains 
get bunched at Major Junctions.  For example, the line capacity utilization near Kanpur 
Central Junction is 175 per cent (Kanpur-Juhi) and in Prayagraj area  it is around 137 
per cent.  Similarly, near Patna junction (PNBE), the line capacity utilization was 172.6 
per cent in Rajinder Nagar (RJPB)-PNBE and 170 per cent in Danapur (DNR)-PNBE 
section.  
 
65.     Referring to the fact that despite increases in sectional capacity, the handling 
capacity of traffic nodes (junctions, yards) has not been raised proportionately, when the 
Committee asked about the Ministry's plan to upgrade handling capacities at these 
critical nodes and further asked whether they had any ongoing projects to automate or 
modernize terminal operations to facilitate faster arrivals, departures, and other related 
activities, theMinistry stated as under: 
“In the year 2024-25, Rs. 26000 Cr has been allotted for traffic facility works 
which includes terminal development works such as adding loop lines, yard 
development, standardization of loop lengths, Intermediate Block Huts (IBH), 
splitting of longer block section etc. To facilitate faster arrival and departure at 
terminals, in addition to above works, automatic signaling works near major 
junctions are also being taken up.” 
 
66. When asked whether there are any plans in place to establish a centralized and 
integrated control system with automated tools for traffic control and how did the 

32 
 
Ministry expect to transition from a manual, voice-command-based system to a fully 
automated, computerized control system, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) which enables centralized operation of station 
signaling gears from remote place, has been installed on Ghaziabad –Kanpur 
section of 400 RKm to gain further experience.” 
 
67. Referring to the Ministry's claim that monitoring and planning are done in real-
time through ICMS, critical decisions like loop/platform allocation are still made 
manually, when the Committee asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to 
automate decision-making processes to reduce human error and improve efficiency and 
whether there was any timeline for integrating all station resource management under a 
centralized, computerized system to minimize delays at interchange points, the Ministry 
stated as under: 
 
“Normally, the train services on IR operate from designated platforms. It is only in 
cases of late running/late arrival etc, that these are to be changed/ altered. 
Adoption of new technologies on Indian Railways is an on-going process.” 
 
68. When the Committee enquired as to what infrastructure projects were being 
undertaken to expand capacity and reduce congestion and how did the Ministry intend 
to manage traffic better at these heavily utilized sections to prevent bottlenecks, the 
Ministry responded as under: 
 
“Indian Railways are undertaking electrification of the routes, multi-tracking, etc. 
for creation of additional capacity and to reduce congestion. On the existing 
sections, shifting/diversion of trains, operating Freight though by-passes/alternate 
route, if any, is done to mitigate the effect of traffic congestion.  
As on 01.04.2024, across Indian Railways, 488 Railway Infrastructure projects 
(New Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling) of 44,488 Km length, costing 
approx. Rs 7.44 lakh crore are in planning/approval/construction stage, out of 
which 12,045 Km length has been commissioned and an expenditure of approx. 
Rs 2.92 lakh crore has been incurred upto March, 2024. Completion of these 
Infrastructure projects will enhance line capacity of the IR network.” 
 
Time table preparation and Allowances 
 
69. In IR, time table is prepared manually and the existing timetables are being 
modified based on needs. In comparison, globally, simulators and computerized 
systems are used in the preparation of the time table. The running time of trains is fixed 
on scientific calculations. Though IR has simulators but does not use the same for time 
table preparation. International Union of Railways (UIC) recommended a time 
supplement of three to five percent for passenger trains up to speed of 140 Kmph. 
 
70. The Ministry in their background note have stated in this regard as under: 

33 
 
 
“Under the recently concluded exercise of rationalization of Time Tabling, 
undertaken with the assistance of IIT Bombay and CRIS/New Delhi, the corridors 
for maintenance blocks have been increased from two to three hours and also 
resulted in increased number of freight paths. IR has been able to enhance the 
speeds of over 2000 trains. Under the exercise, the travelling time of 1600 trains 
have been reduced by more than 30 minutes & more (including 900 trains in 
which travelling time has been reduced by more than an hour), 362 passenger 
trains have been converted into Mail/Express trains by speeding up while 120 
Mail/Express have been converted into super fast service (i.e.  end to end speed 
of above 55 Kmph).   Thus, an increase of about 5% in the average speed of 
passenger train services has been achieved by rationalization of Time Table.” 
 
 
71. In the backdrop of the fact that there is a wide variation in time allowances 
(ranging from 7% to 38%) across different trains and zones, when the Committee asked 
as to why has a standardized yardstick for traffic allowances not been prescribed to 
reduce these disparities and how did the Ministry plan to align time allowances more 
closely with international standards, such as those recommended by the International 
Union of Railways (UIC), to improve punctuality and consistency, the Ministry made the 
following submission: 
 
“Indian Railways endeavours to keep the Traffic Allowance at a bare minimum 
and it is fixed as per the actual requirement of running depending on the level of 
congestion, cross movement, crossing/precedence etc. Since, these factors are 
different on different zonal railways there is no uniform Traffic allowance.” 
 
72. In view of the fact that despite the availability of simulators, the Indian Railways 
does not use them for timetable preparation, when the Committee wanted to know the 
reasons for this underutilization and further asked as to when did the Ministry plan to 
fully integrate simulators and computerized systems for timetable creation and what 
steps were being taken to ensure that running times are based on scientific calculations 
rather than manual approximations, the following was submitted by the Ministry: 
 
“Making use of the Simulator of IIT-Bombay, Indian Railways have undertaken 
the rationalization of time table. Besides, Indian Railways is using and improving 
the SatSANG application for time-tabling exercise to optimize path and avoid 
conflict. Time-Tabling is done to run Passenger trains punctually in the most 
organized way. Though the Simulators give a fair evaluation for planning, 
however, the simulation under ideal conditions may not reflect the reality at 
ground level of actual operations where unforeseen factors like terminal 
detentions, loss of path, equipment failures, external factors, etc.  have a 
significant role and impact. As such, there will always be a visible gap between 
simulation results and outputs from ground operations.”  
 

34 
 
73.  When the Committee asked about the measures being taken to streamline 
operations and improve coordination between different zones, the following reply was 
made by the Ministry: 
 
“In view of the fact thatIndian Railways lacks a dedicated corridor for operation of 
freight services passenger trains are operated as per a charted schedule or 
scheduled time-table, while the freight services are operated to open timings. As 
such, there is normally no issue with regard to handling over/taking over of 
Passenger carrying train. However, as the Freight trains are operated to open 
timings, there may be possibility of conflict/clash of timings, which are mutually 
resolved.”  
 
74. When the Committee asked why there is still reliance on manual methods for 
timetable preparation and the timeline for the adoption of a fully automated and 
integrated timetable preparation system across Indian Railways, the Ministry submitted 
as below: 
 
“To address the major cause of train delays arising out of non-availability of path 
Indian Railways has undertaken the exercise of rationalization of Time Table, 
with the assistance of IIT Bombay using their traffic simulator, to accommodate 
the increasing number of trains and improve path availability. Besides, Indian 
Railways is also using and improving the SatSANG application for time-tabling 
exercise to optimize path and avoid conflict.”  
 
75. When the Committee asked to provide more details on the methodology and 
outcomes of the rationalization of time tabling exercise conducted with IIT Mumbai, the 
following submission has been made by the Ministry: 
 
“The exercise was undertaken in two phases. In the phase-I of the rationalization 
exercise, Mumbai-Delhi corridor had been taken up for zero base time tabling 
with the help of Software Aided Train Scheduling and Network Governance 
(SATSANG) application of CRIS. To assess the outcome and ascertain whether 
the results were optimum, IIT-Bombay had been involved for validation of the 
results obtained. After validation of Zero Base Time Table concepts on New 
Delhi-Mumbai Central Route, with the simulator of IIT-Bombay, the same was 
adopted for other routes. The exercise involving CRIS included- (a) use of IT 
System for dynamic data extraction, (b) integration with the actual running data, 
(c) removal of excess time allowances beyond the norms, (d) Rationalization of 
halt time at stations and (e) compaction of trains to create Corridor Blocks and 
Freight paths.  
In the Phase-II, the Zero Base Time Table exercise was taken up on the 
Mumbai-Howrah, Howrah-Chennai sectors and Chennai-Mumbai sectors with 
technical support from CRIS and IIT Bombay for simulation, and further 
implementation by Zonal Railways on other routes.” 
 

35 
 
General 
 
76. When the Committee asked the number of top priority projects that have been 
completed and the number of projects remaining and the plans to complete the 
unfulfilled objectives, the Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“As per Vision-2024, 272 sanctioned projects of total length 24,358 km were 
identified for completion, out of which 152 projects of length 12,299 km have 
been completed. Of the remaining 120 projects of length 12,058 km, sections of 
6,618 km length have been commissioned. 
 Apart from above, 51 sanctioned projects of total length 6,488 km were identified 
for completion during the period 2025-30, out of which 02 projects of total length 
84 km have been completed. Of the remaining 49 projects of total length 6,403 
km, sections of length 1,770 km have been commissioned. 
48 unsanctioned projects of total length 4,958 km were also included in Vision 
2024 statement, out of which 29 projects of total length 2,853 km have been 
sanctioned since inception of Vision 2024 to till date. 
The completion of any Railway project(s) depends on various factors like quick 
land acquisition by State Government, forest clearance by officials of forest 
department, deposition of cost share by State Government in cost sharing 
projects, priority of projects, shifting of 
infringing  utilities,  statutory  clearances  from  various  authorities, geological 
and topographical conditions of area, law and order situation in the area of 
project(s) site, number of working months  in  a year for particular project site due 
to climatic conditions etc. and all these factors affect the completion time and 
cost of the project(s). 
  
Steps taken to expedite completion of projects 
 
Various steps taken by the Government for speedy approval and implementation 
of rail projects include (i) setting up of Gati Shakti units (ii) prioritisation of 
projects (iii) substantial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects (iv) 
delegation of powers at field level (v) close  monitoring  of  progress  of project at 
various levels, and (vi) regular follow up with State Governments and concerned 
authorities for expeditious land acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and 
for resolving other issues pertaining to projects. This has led to substantial 
increase in rate of commissioning since 2014.  
In Vision-2024, 58 super critical and 68 critical works were identified. All 58 super 
critical works have been completed. Out of 68 critical works,32 works have been 
completed and remaining 36 works are under various stages of execution.” 
 
77. When asked to elaborate on the role of digital systems like Real Time Information 
System (RTIS) and Data Loggers in improving operational efficiency and punctuality 
and about future technological advancements being implemented, the Ministry stated as 
under: 

36 
 
 
“Indian Railways have progressively moved to automatic uptake of timings by the 
train movement itself.  This is achieved through GPS devices fitted with 
locomotives {Real-Time Train Information System (RTIS) and Remote Monitoring 
and Management of Locomotives and Trains (REMMLOT)} and Data loggers 
integrated with the station signaling system. This helps in better monitoring of 
trains. The application of new technologies can be considered as and when they 
come.  
Data logger system logs signaling events and sent to centrailised divisional 
server. At present data logger system is mainly used for ‘offline’ simulation 
purpose to analyse signaling faults.   
RTIS provides Real Time Train information about location of the Train for feeding 
it to control office application which in turn is integrated to 
National Train Enquiry System.” 
 
78. When asked about the steps being taken to implement measures like 
computerized timetabling, train grouping, conflict resolution and integrated maintenance 
which could improve punctuality, the Ministry responded as under: 
 
“Computerized timetabling, train grouping, conflict resolution and integrated 
maintenance have all been the part of the exercise of rationalization of Time 
Table undertaken in the year 2020-21, with the assistance of IIT-Bombay using 
their traffic simulator.” 
 
Standardization of Rakes 
 
79. IR initiated action for standardization of rakes to enable flexibility in train 
operations and improve Punctuality. As on 01July 2019, 1000 rakes out of 2700 have 
been standardized/integrated. Thus, the rake standardization has been done to an 
extent of 37 per cent only but the timeline has not been fixed for complete 
standardization. The attempt to standardize the rakes has not gained momentum in all 
the zones and the non-standardization of rakes impacted the Punctuality. 
 
 
80. When asked as to why the desired improvement in critical areas like rakes 
standardization, modernization, use of advanced technology, time bound completion of 
maintenance operations, signaling system, emergency response system etc. could not 
be achieved to improve the passenger experience in relation to the travel time and 
punctuality, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“With a view to provide better safety and travel experience, Indian Railways have 
inducted LHB coaches and have also undertaken the standardization of LHB 
rakes for  better utilisation of coaching assets. The extant policy on 
Standardization of LHB rakes, issued in October, 2023,  provide for 12 (Twelve) 
General  class & Sleeper class non- AC coaches and 08(eight) AC-Coaches, in a 

37 
 
train of 22 coaches, thereby providing greater accommodation for the 
passengers using General and non-AC Sleeper Coaches.  
As a part of its modernisation, Indian Railways (IR) are replacing conventional 
coaches (ICF coaches) by modern light weight LHB coaches having state-of-the 
art technology.  At the end of 2023-24, more than 50% of the stock holding of IR 
constitutes LHB stock. Continuing with its plan for induction and proliferation of 
LHB coaches, Indian Railways, during the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, have 
converted 886 rakes, which were being used for operating around 572 pairs of 
trains, into LHB rakes. Going ahead, during 2024-25 (upto September-2024), 58 
rakes have additionally been converted. 
Further, as a part of the adoption/upgradation of modern technology, faster 
services like Vande Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains are 
being introduced.  Introduction and proliferation of Vande Bharat services, which 
are faster services having better speed potential,  is a major milestone in the 
developmental history of IR. Presently, 136 Vande Bharat services, 2 Namo 
Rapid Rail and 4 Amrit Bharat services are operational over the IR network. 
Introduction of more such services would help Indian Railways speed up train 
services in a significant way.  
With a view to improve the punctuality of trains, IR has taken a number of steps 
which include rigorous monitoring, standardization of rakes and provision of 
spare rake, removal of infrastructure bottlenecks in a planned manner, 
rationalization of Time Table in a scientific manner, provision of Bye-pass at 
stations to avoid engine reversal etc.   
Use of an integrated digital platform for monitoring of train operations comprising 
the Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) and Control Office 
Application (COA) and their integration with National Train Enquiry System 
(NTES), used by passengers is a major way forward.  Progressive advancement 
for automatic uptake of timings by the train using  GPS fitted locomotives {Real-
Time Train Information System (RTIS) and Remote Monitoring and Management 
of Locomotives and Trains (REMMLOT)} and use of Data loggers in an 
integrated manner with the station signaling system, are helping in realistic 
monitoring and reporting of Punctuality of Passenger carrying trains.”  
 
*****  

38 
 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR), often referred to as the lifeline of the nation, is one of the 
world’s largest rail networks, spanning about 69000 route kilometers and has the 
distinction of being the fourth railway network worldwide and transports over               
1 billion tonnes of freight traffic in terms of originating loading. However, one of 
the major challenges that continue to hinder Indian Railways’ overall efficiency is 
the issue of punctuality. The issues raised in the Chapter 2 of Audit Report No. 22 
of 2021 have been thoroughly examined by the Public Accounts Committee 
followed by detailed observations and recommendations in the subsequent 
sections of this report. The Committee believe that addressing punctuality 
challenges through policy reform, technological intervention, and operational 
efficiency measures will significantly improve the overall performance and 
reliability of Indian Railways. 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Need for improvement on Parameters like Punctuality and average speed of time 
for Indian Railways 
 Indian Railways is one of the largest transportation organization in the 
world carrying crores of passengers and operating thousands of trains everyday 

39 
 
throughout the country.  The train network in the country is lifeline of the country 
for the people at large to cater their travel needs and the citizens of the country 
have high expectations from Indian Railways in meeting their travel requirements.  
They also expect Indian Railways to maintain basic operational requirements like 
punctuality, cleanliness and affordability as far as train services are concerned. It 
is seen from the audit report that the punctuality and average speed of trains in 
any significant way have not seen any improvement over the last two decades.  
This indicates a sorry state of affairs as well as the priorities of Indian Railways. 
 While the Committee recognize that Indian Railways have introduced 
Vande Bharat Trains which are high speed trains as well as technologically 
advanced coaches, the bulk of the Indian Railways network is catered by normal 
express, superfast and passenger trains.  The Committee would like to point out 
that the road network in the country have seen phenomenal increase by way of 
new routes, wide and smooth roads with minimum signals alongwith significant 
advancement in automobile technologies.  Now public can and are using roads 
for travelling even long distances and the average travelling time for a truck and 
the logistic costs have seen good improvement.  Similarly, the Indian aviation 
Sector has also grown significantly with the addition of new airports as well as 
more aircrafts in the fleet. Indian Railway is the lifeline of the country and the 
Committee feel that there is a need to comprehensively review different facets of 
railway operations like punctuality, average speed of trains, hygiene, better 
services, easier booking and cancellation mechanism, etc.  The Committee, 

40 
 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry and Indian Railways should take help 
from outside agencies to comprehensively improve upon average speeds of 
express and other trains and also work upon making punctuality of trains a key 
corner stone of railway operations. 
Recommendation No. 2 
Punctuality threshold of Coaching Trains 
 The Committee note from audit observation that IR measures the 
punctuality of trains at the terminating stations. Whereas, in other countries, it is 
measured at the originating point, intermediate station, and at terminating 
stations. Besides, for measuring punctuality, IR provides an allowance of                      
15 minutes delay with reference to the scheduled time. The Committee also note 
that global best practices for measuring punctuality reflects a much stricter 
threshold as the yardstick in Japan is in seconds and a train arriving before 
scheduled time is also considered as punctuality loss. Besides, in Netherlands, it 
is 3 minutes; in Germany and Russia, it is 5 minutes; and in Great Britain, it is 10 
minutes. Despite a low benchmark and higher threshold of 15 minutes, the 
punctuality of Mail/Express trains over IR declined from 79 per cent (2012-13) to 
69.23 per cent (2018-19) that too at the terminating stations only. The Committee 
note that out of 6.22 lakh trains, 1.82 lakh trains did not meet the punctuality 
yardstick of15 minutes. The Committee further note that on an average 13,15,456 
trains are reported through Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) per 
annum and out of these, only 29.64 per cent of trains (3,89,877 trains) reached on 

41 
 
time (RT) and  20.17 per cent of trains (2,65,391 trains) arrived before time (BT) 
and the remaining 50.19 per cent of trains (6,60,188 trains) are delayed. 
The punctuality of trains during 2015-16 was 77.51% while it was 69.23% 
during 2018-19.  However, there has been a significant improvement in the 
punctuality performance of trains and it rose to 90.48% during 2021-22. The 
punctuality performance of Indian Railways during the year 2024-25 (up to 
August) was recorded at 78.67% as compared to 73.62% recorded in 2023-24. The 
Committee have further observed that, though Indian Railways measures 
punctuality on terminating stations but, it is also done at originating point and at 
en-route stations at Divisional and Zonal levels using real-time on line Integrated 
Coaching Management System (ICMS). During 2024-25 train delays have been reduced by 
5% as compared to that of 2023-24. During 2023-24, the percentage of train delays was 26% and in 
2024-25 the delay of trains is 21%. 
 The Committee are of the view that this narrow approach to punctuality 
monitoring fails to account for delays experienced enroute, leading to an 
incomplete and often misleading picture of actual train performance. The existing 
allowance of a 15-minute delay within Indian Railway’s punctuality benchmark 
further dilutes the accuracy of performance assessment. Any Consumer, whether 
a Passenger travelling in a train or sending goods in freight train expects the train 
to reach his destination on the time given in the time table. The 15 minutes extra 
threshold is too large. The current yardstick for Punctuality being adopted by 
Indian Railways does not reflect the expectation of the people. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Indian Railways to review and revise time punctuality 

42 
 
assessment through integrated monitoring at originating / intermediate stations 
alongside the existing termination station. The Committee also desire to be 
communicated about the steps taken in this direction. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Need for strict and scientificYardstick for increasing average speed 
 The Committee note from audit observation that the target of achieving           
160 Kmph speed of Coaching trains and 100 Kmph speed of Freight trains, were 
fixed on several occasions between 1960 to 2016-17 and the timeline to increase 
the speed has been constantly revised. However, the same has not been achieved 
yet. Indian Railways introduced “Mission Raftaar” in 2016-17 aiming to double the 
average speed of freight trains from 25 Kmph to 50 Kmph and to increase the 
average speed of Mail/Express trains from 50 Kmph to 75 Kmph by the end of 
2021- 22. However, the average speed of Mail/Express Trains and Goods Trains 
were only 50.6 kmph and 23.6 kmph respectively. 
The Committee note that the average speed of passenger carrying trains 
depends upon various factors which include Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) 
of a section, type of the coaching stock being used, traction used, Speed 
restrictions, Gradients and curves, number of stoppages, etc. adding that to 
ensure optimal utilization of the speed potential of rolling stocks, all passenger 
carrying trains are charted at Maximum Permissible Speed (MPS) of the sections 
over which they operate. Indian Railways have taken a number of steps including 

43 
 
rationalization of Time Tabling, with the assistance of IIT Mumbai using their 
traffic simulator, replacing of conventional coaches ICF (Integrated Coach 
Factory) coaches by modern light weight LHB (Linke Hofmann Buch), emphasis 
being given to enhance sectional speed upto 160 Kmph for Delhi-Howrah and 
Delhi-Mumbai route and upto 130 Kmph for remaining routes, 100% electrification 
of the routes etc. done. The Ministry has further elaborated that the 
adoption/upgradation of technology, induction of rolling stock like LHB having 
high speed potential, multi-tracking works, introduction of services like Vande 
Bharat, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail and Amrit Bharat trains would help Indian 
Railways speed up train services in a significant way. The Committee note that 
while High-speed / Super Fast and Express trains are using the same track, it fails 
to understand why the speed of long distance trains which have 2000 KM more 
distance has not increased over the years. In order to ensure seamless and fast 
freight movement, Indian Railways has been taking many measures including 
infrastructure projects such as Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) and 
Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) to create dedicated freight path to 
give exclusive access to freight trains, completion of targeted super critical and 
critical doubling, multi - tracking and other traffic facility works, completion of rail 
flyover and bypass works so that congested junctions are bypassed, leading to 
higher freight train speed.  The Committee are of the view that though the 
Ministry has taken number of steps to improve the average speed/maximum 
speed of trains but lack of an integrated approach involving all zonal railways is 
proving hindrance in the way, therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry 

44 
 
to prepare a plan encompassing zonal Railways to achieve the desired increase 
in the average and maximum speed of Passenger and Freight trains in their 
network and strive to achieve it without compromising safety. The Committee 
would expect an incremental increase in average speed of trains from 5 to 10 
km/hr every few years in express trains which will reduce travelling time by a few 
hours for long distance trains. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Introduction of EMU/MEMU rakes across all the railway zones 
 The Committee learn from audit finding that before implementation of 
Mission Raftaar, the average speed of EMU trains in 2015-16 was 41 kmph. 
Despite induction of fast moving EMU services, the average speed decreased to 
37.9 kmph during 2019-20. Thus, no appreciable improvement in the average 
speed of EMU trains was achieved despite conversion of trains into MEMU/DEMU. 
The Committee also note from audit observation that for EMU/MEMU trains, which 
have shorter runs compared to Mail Express trains, the possible savings per                 
50 km is 16-17 minutes. 
One of the components of Mission Raftaar was replacement of 
conventional Passenger Trains with fast moving MEMU services. During 2015-16 
to 2021-22, 414 Passenger train services running with conventional coaches were 
converted into MEMU services and this has helped speed up passenger trains 
from 33.9 kmph during 2015-16 to 37.4 kmph during 2022-23. Besides, under the 
rationalization exercise, 120 Trains over several Railway zones have been 

45 
 
speeded up to Superfast category. The Committee note that as a part of "Mission 
Raftaar" that during 2015-16, on an average daily basis, 5128 sub-urban services 
were operational. This number rose to 5396 during 2019-20, impacting the speed 
of EMU services. The capacity creation and augmentation of infrastructural 
facilities, presently underway, would help improve speed of sub-urban services. 
The Indian Railways is converting the passenger trains more and more into DEMU 
and MEMU the advantage of which is that both sides of it have engines, so, 
engine reversal does not take time and  saves a lot of time. The station capacity 
gets improved, more trains can be run. 
The Committee while appreciating the effectiveness of the EMU/MEMU 
rakes recommend that exercise of conversion of passenger trains into DEMU and 
MEMU may be expedited in order to obtain optimum speed and be applied to all 
passenger trains across all the railway zones. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the latest status in regard to the initiatives taken and achievements 
made in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Holistic mechanism for real-time monitoring of train movements 
 The Committee note from audit observation that Sectional capacity 
increased with doubling/tripling/automatic signaling, but the handling capacity of 
traffic nodes (Junction/yard) were not raised in proportion, resulting in 
bottlenecks.Route-bound operation, Centralized & Integrated control with 
automated tools of traffic control are not available in Indian Railways. Voice 

46 
 
commands & distributed control system exist in IR. These are mostly manual & 
section oriented.  
The Committee further note that Indian Railways have an integrated digital 
platform for monitoring of train operations comprising Integrated Coaching 
Management System (ICMS) and Control Office Application (COA) which are 
integrated with National Train Enquiry System (NTES).  Besides, progressive 
advancement for automatic uptake of timings by the train movement itself, is 
being achieved through GPS devices fitted locomotives {Real-Time Train 
Information System (RTIS) and Remote Monitoring and Management of 
Locomotives and Trains (REMMLOT) and Data loggers integrated with the station 
signaling system. While appreciating the adoption of GPS-enabled locomotives, 
Real-Time Train Information Systems (RTIS), and the Integrated Coaching 
Management System (ICMS) and the automatic data capturing of arrival/departure 
of Mail/Express trains up to 95%, the Committee note with constraint that the 
manual data capturing is still persisting in certain zones. 
The Committee desire that Indian Railways should adopt new / modern 
technological tools / system to improve speed, reduce delay and capture the data. 
The Committee are of the view that an integrated digital platform is the need of 
the hour to ensure a comprehensive and foolproof data capturing and monitoring. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that an integrated digital platform 
encompassing features of all the existing systems for real time monitoring 
system should be developed and implemented. The Committee desire to be 

47 
 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard and the status of success in its 
implementation. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Need to review the criteria of Superfast trains in Indian Railways 
 The Committee note that in  May 2007, IR decided that if the average speed 
of a train, in both Up and Down directions, is a minimum 55 Kmph on Broad 
Gauge and 45 Kmph on Metre Gauge, it would be treated as a Superfast (SF) train. 
Audit has observed that the benchmark of 55 Kmph for classifying a train as 
Superfast is itself low, given the MPS of rolling stock and sectional speed. There 
has been no change in the criteria of classification of SF trains since 2007. 
Audit has pointed that out of 478 Superfast trains of Indian Railways, the 
scheduled speed of 123 Superfast trains was less than 55 Kmph. The Ministry,  in 
its response has stated that a scrutiny of the list of 123 trains categorized as 
Superfast reveals that 47 services have speed over 55 kmph as per the current 
data whereas in respect of the remaining Superfast trains for which the speed has 
been found to be less than 55 Kmph, it states that at the time of introduction of 
these trains, the charting of these was done in line with the criteria fixed for 
Superfast trains and were operating well beyond 55 KMPH. However due to 
provision of additional stoppages after commencement of regular operation of 
these trains, the average speed of a few trains have got affected. The Committee 
while expressing concern over categorization of trains running at a mere speed of 

48 
 
55 kmph as ‘Superfast Trains’, convey their unhappiness over lack of adherence 
to the limit set by the Ministry itself. The Committee are forced to conclude that 
the demarcation of trains as superfast was to apply higher charges. As and when 
the speed of trains fell below, Indian Railways should have removed the train 
from Super Fast Category and revised the fare. 
The Committee consider the superfast benchmark of 55 kmph too 
conservative and anachronous and not in consonance with the present time 
specially when some of the east Asian countries like China and Japan have been 
running their trains at speeds far beyond our speed benchmarks. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to review and rationalize the criteria for categorizing the 
trains as ‘Superfast’ comparable with global standards approximating to 100 
kmph and explore the feasibility of achieving a consistent speed of 100 kmph not 
just at the terminating point, but throughout the entire journey—from the 
originating station, through intermediate stops, and up to the terminating point—
by the year 2030. The Committee are also of the view that introduction of new 
trains tends to cause delays due to halting of other existing Express/Superfast 
trains for enabling them to pass off and, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should focus more on ensuring that the existing express and super fast trains run 
on time over other newly introduced trains. The Committee also feel that charging 
of full fare for tickets under RAC and where the ticket holder continues in RAC 
category after Chart Preparation without berth facility is not justified and, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should devise a mechanism to refund partial 
fare to the customer/traveler who could not get full berth but had to pay full 

49 
 
charges at the time of boarding. The Committee desire to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard and also of the steps proposed/taken to transform the 
superfast train network into a truly high-speed and efficient mode of 
transportation. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Need to streamline freight trains’ movement 
 The Committee note from audit observation that IR has not fixed time of 
delivery of consignment and schedule for running of Goods trains nor has 
incorporated Goods paths in their Working Time Tables. The Committee also 
observe that freight loading has increased from 1051.64 MT in FY 2013-14 to 
1588.02 MT in FY 2023-24 (provisional). The Committee note that path for freight 
services are provided after the scheduled running of coaching trains and, 
therefore, it is not possible to have enforceable time-tabled goods paths. Even in 
case of a few time-tabled freight trains, they are rarely able to run on their 
scheduled paths. In order to ensure seamless and fast freight movement, Indian 
Railways has been taking many measures including infrastructure projects such 
as Eastern dedicated freight corridor and Western dedicated freight corridor, 
completion of rail flyover/bypass works so that congested junctions are 
bypassed, induction of higher horsepower locomotives, etc.  Likewise terminals 
and their connectivity are being improved as well. The Committee further note 
that there is limited availability of dedicated freight corridors and once separate 

50 
 
corridors for goods and passengers trains are completed, fixing guaranteed 
delivery times will become operationally feasible. The Committee have also noted that 
Various network capacity augmentation works of multi-tracking, ROR, bypasses etc are being 
undertaken by IR.  These are at various stages of completion. The effect of these capital 
investments will be visible only after complete network wide capacity augmentation. Moreover, 
there has been a significant growth in traffic since 2014 in the number of trains: both goods and 
passenger. This is evident from the fact that freight loading has increased from 1051.64 MT in FY 
2013-14 to 1588.02 MT in FY 2023-24 (provisional) excluding loading on Konkan Railway 
Corporation Limited (KRCL). 
The Committee, however, note that despite efforts made hitherto, the Indian 
Railways has not been able to incorporate Goods Train paths in their Working 
Time Tables to have a proper schedule for running of goods train. Considering 
the large volume of freight being carried out by the Indian Railways and 
contribution of as much as 1.5 of country’s GDP, the Committee, urge upon the 
Ministry to address the issues through multipronged strategy in order to 
streamline the running of freight trains in a coordinated and time bound manner. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should ensure the time bound 
completion of various measures taken by it for seamless and fast freight 
movement and work out an implementation strategy for a freight service time 
table for guaranteed timely delivery of consignments to ensure continued 
relevance of railway transportation network. 
 
 

51 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Need to fix controllable internal factors and minimize external factors  
 The Committee note that, as per ICMS data which captures all the incidents 
that caused the train operations’ delay, out of 33 factors responsible for 
punctuality loss, 27 factors are controllable by Railways and the remaining six 
factors are external factors. The total contribution of external factors for the two-
year period (2017-19) was 12.89 per cent. The internal factors, which contributed 
to 66 per cent could have been controlled well by IR but were not addressed 
adequately. 
The Committee further note that top six internal factors (Out of path, 
Engineering, Rescheduling of trains, from other Railways, Planned block open 
line, Traffic) contributing to train detention to the extent of 66% in 2017-19 has 
been reduced to 47% in 2024-25. However, continuous monitoring is also done at 
different levels to ease traffic congestion through infrastructural inputs. 
Signalling assets reliability improvement measures (technological upgradation, 
midterm rehabilitation and redundancy) are regularly undertaken.  Specific 
measures like power supply system (IPS); Earthing & lightening protection 
system; Data logging & failure alert generation, replacement of Signal filament 
lamps by LED signals, hardware redundancy in critical equipments & 
communication media diversity (Copper /OFC media etc) are also being 
implemented. 
The Committee, however, find the claimed improvement as insufficient and 
unsatisfactory as the share of internal factors is more in train delays than the 

52 
 
external factors. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry need to 
conduct a study of  internal factors to find out the ways to check the detention 
caused by them and take concrete steps to fix the controllable internal factors on 
a war footing within a reasonable timeframe. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to find ways to control and manage the external factors. This would help 
secure punctuality and alleviate the painful waiting period for passengers and 
thus serve the established principle of ‘Time is Money’. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Segregation of passenger and freight trains  
 The Committee observe that use of common path for movement of both 
coaching and freight trains has been cited as one of the major obstacles in 
securing the objective of punctuality and travel time in the Indian Railways. In 
order to ensure seamless and fast freight movement, Indian Railways has been 
taking many measures including infrastructure projects such as Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor 
(WDFC) to create dedicated freight path to give exclusive access to freight trains. 
Besides, more and more tripling and quadrupling is being done and will 
culminate in the DFC. The Committee note that because of the speed change, the 
running speed is 130 Kmph as well as 160Kmph on a few sections. The speed 
difference causes a lot of wastage as far as the throughput is concerned, and that 
was one of the major points why Indian railways, way back in 2006, planned for 

53 
 
dedicated freight corridors. Around 300 trains are running on dedicated freight 
corridors.  
In view of the Indian Railways, being the life line of the Country, the 
Committee find it worth the cost to focus on developing a dedicated freight 
corridor and recommend the Ministry to complete the process of segregation of 
passenger and freight corridors  in a time bound manner. The Committee are of 
the view that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of laying extra lines for 
reasonable length in sections where land is available so as to facilitate 
stay/stoppages/halts of additional/standing trains so as to ensure uninterrupted 
movement of running trains. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action 
taken status regarding development of dedicated freight corridor within 6 months 
of presentation of report. The Committee desire that new shorter routes may also 
be explored to quicken the travel. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Need to update the Time-Tabling Mechanism 
 The Committee note from audit observation that in Indian Railways, time 
table is prepared manually and the existing time tables are being modified based 
on needs. In comparison, globally, simulators and computerized systems are 
used in the preparation of the time table. The running time of trains is fixed on 
scientific calculations. Though Indian Railways has simulators but does not use 
the same for time table preparation. The Committee also note from audit finding 
that as per data for Mail/Express trains for 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 from 

54 
 
ICMS report, 20.17 per cent of trains i.e. 2,65,391 trains, out of an average of 
1315456 trains, arrived before time which indicates poor timetabling by provision 
of extra running time. 
The Committee further note that under the recently concluded exercise of 
rationalization of Time Tabling, undertaken with the assistance of IIT Bombay and 
CRIS/New Delhi using their traffic simulator, the corridors for maintenance blocks 
have been increased from two to three hours and also resulted in increased 
number of freight paths and thus, the Indian Railways has been able to enhance 
the speeds of over 2000 trains leading to an increase of about 5% in the average 
speed of passenger trains by rationalization of Time Table whereas average 
freight speeds increased by 10.64% and the punctuality performance during 2020-
21 was recorded at 90.48% as compared to 75.6% recorded during 2019-20.  
Under this exercise, the travelling time of more than 900 trains have been reduced 
by more than an hour while for 1600 trains, the travelling time has been reduced 
by more than 30 minutes.  The Committee note that the allowance given to trains 
keeps on varying, zone-wise, to maintain the punctuality performance of 
trains.Further, Charting of trains are done utilizing SATSaNG (Software Aided 
Train Scheduling and Network Governance). 
 Since well-designed railway timetable is the foundation to enhance 
punctuality by providing time buffers to absorb unexpected delays and for 
coordinating train movements to avoid conflicts, the Committee recommend that 
the Indian Railways should undertake a review of time-tabling exercise and usher 
in an integrated and simulation based digital and use of AI (Artificial Intelligence) 

55 
 
in time of Trains to inculcate the spirit of punctuality in running of trains.  The 
Committee also recommend that effective measure should be taken to eliminate 
the ‘before time’ cases of loss of punctuality by way of shortening the provision 
of extra running time. The Committee further recommend to explore the 
possibility of loop line in certain sections of existing route,which can help in 
decongestion / speeding up the existing trains. This can be done at low additional 
cost and with huge benefit so far as increasing the average speed of train is 
concerned. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Need to expedite Standardization of Rakes 
 The Committee note from audit observation that a timeline for complete 
standardization has not been established and that as of July 1, 2019, only 1,000 
out of 2,700 rakes have been standardized or integrated, indicating that the rake 
standardization has reached only 37 percent. The Committee are also given to 
understand that the attempt to standardize rakes has not gained sufficient 
momentum across all zones, and the lack of standardization is adversely 
affecting punctuality. The Committee note that standardization of rakes is feasible 
primarily in cases where the nature of services is similar. However, Indian 
Railways operates a diverse range of services, including short to medium 
distance intercity services, long-distance Mail/Express services, and premium 
services such as Vande Bharat, Tejas, Rajdhani, and Shatabdi.  

56 
 
The Committee further observe that in replacing conventional ICF coaches 
with modern, lightweight LHB coaches that incorporate state-of-the-art 
technology, by the end of 2023-24, more than 50 percent of Indian Railway's stock 
will consist of LHB coaches. The production units of Indian Railways have been 
exclusively producing LHB coaches since April 2018 with production continually 
increasing over the years, resulting in more than 35,700 LHB coaches being 
manufactured. During the period 2019-20 to 2023-24, Indian Railways have 
converted 886 rakes into LHB rakes. Further, upto September, 2024, 58 additional 
rakes have been converted.  The conversion of conventional ICF coaches into 
LHB coaches is being carried out in a phased manner, and ongoing 
infrastructural works are expected to improve train operations in terms of both 
speed and punctuality. 
The Committee are of the opinion that all out efforts are required to bring 
about functional uniformity in the traffic pattern and services to the maximum 
possible extent and the standardization of rakes can pave the way for that. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Indian Railways to augment the production 
of LHB coaches and expedite the process of standardization of rakes including 
conversion of ICF coaches to LHB coaches in order to enhance operational 
efficiency and punctuality across the network and within the stipulated 
timeframe. The Committee further recommend that Indian Railways should 
enhance the production capacity of LHB coaches to meet the growing demand 
and ensure that the transition from ICF to LHB coaches is seamless. The 

57 
 
Committee emphasize the need for a coordinated effort across all zones of Indian 
Railways to ensure that the standardization of rakes is uniformly implemented.  
***** 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                K. C. VENUGOPAL 
02 December, 2025                   Chairperson 
11 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)            Public Accounts Committee  
 