   28  
 
 
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO NON-REGISTRATION OF 
LEASE AGREEMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Public  Accounts  Committee  contained  in  their  141st  Report (17th Lok 
Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (UT) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


   PAC NO.  2422   T W E N T Y  E I G H T H  R E P O R T     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA)          
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 141st Report (17th Lok Sabha)]  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (UT)     Presented to Lok Sabha on:  29.07.2025             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   29.07.2025    L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I   July, 2025 / Shraavana, 1947 (Saka)  
 LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO NON-REGISTRATION OF LEASE AGREEMENT  

i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                   (iv) 
COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  ...................................................................................       (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report.......................................................................          1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the     
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the   
   replies received from the Government.................... 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   replies of the Government have not been accepted 
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
   the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I*   Minutes of the 4 th sitting of the Public Accounts  
 Committee (2025-26) held on 17.06.2025 
 
II   Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their 
One Hundred and Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
_____________________________________________ 
* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri H. Ram Prakash           - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Dr. Faiz Ahmad   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Nahar Singh  - SSA 
 
Shri K. C. Venugopal - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
18. Dr. K Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their One Hundred and Forty First 
Report on “Loss of Revenue due to non-Registration of Lease Agreement” 
relating to Ministry of Home Affairs (UT)”. 
 
2. The One Hundred and Forty First Report was presented to Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on 29th April, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th 
July, 2024. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered 
and adopted the Twenty Eighth Report at their sitting held on 17th June 2025. 
Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix I.  
  
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Forty First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       K C VENUGOPAL 
22 July, 2025  Chairperson 
31Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)    Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their One Hundred and Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Loss of 
Revenue due to Non-Registration of Lease Agreement".  
 
2. The One Hundred and Forty First report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024.  It contained four Observations/Recommendations. The 
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Home Affairs (UT) and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and  4       
     
      Total:       4 
         Chapter -   II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. NIL 
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 Para No. NIL        
         Total:         0 
         Chapter -  IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
 Para No. NIL     
           
           
         Total:         0   
         Chapter -  V

2 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings on the part of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh that Municipal 
Corporation accepted the instrument as agreement on non-judicial stamp paper of 
Rs.100 without ensuring that the instrument was registered as lease deed with the 
concerned Sub Registrar.  Due to non-registration of lease deed by the licencee and 
acceptance of the same by the Municipal Corporation, the Government was deprived of 
stamp duty and registration fee of Rs.29.56 lakh and Rs.0.10 lakh, respectively.  The 
Committee had accordingly given their observations/recommendations in their One 
hundred and Forty One Report.   
4.  The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs (UT) on each 
of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their One 
hundred and Forty First Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this 
Report.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit 
comments. 
5. The Committee desire Ministry of Home Affairs (UT)to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the 
Report, positively within three months of the presentation of the Report to the 
Parliament. 
 
6. The Committee in their original report no. 141 had recommended as under :- 
The Committee during the course of the examination of the subject learn that 
Municipal Corporation accepted the instrument as agreement on non-judicial stamp 
paper of Rs. 100 without ensuring that the instrument was registered as lease deed with 
the concerned Sub Registrar. Due to non- registration of lease deed by the licencee and 
acceptance of the same by the Municipal Corporation the Government was deprived of 
stamp duty and registration fee of Rs. 29.56 lakh and Rs. 0.10 lakh, respectively.  
The Committee are concerned to note from the Action Taken Replies of the 
Ministry where the Chandigarh Administration has stated that Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh was not at fault for non-registration of lease deed and non-deposition of 
stamp duty and sole liability/responsibility to register the lease deed before the Sub-
Registrar was of the licensee. The Committee are further surprised to note in this regard 
that instead of admitting the lapse, the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh has 
justified their inaction by stating that Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh was strictly 
bound by the lease deed wherein registration of the lease agreement was nowhere 
mentioned. The Committee are of firm opinion that entire episode may not be just a 
lapse and appears to be a deliberate act on part of some vested interests of Municipal 
Corporation of Chandigarh in connivance and collusion with licensee/contractor. Above 

3 
 
all, it appears to have happened due to failure to follow the systems and procedure or 
lack of it in Chandigarh Municipal Corporation. 
Para 3 of the 141st Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
7.     The Ministry of Home Affairs (UT)  in their Action Taken Notes have stated as 
under:- 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the requisite amendments with 
regard to mandatory registration of concession agreement under the Indian Registration 
Act, 1908 and the associated stamp duty payable with the Registrar UT, Chandigarh, 
have already been carried out in the subsequent tender documents issued after the 
year 2017 to strengthen the systems and procedure.  
8 In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit in their vetting comments have 
stated as under :- 
 
Since registrations have been made mandatory, its implementation may be 
ensured by the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation.  
9. In further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the Municipal Corporation, 
Chandigarh has already circulated a check list vide letter no. 791 dated 04.07.2024 
(Annexure-A), particularly with respect to registration of documents, deposition of 
government fees, charges and other legal formalities to be completed by the bidders, 
concessionaries, etc.  
 
10. The Committee had expressed apprehension that entire episode may not 
have been just a lapse, rather it appeared to be a deliberate act on part of some 
vested interests of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh in connivance and 
collusion with licensee/contractor and due to failure to follow the systems and 
procedure or lack of it in Chandigarh Municipal Corporation. The ATN states 
thatMunicipal Corporation, Chandigarh  has already circulated a checklist, 
particularly with respect to registration of documents, deposition of government 
fees, charges and other formalities to be completed by the bidders, 
concessionaries, etc.  Further, the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, has 
initiated the process of registration of documents under the Indian Registration 
Act, 1908. 

4 
 
   The Committee desire to be apprised of the recovery status of the loss of 
Rs. 29.56 lakh and Rs. 0.10 lakh incurred due the malafide intention of the staff of 
Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh. 
 
 
 
*********** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee further note that Section 17 (1) (d) of the Indian Registration 
Act, 1908 provides that lease of immovable properties from year to year, or for any 
term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent are compulsorily registerable 
documents. Further, the expenses for providing the proper stamp duty and registration 
fee in the case of lease shall be borne by the lessee. Article 35 of Schedule 1-A of the 
Indian Stamp (Punjab Amendment) Act as applicable to UT of Chandigarh, provides 
for levy of stamp duty on lease deeds at prescribed rates for the amount of the 
average annual rent, where the lease purports to be for a term of not less than one 
year but not more than five years. 
Para 1 of the 141st Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The above observation is a gist of the audit paragraph.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Being statement of facts, no comments. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
 

6 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee further note that Section 17 (1) (d) of the Indian Registration 
Act, 1908 provides that lease of immovable properties from year to year, or for any 
term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent are compulsorily registerable 
documents. Further, the expenses for providing the proper stamp duty and registration 
fee in the case of lease shall be borne by the lessee. Article 35 of Schedule 1-A of the 
Indian Stamp (Punjab Amendment) Act as applicable to UT of Chandigarh, provides 
for levy of stamp duty on lease deeds at prescribed rates for the amount of the 
average annual rent, where the lease purports to be for a term of not less than one 
year but not more than five years. 
Para 2 of the 141st Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The above observation is a gist of the audit paragraph.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Being statement of facts, no comments. 
 
Ministry’s Reply 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee during the course of the examination of the subject learn that 
Municipal Corporation accepted the instrument as agreement on non-judicial stamp 
paper of Rs. 100 without ensuring that the instrument was registered as lease deed 

7 
 
with the concerned Sub Registrar. Due to non- registration of lease deed by the 
licencee and acceptance of the same by the Municipal Corporation the Government 
was deprived of stamp duty and registration fee of Rs. 29.56 lakh and Rs. 0.10 lakh, 
respectively.  
The Committee are concerned to note from the Action Taken Replies of the 
Ministry where the Chandigarh Administration has stated that Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh was not at fault for non-registration of lease deed and non-deposition of 
stamp duty and sole liability/responsibility to register the lease deed before the Sub-
Registrar was of the licensee. The Committee are further surprised to note in this 
regard that instead of admitting the lapse, the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh 
has justified their inaction by stating that Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh was 
strictly bound by the lease deed wherein registration of the lease agreement was 
nowhere mentioned. The Committee are of firm opinion that entire episode may not be 
just a lapse and appears to be a deliberate act on part of some vested interests of 
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh in connivance and collusion with 
licensee/contractor. Above all, it appears to have happened due to failure to follow the 
systems and procedure or lack of it in Chandigarh Municipal Corporation. 
Para 3 of the 141st Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the requisite amendments with 
regard to mandatory registration of concession agreement under the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 and the associated stamp duty payable with the Registrar UT, 
Chandigarh, have already been carried out in the subsequent tender documents 
issued after the year 2017 to strengthen the systems and procedure.  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
 
Since registrations have been made mandatory, its implementation may be 
ensured by the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation.  

8 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the Municipal Corporation, 
Chandigarh has already circulated a check list vide letter no. 791 dated 04.07.2024 
(Annexure-A), particularly with respect to registration of documents, deposition of 
government fees, charges and other legal formalities to be completed by the bidders, 
concessionaries, etc. Further, the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, has initiated the 
process of registration of documents under the Indian Registration Act, 1908. 
[For Comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I] 
Ministry of Home Affairs (UT)’s case No.U-14037/10/2022-CPD(CHD) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
The Committee also learn that Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh has charge 
sheeted concerned employees of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh for non-
compliance of the Registration Act, 1908 as well as Indian Stamp Act as applicable to 
Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Committee while expressing satisfaction that 
disciplinary proceedings against concerned officials has been initiated, nevertheless, 
recommend that with a view to obviate such recurrences in future a robust system of 
IT-enabled internal control and checks and balances should be put in place in a time 
bound manner under intimation to the Committee. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action primarily initiated in this regard. 
Para 4 of the 141st Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, the Municipal Corporation has 
prepared and circulated a checklist, particularly with respect to registration of 
documents, deposition of government fees, charges, and other legal formalities 
required to be fulfilled by the concessionaires, and the same have been made 
mandatory to be included in the terms and conditions of the tender documents/ RFPs. 
The tenders would be allowed to be uploaded on the e-tendering site only on the 

9 
 
fulfilment of mandatory requirements as mentioned above. This checklist has also 
been shared on website of the Municipal Corporation so as to help the prospective 
bidders of the mandatory requirements particularly with respect to registration of the 
document under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 and subsequent deposit of Stamp 
Duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. 
 
As regards the use of IT-enabled tools, it would be pertinent to mention that the 
Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh has already introduced the system of Electronic-
Performance Bank Guarantee (E-PBG). The necessary checklist/SOP have been 
issued to the concerned wing of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh vide letter no. 791 
dated 04.07.2024 (Annexure-I).  
 
Vetting Comments of Audit 
As desired action has been taken, no comments please. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIL 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
NIL 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         K C VENUGOPAL 
22 July, 2025                                                                                    Chairperson, 
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   Public Accounts Committee 
  

13 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 04 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 100 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
  
 
 
***************** 