 
 
25 
 
EVASION OF TAX DUE TO SUPPRESSION OF 
SALES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- FIFTH   REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
PAC NO. 2419   T W E N T Y  F I F T H  R E P O R T     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26)   (EIGHTEENTH LOK S ABHA)          
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha)]  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION)    Presented to Lok Sabha on: 25.07.2025              Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  25.07.2025    L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  N E W  D E L H I    July, 2025/ Shravana,1947 (Saka)   
EVASION OF TAX DUE TO SUPPRESSION OF SALES  

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS                                    (iii) 
 COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................    (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report..................................................................      1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
   accepted by the Government................................... 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
   do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
   from the Government................ 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
   by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
   the Government have furnished interim replies........ 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2024-25) 
held on 29.04.2025.  
II Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Eighth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
Shri K. C. Venugopal    -        Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T. R. Baalu 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Jai Parkash 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri C. M. Ramesh 
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9. Prof. Sougata Ray 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Dr. Amar Singh 
12. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
17. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
22. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi   
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma     - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave             - Deputy Secretary  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (2025-26) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the on Public Accounts Committee contained in their One Hundred and Thirty Eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Evasion of Tax due to Suppression of Sales”.  
 
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker 
on 23rd  February, 2024 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 
2024. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted 
the draft Report at their Sitting held on 29th April, 2025 Minutes of the Sitting are given 
at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5.   An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Thirty Eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
  
 
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Public Accounts deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their One Hundredth Thirty Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Evasion of Tax Due to Suppression of Sales” based on Para 3.10 of C&AG Report No. 
24 of 2022. 
 
2. The One Hundredth Thirty Eighth, Report which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2024, contained 05 
Observations/Recommendations.  The Action Taken Notes on all the Observations 
/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs and are 
categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4& 5 
          Total:05 
              Chapter: II 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No.: NIL 
     Total: Nil 
            Chapter: III 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para No.: NIL 
     Total: Nil 
            Chapter: IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies /no replies: 
 Para No.: NIL 
Total: nil 
            Chapter: V 
 
3. The Committee have learnt that the Audit noted from the assessment records of 
Excise and Taxation Department, that the dealer M/s Onkar Alloy House, had business 
income of ₹ 23.97 lakh from sale of old tyres during the year 2012-13 to 2015-16. Audit 
further noted that the sales were suppressed by taking the sale of old tyres to Profit and 
Loss Account instead of Trading Account and the dealer M/s Onkar Alloy House failed 

 
 
to pay the applicable tax. Audit worked out the evasion of tax of ₹ 9.68 lakh, including 
interest under Section 32(3) and penalty under Section 53 of the Punjab VAT Act. 
 
4.  The Committee also learnt that on being pointed out the Excise and Taxation 
Department Chandigarh, while accepting the audit observation, stated that the 
assessment order pertaining to the dealer for the assessment years 2012-13 to 2015-16 
had been revised and tax demand including interest and penalty of ₹ 8.10 lakh had 
been accordingly raised. 
 
5. The Committee have learnt from the audit findings that the cases from 2012-13 
to 2015-16 were rectified u/s 29(8) of PVAT Act 2005 as extended to U.T. of 
Chandigarh. Additional demand of Rs. 8,09,632/- on account of tax including applicable 
interest and penalty was created. 
 
6. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh 
Administration) in respect of all the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee 
as contained in their One Hundredth Thirty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) have been 
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with 
the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations /Recommendations 
made in their One Hundredth Thirty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha), which need 
reiteration or merit comments. 
 
7. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh 
Administration) may furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report within 3 months of its 
presentation to the House. 
Recommendation (Para no.1) 
8.  The Committee in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:-  
“The Committee note that as per Section 2 (zg) of Punjab Value Added Tax 
(PVAT) Act, 2005 (as extended to UT Chandigarh) provides that sale price 
means the amount of valuable consideration received or receivable by a person 
for any sale made including any sum charged on account of freight, storage, 
demurrage, insurance and any sum charged for anything done by the person in 
respect of the goods at the time of or before the delivery thereof. Further, sub 
section (zc) of section 2 of the Act defines "return" as a true and correct account 
of business pertaining to the return period in the prescribed form.” 
9. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
“The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph..” 
10 Being statement of facts, Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 

 
 
Recommendation (Para no.2) 
11.  The Committee in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:-  
 “The Committee further note that the assessing authority of Excise and Taxation 
Department, Union Territory of Chandigarh in the first instance and in their 
primary assessment failed to detect suppression of sales resulting in registered 
evasion of tax of Rs. 8.10 lakh.” 
12. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
“The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph.” 
13. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 
14. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of failed to live up to 
the responsibility cast on themto detect suppression of sales resulting in 
registered evasion of tax of Rs. 8.10 lakh. This is unfortunate to say the least. The 
Committee do not accept the specious argument of the Ministry that it was an 
error of judgement on the part of the designated officer who did the assessment 
of M/s Onkar Alloy House resulting in wrongful gain to the assessee and loss to 
the exchequer at the primary assessment stage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry ought to device a mechanism which is not only 
administratively feasible but also in conformity with financial prudence so that 
such errors can be avoided.  The Committee also recommend that in order to 
obviate recurrence of such instances, the Officers responsible for fiduciary loss 
to the Government must be made accountable. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
15. The Committee in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:- 
“The Committee further find from the reply of the Department that the above 
amount has been fully recovered. The amount accrued as a result of rectification 
of cases has duly been recovered and no amount of tax is due for recovery. 
Here, the Committee appreciate that Chandigarh administration has issued 
directions to all the ward in-charge vide memo no.3279-81 dated 18.04.2023 so 
that such irregularities do not recur in future and in this sequel officers have been 
directed to follow the due procedure as per extant Act and Rules.” 
16. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
“The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph” 
 
17. The Audit in this regard stated as under: 

 
 
“Chandigarh Administration has issued directions to all the ward in-charge vide 
memo no. 4233 & 34 dated 18.04.23 as per our records and not vide Memo No. 
3279-81 dated 18.04 2023 as projected above.” 
 
18. The Ministry in its updated action taken in the matter have stated that: 
“As informed by Chandigarh Administration, directions have been issued to all 
ward in-charges vide Memo No. 4233 & 4234 dated 18.04.2023 and this 
Advisory on audit paras was issued under the signature of Assistant Excise & 
Taxation Commissioner. It is also submitted that a separate Advisory on audit 
paras was issued under the signature of the then Joint Excise & Taxation 
Commissioner vide Endorsement. No. 3279-81 dated 18.04.2023.Therefore, both 
the advisories on Audit Paras were issued by the officials of the Excise & 
Taxation Department.” 
19. The Committee are dismayed to note that for a lapse mere directions 
/advisory have been issued and no concrete or tangible action has been taken 
against the errant officials.  This scenario posses a situation where a 
unwarranted book-entry done by the assessee with a malafide intention to evade 
taxation which went unnoticed by the Excise and Taxation Department which has 
the primary responsibility and onus to check as to whether the assessment 
records were in order.  The Committee are convinced that certain unscrupulous 
elements within the system are hand-in-glove with M/s Onkar Alloy House which 
needs to be probed to fix accountability on the erring officials. In the opinion of 
the Committee, monitoring the officials handling the subject and holding them 
accountable for lapses should have been in place much earlier. However, it was 
only on the insistence of Audit finding that the Excise and Taxation Department, 
Chandigarh came into action. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
examine the issue sincerely. They would also like to be informed by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs regarding the final decision taken in the matter. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
20. The Committee in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:- 
“The Committee further find that Show Cause Notice has been issued to the 
concerned officer and disciplinary action has also been initiated. Advisory on 
Audit Paras has also been issued to the assessing officers.” 
21. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 “The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph.” 
22. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 

 
 
23. The Ministry in its updated action taken has stated that no further comments 
demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no updated action is required at this 
stage. 
24. The Committee are disappointed to note that it was only on the insistence 
of audit that the Department took cognizance of the matter.  The Committee 
exhort the Ministry of Home Affairs to scrupulously abide by the tenets of 
financial propriety and caution them to keep a close watch on the assessment of 
documents proffered by the assesses.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon 
the Ministry to make efforts to ensure rectification of such lapses and ensure that 
such omissions do not recur.  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
25. The Committee in their 138th Report (17th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
follows:- 
“The Committee, while considering the above facts into account note and opine 
that the above case should not be viewed in isolation as an evasion of tax due to 
suppression of sales only but should be viewed as a case casting reflection on 
the tax evaluation mechanism. Notwithstanding the fact, that the amount is trivial 
it is of much importance to enable the system to make their mechanism of 
checks and balances foolproof. The Committee wonder as to why such abrasion 
was detected only by audit but not the officials of the Department. At this stage 
the Committee can only recommend that a robust mechanism in addition to the 
standard operating procedure should be developed under intimation to the 
Committee so that no amiss of this nature surfaces.”  
26. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 “The Chandigarh Administration has taken note of the recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Committee. To ensure the efficiency and integrity and to uphold statutory 
requirements and foster a culture of compliance and accountability of tax 
administration, Excise and Taxation Department, Chandigarh Administration has 
taken following actions: 
Regular reviews of assessed cases to ensure accuracy and compliance. 
Necessary revisions are made to address discrepancies and maintain the 
integrity of the tax evaluation process. Specific guidelines and instructions are 
issued from time to time to prevent irregularities. Further, regular training 
programs are also conducted about the latest regulations to enable effective 
performance of their duties. 
Robust system has been developed to adhere Statutory Requirements, ensure 
checks & balances and strengthen tax evaluation mechanisms which helps 
preventing future discrepancies and enhancing assessment accuracy.” 
27. The Audit had no further comments to add in the matter. 

 
 
28. The Ministry in its updated action taken have stated that no further comments 
demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no updated action is required at this 
stage. 
29. Though the Ministry has taken cognizance of their observations for 
compliance, the Committee desire that a robust policy framework to ensure 
feasibility of the review mechanism and periodical evaluation insofar as primary 
assessment is concerned. While taking a serious view of such a cavalier 
functioning, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need for the Ministry to 
find practical solutions and deft handling oftax evaluation mechanism. The 
Committee view such lackadaisical approach on the part of Excise and Taxation 
Department very seriously thereby giving an inescapable impression that there 
was something fishy in the whole affair. The Committee, therefore, feel thatit is 
obligatory on the part of the officers expending or dealing with public money to 
take immediate action to remedy the deficiencies/irregularities pointed out by the 
Audit and the Committee may be apprised of the review being undertaken by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee note that as per Section 2 (zg) of Punjab Value Added Tax (PVAT) Act, 
2005 (as extended to UT Chandigarh) provides that sale price means the amount of 
valuable consideration received or receivable by a person for any sale made including 
any sum charged on account of freight, storage, demurrage, insurance and any sum 
charged for anything done by the person in respect of the goods at the time of or before 
the delivery thereof. Further, sub section (zc) of section 2 of the Act defines "return" as 
a true and correct account of business pertaining to the return period in the prescribed 
form. 
 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 1 of 138th Report of 
Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph. 
 
Audit Vetting Comments 
 
 
Being statement of facts, no comments. 
 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 The Committee further note that the assessing authority of Excise and Taxation 
Department, Union Territory of Chandigarh in the first instance and in their primary 
assessment failed to detect suppression of sales resulting in registered evasion of tax of 
Rs. 8.10 lakh. 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 2 of 138th Report ofPublic Accounts Committee(17th 
Lok Sabha)] 

 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph. 
 
Audit Comments 
 No comments. 
 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage. 
 
[Please see Para no.14 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 The Committee further find from the reply of the Department that the above amount has 
been fully recovered. The amount accrued as a result of rectification of cases has duly 
been recovered and no amount of tax is due for recovery. Here, the Committee 
appreciate that Chandigarh administration has issued directions to all the ward in-
charge vide memo no.3279-81 dated 18.04.2023 so that such irregularities do not recur 
in future and in this sequel officers have been directed to follow the due procedure as 
per extant Act and Rules. 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 3 of 138th Report ofPublic Accounts 
Committee(17th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action Taken 
  
The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Chandigarh Administration has issued directions to all the ward in-charge vide memo 
no. 4233 & 34 dated 18.04.23 (copy enclosed) as per our records and not vide Memo 
No. 3279-81 dated 18.04 2023 as projected above. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
As informed by Chandigarh Administration, directions have been issued to all ward in-
charges vide Memo No. 4233 & 4234 dated 18.04.2023 and this Advisory on audit 

 
 
paras was issued under the signature of Assistant Excise & Taxation Commissioner. It 
is also submitted that a separate Advisory on audit paras was issued under the 
signature of the then Joint Excise & Taxation Commissioner vide Endorsement. No. 
3279-81 dated 18.04.2023. Therefore, both the advisories on Audit Paras were issued 
by the officials of the Excise & Taxation Department. 
 
[Please see Para no.19 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
The Committee further find that Show Cause Notice has been issued to the concerned 
officer and disciplinary action has also been initiated. Advisory on Audit Paras has also 
been issued to the assessing officers. 
 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 4 of 138th Report of Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)]  
 
Action Taken 
  
The above observation is only a gist of the audit paragraph. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
 No comments. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no updated 
action is required at this stage 
 
[Please see Para no.24 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
 Ministry of Home Affairs The Committee, while considering the above facts into account 
note and opine that the above case should not be viewed in isolation as an evasion of 
tax due to suppression of sales only but should be viewed as a case casting reflection 
on the tax evaluation mechanism. Notwithstanding the fact, that the amount is trivial it is 
of much importance to enable the system to make their mechanism of checks and 
balances foolproof. The Committee wonder as to why such abrasion was detected only 
by audit but not the officials of the Department. At this stage the Committee can only 
recommend that a robust mechanism in addition to thestandard operating procedure 

 
 
should be developed under intimation to theCommittee so that no amiss of this nature 
surfaces. 
[Recommendation/Observation No. 5 of 138th Report of Public Accounts Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha)]  
 
Action Taken 
  
The Chandigarh Administration has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Committee. To ensure the efficiency and integrity and to uphold 
statutory requirements and foster a culture of compliance and accountability of tax 
administration, Excise and Taxation Department, Chandigarh Administration has taken 
following actions: 
 
Regular reviews of assessed cases to ensure accuracy and compliance. Necessary 
revisions are made to address discrepancies and maintain the integrity of the tax 
evaluation process. Specific guidelines and instructions are issued from time to time to 
prevent irregularities. Further, regular training programs are also conducted about the 
latest regulations to enable effective performance of their duties. 
 
Robust system has been developed to adhere Statutory Requirements, ensure checks 
& balances and strengthen tax evaluation mechanisms which helps preventing future 
discrepancies and enhancing assessment accuracy. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
 No comments. 
 
Updated Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
 
No further comments demanded by the Audit on action taken, therefore, no 
updated action is required at this stage 
 
[Please see Para no.29 of Chapter-I for comments of the Committee] 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:  
    
22 July, 2025  
31 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
  
 
 
K.C. VENUGOPAL  
Chairperson, 
    Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS (2024-25) HELD ON 29 APRIL, 2025 
The Committee on Public Accounts sat on Tuesday, 29 April, 2025 from 1303 hrs to 
1425 hrs in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri K.C. Venugopal   -  Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
3. Shri Jai Parkash 
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
5. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
6. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
7. Dr. Amar Singh 
8. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri Praful Patel 
13. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
14. Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P  - Director 
3. Shri Atul Bhave   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta  -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
Sl. No. Name 
 
Designation 
1.  Ms. Atreyee Das Deputy C&AG 
2.  Ms. Smita S. Chaudhri  Deputy C&AG 
3.  Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj Deputy C&AG 
4.  Ms. Yashodhara Ray Chaudhuri Addl. Deputy C&AG 
5.  Shri Samar Thakur  Director General 
6.  Shri Anadi Mishra Director General 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officers of the office of C&AG of 
India to the sitting of the Committee. He invited suggestions of the Members on the 
following four Draft Reports:-  
i. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
ii. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
iii. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
iv. Draft Action Taken Report on the 138th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Evasion of Tax Due to Suppression of Sales” based on Para 3.10 of C&AG 
Report No. 24 of 2022 pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs (Chandigarh 
Administration). 
7. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the 
light of factual verification done by Audit. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ONE HUNDREDTH THRITY EIGHT REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 05 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2,3,4 and 5 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
reply of the Government: 
Para No. –  NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para No. – NIL 
 
Total: 0 
Percentage:  
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para No. –  NIL 
Total: 0 
Percentage: 0 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 