           
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 27TH Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants – 2007-08 of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
  
 
 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
        
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)  
35 

 2 
 
 
SCR No.: 123 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 27TH Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants – 2007-08 of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……….…..2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on …………………2007 
 
    
           
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)  
 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………   1       
     
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been    11 
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  26 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which     27 
    Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which    32  
final replies of the Government  are still awaited  ……. 
 
 
PART – II 
 
APPENDIX 
 
I.  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on     34  
Railways held on 03.12.2007 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government     36 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the  
27th Report  of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for  
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Railways’  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.          Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.       Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.        Ch. Lal Singh 
13. Smt. Suman Mahato 
14.       Shri Ananta Nayak 
15.        Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
16.        Shri A. Sai Prathap 
17.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18.        Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19.       Shri Manik Singh 
20.        Shri K. Subbarayan  
21. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 

 5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Misra   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri R.S. Negi    - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007-08), having been 
authorized by the Committee to p resent the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty 
Fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2006 -07) on ‘Demands fo r Grants – 2007-08 of the Ministry of 
Railways.’ 
 
2.  The Twenty Seventh Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25.04.2007 
and presented to Lok Sabha on 26.04.2007. It contained 18 
recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 25.10.2007.   
  
3.  The Committee considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at 
their sitting held on 03.12.2007.    
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government o n the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2006-07) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
4   December, 2007                                                              Chairman, 
13   Agrahayana, 1929 Saka                                 Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by th e 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 
Twenty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2006-07) 
on ‘Demands for Grants - 2007-08 of the Ministry of Railways’.  The 
Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25.04 .2007 and  to the Lok 
Sabha on 26.04.2007.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 18 recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report.  These have been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15 and 18. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Nil. 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos. 12, 13, 16 and 17. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -  
 
Para Nos.11 and 14.     
 
1.3. The Committee desire that replies to the 
observations/comments contained in Chapter I and V of the 
Report be furnished to them expeditiously.     
 

 8 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government 
on some of their recommendations/observations.   
 
A.  Execution of Dedicated Freight Corridor 
             (Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
 
1.5 The Committee felt that utmost priority needs to be accorded to 
execute the dedicated freight Corridor project which was admittedly 
lagging behind by five years. The Committee also noted that allocation of 
Rs.1,300 crore had been made for this project during  2007 -08. The 
Committee had desired to be apprised of the details of this project with 
target for completion.  
 
1.6 In their action taken r eply, the Ministry of Railways have, inter alia  
stated as under:- 
“The Dedicated Freight Corridors are proposed to be completed in a 
time frame of 5 years through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). 
Cabinet, in its meeting on 24 th August, 2006, approved setti ng up of a 
Special Purpose Vehicle under the Ministry of Railways for execution of 
Dedicated Freight Corridor projects. An Implementing Agency called 
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) has 
been incorporated on 30th October, 2006. 
The project would be funded by a mix of debt and equity in 
the ratio of 2:1. Government of India through Ministry of Railways 
will invest in the equity of the implementing agency (DFCCIL). 
Financial assistance is being sought through Department of 
Economic Affairs under the STEP Loan Scheme of the Government 
of Japan. 
 
1.7 The Committee regret to note that though as much as Rs. 
1300 crore has been allocated for the Dedicated Freight Corridor 
project during 2007 -08, work on execution of the Project does 
not seem to have been started yet.  The Committee would like to 
know the present status of obtaining financial assistance for the 
project and how soon work in execution of the project is 
expected to be started.  
 
 

 9 
 
 
B.  Delay in Signalling and Telecommunication Works 
(Recommendation Para No.5) 
 
1.8 The Committee noted with regret that there had been huge 
shortfall in achievement in signalling replacement and rehabilitation works, 
track circuiting and blocks proving by Axle Counters during 2006 -07. The 
Committee were of the view that the reasons advanced by Ministry for this 
shortfall such as constraints of manufacturing and contractual capabilities,      
non-finalisation of tenders, severe shortage of signal engineers and staff 
and delay in provision of service buildings could be  controlled by advance 
planning and proper coordination. The Committee urged that at least in 
2007-08 prompt efforts should be made to identify the shortcomings and 
deficiencies with a view to achieving satisfactory performance in thi s 
regard. The Committee also trusted that action would be taken to adhere 
to the time limit laid down by Khanna Committee to complete track 
circuiting at stations. 
  
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 
“Hon’ble Minister in his Budget Speech 2007-08 has emphasized on 
using modern signalling systems to effect improvement in line 
capacity.  The concerns expressed by the Committee for shortfall in 
achievement have been noted.  Railways have been endeavouring 
to bring about changes in the system and execute projects on fast 
track.  However, there are certain extraneous factors on which 
Railways have no control and these affect the implementation of 
projects.  Recently, some decisions like floating & finalization of 
composite tenders have been taken for S&T projects to expedite 
the progress.  Track circuiting works at stations are being given 
highest priority and action is being taken to adhere to the time limit 
laid down.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Railways in their reply have not specified 
what are the extraneous factors that hinder implementation of 
projects.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the same.  The 
Committee would also like to know whether these issues were 

 10 
 
ever taken up with the concerned authorities/agenc ies and if so, 
when and with what result. 
 
C.  Review of Advance Payment Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
1.11 The Committee noted that freight outstanding from State 
Electricity Boards and Power Houses as on 31 st January 2007 was stated to 
be over Rs. 1411 crore. The Committee were informed that the main 
defaulters in this regard were Badarpur Thermal Power Station (Rs. 554.81 
crore), Punjab Electricity Board (Rs. 442 crore), and Delhi Vidyut Board (Rs. 
176 crore) and that Badarpur Thermal Power Station  had since paid Rs.300 
crore. Punjab Electricity Board and Delhi Vidyut Board with whom there 
was a serious dispute over the dues had reportedly gone to Court and the 
verdict of the court appointed arbitrator has gone against Railways. The 
Committee had de sired to be informed as to how it was proposed to 
recover those dues and whether there was violation of any provisions of 
the contract by Railways with regard to those cases. The Committee 
desired the Ministry to order a probe into the matter with a view t o fixing 
responsibility for lapses, if any. 
 
1.12 As regards dues from Punjab State Electricity Board, the Ministry 
of Railways have, inter alia  stated in the action taken reply as under:- 
“The Award given by the Arbitrator against the Railways is 
not in accordance with the provision of the Advance Payment 
scheme at Destination. Hence Northern Railway has challenged the 
award. Accordingly, the case has been heard before the Civil Court 
of Patiala, which upheld the award given by the Arbitrator. The 
judgement is under  legal scrutiny. As far as Railways are concerned, 
there has been no violation of any provision of contract. The 
Advance Payment Scheme has been implemented with the 
agreement of the concerned State Electricity Board. As stated 
earlier, normally all traffic especially Coal is required to be booked as 
‘paid’. Since SEB’s are not regular in arranging pre -payment, this 
scheme was designed to help them avoid pre -payment by 
maintaining an Advance Deposit with Railways. In case the deposit 
fell short of the requisite amount, the traffic was automatically 
charged at a higher tariff than the paid tariff as per rules. In fact, 
the violation was on part of the Electricity Board for which charges 
were accordingly raised against them.” 

 11 
 
 
The Ministry of Railways have also stated that since there was no 
lapse on part of Railways, the need to order the probe to fix 
responsibility in the matter is not considered necessary. 
 
1.13 The reply of the Ministry of Railways is silent as to how it is 
proposed to recover t he dues from the Punjab State Electricity 
Board.  The Ministry have not cared to furnish the points of 
reasoning given in the arbitral award, to justify the Ministry’s 
claim that there was no lapse on the part of Railways.  The fact 
that even six months af ter the Committee’s recommendation on 
the subject, the Ministry of Railways have not decided on further 
course of action in the matter reflects that something is amiss in 
the entire case.  The Committee wonder whether there were any 
shortcomings in the Adv ance Payment Scheme.  It is not clear 
whether the Ministry of Railways had a re -look at the Scheme in 
the light of arbitral award and the court judgement.   
 
D.  Evolving an accurate measure of Zonal performance 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 
1.14 The Committee had agreed with the views of the Railways that the 
operating ratio which reflects the operating efficiency of the Indian 
Railways be viewed as a whole and not Zone-wise.  The Committee in this 
connection noted that for calculating Zone -wise operating ratios, 
passenger and freight earnings are apportioned between Zonal Railways 
based on the traffic earned on their respective systems and that all Zonal 
Railways are not placed evenly with regard to traffic earnings, by virtue of 
their jurisdiction and geographical location and that higher operating ratio 
reflected in Zonal Railways were beyond their control.  As such the Zonal 
operating ratios could not be relied upon as a measure of the operating 
efficiency of the zones.  The Committee wondered as to what  then was 
the need and relevance of depicting Zonal operating ratios in the 

 12 
 
documents presented to Parliament and felt that it was high time to have 
a re-look at this issue. 
 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
  
“The zonal system on the Railways was introduced for the 
administrative convenience for better management of the vast 
network. The operational efficiency of the Indian Railways is the 
outcome of aggregate performance of all the zonal Railways.   
The Ope rating Ratio is the key indicator of operational 
efficiency of the Railways, which is the ratio of input cost to the 
traffic output.  As has been submitted to the Committee all the 
zonal Railways are not evenly placed with regard to traffic earnings 
which are apportioned between the zonal Railways based on unit of 
traffic traversed on the system, irrespective of the fixed element of 
operating expenditure that are essentially incurred to run the 
system.  In order to improve the overall efficiency of the Indi an 
Railways, performance of each zone needs to be monitored, 
despite compulsions of the system. Accordingly, the operating ratio 
is calculated and depicted for all the zonal Railways, which facilitate 
major policy formulation in regard to development of th e Railways 
and exploration of traffic potency in various parts of the country.”     
 
1.16 The Committee are surprised to note that major policy 
formulation in regard to development of the Railways is 
facilitated by a yardstick which is considered faulty.  Zonal 
operating ratio is reportedly used for major policy formulation of 
Railways.  Admittedly, the Zonal operating ratio cannot be relied 
upon as a measure of operating efficiency of the Zones.  Policy 
formulation of Railways would obviously be defective to the 
extent it relies on an inaccurate indicator.  The Committee 
wonder whether the Ministry of Railways ever attempted to work 
out a measure which can accurately indicate the performance of 
Zones.  The Committee would like to know the details in this 
regard.   
 
 
 

 13 
 
 
 
 
E.  Critical review of Policy of outsourcing 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
 
1.17 The Committee stressed that no core activity should be brought 
under Public Private Partnership (PPP) scheme.  The Committee also 
desired that it should be ensure d that the interest of railway employees 
and railway users were not compromised. The Committee also felt that 
the policy of outsourcing required a critical review. 
 
1.18 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 
“No core  area is being brought under the Public -Private 
Partnership (PPP) Scheme. Further, the interest of railway users 
and railway employees is of paramount importance while decision 
on areas to be identified for PPP. In fact, one of the objectives of 
using PPP for identified projects is to bring about improvement in 
the expertise and working environment of employees and service 
delivery to rail-users.  
Railway’s policy of outsourcing is based on the above policy 
parameters. It has been stated by Hon’ble Minister  for Railways in 
different forums that there would be no privatisation in the 
Railways and the interest of railway users and railway employees 
would not be compromised. Some of the areas where public-private 
partnership option will be explored are developm ent of world class 
stations, manufacturing of locomotives and passenger coaches, 
development of multimodal logistic parks and agro - retail chains, 
budget hotels etc.” 
 
1.19 It is not clear from the reply of the Ministry of Railways 
whether the policy of ou tsourcing was critically reviewed by 
Railways as recommended by the Committee.  The Committee 
hope that the recommendation of the Committee in this regard 
has been taken note of for appropriate action.   
 
 
 

 14 
 
 
F.  Replacement of Safety Surcharge with Development 
Surcharge 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
1.20  The Committee noted that after expiry of the period of 
Special Railway Safety Fund, ‘Safety Surcharge’ levied for the purpose 
would be subsumed in the actual fare and the revenue so generated 
would be util ized for funding the construction of dedicated freight 
corridor.  The Committee did not agree with such an arrangement.  The 
Committee in this connection recalled their recommendation made in the 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants 2006 -07’ where the Committee h ad 
disapproved the policy of the Railways putting indirect burden on the 
commuters and had strongly recommended that the Railways should 
refrain from adopting such deceptive practices. 
 
1.21      In their Action Taken Reply, the Government have stated as 
under:- 
 
“Safety Surcharge was levied with effect from 1.10.2001 i.e. from 
2001-02 to 2006 -07 to raise Rs. 5000 crore for the newly created 
non-lapsable Special Railway Safety Fund.  This surcharge lapsed 
on 31 st March’ 2007 after expiry of five year period .  Safety 
Surcharge has been replaced with Development Charge w.e.f. 
1.4.2007, for part funding of the proposed Dedicated Freight 
Corridors (DFC). It may be mentioned  that imposition of 
Development Surcharge on passenger fares will not result in any 
change in the existing chargeable passenger fares in any Class.  
Thus, Railways have not adopted any deceptive practices, as 
mentioned by the Committee, to increase the passenger fares.” 
 
1.22 The Committee are dismayed to note that Safety Surcharge 
has been re placed with Development Charge w.e.f. 01.04.2007 
for part funding of the proposed Dedicated Freight Corridors, 
inspite of the Committee’s repeated recommendation against 
such a move.  The Committee do not agree with the view of the 
Ministry of Railways tha t the imposition of Development 
Surcharge on passenger fares will not result in any change in the 
existing chargeable passenger fares.  Withdrawal of Safety 

 15 
 
Surcharge from the passenger fares would have certainly given 
some relief to the passengers.  Repla cing Safety Surcharge with 
Development Charge has obviously denied this relief to the 
passengers.  It is in this context the Committee had observed 
that Railways should refrain from adopting such deceptive 
practices.  The Committee urge the Ministry to rev iew 
replacement of Safety Surcharge with Development Charge.    
 
G.  Implementation of revised Catering Policy – 2005 
(Recommendation Para No.18) 
 
1.23 The Committee had noted that despite their recommendation in 
their 14 th Report on ‘Indian Railway Cateri ng and Tourism Corporation’ 
(IRCTC) and reiteration of the same in their 22 nd Action Taken Report that 
the Catering Policy - 2005 should be reviewed on priority basis,  nothing 
had been heard from the Railways in this regard. The Committee had 
stressed tha t outcome of the review of Railway Catering Policy – 2005 
undertaken by the Ministry of Railways be placed before them without any 
further delay. 
 
1.24 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“The recommendation of the Commit tee made in their 14 th Report 
to review the Catering Policy – 2005 was given due consideration 
and after review, the Revised Catering Policy -  2005 was issued on 
21.12.2005.  The Revised Catering Policy – 2005 dated 21.12.2005 
is still at the stage of imp lementation.  Since catering services in 
Railways are considered as a passenger amenity, it has been 
ensured in successive catering policies that the tariff of tea/coffee, 
breakfast and standard meals remains reasonable and is kept 
outside the purview of m arket forces. Ministry of Railways 
accordingly, fixes tariff of these items.  Revision of these items was 
last made in 2003.  Market forces have been allowed to operate in 
the segment where the customers have the capacity to afford the 
market determined pr ices, and the licensees can get reasonable 
profits.” 
  
 
 

 16 
 
1.25 The Committee regret to note that though the Catering 
Policy-2005 was reportedly revised after the review 
recommended by the Committee, nothing has been mentioned in 
the reply of the Ministry of Railways about the salient features of 
the revised Catering Policy -2005.  It is also not clear from the 
Ministry’s reply whether the revised Catering Policy has since 
been implemented.  The Committee would await the response of 
the Ministry of Railways in this regard. 
      
 
 
 

 17 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 The Committee had noted that the performance of Railways with 
an estimated net revenue of over Rs.14,000 crore and a n operating ratio 
of 78.7% during 2006 -07.  The Committee were concerned to note that 
there would be deceleration in the growth rate of Railways in the year 
2007-08 as compared to the year 2006 -07.  The surplus after dividend 
which was expected to record a 72% growth in 2006-07 over the previous 
year is projected to fall to 8% in 2007 -08 and Gross traffic receipts from 
16% to 13%.  On the other hand, the total working expenditure was 
expected to sharply rise by 14% in 2007 -08 as compared to 9% in 2006 -
07.  As a result, the operating ratio of Railways would go up from 78.7 in 
2006-07 to 79.6 in 2007 -08.  The Committee felt that concerted efforts 
were needed to sustain the growth momentum achieved by Railways in 
the year 2006 -07 by measures such as productivit y improvement, better 
asset utilization, capacity augmentation, increasing the market share, etc. 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The deceleration in the growth of traffic earnings in 2007 -08 is 
mainly on account of va rious discount and reduction in passenger 
fares and modification in freight structure announced in Budget, 
2007-08, details of which have already been submitted for the kind 
information of the Hon’ble Committee.  As regards working 
expenses, it may be reiterated that an increase to 14% projected in 
the Budget Estimates, 2007-08 includes provision of Rs.1250 cr. for 
likely sanction of Interim Relief to the staff and pensioners.  
Excluding this factor the growth rate in working expenditure would 
work out to 1 1.7% over the Revised Estimates, 2006 -07. The 
operating ratio for 2007-08 would accordingly work out to 77.9% as 
against 78.7% projected for 2006-07 in the Revised Estimates. 
 
 
 

 18 
 
The Hon’ble Committee’s emphasis on the need for sustaining the 
growth momentum is noted.  It may be submitted that concessions 
and modifications announced in the Budget, 2007 -08 for fare and 
freight are aimed at attracting more traffic.  Besides these, Budget 
2007-08 also envisages various initiatives for augmenting traffic 
capacity viz. running of more freight trains with higher axle-load of  
22.9 tonne and 25 tonne, manufacture of higher axle -load and 
payload wagons with latest technology, implementation of Unit 
Exchange Maintenance for improving productivity of wagons, 
adding 800 more coaches in popular passenger trains etc.  In order 
to increase the market share, zonal railways  have been advised to 
engage independent marketing agencies to explore new traffic 
streams. Further, Railways are strictly observing economy and 
austerity in expenditure and the zonal units have been given a 
spending limit effecting a saving of 4% over the budgetary 
allocation.   The performance of the railways is being monitored on 
monthly basis and necessary steps will be taken not only to 
achieve the bud getary targets but also to improve the 
performance.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
  
Incidentally, Railway Board Chairman indicated during oral 
evidence that there had been an incorre ct representation of information 
provided by the Railways to the Committee regarding budget surplus/net 
revenue.  The Committee would like to be informed of the correct figures 
in this regard.  The Committee found that there had also been 
discrepancies in the documents presented to Parliament by Railways.  The 
Committee urged that extreme care should be exercised to ensure that 
the documents/information presented to the Parliament and the 
Parliamentary Committees are free of errors.  
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The Budgetary Surplus and Net Revenue for 2005 -06, 2006 -07 
(BE & RE) and 2007 -08 (BE) which has been incorporated in the 
Explanatory Memorandum on Railway Budget, 2007 -08 is indicated 
below.  It may be mentio ned here that in order to make 

 19 
 
meaningful comparison, figures for 2005 -06 have been modified 
incorporating the accounting changes made from Revised 
Estimates, 2006-07 onwards.  
(Rs. in cr.) 
 Actuals, 
2005-06 
Budget 
Estimates, 
2006-07 
Revised 
Estimates, 
2006-07 
Budget 
Estimates, 
2007-08 
Net Revenue 10,143.15 10,885.54 14,869.74 16,021.99 
Excess/Shortfall 6,193.32 6742.31 10627.48 11,449.45 
 
Discrepancies in the documents noticed by the Hon’ble Committed 
are regretted.  It is submitted that in future due c are will be taken 
to reflect correct information in all the documents presented to 
Parliament and the Parliamentary Committees.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 
Though freight traffic gi ves almost 63% of Railway earnings, 
freight gets last priority in movement. The Railway Board Chairman was 
candid enough to admit that Railways should have gone for dedicated 
freight track about three to five years earlier. The Committee were not 
clear as to why timely initiatives were not taken in this regard. In order to 
improve freight business, the budget for 2007 -08 has outlined market 
responsive schemes which include empty flow freight discount, two leg 
freight discount, incremental freight discount f or non -peak season, 
rationalization of parcel policy and upgradation of routes to carry higher 
axle load trains upto 23 tonnes and 25 tonnes. Notwithstanding these 
measures, the Committee felt that utmost priority needs to be accorded to 
execute the dedica ted freight Corridor project which was admittedly 
lagging behind by five years. The Committee noted that allocation of 
Rs.1,300 crore had been made for the project during the current year 
(2007-08). The Committee had desired to await details of this project with 
target for completion.  

 20 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Railways had proposed a 2700 kilometer long railway line project 
(Eastern Corridor -1279 Kms. and Western Corridor -1483 Kms.) as 
an augmentation of the ca pacity of Indian Railways network to 
handle the large increase in volume of traffic over the coming year . 
These Dedicated Freight Corridors in Phase – I along with the 
feeder routes of Indian Railways will ensure availability of sufficient 
capacity in the face of rising demand for transport.  
 
Both Eastern & Western Corridors will be made suitable for running 
of heavier trains of 25 tonne axle load. Maximum moving 
dimensions on the routes will be more liberal and comparable to 
world standards in order to pe rmit heavier and longer trains. While 
Eastern Corridor will be electrified, the Western Corridor will 
operate on diesel traction in order to permit Double Stack Container 
operation. Bridges and fixed structure, which have long life, would 
be laid on this r oute for 30 tonne axle load. The loops provided on 
the route (DFC) should have length to accommodate double trains 
(1500 meter).  Logistics Parks are proposed to be developed on 
Dedicated Freight Corridor.  
  
The Eastern Corridor as approved by the Cabinet  Committee on 
Economic Affairs in its meeting on 22.02.2007 will start from 
Ludhiana in Punjab and   terminate at Sonnagar, via  Ambala,  
Saharanpur,   Khurja  and  Allahabad. However, considering the 
possibility of increase in freight traffic on account of  proposed deep 
sea port, Eastern Corridor will be extended up to the proposed port 
in Kolkata area. The 1279 kilometers long dedicated freight corridor 
fit for electric traction and high axle load operation is estimated to 
cost Rs.11,589 crores. RITES PETS  Report had projected traffic of 
144 Million Tonnes by 2021 -22. The feeder routes on the existing 
Indian Railways network will also be developed to carry heavier 
traffic of coal and steel. The total length of feeder routes for 
Eastern Corridor will be about 3000 kilometers.  
 
The Western Corridor will start from Jawaharlal Nehru Port, New 
Mumbai and will be routed via Vadodara, Ahmedabad, Palanpur and 
Rewari to Tuglakabad and Dadri. The feeder routes of the Western 
Corridor connecting Ports of Gujarat will be upgraded. A feeder 
route from Rewari to Ludhiana via Hissar will also be developed to 
serve the States of Punjab and Haryana. This corridor will carry 
mostly container traffic. Both Eastern and Western Corridors will be 
connected between Dadri and Khurj a. This 1483 kilometers long 
Corridor, fit for double stack container operation is estimated to 
cost   Rs. 16,592 crores. RITES PETS report had projected non -
container traffic of 39 Million Tonnes and 61 lakh TEUs of container 
traffic by 2021 -22. Feeder ro utes on the existing Indian Railways 
network will also be developed for moving double stack container 

 21 
 
trains. Total length of feeder routes for Western Corridor will be 
about 1500 kilometers. The project will also include 32 kms single 
line between Pirthala and Tughlakabad to feed ICD at Tughlakabad.  
 
The Dedicated Freight Corridors are proposed to be completed in a 
time frame of 5 years through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). 
Cabinet, in its meeting on 24th August, 2006, approved setting up of 
a Special Purpose Vehicle under the Ministry of Railways for 
execution of Dedicated Freight Corridor projects. An Implementing 
Agency called Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited (DFCCIL) has been incorporated on 30th October, 2006. 
   
The project would be funded by a mix of debt and equity in the 
ratio of 2:1. Government of India through Ministry of Railways will 
invest in the equity of the implementing agency (DFCCIL). Financial 
assistance is being sought through Department of Economic Affairs 
under the STEP Loan Scheme of the Government of Japan.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Para No: 4) 
 
          The Committee had noted that track constitutes the basic 
infrastructure of a railway system and bears the brunt of coping with ever 
increasing traffic.  High speed and heavy axle load operation necessitates 
upgradation of the track structure as part of track renewals.  The 
Committee were glad to note that the track renewal target of 4,000 kms 
for 2006 -07 was surpassed and the actual achievement in this respect 
was 4686 kms.  The Committee had desired that there should be no 
arrears of track renewal at any given point of time and action should be 
taken to ensure this. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Track renewals are charged to DRF.  Sufficient funds are being 
made available under this plan -head.  It is therefore not likely that 
arrears of track renewals be there at any given point of time.  Track 
renewal work once sanctioned takes nearly 3 -4 years to complete.  
Therefore, at any time nearly 2 years accruals will remain 
sanctioned and yet to be executed.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 

 22 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No: 5) 
 
         The Committee had noted that the signaling had mainly used for 
Railways safety, whereas modern signaling systems have possibilities to 
effect improvement in line capacity.  This signifies the importance  of 
modern signaling  systems.  Regrettably, ther e had been huge shortfall in 
achievement during 2006-07 in replacement and rehabilitation works, track 
circuiting and Blocks proving  by Axle Counters.  Reasons  advanced in this 
regard such as constraints of manufacturing and contractual capabilities, 
non-finalisation of tenders, severe shortage of signal engineers and staff 
and delay in provision of service  buildings - reflect poorly on the Railways.  
These factors were controllable with advance planning and proper 
coordination.  The Committee urged that at least now prompt efforts 
should be made  to identify the shortcomings and deficiencies with a view 
to achieving satisfactory performance in this regard  in the current year.  
The Committee in this connection noted that Khanna Committee had 
recommended t hat complete track circuiting at stations should be done 
according to priorities and time frame of 2-6 years.  The Committee trusted 
that action would be taken to adhere to the time limit laid down by Khanna 
Committee. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Hon’ble MR  in his Budget Speech 2007 -08 has emphasized on  
using modern signaling systems to effect improvement in line 
capacity.   The concerns  expressed by the Committee  for shortfall  
in achievement has been noted.  Railways have been  
endeavouring   to bring about changes in the system and execute 
projects  on fast track.  However, there are certain extraneous   
factors on which Railways have  no control and these affect the 
implementation of projects.  Recently,  some decisions like  floating  
& finalization of composite tenders have been taken for S&T 
projects  to expedite the progress.   Track circuiting works at 
stations are being given highest priority  and action is being taken 
to adhere to the time limit laid down.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 

 23 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
   
The Committee were informed that Railways were reported to have 
1,27,768 bridges.  To improve the safety of rail and road users, the 
existing busy  level crossings having heavy traffic density are being 
replaced by road over/under bridges in a phased manner.  Though in 
2005-06, 1,431 bridges were rehabilitated/rebuilt, the initial target fixed 
for 2006-07 was considerably lower at 1,334.  The Committ ee regretted 
to note that even this lower target was further revised downwards to 
1,272 during the year on the plea of complexities involved in execution of 
bridge works.  The Committee noted that work on only 945 bridges could 
be completed till the end of  Feb., 2007.  The Committee hoped that the 
revised target would be achieved as assured by the Ministry in a written 
reply.  The Committee would like to know the total outstanding work of 
bridges rehabilitation at present and the target fixed for the year 2007-08.        
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“There has been reduction in initial targets of Bridge Works for 
2006-07 as compared to that of 2005 -06 because backlog of 
rehabilitation/repair/rebuilding of Bridges is getting completed 
since sanction of 2370 Bridges under SRSF (Special Railway Safety 
Fund) in 2001-02.  As a matter of fact upto 31.03.06, 1920 no. of 
Bridges had already been completed under SRSF out of the initially 
sanctioned 2370 Bridges.  Evidently, in  the beginning when SRSF 
works were sanctioned, higher targets were fixed to clear the 
backlog within the stipulated time period.   
 
During the year 2006 -07, a total of 1114 no. of Bridges have been 
repaired/rehabilitated/rebuilt on various Zonal Railways.  There has 
been some shortfall in achievement of physical targets during the 
year, due to various complexities involved in execution of Bridge 
Works.   
 
As on 01.04.2007, about 3655 no. of Railway Bridges are 
sanctioned chargeable to SRSF & DRF for 
repair/rehabilitation/rebuilding on Indian Railway system.  Out of 
this, 1444 no. of Bridges have been targeted for 

 24 
 
repair/rehabilitation/rebuilding during 2007 -08, for which an outlay 
of Rs. 597.50 Crore (Net) has been provided in Budget 2007-08.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee were informed there were 64 unmanned level 
crossing accidents up to January during 2006 -07 as against 59 accidents 
during the corresponding period in th e previous year.   Sadly, the target 
achievement of manning the unmanned level crossings during 2006 -07 
has been very poor.  As against the target of manning of 369 unmanned 
level crossings, Railways had manned only 168 unmanned level crossings 
till Feb., 2007 during the year 2006 -07. Manpower shortage and delay in 
recruitment process are cited as the main reasons for shortfall in this 
respect.  The Committee felt that this was a matter which should had 
been handled with foresight and by having honest and e fficient 
Recruitment Board.  Efforts should be made to ensure that sufficient 
manpower was in place to man the targeted unmanned level crossings.  
The Committee in this connection appreciated the policy decision of the 
Railways to convert unmanned level cr ossings into limited height subways 
wherever feasible with powers delegated to Zonal Railways to sanction 
such works up to Rs. 50 lakhs.  Hopefully, this would go a long way in 
bringing down the number of accidents. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The Zonal Railways have been directed to take immediate steps to 
recruit manpower where ever required to fill up the vacancies 
including that of Gateman who are in category ‘D’ and belong to 
the Safety category.  Since recru itment of Gatemen is not 
conducted by Railways Recruitment Boards, the recommendation of 
the Hon’ble Committee relating to manning of Railway Recruitment 
Boards by efficient and honest officers are not applicable.  
However, it is to be mentioned that the o fficers are posted in 
Railway Recruitment Boards as per the procedure and policy of 
Railway Board with proper vigilance clearance etc.   Further, till the 

 25 
 
end of June’07, Railways have identified 433 level crossings for 
replacement by Limited Height Sub -ways. The sanction of these 
works  of Limited Height Subways is under process at Zonal 
Railways, and some of them have been taken up for execution.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.:  8) 
 
The Committee were disappointed to note that during the 10 th Plan 
period ending in 2006 -07, there was a considerable shortfall in four 
important areas of activity as discussed in this and in the succeeding 
paragraph.  Shortfall was expected in construction of n ew lines to the 
extent of 365 kms and in doubling as much as 212 kms.  The Committee 
were not convinced of the reasons advanced in this regard such as delay 
in land acquisition, forestry clearance, geo -technical problems and slow 
progress/failure of contra ctors.   These reasons were routinely put forth 
by the Railways year after year.  The Committee felt that some of these 
were within the control of the management and others could be 
anticipated and provided for at the formulation stage.  The claim of the 
Railway Board Chairman that the Railways set high and difficult targets to 
get the best out of the system does not carry conviction as the Railways 
had surpassed the targets in other areas of activity such as gauge 
conversion, doubling, track renewals, elec trification etc. during the 10 th 
Plan.  The Committee felt that what was lacking is proper coordination 
and effective project management.  The Committee desired that at least 
now inter-departmental and inter -enterprise linkages should be identified 
and coo rdination committee at a fairly high level organized to see that 
various items of work were properly synchronized. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“It  is a fact that over the years railways have been increasing their  
targets for completion of New Line, Gauge Conversions and 
Doublings in view  of increased availability of resources and need 
for expediting completion of ongoing projects.  It is evident from 
the fact that during the IX Plan,  3755 kms of BG lines were ad ded 

 26 
 
whereas in the X Plan, total achiement was 6508 kms i.e. an 
increase of  73% as compared to IX Plan.  The average progress of 
new line, GC and doublings during first four years of X Plan was 
about 1,200 kms per annum which increased to 1718 kms during 
2006-07.  All this was possible because of proper monitoring and 
effective project management. Railways have a system of inter -
departmental planning and coordination at all levels.  The issues 
are also taken up at the ministerial level whenever the need ar ise. 
However, the targets set for 2007-08 are on the very high side and 
railways have been advised  to suitably  monitor the projects.  An 
effort has also been made for further empowerment of field units 
so as to expedite decision  making and project imple mentation.  It 
is mentioned that projects are effectively being monitored at 
various levels but there are various reasons which cause delay on 
which little control is available with the Railways. These include; 
delay in land acquisition, forest clearances,  geotechnical problems, 
adverse law and order conditions and slow progress/failure of the 
contractors.  In the past, steep hike in prices of steel and cement 
had adversely affected the implementation of projects.   
 
The concern expressed by the Committee h as been noted and it is 
assured that all efforts are being made to ensure timely completion 
of the projects.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
          The Committee had noted that the huge  shortfall in manufacture of 
Electric Multiple Units (shortfall of 1096 coaches which is about 56% of the 
target) and Mainline Electric Multiple Units/Diesel Electric Multiple Units 
(shortfall of 140 coaches which is about 19% of the target) during the 10 th 
Plan was attributed to problem in design, limitation of capacity in the 
production units and higher demand of General Service Coaches.  Design 
problem was stated to had been set right in association with Siemens.  
Works had also reportedly been sanctione d to enhance production capacity 
at ICF/Chennai and RCF/Kapurthala to 1,500 and 1,400 coaches annually 
from the present capacity of 1,000 coaches.  The Committee were at a loss 
to understand why timely action could not be taken to overcome these 
problems.  The Committee desired that it should be ensured that enhanced 
capacity becomes available in the production units within two to three 
years as was expected.  

 27 
 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The requirement of EMUs (fo r the plan period) included 909 
coaches for MRVC (AC/DC EMUs for Mumbai area). Since there was a 
constraint in the total capacity of the manufacturing units, the annual 
Production Programme from year to year, evaluating the requirement 
for coach types for services in Indian Railways increased the 
manufacture of general service coaches at the cost of 
EMU/DEMU/MEMUs.  As a result, General Service coaches 
manufactured during the plan period are 12202 against the 9160 
originally projected as plan requirements.   
          
To make good the shortfall, a work to enhance the EMU 
manufacturing capacity at ICF has been approved in 2001 -02 and is 
now under execution. On completion of this work the EMU 
manufacturing capacity will increase from the present 250 – 300 
coaches per year to more than 500/ year.   Works have also been 
sanctioned to enhance production capacity at ICF/Chennai and 
RCF/Kapurthala from the present installed capacity of 1000 coaches 
each per year at these factories, to 1500 and 1400 coaches per 
year for ICF & RCF respectively. These enhanced capacities are 
expected to become available in two to three years time.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee noted that there appea rs to be discrepancy in the 
figures of passenger traffic shown in the Outcome budget as that of 10 th 
Plan document. According to the 10 th Plan document, the target of 
number of originating passengers in 2006 -07 was 5,885 million whereas 
the Outcome Budget portrays it as 5,686 million. Similarly, the target of 
passenger kilometre as given in the 10 th Plan document was 625 billion 
whereas what was shown in the Outcome Budget was 593 billion. The 
misrepresentation of figures had probably led the Railways to ma ke an 
erroneous claim in the Outcome Budget that the actual passenger traffic 
surpassed the 10 th Plan target for terminal year (2006 -07) in the fourth 
year of the Plan itself. The Committee had desired to be informed of the 
factual position in this regard. 

 28 
 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“In this regard, it is brought out that the targets for number of 
originating passengers and passenger kilometers in the year 2006 -
07 as mentioned in 10 th Plan Document were 5885 millio n and 625 
billion kilometers respectively. 
 
 
Based on the performance of 3 years of 10 th Plan, these targets 
were revised to 5686 million passengers and 593 billion passenger 
kilometers respectively in the Mid -Term Review of 10 th Plan. But 
the revised targ ets were not included in the Mid -Term Review 
published by the Planning Commission resulting in the 
discrepancies in the figures. The actual passenger traffic in the 
fourth year of the Plan i.e. in 2005 -2006 was 5725 million 
passengers and 615.6 billion passenger kilometers.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
      The Committee were distressed to note that of late Railways had 
become a soft target for terrorists, naxalites and other disru ptive forces 
causing loss of innocent lives and loss of properties of Railways and 
passengers. Such incidents also created a sense of insecurity and fear 
psychosis among the Railway passengers.  They also noted that in the 
wake of recent bomb blasts in Del hi-Attari link Express and Mumbai 
suburban trains and Lumding -Silchar incident, Railways had taken steps to 
strengthen and modernize security arrangements such as installation of 
explosive detection devices, door -frames and hand held metal detectors, 
CCTV and smart Video cameras at sensitive stations. The Committee 
desired that the Railways should in collaboration with State Police, 
Intelligence agencies and para military forces evolve a comprehensive and 
coordinated strategy to strengthen and improve the s ecurity on Railways.   
The Committee in this connection noted that there were large number of 
vacancies in various ranks in Railway Protection Special Force/Railway 
Protection Force.    The Minister for Railways announced in his Budget 

 29 
 
Speech filling up of  8000 vacancies in Railway Protection Special Force.  
Necessary instructions had reportedly been issued to fill up these vacancies 
within six months.   The Committee believed that prompt action would be 
taken in this regard.   In this connection, the Commi ttee also stressed that 
the existing vacancies in other departments particularly in safety category 
should also be filled up simultaneously.  
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“‘Policing’ being a State subject, registrati on of cases, their 
investigation, maintenance of law and order in Railway premises as 
well as on running trains and collection, collation and sharing of 
actionable intelligence are the statutory responsibility of the State 
Police.  The State Police have a separate wing called the 
Government Railway Police (GRP) for dealing with all matters 
relating to law and order on the Railways.  
        
The primary functions of the Railway Protection Force is to provide 
protection and security to Railway Property ( whic h includes 
Railways own assets, and the property entrusted to it for 
transportation), to remove any obstructions in the movement of 
Railway Property and to do other acts conducive to the better 
protection and security of Railway Property. 
  
To provide bett er security to the traveling passengers in trains and 
passenger areas, the RPF Act, 1957 and the Railways Act, 1989 have 
been amended to  enable  the  Railways,  through    the Railway   
Protection  Force,  to effectively supplement    the   efforts  of th e  
State Governments  in  controlling crime on the Railways. The 
Railway Protection Force staff   are being   deployed to escort many 
trains and deployed in the passenger area to augment the efforts of 
the State Governments. RPF has also been empowered to deal with 
the minor offences affecting the train operations such as alarm chain 
pulling, roof travel, touting, ticket less travel, unauthorized entry into 
coaches earmarked for ladies etc. (except Sabotage related offences 
under Sections 150 to 152) amendi ng the Railways Act w.e.f. July 
2004. The objective was to ensure that the State Police 
(Government Railway Police) get more man power and time to 
handle heinous offences such as Murder, Dacoity, Robbery, Rape 
etc. including Sabotage and Train Wrecking, un der the provisions of 
Indian Penal Code, the Railways Act and other laws of the land.  
  
The Board has constituted a Committee for formulation of a 
Composite Security Plan comprising of officers from Intelligence 
Bureau, Central Industrial Security Force, National Security Guard, 
Delhi Police and the Chief Security Commissioners of Railway 

 30 
 
Protection Force of Eastern, Northern, Western and  Central 
Railways under the Chairmanship of Addl. Director General / RPF, 
Railway Board.  
  
The following measures are also being taken to improve security 
arrangements at important and vulnerable Railway stations: - 
1. Installation of Close Circuit Televisions at vulnerable Railway 
Stations. 
2. Modern security gadgets like Hand Held Metal Detectors, Door 
Frame Metal Detectors, Entry Scans / X-Rays Machines etc. to 
strengthen access control at entry / exit points. 
3. Dog Squads, Bomb Detection and Disposal Squads at various 
divisions and railway stations to conduct anti -sabotage 
checks. 
4. To upgrade training centers to improve quality  of training to 
Railway Protection Force personnel.  
5. Intensive publicity and public awareness campaigns alerting 
and educating all passengers / public to remain vigilant 
against any unidentified / unclaimed suspicious objects lying 
on platforms, other premises or coaches and to report to RPF 
/ GRP / Railway officials available nearby.  
6. Frequent announcements at all stations alerting passengers to 
be vigilant about suspicious movement of co -passengers and 
not to touch any suspicious luggage / bag especially in 
general compartments. 
7. Steps to prevent entry of unauthorized persons in trains and 
in empty coaching rakes at originating / destination stations, 
before and after placement in maintenance sidings.  
8. Close co -ordination with GRP / State Police / Central 
Intelligence agencies to prevent any untoward incident. 
 
In order to fill up the existing vacancies in the non -gazetted cadre 
in RPF/RPSF, steps have been taken on a war footing. As a part of 
this, notifications for filling up the existing and anticipated ( upto 
December 2008), vacancies have been issued by all Indian 
Railways (except Central, South Central and North East Frontier 
Railways where the recruitment process has already been 
completed). The recruitment will begin w.e.f. 18th June, 2007 from 
East Central Railway. Besides, notification for filling up about 1000 
vacancies of Sub -Inspectors in RPF/RPSF will also be issued 
shortly.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 

 31 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No: 18) 
  
         The Comm ittee had noted that in 14 th report on ‘Indian Railway 
Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC)’ they had recommended that the  
whole system of catering including the Catering Policy – 2005 should  be 
reviewed so as to align the catering policy as a part of passenger 
amenities and not as a commercial and profit making venture alone.  This 
was also commented upon  by the Committee in their 22 nd  Action Taken  
Report and desired that the Catering Policy – 2005 should be reviewed on 
priority basis.  Nothing had been heard from the Railways so far in this 
regard.  The Committee stressed that outcome of the review undertaken 
by the Ministry of Railways be placed before them without any further 
delay. 
  
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The recommendation of the Committee made in their 14 th Report 
to review the Catering Policy - 2005 was given due consideration 
and after review, the Revised Catering Policy 2005 was issued on 
21.12.2005.  The Revised Catering Policy - 2005 dated 21. 12.2005 
is still at the stage of implementation.   Since catering services in 
Railways are considered as a passenger amenity, it has been 
ensured in successive catering policies that the tariff of tea/coffee, 
breakfast and standard meals remains reasonable  and is kept 
outside the purview of market forces. Ministry of Railways 
accordingly, fixes tariff of these items. Revision of these items was 
last made in 2003. Market forces have been allowed to operate in 
the segment where the customers have the capacity  to afford the 
market-determined prices, and the licensees can get reasonable 
profits.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 

 32 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL-

 33 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Recommendation (Para No: 12) 
The Committee noted that the freight outstanding from State 
Electricity Boards and Power Houses as on 31 st January 2007 was stated 
to be over Rs.1411 crore. The Committee wer e informed that the main 
defaulters in this regard were Badarpur Thermal Power Station (Rs. 
554.81 crore), Punjab Electricity Board (Rs. 442 crore), and Delhi Vidyut 
Board (Rs. 176 crore) and that Badarpur Thermal Power Station had since 
paid Rs.300 crore.  Punjab Electricity Board and Delhi Vidyut Board with 
whom there was a serious dispute over the dues had reportedly gone to 
Court and the verdict of the court appointed arbitrator has gone against 
Railways. The Committee had desired to be informed as to ho w it is 
proposed to recover these dues and whether there was violation of any 
provisions of the contract by Railways with regard to these cases. The 
Committee desired the Ministry to order a probe into the matter with a 
view to fixing responsibility for lapses, if any. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Normally all traffic, especially Coal, is required to be booked ‘paid’. 
Since SEBs were not regular in arranging pre -payment, Advance 
Payment Scheme at destinations was de signed to help them to 
avail ‘paid rates’ without actual pre -payment by maintaining an 
Advance Deposit with Railways. As per the said scheme, in case of 
advance deposit falling short of requisite amount, the traffic was 
treated as ‘To pay’ and accordingly charged at higher tariff than the 
‘paid’ tariff. The amounts mentioned in the above recommendation 
have been raised against these Power Houses where ‘To - pay’ tariff 
was levied as per terms and conditions of the above scheme since 
these Power Houses failed  to maintain the minimum level of 
Advance Deposit required under the said scheme. 
 
As regards recovery of dues from the Power Houses, continuous 
efforts are being made by both Zonal Railway and Ministry of 
Railways as indicated below:- 
 
(1) Badarpur Thermal Power Station. 
 
A series of meetings were held with BTPS and Ministry of Power to 
persuade them to pay the outstanding freight dues. Accordingly, 

 34 
 
Ministry of Power had given a time bound schedule for clearance of 
old outstanding dues amounting to Rs. 966 .63 crores relating to 
BTPS due to be paid to Railways as on 31.3.03. Out of Rs. 966.63 
crores, BTPS has paid Rs.717.63 crores to Railways till date, 
including the advance due of  November 2007 and May 2008 as per 
the payment schedule. Total outstanding du es against BTPS as on 
31.3.07 is Rs. 249 crore. The position is being monitored closely so 
that the balance outstanding is liquidated. 
 
(2) Punjab State Electricity Board 
 
The Award given by the Arbitrator against the Railways is not in 
accordance with the  provision of the Advance Payment scheme at 
Destination. Hence Northern Railway has challenged the award. 
Accordingly, the case has been heard before the Civil Court of 
Patiala, which upheld the award given by the Arbitrator. The 
judgement is under  legal scrutiny. As far as Railways are 
concerned, there has been no violation of any provision of contract. 
The Advance Payment Scheme has been implemented with the 
agreement of the concerned State Electricity Board. As stated 
earlier, normally all traffic espec ially Coal is required to be booked 
as ‘paid’. Since SEB’s are not regular in arranging pre-payment, this 
scheme was designed to help them avoid pre -payment by 
maintaining an Advance Deposit with Railways. In case the deposit 
fell short of the requisite am ount, the traffic was automatically 
charged at a higher tariff than the paid tariff as per rules. In fact, 
the violation was on part of the Electricity Board for which charges 
were accordingly raised against them. 
 
(3) Delhi Vidyut Board 
 
Inspite of repeat ed requests made by Railway, DVB was not 
making payment to clear the outstanding. However after 
constitution of GENCO, Delhi Vidyut Board have started booking of 
coal rakes on pre-payment at booking points w.e.f. 22.1.2004. This 
has checked the rising tren d. However, the old outstanding dues 
are still persisting. In order to recover the old outstanding dues, 
several meetings were held by Northern Railway to reconcile the 
outstanding dues with Delhi Vidyut Board and the same is in 
progress. Ministry of Power  has recently proposed to move a 
Cabinet Note for the settlement of dues pertaining to DESU period. 
Ministry of Railways has already furnished their comments and the 
Cabinet Note is expected to be taken up shortly.  
 
Since there was no lapse on part of Railways, the need to order the 
probe to fix responsibility in the matter is not considered 
necessary.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 

 35 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee had agreed with the Railways that the operating 
ratio which reflects the operating efficiency of the Indian Railways be 
viewed as a whole and not Zone -wise.  The Committee in this connection 
noted that for calculating Zone -wise operating ratios, passenger and 
freight earnings are apportioned b etween Zonal Railways based on the 
traffic earned on their respective systems and that all Zonal Railways were 
not placed evenly with regard to traffic earnings, by virtue of their 
jurisdiction and geographical location and that higher operating ratio 
reflected in Zonal Railways are beyond their control.  As such the Zonal 
operating ratios could not be relied upon as a measure of the operating 
efficiency of the zones.  The Committee wondered as to what then was 
the need and relevance of depicting Zonal oper ating ratios in the 
documents presented to Parliament.  It was high time to have a re-look at 
this issue. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The zonal system on the Railways was introduced for the 
administrative convenie nce for better management of the vast 
network. The operational efficiency of the Indian Railways is the 
outcome of aggregate performance of all the zonal Railways.   
 
The Operating Ratio is the key indicator of operational efficiency of 
the Railways, which  is the ratio of input cost to the traffic output.  
As has been submitted to the Committee all the zonal Railways are 
not evenly placed with regard to traffic earnings which are 
apportioned between the zonal Railways based on unit of traffic 
traversed on t he system, irrespective of the fixed element of 
operating expenditure that are essentially incurred to run the 
system.  In order to improve the overall efficiency of the Indian 
Railways, performance of each zone needs to be monitored, 
despite compulsions of the system. Accordingly, the operating ratio 
is calculated and depicted for all the zonal Railways, which facilitate 
major policy formulation in regard to development of the Railways 
and exploration of traffic potency in various parts of the country.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 

 36 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee had noted that Public Private Partnership options 
would be explored with the aim of modernisation of metro and mini metro 
stations with world class passenger amenities, development of agro -retail 
outlets and supply chains, construction of multi -modal logistic parks, 
warehouses, budget hotels, expansion of network and increase in 
production capacity. The Committee had stressed that no core act ivity 
should be brought under PPP scheme. It should be ensured that the 
interest of railway employees and railway users were not compromised. In 
this connection, the Committee felt that the policy of outsourcing also 
require critical review. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“No core area is being brought under the Public -Private Partnership 
(PPP) Scheme. Further, the interest of railway users and railway 
employees is of paramount importance while decision on areas to 
be identified for PPP. In fact, one of the objectives of using PPP for 
identified projects is to bring about improvement in the expertise 
and working environment of employees and service delivery to rail -
users.  
 
Railway’s policy of outsourcing is based on th e above policy 
parameters. It has been stated by Hon’ble Minister for Railways in 
different forums that there would be no privatisation in the 
Railways and the interest of railway users and railway employees 
would not be compromised. Some of the areas wher e public -
private partnership option will be explored are development of 
world class stations, manufacturing of locomotives and passenger 
coaches, development of multimodal logistic parks and agro - retail 
chains, budget hotels etc.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
 
 

 37 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee noted that out of Rs. 17,000 crore allocated for 
Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF), Rs. 5,000 crore were to be mobilized 
by the Railways through levy of a ‘Saf ety Surcharge’.  The Committee 
noted that after expiry of the period of SRSF ‘Safety Surcharge’ would be 
subsumed in the actual fare and the revenue so generated would be 
utilized for funding the construction of dedicated freight corridor.  The 
Committee did not agreed with such an arrangement.  The Committee in 
this connection recalled their Report on ‘Demands for Grants 2006 -07’ 
where the Committee had disapproved the policy of the Railways putting 
indirect burden on the commuters and had strongly recomme nded that 
the Railways should refrain from adopting such deceptive practices. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Safety Surcharge was levied with effect from 1.10.2001 i.e. from 
2001-02 to 2006 -07 to raise Rs. 5000 crore  for the newly created 
non-lapsable Special Railway Safety Fund.  This surcharge lapsed 
on 31 st March’ 2007 after expiry of five year period.  Safety 
Surcharge has been replaced with Development Charge w.e.f. 
1.4.2007, for part funding of the proposed Dedi cated Freight 
Corridors (DFC). It may be mentioned  that imposition of 
Development Surcharge on passenger fares will not result in any 
change in the existing chargeable passenger fares in any Class.  
Thus Railways have not adopted any deceptive practices, as 
mentioned by the Committee, to increase the passenger fares.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 
 

 38 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee were surprised to learn that no market study  had 
ever been undertaken by Railways with a view to improving their market 
share of passenger traffic as well as freight traffic. The Committee hardly 
needed to emphasise the significance and usefulness of such a study to 
align the Railways to the growing market competi tion and to adopt 
strategy of lower unit cost and higher volumes. The Committee hoped 
that as agreed to by a representative of the Railway Board during oral 
evidence, a scientific market analysis would be undertaken in a time 
bound manner and the Committee be informed of the outcome. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Draft policy guidelines for selection of market survey has been 
formulated and likely to be finalized within three months.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 The Committee had noted that despite the fact that the 11 th Plan 
period had commenced from 1 st April 2007, the physical targets for 
capacity augmentation in fixed infrastructure, rollin g stock and the 
required financial outlays for implementation were stated to be still under 
preparation. Admittedly, the Railways were late in submitting the draft 
Plan to the Planning Commission. The Committee hold that the Ministry of 
Railways should not be found wanting in this respect. They expected from 
the Ministry to finalised the plan in consultation with Planning Commission 
without any further delay and the Committee be apprised of the Plan 
details. 
 
 

 39 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The Working Group on Railways headed by Chairman, Railway 
Board for preparation of 11 th Five Year Plan for Railways has 
submitted its Report to Planning Commission. The 11 th Five Year 
Plan for the Railways is now under finalization by the Planning 
Commission. The recommendations of the Standing Committee are 
noted.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 25.10.2007] 
 
 

 40 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 3 rd December 2007 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1530 hrs. in Room  No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
4. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
5. Smt. Suman Mahato 
6. Shri Ananta Nayak 
7. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
8. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
9. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
10. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Deputy Secretary-II 

 41 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 27 th Report on 
‘Demands for Grants 2007 -08 of the Ministry of Railways’ without any 
amendment.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 42 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVTIONS CONTAINED IN THE 27 TH REPORT     
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
RAILAYS’. 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     18 
 
 (i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted     
  by Government         12 
(Vide recommendations/observations)  
   
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15 and 18 
 
  Percentage of total        60% 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   
desire to pursue in view of Government replies      
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
   Para No. NIL 
 
Percentage of total        NIL 
 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    
  which replies of Government have not been accepted by the   04 
Committee which require reiteration.  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
Para Nos. 12, 13, 16 and 17 
 
Percentage of total        22%
     
 
 (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of   
  Government are still awaited.       02 
(Vide Recommendations/observations) 
   
Para Nos. 11 and 14. 
 
  Percentage of total        11% 
   
 
 
 
 
 