 
 
1 
 
31 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 21st Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’] 
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 
 
2 
SCR No.: 118  
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 21st Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.09.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 
 
3 
CONTENTS 
 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….        (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………      1  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been   7 
   accepted by the Government ………………………….        
 
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  16 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   reply .…………………………………………………..         
   
CHAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   17 
   Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which require reiteration ……………….       
 
CHAPTER  V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final   18 
   Replies of Government are still awaited ………………..       
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX    I.     Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 19 
      held on 06.09.2007    
        
APPENDIX    II.   Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the  21 
      Recommendations/Observations contained in the 21st Report 
      of the Standing Committee on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) 
      on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’.      
     
        
  
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
4 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2007 -08) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.          Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3.         Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4.         Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7.       Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.        Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.        Ch. Lal Singh 
13.        Shri Ananta Nayak 
14.        Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15.        Shri A. Sai Prathap 
16.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17.        Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.        Shri Manik Singh 
19.        Shri K. Subbarayan  
20. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Sunita    - Under Secretary  
 
 (iv) 
 
 

 
 
5 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty Firs t 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’.  
 
2. The Twenty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.07.2006. It contained 
11 recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 27.02.2007.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft A ction Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 06.09.2007.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA  
6 September, 2007                   Chairman,  
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka        Standing Committee on Railways  
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 
 
6 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Acti on Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 21 st Report 
of the Standing Committee on Railways on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan 
Cities’.  The Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
25.07.2006. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 11 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been broadly categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Nil 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Para No. 7. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited:  
 
Para Nos. 3 & 8.   
 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies h ave been given by 
the Government should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 

 
 
7 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations. 
 
A.   INTEGRATED TRANSPORT PLANNING - (Para No. 2) 
 
5. Taking note of rapid increase in population and increasing inbound and 
outbound traffic, the Committee recommended that an integrated transport 
planning should be undertaken for Delhi in consultation with the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi, Ministry of Urban Development and other civic 
agencies.  The Committee also desired that Narela Railway Station should be 
expanded and all the terminal facilities should be provided there. 
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated the  
recommendation regarding integrated transport planning has been noted and 
follow up action will be taken by Northern Railway in this regard.  It has also 
been stated that at present there is no proposal for developing terminal facilities 
at Narela.  Proposals for a directional terminal at Bijwasan and at Holambi Kalan 
are stated to be under examination.  
 
7. Nothing has been mentioned in the report as to what initiatives 
have since been taken to integrate transport planning.  The reply is 
also silent about  the recommended expansion of Narela Railway 
Station.  The Committee would await details in this regard. 
 
B. AUGMENTATION AND CREATION FO TERMINAL FACILITIES – 
(Para No. – 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8 
10. The Committee would like to be informed whether the Committee of 
Executive Directors has since presented its report and if so, what are its major 
recommendations. 
 
C.   CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN CHENNAI CENTRAL AND CHENNAI 
EGMORE - (Para No. 5) 
 
11. The Committee had been informed that a feasibility study for connecting 
Chennai Eg more and Chennai Central had been entrusted to M/s. RITES. The 
Committee had desired that the study should be completed within a fixed 
timeframe and the action taken in this regard be intimated to them. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rai lways have stated as 
under:- 
“The project was sanctioned by Railway Ministry on 08.04.2003 based on 
the Preliminary Report.  M/s RITES who have been engaged for carrying 
out detailed study and technical feasibility of the Project have submitted 
the draft r eport.  Due to certain development with regard to urban 
transportation in Chennai city t he State Government has proposed 
construction of elevated Highway from Chennai Fort to Maduravoil for an 
estimated cost of Rs. 800 Crores under Jawaharlal Nehru Urban R oad 
Mission, which will run parallel to Poonamallee High Road.  Besides, there 
is a proposal to have elevated Metro rail connecting East and West 
corridor, for which DMRC has already taken up preparation of detailed 
Project Report. 
 
Two projects proposed b y State Govt. were not envisaged when the 
project of Chennai Central & chennai Egmore was proposed. 
 
Since the proposed alignment of BG link involves crossing of Poonamallee 
High Road, RITES have been engaged to carry out a feasibility study for 
the propos ed link taking into consideration the proposals of the State 
Govt.  This work is in progress.  GM/Southern Railway has also addressed 
Chief Secretary, Govt. of Tamilnadu to expedite the clearance of the 
above Project.” 
 
13. In a further communication, the Ministry of Railways have stated that  
“M/s. RITES had submitted the final report on 22.01.2007.  However, the 
proposals of State Government to construct an elevated highway from 
Chennai Fort to Maduravoil and another proposal for elevated Metro Rail 
connecting East & West corridor are likely to foul with the Broad Gauge 

 
 
9 
connectivity between Chennai Central and Egmore and hence State 
Government is not in a position to convey its clearance for this Rail 
connectivity.” 
 
14. The Committee would like to be appr ised of the recommendations 
contained in the final report submitted by RITES in January 2007 and the action 
taken or proposed to be taken thereon.  
 
D.   CROWD MANAGEMENT AT STATION PREMISES - (Para No. 7) 
 
15. The Committee suggested that some concrete ac tion should be taken for 
crowd management at the station premises particularly in metropolitan cities.  
They desired that only genuine passengers with the restricted number of 
accompanying persons should be allowed at the platforms as is being done in the 
case of airports. 
 
16. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“In 1989 efforts were made to restrict platform tickets to reduce 
congestion on the platform.  However, the scheme had to be withdrawn 
soon because of criti cism in the Press and representations from various 
quarters in pressing the need to accompany senior citizens, ladies, 
children or sick/handicapped passengers to help them to board the train 
or receive them on arrival.  The modality for restricting a person is difficult 
to implement since platform ticket is used not only for seeing off 
passengers but also to receive them.   
 
Unlike Airports, at Railway stations passengers are required to carry 
luggage over FOB and on to the trains.  Moreover, volumes and th e 
clientele traveling by air and rail are totally different, therefore, not 
comparable.   
 
Another approach can be to increase the fare for platform ticket to reduce 
its sale.  This was attempted in June 2005 when rate of platform ticket 
was raised from Rs. 3 to Rs. 5 but it was withdrawn the next day because 
of public resentment.  Under these circumstances, efforts are being made 
to have consensus view on the subject so as to achieve reduction in the 
number of persons to the platforms.” 
 
17. The reply of t he Ministry that efforts are being made to have a 
consensus view on crowd management at the platform into general.  

 
 
10 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken in 
this regard and the outcome thereof.     
 
E.   PLATFORMS - (Para No. 9) 
 
18. The Committee had noted that the Railways were planning to switch over 
to use of 24 -26 coach length trains in a big way.  Appreciating the initiative 
taken by the Railways in this regard, the Committee had recommended that in 
future all platforms should be made to handle a minimum of 24 -26 coach trains.  
They had also suggested that with regard to the existing platforms, wherever 
feasible, the length of the platforms should be suitably increased. 
 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rai lways have stated as 
under: 
 
“The recommendation that in future all platforms should be made so as to 
handle 24-26 coach trains is noted for examination.  As regards extension 
of existing platform is concerned, about 526 stations have been identified 
to be extended to accommodate 24 -26 trains.  Work on 179 stations has 
been completed and on 268 stations is in progress.  Out of remaining 79 
stations, some stations require yard remodeling.  At other stations where 
extension of platforms is feasible, proposals  are under consideration for 
sanction.” 
 
20. The Committee are happy to note that out of 526 stations 
identified for extension to accommodate 24 -26 coach trains, Railways 
have been able to complete the work of extension on 179 stations and 
on another 268 stations work is in progress.  The Committee hope that 
on the remaining stations, wherever extension is feasible, the work will 
be taken up and completed expeditiously.   

 
 
11 
 
 
H.  PREVENTION OF CONGESTION AND POLLUTION AT FREIGHT 
TERMINALS 
(Para No. 10) 
 
1.27 The Committee had been informed that there were 15 freight terminals in 
Delhi, 31 in Mumbai, 31 in Kolkata and 17 in Chennai.  The Committee had 
observed that Railways had been taken a number of steps to develop the 
terminals.  They had been further infor med that these terminals were regularly 
monitored at different level so that the detention of wagons at these terminals 
did not remain for long.  The Committee had found that little action has been 
taken by the Railways to prevent congestion and pollution in these terminals.  
The Committee desired that while considering the proposals for providing of 
more freight terminals, railway should ensured that nuisance to general public is 
not caused due to pollution and congestion. 
 
 
1.28 In their Action Taken Repl y, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 “Railways have taken number of steps for reduction of terminal detentions 
through one or more of the following measures:- 
(a) Investment in or augmentation of infrastructure for mechanised 
loading and unloadi ng such as increase in number of pay -loaders, 
tipplers, in motion weigh bridges, loadings chutes etc. 
(b) Provision of Warehousing through Central Warehousing Corporation 
and other operators. 
(c) Invest in yard layout of their sidings. 
(d) Introduce round the clock wo rking in terminals to save detention to 
wagons. 
(e) Introduction of terminals incentive for Engine-On-Load-Scheme. 
 

 
 
12 
1.29 The Committee, while appreciating the efforts made by the 
Railways to improve and reduce congestion at freight terminals, feel 
that a lot o f action is still to be taken to reduce pollution and ensure 
healthy working conditions in these terminals.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation to prevent congestion 
and pollution at these terminals.  The Committee would  also l ike to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 

 
 
13 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 21st REPORT       
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘TERMINAL FACILITIES IN METROPOLITAN CITIES’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     11 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  09 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11 
 
Percentage of total        
 81.8% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  -- 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
(Vide recommendations/observations) Para No. NIL 
 
Percentage of total        
 -- 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    01 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
(Vide  recommendations/observations)  
Para Nos. 7  
 
Percentage of total           
 9% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   01 
replies of Government are still awaited  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para No. 8 
 
Percentage of total        9% 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
14 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th September, 2007 from 1000 hours to                        
1030  hours in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Anwar Hussain 
5. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
6. Ch. Lal Singh 
7. Shri Manik Singh 
8. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
9. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary-II 

 
 
15 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken 
Reports without any amendment:- 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(iv) Draft report  on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 21 st report on ‘Terminal 
Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’ 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   
 