           
23 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 11th  Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘X Five Year Plan of the Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 2
 
 
SCR No. 106 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 11th  Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘X Five Year Plan of the Railways’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……….. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ………… 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 

 3
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
  
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………   1 
           
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Obse rvations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I Minutes   of   the   sitting    of   the   Standing   Committee  
on Railways held on  18.09.2006 
  
 
APPENDIX-II Analysis    of    Action    Taken    by    Government    on  
the   Recommendation/observations  contained   in  the  
11th Report   (14th Lok Sabha)   on  ‘X Five  Year   Plan  
of the Railway.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 4
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
2.       Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3 Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5         Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Ramdas B. Athawale  
7 Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8 Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
11. Shri Anwar Hussain 
12. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
13. Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  
15. Shri Ananta Nayak 
16. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
17. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
18. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
19. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan  
21. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.      Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
28. Shri Isam Singh 
30.       Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
     31. Shri Abani Roy  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director  
4. Shri A.K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
5. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj  - Executive Officer  
 
 (iii) 
 
 

 5
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Commi ttee on Railways (2006-07), having 
been authorized by the Committee to presen t the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Third Report of the Committ ee on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations cont ained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rai lways (2005-06) on ‘X Fi ve Year Plan of the 
Railways’. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was present ed to Lok Sabha on 08.08.2005 and it 
contained 7 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 
28.12.2005  
  
3. The Committee considered and adopt ed the Draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on  18.09.2006.    
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2006-07) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         BASUDEB ACHARIA 
        November, 2006                                                Chairman, 
        Agrahayana, 1928 Saka                     Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 6
CHAPTER - 1 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the 11 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways  (2004-05) on ‘X Five Year Plan of the  Railways’ which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2005. 
 
1.2. The aforesaid Report contained 7 reco mmendations/observations Paras.  Action 
Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations which have been broadly categorized as follows. 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations  which have been  accepted 
by the Government – Para Nos.3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observa tions which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply – Para 
Nos. 3.4, 3.6 and 3.7 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations  in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee – Para No. 3.5 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations  in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited – Nil 
 
1.3. The Committee  will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their Recommendations/Observations. 
 
Viability criteria of Projects 
Recommendation (Para No.3.5) 
 
1.4 The Committee in the aforesaid paragra ph   had found that the Railways in the 
absence of substantial resources  for investment in the infrastructure have for the  first 
time in 1994 decided to mobilize resources fo r projects through external sources  and 
floated a BOLT Scheme to attract privat e investment. Later on this Scheme was 
redesigned as Built, Operate and Transfer Scheme.    However, the Committee noted that 

 7
no substantial investment from Private Sector  had registered  during VIII and IX Plan 
under the Scheme.  Later on in January, 2003 the Ministry constituted Rail Vikas Nigam 
Limited (RVNL) to focus towards resource mobilization  and execution of bankable 
projects having Rate of Return (ROR) of  more than 14%. To boost State Government 
and Public Sector participation in the ex ecution of viable projects, the Committee had 
emphasized to explore the possibility of Join t Ventures  and Speci al Purpose Vehicles 
(SPV)  with States just  as in the case of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Jharkhand and West Bengal.  They found  that  the requisite condition of 14 per 
cent  as ROR to declare a project as viable had further  worsened the malady and  as a 
result most of the projects were left out  of the scope of RVNL.  The Planning 
Commission had also informed the Committee that the extant RO R (i.e. 14 per cent) 
could be reviewed in the light of  low infla tionary norms and declining interest rate.  The 
Committee,  having gone into the entire gamut of  investments needs in rail infrastructure 
projects, had recommended that the Railways must accord utmost priority to  partnership 
in execution of rail projects and the existing cr iteria  of 14 per cent rate of return to 
decide the viability of projects be considered for review so that more and more projects 
could be brought in to the purview of RVNL for execution.    
 
1.5. The Ministry of Railways, in their Acti on Taken reply  have stated as under:- 
“Prior to 1969, financial appraisal of Railway projects was done on the 
conventional system, taking into account a cu t-off return of 6%,  assuming that to 
be the dividend rate.  However, later on, it was considered necessary that the 
productivity from the Capital should be improved and one of the ways was to 
undertake new investments only when the re turns are higher.  It was therefore 
decided to set up a Co mmittee in 1968, which would examine and recommend 
suitable methods of project evaluatio n and cost benefit analysis to 
supplement/supplant the conventional me nthod of assessement of financial 
viability of projects.  The Committee recomm ended  that the rate of return be so 
fixed for the Railway investment as to le ave a surplus, after meeting the dividend 
liability, sufficient to cover  Capital forma tion out of internal resources.  The rate 
of return was enhanced to 10% in July, 1969. 
Ministry of Finance vide their office memorandum dt. 23/08/1984 laid  
down that only those projects with a fi nancial rate of return exceeding 12% 
should be posed to PIB for the consider ation in future.  In the background of 

 8
Ministry of Finance’s letter the rate of return was further increased to 12%.  
Consequent on the reduction in budgetary support and limitation on internal 
generation of resources.  Railways were re quired to resort to market borrowing, 
which was done through Indian Railway  Finance Corporation and the lease 
charges were at the rate of 14.5%.  This led to further increase in ROR from 12% 
to 14%. 
The issue of revision of rate of retu rn has also been deliberated upon by a 
number of high-powered Committees.  Their recommendations are summarized 
below:- 
(1) The Railway Freight and Fare Committee (Dec.1993) recommended 
vide para  no.8.6.9 of th eir report that Indian Railway might have to 
earn a minimum of 16% return if it were to meet its investment needs. 
 
(2) Standing Committee on Railways (2001) in the ninth report have 
stated as under “The Committee are of the firm opinion that the time 
has come to stop the blanket liberty presently in practice in the 
Railway Board to distribute the large sse resulting in spreading the rare 
resources thinly.  They are of the opinion that those projects which are 
near completion stage/viable must get priority.  The projects which are 
socially desirable be taken up onl y when matching funds are either 
assured by the States concerned or  the Central Government.  They 
strongly recommend that  existing priority of on-going project be 
reviewed critically and it must not be a mere categorization of projects 
but realistic enough in terms of funding requirement.” 
 
(3) One of the recommendations of Railway Safety Review Committee,  
1998 better known as Khanna Committee (para 2.3.2) which submitted 
its report in Feb. 2001, is as following: 
“Financial justification should be the only consideration for approving 
and prioritizing an investment proposal.  Further projects which yield a 
minimum  return of 20 percent, slightly more than the prevailing 
market rate of return, should henceforth be undertaken.” 
  

 9
(4) Rakesh Mohan Committee in Chapter IV of their Report, have 
observed that Indian Railways are at a crossroads.  All the indications 
are that Indian Railways is facing a financial crisis and without a 
strategic change in direction its future as a viable entity is dim.  There 
is a need for a more focused investment programme that enhance IR’s 
productivity and which expands its capacity to cope with traffic 
growth projected.  Investment expenditures that do not result in 
additional revenues must be eschewe d.  At another place in the same 
Chapter, the Committee has drawn attention to the great difficulties  IR 
faces in keeping up adequate level of investments.  The problem has 
been compounded by the change in investment priorities where 
attention has been given to unremune rative projects.  Also projects 
funded out of internal resources need  to be selected through a rigorous 
screening process and identified as being of the highest organizational 
priority on which the limited internal  resources should be invested.  It 
has also been observed by the Committ ee that “an inherent conflict of 
approach is evident in the promoti on of an investment strategy that 
perpetuates resource constraint.”   
1.6 Railways are conscious of their res ponsibilities towards socio-economic and 
industrial development of backward areas not connected by a reliable transport network.  
Regardless of the benchmark of 14% many projects on Indian Railways are sanctioned on 
socio-economic and developmental considerations. 
 
1.7 The prescribed cut – off rate of return being followed in Indian Railways for 
determining the financial viability of projects constitutes not only the cost of capital but 
also provision for capital formation, risk factors etc.  Besides paying  dividend to General 
Revenue, the Indian Railways are required to  make provisions for Depreciation Reserve 
Fund (DRF), Pension Fund and Development F und (DF).  Since railways have initiated a 
plan to cater to the modernization, operational improvement and throughput enhancement 
for quantum jump in the traffic expected on Indian Railways, it has become imperative 
that adequate surplus is generated to take care of the requirements of Development Fund 
(DF). 
 

 10
1.8 It is also relevant to point out here  that only about 50% of the total Plan 
Expenditure of IR, which is Rs.15,000 crore in 2005-06, gets Budgetary support from the 
Central Govt.  The balance 50% has to be necessarily funded through internally generated 
surplus and other market borrowings.  There is a crying need to increase the internal 
generation of resources for financing projects (through DRF, DF etc.).  Therefore,  only 
those projects  which are capable of genera ting high returns, need to be taken up.  To 
enable selection of such projects, it is necessa ry to keep the cut off percentage of ROR at 
sufficiently high level and this justifies 14%  ROR as cut off percentage for selecting 
projects for investment. 
 
1.9 Railways are at present having a shelf of 240 projects, of which only  about 
17.5% are meeting the criteria  of ROR laid down.  Addition of projects to the existing 
basket without the requisite ROR will affect th e financial viability of the system.  So far 
as RVNL is concerned, the projects are exam ined by independent financial institutions 
for their bankability.  Considering the long gest ation period for the infrastructure projects 
like Railways, it will be difficult to find resources, for unremunerative projects.  Unlike 
budgetary support, debt servicing liability on  these projects will devolve on the Railwys 
and it is necessary to exercise adequate  caution before posing projects for debt 
financing.”  
 
1.10. The Committee had made the aforesaid recommendation with a view to 
facilitating the inclusion of more and mo re projects under the purview of RVNL.  
They note that  RVNL constituted in January, 2003 with the main objective to 
supplement the efforts of the Railways to mobilize adequate resources for 
investment in rail infrastructure, selects only those projects for execution which has 
a rate of return of 14 per cent or more so as to ensure their financ ial viability.  The 
Committee have time and again glossed over the extant criteria of 14 per cent as 
rate of return to declare a project as financially viable.  To this sequel, they had 
discussed with the Planning Commission a nd they were  also of the view that 
considering the declining interest rates and low inflationary regime, the prevailing 
criterion of 14 per cent rate of return could be reviewed. The Committee are 
constrained to note from the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry of Railways have 
not given any serious consideration to their recommendation about according of 
utmost priority to partnershi p in execution of rail projects.  As the Railways find it 

 11
difficult to mobilize adequate resources through the normal course of budgetary 
support for ongoing projects which have  a huge throw forward of more than 
Rs.47000 crore, the Committee   are of the considered view that investment through 
Joint Ventures  of Public Sector Undertakings and  State Governments 
participation is an inevitable prepositio n.  They consider that in this way the 
Railways would be able to meet their ob ligation of socio-economic development of 
backward regions by ensuring adequate f unds for execution of ongoing projects in 
these areas and leaving the bankable projects exclusively under the RVNL for 
implementation and execution.  They , therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation  for according utmost priori ty to partnership and also stress that 
the existing criteria of 14 per cent Rate of  Return for deciding viability of the 
project be reviewed at the earliest. 
   

 12
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.1) 
 
 The Committee note that gives the huge throw forward of ongoing projects of 
about Rs.46000 crore and inadequate mobiliz ation of resources particularly the 
Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR ), the Railways at present are facing 
tremendous  pressure to  sustain their growth .  Their  credibility in terms of safety, 
punctuality, speed and reliability has further added to their concern.  The 
emergence of quality  highways and pipe line sectors have also posed stiff 
competition in regaining the lost traffic from these sectors.  The unabated  inclusion 
of non-viable projects year after year without making provisions of adequate 
financial resources has put tremendous pressure on the Railways to cope up with 
maladies affecting their  growth.  Th e Committee find that out of Rs.27,600 crore 
budgetary support earmarked  for X Plan, more than 70 p er cent has already been 
placed at the  disposal of the Railways durin g  initial three years of the X Plan itself.  
The Contribution of IEBR as percentage of total X Plan IEBR is only about 55 per 
cent whereas the share of inte rnal  resources has drastically  plummeted to 17 per 
cent in 2002-03, 19 per cent in 2003-04 and 20 per cent in 2004-05 (BE) of the Plan 
outlays.  Taking into account all these facts, the Committee are of the view that 
Railways have not  been able to inst all the self-propelling system which 
progressively pushes the organization towards the achievement of higher growth 
rate year after year.  They find that the X Five Year Plan (2002-07) also emphasize 
for commercial role for the Railways wh ile it continues to play social and 
developmental role for which suitable co mpensation be provided.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that the Railways shou ld gradually more towards self-sustaining, 
commercial system.  However, while doing so the Railways must continue to play 
social and developmental role. 
 Further, in view of the new emerging horizons of conpetition from the 
quality highways and pipeline se ctors and the lack of desi red efficienc, safety and 
reliability levels, the Committee are of th e considered view that the Railways must 

 13
concentrate to improve their efficiency le vel by (i) adopting transparent accounting 
system based on cost center and profit center approach, (ii) providing better 
throughputs on Golden Quadrilateral diag onals and viable corridors and (iii) 
ensuring better connectivity between ports and hinterlands. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Terms of reference (TOR) of the A ccounting Reforms Project already includes 
the Standing Committee on Railway’s recomme ndations contained in Para 3.1 on the 
subject “X Five Year Plan of Railways” a nd will be duly implemented at the time of 
execution of the project. 
(ii) In order to improve the throughput on th e Golden Quadrilateral and its diagonals, 
the National Rail Vikas Yojana was announced in 2002, which includes strengthening of 
the Golden Quadrilateral and its diagonals.  Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd. (RVNL), a special 
purpose vehicle has been set up to execute the works of strengthening of the Golden 
Quadrilateral and its diagonals.  Apart from the projects covered in National Rail Vikas 
Yojana, Minister for Railways in his re ply to the Budget 2005-06 mentioned that 
Dedicated freight Corridors are proposed to be provided on Golden Quadrilateral and 
other high density routes.  The study for de dicated corridor on Delhi-Howrah and delhi-
Mumbai routes has already been taken up. 
 The removal of bottlenecks on other freight intensive routes is also being given 
priority and works related to doubling and multip le lines on these routes have been taken 
up/are planned so as to generate additional capacity.  Seven high density corridors have 
been identified and route wise approach is  being adopted in implementation of various 
throughput enhancement works. 
(iii) Indian Railway attaches considerable importance to the development of rail 
connectivity to the ports under National Rail Vikas Yojana (N RVY).  An initiative  has 
been undertaken for strengthening port connectivity.  A total of 29 projects including 21 
sanctioned and 8 unsanctioned projects have been identified as port connectivity works as 
of now.  Out of this total of  21 projects (13 sanctioned and 8 unsanctioned projects) have 
been  transferred to Rail Vikas Nigam Limited. 
 A Committee of Secretariat under the Ch airmanship of Member Secretary, 
Planning Commission has been formed on the di rectives of Hon’ble Prime Minister to 
make recommendations on improving rail-road connectivity  of major ports.  Member 
traffic, Railway Board is also one of the members of the Committee along with Secretary, 

 14
Shipping, Secretary/Road transport & Highway s and Secretary/Environment & Forest.  
Meetings are being held by the Committ ee to identify the projects needed for 
strengthening rail connectivity to major ports. 
[Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.2) 
 
 The Committee find that the Central Exchequer has provided about 
Rs.58474 crore since 1951 to 2004-05 to Railways as Budgetary Support enabling 
them to invest in infrastructure  projects.  The latter has paid Rs.34756 crore as 
dividend to the formaer during the same period.  The Budgetary Support to the 
Railways has increased manifold in absolute  term since VIII Five  Year Plan.  The 
Railways received Rs.7311 crore as central assistance in VIII Five Year Plan.  
During the IX Plan Rs. 15551 crore was provided to the Railways as Central 
Assistance including Rs.1140 crore a share of Road Safety Fund and Special 
Railway Safety Fund.  The average share of  the Railways in budgetary support to 
the Central Plan during IX Plan was 6.32 pe r cent.  During the X Five Year Plan, 
the Gross  Budgetary Support (GBS)  has been approved to the order of Rs.27600 
crore  including Rs.10,965 crore and Rs .2150 crore contribution under the SRSF 
and RSF respectively.  The Planning Commissio n  submitted that 70 per cent of the 
X Plan budgetary  support has already been provided to the Railways.  During 
2004-05, the budgetary support  has been ra ised to Rs.8157 crore and this will not 
come down from Rs.8000 crore per year dur ing the remaining two years of the X 
Plan.  Thus, Railways would be getting  about Rs.36000 crore as Gross Budgetary 
Support by the end of X Plan which is more  than approved in the Plan document.  
However, the Planning Commission stated that the real problem is not the Gross 
Budgetary support to the Railways but the low level of IEBRs. 
 Further, over the years acquired financ ing pattern by the Railways exhibits a 
continued reliance on the budgetary support.  The share of the Central Assistance to 
the Railways has become more than 50 pe r cent of the Plan.  The Commission 
further stated that the Railways  bein g a commercial organization should first 
finance its Plan substantially by Internal Resources.  The Committee observe that 
due to some inherent  distortions in the Railways Policy framework, the financial 
health of the Railways is not growing with the result that even the projected targets 

 15
of IEBRs could not be achieved during the IX Plan.  They feel that Railways have to 
ensure greater  financial discipline and efficiency in their functioning. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 The trend of funding in the first four years of the X Five Year Plan is given in  the 
following  table :  
          ( R s .  i n   c r o r e )  
Actual Performance   As proposed by 
Railways 
As approved by 
Planning 
Commission 
Year Internal 
Generation 
 Market 
Borrowings 
Total 
IEBR 
A
. 
IEBR 
Internal Resource 
(incl. Safety 
surcharge)  
Market borrowings 
24,072 
14,072 
 
 
10,000 
 
 
33,000 2002-03 
2003-04 
 
 
2004-05 
(Actuals) 
2005-06 
(BE) 
3113 
3475 
 
 
3712 
 
4718 
2517 
2837 
 
 
3041 
 
3400 
5630 
6312 
 
 
6753 
 
8118 
 
    Total 15018 11795 26813 
    Year BS 
 
SRSF 
Cont. 
Diesel 
Cess 
Share* 
Total 
CBS 
B
. 
Gross Budgetary 
Support 
 
• Budgetary 
Support 
 
• Contributi
on to 
SRSF 
 
• Share out 
of diesel 
cess 
40,615 
 
27,500 
 
10,965 
 
 
2,150 
 
 
27600 2002-03 
 
2003-04 
 
2004-05 
(Act.) 
 
2005-06 
(BE) 
4264 
 
5315 
 
5466 
 
 
3821 
1350 
 
1600 
 
2975 
 
 
2699 
164 
 
166 
 
201 
 
 
711 
5778 
 
7081 
 
8642 
 
 
7231 
    Total 18866 8624 1242 28732 
 
• The amount received as Railway share out of diesel cess have been Rs.264 crore, 
Rs.433 crore, Rs.401 crore as per RE of 2002-03,  2003-04, 2004-05 respectively. 
 
From the above table it will be seen th at under IEBR portion, while the Railways has 
already  achieved a higher internal generation in first four years of the X Plan s per the 
projections made, by the end of the terminal year of the plant it would also be achieving 
the IEBR target fixed by the Planning Comm ission.  As regards Budgetary Support, the 
demand has been toned down by the Planning Commission initially.  However, in the 

 16
first four years the funds rece ived have already crossed the allocated funds.  This is 
mainly an account of Rs.1550 crore received for funding the national project of 
Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla  New Line, whic h is treated as outside the Railway Plan 
and Rs.1017 crore received for Rail Vikas Nigam Limited out of the Viability Gap Fund 
which did not form part of the initial X Plan. 
 It is the endeavour of th e Railways to increase its inte rnal resources by increasing 
the earnings and managing the expenditure.  These efforts have resulted in increased 
internal resource generation of the Railways and the same facilitated an increased 
appropriation to various funds by Rs.1861 crore over the budgeted figure of Rs.10,140 
crore in 2004-05.  It also enabled the Railways to discharge the deferred dividend liability 
by Rs.483 crore.  Further, the Operating Ra tio for 2004-05, which  broadly indicates the 
financial health of the system, improved to  90.98% as against  budgeted projection of 
92.58%.  The financial results in the current fiscal, so far, are also encouraging and 
Railways are expected to further  improve their Operating Ratio and appropriation to 
various funds over the budgeted figure. 
  [Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.3) 
 
 Despite the fact that the Railways have registered a continuous  improvement 
in the utilization of their assets, a shortfall  to the extent of 36 million tones in the 
freight traffic in the term inal year or IX Plan was registered.  The Railways 
attributed this to the recessionary trends in the economy.  The Committee note that 
during the X Plan, the freight traffic for that terminal year of X Plan is fixed at 624 
MTS of original traffic and 396 BNTKMS of  freight  output.  In the mid term 
appraisal, the freight  output has b een revised to 424 BNTKMS.  The Committee 
were informed that against the target  of 580 MTs planned during 2004-05.  
Railways would be  achieving  somethin g in between 590 to 595 MTs  and 5.8 per 
cent compounded growth to BNTKMS.  Th erefore, freight target of 624 MTS 
targeted would be achieved easily while k eeping the average growth rate of freight 
at 5.6 per cent per annum as against the required growth rate of 4.8 per cent.  
However, the growth rate in passenger segment would be approximately 1.9 per 
cent in number of passenger and 3.8 per cent in passenger Kms. Only as against  the 

 17
target growth rate of 2.6 per cent in number of passengers and 4.8 per cent in 
passenger Kms. Respectively. 
 The Committee feel that the Railways do  need a strategic shift in their 
objectives to become more and more us er friendly and market savvy in their 
business.  They should develop their enterprise to respond instantly to customers 
needs and market forces.  The committee are of the view  that the Railways  must 
augment their capacity and simultaneously accord topmost priority for 
improvement of safety and reliability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 During 2004-05, Railway achieved revenue earn ing originating freight  loading of 
601.89 million tones, registering a growth of 7.9 8% on the originating freight loading of 
2003-04.  In terms of freight output, railway achieved 411354 million NTKM, which was 
7.90% as compared to the freight output of 2003-04.  the revenue earning freight  loading 
target for the year has been kept at 431800 million  NTKM, a growth of 4.9% over the 
freight output of 2004-05. 
 The Railways have worked out strategi es to meet the market demand.  The 
significant contribution in achieving this objective were: 
(i) Radical changes have been made in the Good Tariff to make it simple, 
rational and transparent. While, rati onalizing Goods tariff in the Railway 
Budget 2005-06, the total number of classes have been reduced from 59 to 
27 in stages and over 4000 commodities  have been reduced to 80 main  
commodity heads.  Each group of commodities has a single uniform class  
for the various commodities in the group irrespective of there being in 
different physical form, shapes or conditions. 
The concept of minimum weight for charge (MWC) has been done 
away with to bring in complete tran sparency in the system of charging 
freight by suitably  adjusting freight rate for lighter commodities. 
(ii) Improved back loading of traffic in  the empty direction of movement of 
rolling sotkc. 
(iii) Intensive monitoring of freight st ock through the use of  FOIS which has 
resulted in improved wagon turn round and the resultant wagon 
productivity. 

 18
(iv) Focused attention  on the terminal performance in the zonal railways will 
help in improving the mobility of wagons. 
(v) For improving the wagon turn round further, the terminal improvement 
works, throughput enhancement work s and sidings required to be 
electrified  have already been id entified.  The Preferential Traffic 
Schedule has been replaced by Preferen tial Traffic Order (General Order 
No.79), the provisions of  which w ill help in improving the wagon turn 
round. 
(vi) For addressing the need of consumer s of various sectors, Indian Railway 
had organized meeting with these sect ors.  The issues raised  by the 
consumers are accordingly being addressed appropriately. 
 
Railways have also introduced a strategic shift in their objective by becoming 
more user friendly and market savvy in their business.  In the current year’s 
Railway Budget, a number of innovative schemes have been announced for 
attracting freight traffic.  These include:- 
(i) Wagon Investment Scheme 
(ii) Integrated Warehousing Scheme 
(iii) Liberalisation  of Siding Rules 
(iv) Premium Registration Scheme 
(v) Incentives for adopting Engine on Load Concept 
(vi) Rationalisation of free time for Loading/Unloading 
(vii) New initiatives in Parcel Policy 
As a result of the above initiatives, it is expected that additional freight 
traffic would be attracted towards railways. 
 Safety is the prime concern of Indian Railways and adoption of new 
measures to improve safety is a continuous process.  The measures being taken by 
Indian Railways to improve safety in clude adoption of suitable and modern 
technology for interlocking and signaling system, upgradation of standards of 
track and rolling stock, modernization of maintenance practices, replacement of 
overaged assets, upgradation of training aids like simulator, checks on observance 
of safety precautions and provision of Anti Collision Device (ACD). 
 In order to improve the Railway safety, a Corporate Safety Plan for the 
next ten years i.e. from 2003 to 2013 has been drawn up.  The main objectives of 

 19
the Safety Plan are to achieve reducti on in rate of accident s per million train 
kilometers, implement measures to re duce chances of passenger fatality 
substantially in consequential train accidents by 2013, focus on development of 
manpower through major improvements in working environment and training to 
reduce the accidents attribut able to human failure, achieve safety culture on all 
fronts including maintenance depots, wo rksites, stations, control etc. 
progressively achieve an environment of “Fail-proof” from the present “Fail-safe” 
system of asset failures by upgrading the systems by 2013, prioritization of safety 
related projects and implementations of accepted recommendations of RSRC at an 
accelerated pace. 
  [Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 

 20
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.4) 
 
 As on date, the Railways’ shelf consists  of more than 200 on going projects of 
New Line, Gauge Conversion, Doubling, Electrification and Metropolitan 
Transport.  The present throw forward of these ongoing projects has been assessed 
more than Rs.46000 crore.  Majority of these projects are found to be non-viable i.e. 
having less than 14 per cent rate of return required as per the extant guidelines. 
 The Committee find that inadequate fundi ng to execute these projects has led 
to time-overrun  which has ultimately resul ted in enormous cost overrun.  The rare 
and valuable resources allocated to comple te these projects were allowed to spread 
scarcely, which did not yield any tangible re sults.  The priority criteria adopted by 
the Railways in November, 1998 did not adhere to the principles of capacity 
augmentation and completion of last mils projects in true sense.  The Committee 
also notice that the Planni ng Commission has been consistently emphasizing for the  
review of the criteria  of priority norms fixed in  1998.  However the Ministry of 
Railways  are not adhering to that.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
unless pragmatic approach towards  the priority fixation criterion is accorded, the 
desired results are not going to be achieved.  Commercial viability, capacity 
augmentation and strategic consideration require urgent attention of the Railways 
while fixing the priority of projects.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Railways to review the extant criteria of priority fixation procedure and fix the 
priority of projects  afresh in consultati on with the Planning Commission.  The 
Committee also recommend that the socially desirable projects may also be 
accorded due consideration while priroritising the projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 The large shelf of projects of more than Rs.47,000 crore is primarily on account 
of number of projects taken up on socio-econo mic consideration and to meet aspirations 
of the people, which could not be ignored.  On the one hand, Railway is expected to 
function as a commercial orga nization but on the other hand Railway is also asked to 
discharge country’s social obligation fo r providing an easy & economic mode of 

 21
transport to the general public at large, help ing in the overall development of economy of 
the area and  bringing about na tional integration.  Hon’ble Supreme Court  have also 
commented on the role of Railways in the development of backward areas in their 
judgment on the writ  petition challenging the formation of seven new Railway Zones, as 
under: 
 “It has been contended that the objective of developing backward areas or to meet 
public demand, new zones have been formed and such a step will not be consistent with 
efficiency in administration.  There two factors  are noticed not in  isolation but along 
with other criteria as to in crease in traffic load and ac cessibility.  Therefore, the 
contention ignores all the factors taken into consideration and is not tenable.  Even 
otherwise to meet the demands of backward areas cannot by itself be inconsistent with 
efficiency.  When Railway is a public utility service it has to take care of all areas 
including backward areas.”’ 
 However, to have focused investment so  as to complete expeditiously the last 
mile projects and viable/operationally  required projects of new line and gauge 
conversion.  Railways have reviewed  the crite ria for priority fixation of the projects.  
The Cabinet Committee on Econom ic Affairs 9CCEA) has considered the note for 
prioritization of railway projects of new lines and gauge conversion excluding the 
projects under implementation by Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL), in their meeting 
held on 20.04.2005.  While consideri ng this note, CCEA has taken due note of the social 
obligation to be discharged by Indian Railway s.  As  per this, the prioritization of 
ongoing new line and gauge conversion projects have been done and projects have been 
categorized in the following four categories:- 
(i) Last mile projects – where expenditur e is more than 60% of estimated cost 
and throwforward is less than rs.100 crore. 
(ii) Viable projects/those requir ed on operational considerations. 
(iii) National Projects, Defence funded projects, cost shar ing, public private 
partnership projects and those in North Eastern Region. 
(iv) Other ongoing projects that are not  covered in the above categories. 
The projects under category (iv) include projects taken up on sociao-economic 
considerations. 
 While the projects have been categorized in different categories as given above, 
within a category there is no inter-se-priority. 
  [Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 

 22
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.6) 
 
 The Committee note that the Railways are simultaneously implementing 
various funds/schemes like the Special Railway Safety Fund, Road Safety Fund, 
Corporate Safety Fund, Integrated Railway Modernisation Plan, Remote Area Rail 
Sampark Yojana and National Rail Vikas Yo jana.  Though the objectives of these 
schemes may be different but  the overall aim is to ensure better capacity, safety, 
reliability and punctuality of trains.  Moreover, the Central Assistance is separately 
earmarked for each of these schemes.  The Committee apprehend that so many 
schemes may cause confusion and lead to over lapping of aims and objectives of 
these schemes.  They further apprehend that it may lead to over lapping of 
expenditure also.  They are of the view that all these ongoing  schemes may be 
pooled together under an integrated scheme to ensure  cost and time efficiency and 
to avoid over lapping of expenditure and efforts. 
Reply of the Government 
 The funds/Schemes detailed in para 3.6 are not exactly “Schemes” as normally 
visualized in the Planned Schemes of the Planning Commission.  Works sanctioned under 
the various scheme like Inte grated Railway Modernisati on Plan, Remote Area  Rail 
Sampark Yojana, National  Rail Vikas Yojana et c. appear as individual  items in the 
Railway Budget document “Works, Machinery and Rolling Stock Programme” of the 
Railways and as such the question of overlappi ng of expenditure  do es not arise Special 
Railway Safety Fund and Road Safety Fund are funds set up to fund individually 
sanctioned  works as mentioned above.  Ra ilways have elaborate rules of allocation 
which ensure that every sanctioned work draw s money from an iden tified source and no 
duplication/overlapping takes place. 
 There is no such fund like Corporate Safety fund.  It may, however, he stated that 
as  a follow up action for implementation of one of the recommendations made in the 
Report of Railway Safety Review Committee – 1998 (Khanna Committee), the 
“Corporate Safety Plan” of Indian Railways for the period 2003-2013 has been finalized .  
The Corporate Safety plan states the objec tives, targets and strategies for which the 
Indian Railways would be striving in th e period 2003-2013.  The document encompasses 
the priorities for the safety related works and time frame to complete them alson with 
assessed approximate requirement of financial investment. 

 23
 Integrated Railway Modernisation Plan st ates the objectives, targets and strategies 
for modernization of Railways in the pe riod 2005-2010.  The document encompasses the 
priorities for the modernization related works and time frame to complete them along 
with assessed approximate requirement of financial investments. 
 The Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana is a scheme consisting of projects 
sanctioned on socio-economic consideration wi th the intention of connecting remote and 
backward areas with the Rail network.  In  Order to speed up the execution of these 
already  sanctioned projects the Remote Area Rail Sampark  Yojana was  announced. 
 National Rail Vikas Yojana consists of identified works  for removal of capacity 
bottle necks on Indian Railways Rail Vikas Nigam Limited has been set ujp for execution 
of projects under National Vikas Yojana. 
    [Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.7) 
 The Committee find that the target for the X Plan for major projects namely 
new lines, gauge conversion and doubling of tracks has been fixed as 1310 kms., 
4000 kms. And 150 kms. Respectively.  In the first two years of the Plan the target 
fixed were 439 kms. For new lines, 1317 for gauge conversion and 590 kms. or 
doubling.  The Committee find that as  ag ainst these targets,  Railways could 
achieve 340 kms. of new lines, 1684 kms. of gauge conversion  and 400 kms. of 
doubling during the period.  The Railways are way ahead in  achieving  the gauge 
conversion target of 2684 kms. set by th e end of 2004-05, but are lagging behind in 
the field of new lines and doublings because of the  problems relating to land 
acquisition, forestry clearance and contractual  failure etc.  Railways are therefore, 
not keeping pace with the pro-rate targets  of X Plan target under these Heads.  The 
committee further recommend that the Railways  and the Planning Commission 
should shun their conservative  approach while clearing the projects which are 
socially desirable  and having  great impo rtance in view of the developmental needs 
of the backward areas. They also recomme nd that the Railways must identify the 
missing links and areas requiring where gau ge conversion from  Narrow/Metre 
gauge to broad  gauge is undertaken extensio ns and accord due priority to complete 
the same which on completion will increase the freight earnings and market share of 
the Railways. 
 

 24
Reply of the Government 
 Railways have been taking up numerous ne w line and gauge conversion projects 
on socio-economic consideration and/or having  great importance in view of the 
developmental needs of the backward areas.  In fact most of the 84 projects  falling in 
category IV as per the prioritization of th e Railway Projects recently approved by the 
Government on 20.04.2005, have been taken up on socio-economic consideration though 
not justified on viability criteria .  The throwforward of these projects as on 01.04.05 is 
approximately Rs.20,000 crore.  Every year, as part of the Budget exercise, the missing 
links and areas are identified  and works got sanctioned and executed to remove  
bottlenecks and operational constraints. 
 

 25
 
CHAPTER – IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation Para  No.3.5) 
 
 The Committee find that the Railways does not have substantial resources 
for investment in the infrastructure.  The Railways first time in 1994 decided to 
mobilize  resources for projects through external sources and floated  a BOLT 
Scheme to attract private investment which was later on redesigned as Build 
Operate Transfer (BOT) Sche me.  The Committee note with concern that no 
substantial investment from private sector has been registered  during VIII and IX 
Plan for rail infrastructure  projects under the aforesaid scheme.  A Rail Vikas 
Nigam Limited (RVNL) has  been constituted in January, 2003 to focus towards 
resource mobilization and execution of banka ble projects having rate of return of 
more than 14%.  Though the Railways h ave recently initiated certain efforts for 
Joint Ventures and Special Purpose Vehicle as in the case of State of Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand and West Bengal, to boost 
State Government and Public Sector  part icipation in the execution of viable  
projects, the Railways still needs to mobi lize the much needed  investment.  The 
Committee emphasise that Railway should ex plore the possibility of joint ventures 
with other States and well on the similar lines.  The committee have found that the 
requisite condition of 14 per cent as rate of return  to declare a project as viable has 
further worsened the malady as most of the projects are not judged as viable project 
and are left out of the scope of RNVL.   The committee were informed by the 
Planning Commission that under the presen t low inflationary norms and declining 
interest rate, the extant rate of return (i.e .14%) could be thought of for review.  The 
Committee, after having gone into the full spectrum of the need for investment in 
rail infrastructure  projects, have come to  a conclusion that the State Government 
and Public Sector participation in ra il infrastcture projects may prove the real 
panacea for financial health of the Railw ays,  They, therefore, recommend that the 
Railway’s must accord utmost priority to  partnership in the execution of rail 

 26
projects.  They also recommend  that the ex isting rate of return i.e. 14 per cent as 
the viability criteria of the projects be considered for review so that more and more 
projects  could be brought into the purview of RVNL for their execution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“Prior to 1969, financial appraisal of Railway projects was done on the 
conventional system, taking into account a cu t-off return of 6%,  assuming that to 
be the dividend rate.  However, later on, it was considered necessary that the 
productivity from the Capital should be improved and one of the ways was to 
undertake new investments only when the re turns are higher.  It was therefore 
decided to set up a Co mmittee in 1968, which would examine and recommend 
suitable method of project evaluatio n and cost benefit analysis to 
supplement/supplant the conventional me nthod of assessement of financial 
viability of projects.  The Committee recomm ended  that the rate of return be so 
fixed for the Railway investment as to le ave a surplus, after meeting the dividend 
liability, sufficient to cover  Capital formation our of internal resources.  The rate 
of return was enhanced to 10% in July, 1969. 
Ministry of Finance vide their office memorandum dt. 23/08/1984 laid  
down that only those project with a financial rate of  return exceeding 12% should 
be posed to PIB for the cons ideration in future.  In th e background of Ministry of 
Finance’s letter the rate of return was fu rther increased to 12%.  Consequent on 
the reduction in budgetary support and limitation on internal generation of 
resources.  Railways were required to resort to market borrowing, which was done 
through Indian Railway Finance Corporati on and the lease charges were at the 
rate of 14.5%.  This led to further increase in ROR from 12% to 14%. 
The issue of revision of rate of retu rn has also been deliberated upon by a 
number of high-powered Committees.  Their recommendations are summarized 
below:- 
(1) The Railway Freight and Fare Committee (Dec.1993) recommended 
vide para  no.8.6.9 of th eir report that Indian Railway might have to 
earn a minimum of 16% return if it were to meet its investment needs. 
 
(2) Standing Committee on Railways (2001) in the ninth report have 
stated as under “The Committee are of the firm opinion that the time 

 27
has come to stop the blanket liberty presently in practice in the 
Railway Board to distribute the large sse resulting in spreading the rare 
resources thinly.  They are of the opinion that those projects which are 
near completion stage/viable most get priority.  The projects which are 
socially desirable be taken up onl y when matching funds are either 
assured by the States concerned or  the Central Government.  They 
strongly recommend that  existing priority of on-going project be 
reviewed critically and it must not be a mere categorization of projects 
but realistic enough in terms of funding requirement.” 
 
(3) One of the recommendations of Railway Safety Review Committee,  
1998 better known as Khanna Committee (para 2.3.2) which submitted 
its report in Feb. 2001, is as following: 
“Financial justification should be the only consideration for approving 
and prioritizing an investment proposal.  Further projects which yield a 
minimum  return of 20 percent, slightly more than the prevailing 
market rate of return, should henceforth be undertaken.” 
  
(4) Rakesh Mohan Committee in Chapter IV of their Report, have 
observed that Indian Railways are at a crossroads.  All the indications 
are that Indian Railways is facing a financial crisis and without a 
strategic change in direction its future as a viable entity is dim.  There 
is a need for a more focused investment programme that enhance IR’s 
productivity and which expands its capacity to cope with traffic 
growth projected.  Investment expenditures that do not result in 
additional revenues must be eschewed.  At another place in the same 
Chapter, the Committee has drawn attention to the great difficulties  IR 
faces in keeping up adequate level of investments.  The problem has 
been compounded by the change in investment priorities where 
attention has been given to unremune rative projects.  Also projects 
funded out of internal resources need  to be selected through a rigorous 
screening process and identified as being of the highest organizational 
priority on which the limited internal  resources should be invested.  It 
has also been observed by the Comm ittee has “an inherent conflict of 

 28
approach is evident in the promoti on of an investment strategy that 
perpetuates resource constraint.”   
Railways are conscious of their responsibilities towards socio-
economic and industrial development of backward areas not connected 
by a reliable transport network.  Regardless of the benchmark of 14% 
many projects on Indian Railway s are sanctioned on socio-economic 
and developmental considerations. 
The prescribed cut – off rate of return being followed in Indian 
Railways for determining the financial viability of projects constitutes 
not only the cost of capital but also provision for capital formation, 
risk factors etc.  Besides payi ng dividend to General Revenue, the 
Indian Railways are required to make provisions for Depreciation 
Reserve Fund (DRF), Pension Fund and Development Fund (DF).  
Since railways have initiated a plan to cater to the modernization, 
operational improvement and throughput enhancement for quantum 
jump in the traffic expected on Indian Railways, it has become 
imperative that adequate surplus is generated to take care of the 
requirements of Development Fund (DF). 
It is also relevant to point out he re that only about 50% of the total 
Plan Expenditure of IR, which is Rs.15,000 crore in 2005-06, gets 
Budgetary support from the Central G ovt.  The balance 50% has to be 
necessarily funded through interna lly generated surplus and other 
market borrowings.  There is a crying need to increase the internal 
generation of resources for financing projects (through DRF, DF etc.).  
Therefore only those projects, whic h are capable of generating high 
returns, need to be taken up.  To enab le selection of such projects, it is 
necessary to keep the cut off percen tage of ROR at sufficiently high 
level and this justifies 14% ROR as  cut off percentage for selecting 
projects for investment. 

 29
Railways are at present having a shelf of  240 projects, of which only  about 
17.5% are meeting the criteria  of ROR laid down.  Addition of projects to the existing 
basket without the requisite ROR will affect th e financial viability of the system.  So far 
as RVNL is concerned, the projects are exam ined by independent financial institutions 
for their bankability.  Considering the long gestation period for the infrastructure projects 
like Railways, it will be difficult to find resources, for unremunerative projects.  Unlike 
budgetary support, debt servicing liability on  these projects will devolve on the Railwys 
and it is necessary to exercise adequate  caution before posing projects for debt 
financing.”   
[Ministry of Railways OM No.2005/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dt.02.11.2005] 
 
 

 30
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
 
              - N I L - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                BASUDEB ACHARIA 
          November, 2006                                                           Chairman, 
          Agrahayana 1928 Saka                        Standing Committee on Railways 
 

 31
       APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18 th September, 2006 from                 
1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room No. 139, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
  SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya  
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Ramdas B. Athawale 
5. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure   
6. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
7. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
8. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
9. Shri Laxman Rao Patil 
10. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
11. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan  
12. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
14. Maulana Obaidu llah Khan Azmi 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi  
17. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
19. Shri Isam Singh 
20. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
21. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary        
2.      Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3.      Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
 

 32
 
2. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the reco mmendations/observations contained in 
their  11th Report on – ‘X Five Year Plan of  the Railways’ and adopted the same 
without any modifications.  
 
4. The Committee authorized  the Chairman to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to the House during Winter Session.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

 33
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKE N BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVTIONS CONTAINED IN THE 11 th REPORT 
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘X FIVE YEAR PLAN OF THE RAILWAY’. 
 
 Total number of Recommendations/Observations   07 
 (i) Recommendations/observations  which have been accepted     
  by Government        03 
(Vide recommendations/observations)  
   
Para Nos. 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 
 
  Percentage of total       42.86% 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   
Desire to pursue in view of Government replies    03 
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
 Para Nos. 3.4, 3.6 and 3.7 
 
Percentage of total       42.86% 
 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/obs ervations in respect of which replies of    
  which replies of Government have not been accepted by the  01 
Committee which require reiteration.  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
 Para No. 3.5         
 
Percentage of total       14.28%
    
 (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final     
  replies of Government are still awaited.    --- 
(Vide Recommendations/observations) 
   
Para Nos.  Nil 
   
P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l        - - -  
  
 