           
5 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Agrahnaya, 1926 (Saka) 

 
 
SCR No. 84 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2004 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2004/Agrahanaya, 1926 (Saka) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION  
PART - I 
 
Report           
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
PART-II 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways         
held on  27.09.2004 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways  
held on 07.10.2004 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on 18.10.2004 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held 20.12.2004 
   
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2004) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5          Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7          Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Under Secretary 
5. Smt Archana Srivastava   - Sr. Executive Assistant  
 
 

(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing  Committee on Railways (2004), having 
been authorised by the Committee to presen t the Report on their behalf, present 
this Fifth Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Railways (2004) on ‘Safety and 
Security in Indian Railway’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways on   27 th September, 2004  ,  18 th October, 2004.  They called the 
representatives of Nationa l Federation for Indian Rail waymen (NFIR), All India 
Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF), All Indi a Railway Protection Force Association 
(AIRPF Association) and All India Loc o running Staff Association for appearing 
before the Committee on 7 th October, 2004.  The Representatives of AIRPF 
Association appeared before the Committee once again on 18th October, 2004. 
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at t heir sitting held on      
20th December, 2004. Minutes of  the sittings held on 27 th September, 2004,  7 th 
October, 2004, 18th October, 2004 form Part-II of the Report.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Railways (Railway Board), NFIR, AIRF , AIRPF Association, and All India Loco 
running Staff Association for furnishing  the information which the Committee 
desired in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Safety and Security in 
Indian Railways’ and sharing with them the issues conc erning the subject which 
came up for discussion during evidence. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         BASUDEB ACHARIA 
20th December, 2004                                                Chairman, 
29 Agrahanaya, 1926 Saka                   Standing Committee on Railways 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Making Indian Railways a safe and reliable system is an enormous 
challenge.  The Railways have the mo st intricate and involved inter-
dependencies for its proper and safe functioni ng.  Safety on the Railways is the 
end product of the cohesive fusion of its myriad parts, including Railway Staff, 
tracks, rolling stock, signals , electrical equipment suppliers/vendors of various 
equipment and the general public.    Factors such as a single flaw in the 63,122 
km of track that criss-cross the country , a defect in the 7,681 locos, 44,756 
coaches and 2,14,760 wagons (units) that haul about 14 mi llion passengers and 
more than one million and five lakh tonn es of freight every day, an incorrect 
indication on one of a lakh of signals, a mistake or an act of negligence by one of 
its 6,00,000 frontline operating and maintenance staff, a rash act by one of  
millions of road users who daily negotiate about 40,000 odd level crossing gates 
spread across the system, an act of carrying inflammable goods have the 
potential to cause a major tragedy.  Added to these are the acts of sabotage by 
misguided elements in differ ent parts of the country.  For the nation’s premier 
transport organisation, with it s great magnitude of operations safety is of 
paramount importance.   
 
1.2 From time to time a number of Committees viz Kunzru Committee in the 
year 1962, Wanchoo Committee in the year  1968, Sikri Committee in the year 
1978, Venkatachala Committee in the year  1996, Khanna Committee also called 
the Railway Safety Review committee in the year 1988 have studied safety in 
Railways and recommended certain concrete  measures to be taken by the 
Railways to improve the safety system.   The main focus of these Committees 
was on improving safety through bette r man-machine interaction, easier 
operating systems and reducing the need for human dependence in maintenance 
and operation.   

 
1.3 During the oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board said:- 
“Khanna Committee had given recomm endations in two parts, in 
the year 1999 and 2001, and the Railways had accepted 244 
recommendations.  Out of this Ra ilways have already implemented 
92 recommendations by 31.07.2004 and remaining 
recommendations are in the various stages of implementation.” 
 
1.4 During the coming years the Railwa ys would be called upon to lift more 
and more traffic both passenger and goods, wh ich will surely put greater strain 
on the system.  Therefore, high priority is required to be accorded by Railways to 
safety measures to ensure greater safety in rail operations.    
  
1.5 The Ministry of Railways being increasingly aware of the need to review 
the safety performance in the Indian Railways has presented two vital documents 
– ‘The White Paper on Safety on Indian Railways’ and the ‘ The Corporate Safety 
Plan’ for the period 2003-2013  in the Parliament in April and August, 2003 
respectively.  
 
1.6 The White Paper on Safety on the Indian Railways offered a review of 
safety performance of the Indian Railways, in terms of accidents occurring on the 
system during the last 40 years, with a special reference to the last decade.  The 
highlights of the paper revolved around moderanisation of  infrastructure viz. 
track, bridges, rolling stock etc. and examination of the role of ‘human element’, 
specially that of ‘failure of railway staff’ in accidents.  It has also gone into issues 
related to accident inquiry, fixing up of responsibility and recommendations made 
by various inquiry committees and Commissions. 
 
1.7 The ‘Corporate Safety Plan states the strategies being formulated and 
aims and objectives which the Indian Railways would be striving to achieve in the 
next decade.  The document encompasses the priorities of the safety related 
works and indicates a broad timeframe withi n which to complete them along with 
the approximate requirem ent of financial investment for upgrading the 
infrastructure. 
 

1.8  The Railways has claimed that bec ause of their continuous efforts to 
improve safety of passengers and of oper ations, the number of consequential 
train accidents have reduced drastically from 2131 in 1960-61 to 325 in 2003-04 
despite increase of 560% in passenger tr affic and by more than 380% in freight 
traffic.    Accident per million train kms. (a universally accepted Safety index), has 
come down from 5.50 in 1960-61 to 0.39 (provisional) in 2003-04. 
 
1.9 Infrastructure which is running into  thousands of item s require periodic 
maintenance of all assets and each part by   multi-layer inspections and super 
checks.  If any part of infrastructure is weak or found to be even slightly unsafe, 
immediate action is taken to repair/replace the same.  
 
1.10 The transport industry is the only one of its kind where an accident in the 
course of its working often results in injury, loss of property and even loss of lives 
of its valued customers.  In all other industries providing any kind of service to the 
general public, an accident generally affect s the workers of that industry alone, 
and not its customers.  In view of the se rious implications of a Railway accident, 
safety in the Railways has always had a special significance for the traveling 
public. The Railways in turn accord a ve ry high priority to safety in train 
operations.  This is primar ily because of the realisat ion that accidents not only 
cause injury, loss of invaluable lives and pr operty, but also result in a cumulative 
loss of transport capacity – a loss whic h cannot be effectively recouped over a 
period of time. 
 
1.11 In order to facilitate the Ministry of  Railways to formulate a proper policy to 
ensure safety and regain credibility of the Indian Railways the Committee have 
discussed various important aspects such as track circuiting, development of 
manpower through major improv ements in working enviro nment training to the 
operating staff, modernisat ion, maintenance/monitoring of safety assets and 
signalling systems. 

 
CHAPTER - II 
ACCIDENTS 
 
ACCIDENTS AND CONSEQUENTIAL TRAIN ACCIDENTS 
  
2.1 Consequential train accidents incl ude train accidents having serious 
repercussion in terms of loss of human life, injury, damage to Railway property or 
interruption to rail traffic of laid dow n threshold levels and values.  These 
consequential train accidents - include Co llision, Derailments, Fire in Trains, 
Collisions of trains at Level Crossings and few miscellaneous incidents.  All other 
train accidents, which are below the threshold values, are treated as “other train 
accidents”.  This categorization is, br oadly, in consonance with practices  
adopted in many world railways,  though varying in details and degree.  
 
2.2 The number of accidents, including derailments, occurring on Indian 
Railways during the last 5 years are as under:- 
 Year        Number of consequential 
    Train accident Derailments 
 
 1999-2000   463   329 
 2000-2001   473   350 
2001-2002   414   280 
2002-2003   351   218 
2003-2004   325   202     
 
  
2.3 During oral evidence, the Chai rman, Railway Board stated: - 
“The safety track-record of the Indian Railways has been quite 
good and it is going from good to better.  This year itself, that is, in   
2004-05, five months have passed and sixth month is coming to 
conclusion, if we compare with the corresponding period of the 
previous year, this year we have only 100 consequential train 
accidents as compared to 163 numbers in the corresponding period  
of the last year.  O ne thing has been that the collisions have been 
on the decline, der ailments have been on the decline which 
normally result in the serious types of accidents.” 

 
2.4  He further added:- 
“If we have the international com parison also, in the year 2003-04 
we have ended  up with t he number of train accidents per million 
ten kilometres as 0.39.  It co mpares very favourably with any 
leading railway system in the world.  It is varying  approx. 0.40 to 
1.1..  If we compare ourselves with  the other countries of the world 
like Japan, China and USA, we are doing fairly well.  We are on the 
path of recovery and we are on the path of improvement. 
 
2.5 The Committee were informed that main ly all accidents are classified into 
four major types - collision, derailment, level crossing accidents and fire.  Other 
types of accidents incorporated are dist inctly other than the consequential train 
accidents and accidents caused by equipment failure. 
 
2.6 Accident is an occurrence in the cour se of the working of the Railway 
which does or may affect the safety of  the Railway passeng ers or servants or 
which affect the safety of others, or which does or ma y cause delay to a train or 
loss to the Railway. 
 
2.7 A measure of the gravity of train accidents is the in cidence of injury, loss 
of life and damage to railway property.  Generally, these consequential train 
accidents which change the mind set of pub lic who judge the record of safety or 
railway travel by the incidence of these accidents, ignoring other occurrences of 
minor nature.  A few other types of mishaps, involving serious potential hazards, 
are given equal importance.  Indicative Accidents, dist inct from Consequential 
Train Accidents include all cases of ‘t rain passing signal at danger’, averted 
collision’, breach of block  rules etc.  These three types of indicative accidents 
underline the philosophy of IR’s safety. 
 
Collision 
2.8 Collisions are the most  dreaded accidents in any railway system.  These 
can be ‘side collision’, ‘Rea r-end’ and ‘head-on co llisions’.   Trains ramming into 
another from behind are called rear-end collisions, while trains colliding on the 
same  track from opposite ends, are called  head-on collisions and are the most 
fatal of all accidents such as the collision that took  place between 9112 Down 
Jammu Tawi – Ahmedabad Express a nd 1 JMP – Jalandhar-Pathankot 

Passenger Train that took place on 14 th December, 2004 in the Hoshiarpur 
District of Pubjab.  Side collisions can occur either in station area, while 
converging or diverging or by fouling the adjacent track in multiple lines territory.  
Rear-end collisions and head-on  collisions can occur at stations or between the 
stations.  Of the total consequential train accidents, that occurred during the last 
decade, the percentage of collisions involving passenger carrying trains  was  4%  
only, but they are highly volatile mishaps and call for necessary  steps to prevent 
them at all costs. 
 
2.9 During oral evidence the C hairman Railway Board stated:- 
“If you see the Corporate Safety Plan and based on the data of the 
previous ten years, 7% of the to tal accidents have been on account 
of collision and 38 per cent of the to tal fatalities, that is, death have 
taken place on account of collisi on.  We have taken a number of 
measures to prevent the collision.  In the Corporate Safety Plan, we 
have said that we will try to elim inate fully the collision during the 
next ten years.  We have taken a number of measures like anti-
collision device, track circuiting, going for the axle counters, going 
for the train protection warning system and solid state interlocking 
to be intensified.” 
 
2.10 The Ministry in their written replies also stated that 98.95% collisions were 
attributed to the railway staff and the re maining 1.05% were due to incidental 
causes etc. 
 
2.11 The Ministry of Railways while repl ying about the steps taken to reduce 
the consequential train accidents have stated as follows:- 
  
(i) Track circuiting works on main lines in station section on ‘A’, ‘B’ and 
‘C’ routes have been completed to reduce probability of reception of 
a train on blocked line due to human failure. 

 
(ii) Multiplicity of conventional leve r cabins is being substituted by 
Route Relay Interlocking on replacement. 
(iii) ‘Block Proving Axle Counter’ have been provided over 220 block 
sections and is progressively being added. 
(iv) Auxiliary Warning System is  operational in Bombay Suburban 
System. 
(v) Automatic Loco Flasher Lights are being progressively installed on 
locomotives to give indication to drivers of trains running from 
opposite direction in case of mishap for prevention of further 
accidents. 
(vi) Walkie-talkie sets have been supplied to drivers and guards of all 
trains to improve communication between Driver and Guard. 
(vii) More powerful 25-Watt VHF sets are being progressively provided 
to station staff to improve communication betw een Driver/Guard 
and Station staff. 
(viii) Guards have been provided with Electronic Flashing Tail Lamps, 
having better visibility than t he conventional Kerosene lit Tail 
Lamps. 
(ix) Provision of Anti collision Device. 
 
2.12 The number of collisions, inspite of hefty increase in traffic over the years, 
has come down as follows:- 
 
Period Collision Movement of 
Traffic 
Train Kms. 
(in Millions) 
Collisions 
per million 
Train Kilometres
Average in 1960-70 83 433.9 0.19 
Average in 1970-80 59 481.0 0.12 
Average in 1980-90 48 559.8 0.08 
Average in 1990-2000 34 652.9 0.05 
Average in 2000-2001 20 723.8 0.02 
Average in 2001-2002 30 756.4 0.04 
Average in 2002-2003 16 786.2 0.02 
Average in  2003-2004 9 --- --- 
  

 
2.13 During the oral evidence also the Chairman, Railway Board informed as 
under:- 
“In the Plan period we intend to hundr ed per cent eliminate accidents on 
account of collision.” 
 
Derailments 
2.14  The derailment of trai ns, primarily take place on account of following:- 
(i) Equipment Failure. 
(ii) Railway Staff Failure. 
(iii) Miscreant Activities or Sabotage. 
 
2.15 The Chairman, Railway B oard informed the Committee:- 
“As regards derailment is concerned, nearly 75 per cent  of the total 
accidents of derailments and 14 per cent   of the total fatalities, that 
is deaths are on account of the derailments.  In the Corporate 
Safety Plan, our efforts will be that  in the next ten years we will 
reduce the current trend of the derailments by minimum 60 percent.  
Here, we have taken a number of  measures to minimise the 
derailments like assets renewal under  SRSF particularly, going in 
for the longer rails, better quality of  welds  on rails, import of Self 
Propelled Ultrasonic Rail Testing Cars, that is , state of art cars, 
going in for more and more mechani sed maintenance, going in for 
the bridge management system, pha sing out four-wheeler track 
weapons, patrolling of tracks to be intensified during summer, 
winter and monsoon seasons, going in for the bogey mounted 
brakes, going in for the automatic switch over on the flasher lights 
in the locos and the audio-visual si gnals in the locos.  These are 
various measures in a nutshell we have gone in for to minimise and 
reduce the derailment.” 
 
2.16 Some of the steps, taken by the Ra ilways to reduce Equipment Failures, 
are enumerated hereunder:- 
(i) Accelerated replacement of over aged assets, viz. track & bridges, 
rolling stock, signalling etc. 
 
 

(ii) Procurement of rails  with improved specification and quality control. 
(iii) Introduction of need based concept of Ultra Sonic Flaw detection 
(USFD) testing of rails. 
(iv) Procurement of more USFD machines. 
(v) Upgradation of standar d of track structure on various routes. 
(vi) Import of technology for more track friendly coaches. 
(vii) Bogie mounted brake system. 
(viii) Composite brake blocks. 
 
2.17 Some of the steps taken conti nuously to reduce staff failure are 
summarized hereunder:- 
(i) Simulators have been installed for training of drivers. Four 
simulators are presently available – two for diesel drivers and two 
for electric drivers.  More simulators are being procured. 
(ii) ‘Quality Management Syst em’ have been developed and 
implemented as per ISO 9001 Q uality Standards in all the 
Production Units, majority of the workshops and some of the 
sheds/depots.  All ot her important manufacturing/repair Units have 
also been advised to develop an d implement quality management 
systems. 
(iii) Introduction of automatic loco flas her lights in case of train getting 
into an unusual situation and warning train drivers on other tracks. 
(iv) Staff are regularly being sent  for Refresher Course and safety 
camps as per laid down periodici ty.  Safety staff overdue for 
refresher course is not permitted on train duties. 
(v) Training centers have been gi ven new thrust with modern and 
better training facilities. 
(vi) Greater emphasis is given on su rprise inspections, ambush checks 
and safety Audit.  Night inspections are conducted regularly to 
eradicate adoption of short cut methods. 
(vii) Phychological tests are being ca rried out at every level for vital 
categories (Assistant Station Masters, Assistant Drivers, Motorman, 
etc.) 

 
(viii) With revamping of Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs), quality of 
staff being selected through RRBs has substantially improved. 
(ix) Safety Drives to guard against staff failures are launched to curb 
use of short-cut methods and unsafe practices. 
 
2.18 The number of derailments per million train km has also come down as 
follows:- 
Period Derailment Movement of 
Traffic 
Train Kms. 
(in Millions) 
Derailments 
per million 
Train Kilometres
Average in 1960-70 1066 433.9 2.46 
Average in 1970-80 767 481.0 1.41 
Average in 1980-90 624 559.8 1.12 
Average in 1990-2000 359 652.9 0.55 
Average in 2000-2001 350 723.8 0.48 
Average in 2001-2002 280 756.4 0.37 
Average in 2002-2003 218 786.2 0.28 
Average in  2003-2004 202 --- --- 
 
  
2.19 The Ministry have stated that 74.04%  derailments are attributed to the 
negligence of the railway staff, 7.40% due  to equipment failures, 5.66% due to 
sabotage and remaining 6.66% due to the co mbination of factor, ‘incidental’, 
cause ‘could not be established’ etc.  
 
2.20 When the Committee desired  to know the reasons for targeting only 50% 
reduction in rail accidents and 60% reducti on in train accidents occurring due to 
derailment in the Corporate Safety Plan 2003-2013, the Ministry of Railways 
replied that with focused attention on human resources, technological up-
gradation and adoption of modern maintenance practices it has been assessed 
that the present level of railway staff fa ilure, causing derailments, will come down 
significantly through steps like phasing ou t of derailment pr one 4-wheeler tank 
wagon stocks, replacement of over-aged assets under “Specia l Railway Safety 
Fund” improved welding technology en hanced training infrastructure etc. 
Although the technology/inputs are bound to reflect in t he overall decline in the 
number of accidents in various  categories like collision,  derailments and fire, the 
accidents occurring on account of outside interference cannot be fully ruled out 
as Railways have little control over such externalities. 

 
 Further, the Ministry st ated that derailments have declined to 202 in the 
year 2003-04 from an average of 1066 during 1960-70. 
  
2.21 Some of the steps taken to reduc e accidents on account of miscreant 
activity are:- 
(i) Development of anti-theft fitti ngs and fastenings for Short Welded 
Rail (SWR) stretches in vulnerable areas. 
(ii) Burring of fish bolts on vulnerable locations. 
(iii) Elimination of fish-plat ed joints by welding of rails. 
(iv) Deputing watchmen on import ant bridges, deep cuttings, tunnels 
and their approaches, in the sections identified as sabotage prone. 
(v) Undertaking surprise mobile pat rolling in night by joint team of 
Railway Protection Force (RPF) and Gangman, in such sections. 
(vi) Continuous track circuiting of rails. 
 
2.22 There are instance of shifting sand dunes due to sand drifts in Western 
Rajasthan.  On being pointed out that this  hampers the visibilit y level in running 
trains and the sand deposits on the tracks leading to stoppage of trains for safety 
reasons for hour together, the Ministry stat ed that the sand is  removed from the 
tracks manually.  Further the Ministry info rmed that they are planning plantation 
of trees on both sides of the track to stop the sand drift. 
 
Level Crossing Accidents 
2.23 Apart from above there is another catchment area where most of the 
accidents occur, namely level crossings. 
 
2.24 In the last decade, there has been no significant reduction in the numbers 
of accidents taking place at level crossi ngs. Most of these accidents are due to 
the carelessness of the road users.  Of the total consequential train accidents, 
that occurred during the last decade, the accidents at level crossings were about 
16%.  Accidents at manned level crossings we re at the level of  4% of the total 
consequential train accidents, whereas unmanned level crossings account for 
12% of the total accidents. 

 
2.25 During oral evidence the C hairman Railway Board stated:- 
“There had been nearly 23 per cent increase in the level crossing 
accidents during the previous decade based on which we have 
prepared the Corporate Safety Plan.  In this Corporate Safety Plan 
we have mentioned that we will make efforts that this increase is 
totally arrested.  Nearly 16 per cent of the total accidents occur on 
account of level crossings and 46 per cent of the total fatalities are 
on account of level crossings.  In this case, we have taken a 
number of measures like going in for the interlocking of the level 
crossing, provision of phones on the level crossing, manning of the 
unmanned level crossings , going in for the road over-bridges and 
road under-bridges at the busy leve l crossings as a replacement 
measure, going in for the train accentuated  warning devices and 
also resorting to the measures of  the safety counselling by sending 
teams to the nearby villages.” 
 
2.26 Accidents at unmanned level crossings occur primarily due to dashing of 
road vehicles with the oncoming trains and cause fatality of the road user.  A 
road vehicles driver, t hough having the advantage of maneuverability and lesser 
braking distances and shorter reaction time as compared to train drivers, fails to 
maintain the level of alertness, no rmally expected, while crossing such 
intersections, where he is supposed to ta ke necessary precautions as stipulated 
in the Motor Vehicles Act 1988.  It has been observed that over 85% of all 
accidents occurring at unmanned level cr ossings, involved passenger carrying 
trains, reflecting that the road vehicle drivers normally misjudge the speed of the 
oncoming trains and take chances while crossing the rail track. 
 
2.27 During oral evidence on this point, the Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“There are nearly 19,000 unmanned level crossings.  We have a 
certain laid down criteria about  how to man an unmanned level 
crossing.  These criteria are bas ed on the density of road vehicles 
and on the density of rail traffic and also on visibility and prevailing  
conditions and the frequency of motor vehicles in a particular level 
crossing.  Based on these criteria, we have identified  that out of 
these 19,000 unmanned le vel crossings, nearly 1281 level 
crossings need manning.  We are go ing to sanction manning of all 

these level crossing.  We have already sanctioned nearly 550  level 
crossings for manning.  We are doing the manning of these level 
crossings on priority.” 
 
2.28 On an average, every year, 141 perso ns died and 158 injured in the 
accidents occurring at unmanned level cr ossings during the last decade, 
contributing a share of 37% of the total fatalities in all accidents, 9% of the total 
fatalities occurred in manned level crossing accidents, thus indicating that 46% of 
train accident fatalities take place at rail-road intersections. 
 
2.29 The level crossings are made to facilita te the smooth running of traffic in a 
regulated manner governed by specific rules and conditions.  As on 31.03.2002, 
there were 21,792 unmanned and 16,549 manned level crossings on Indian 
Railway System.  At present, 6446 manned  level crossings are interlocked and 
14502 are provided with telephones. 
 
2.30 The Ministry has informed that 55. 88% of manned level crossing accidents 
were attributed to railway staff, whereas 41.18% are due to ne gligence of road 
vehicle  users and 2.94% due to the combination of factors. 
 
2.31 The Ministry enumerated the steps being taken to reduce the accidents 
due to level crossing accidents as follows:- 
(i) Road users frequently misjudge t he speeds of trains.  A train 
travelling at 90 KMPH covers 25 m/se c.  Thus although to the road 
user, the train appears to be 200 metres  away, in terms of time it is 
only 8 seconds away.  This message and need of safety at 
unmanned level crossings is conv eyed through publicity campaign 
launched in various media like TV, Cinema, posters, radio, 
newspaper advertisements and street plays etc. 
(ii) Since accidents at unmanned le vel crossing takes place due to 
negligence of road users, the State Governments can help by being  
strict while issuing and checking driving licenses, specially to 
drivers of trucks, buses and ot her heavy vehicles.  All Chief 
Secretaries have been requested to help in educating road users. 

 
(iii) Analysis of accidents at Unma nned Level Crossings reveals that 
more than 30% of accidents take  place with tractors.  State 
Governments have been requested to  enforce provisions of Motor 
Vehicle Act for tractor drivers. 
(iv) Telephones are also being progressively provided at all manned 
level crossings. 
(v) The level crossing gates are progr essively being manned in phased 
manner. 
(vi) The manned level crossing havi ng very heavy traffic density are 
also being progressively interlocked with signals. 
(vii) Busy level crossing gates are being replaced by road-over-
bridges/road-under-bridges.  
 
Accidents due to Fire 
2.32 During the oral evidence on this point, the Chairman, Railway Board 
stated:- 
”2% of total accidents occur on account of fire and 2% of total fatalities are 
also on account of fire.” 
 
2.33 He further added:- 
“We are going for fire proof c oaches, we are going for improved, 
electrical fixtures and use of fire resistant material in our coaches; 
and we are going for intensive cam paigning to prevent carrying of 
inflammable goods, either through PA system or otherwise.” 
 
2.34 The Ministry also informed that trend of accidents during last 5 years 
(1999-2000 to 2003-04) indica tes 44.59%, Fire accidents were attributed to the 
negligence of the railway sta ff, 27.03% due to the ‘Failu re of other than railway 
staff’, 10.81% due to equipment failures, 6.76% due to sabotage and for 
remaining 10.71% either the cause coul d not be established or were due to 
‘incidental’ causes.  

   
CHAPTER – III 
 
The Human Factor 
3.1 Manpower is the most valuable asse t for Indian Railwa y.  Undoubtedly, 
the entire safety edifice of Indian Railways rests on the ‘human element’.  It is 
also true that on an average 2/3 rd of accidents are attributable to ‘staff failure’, 
either directly or indirectly.     
  
 The Chairman, Railway Board informed the Committee that human 
failures used to be of the order of 66 per cent, which has come down, and as of 
today, to 53 per cent.  
 
 Manpower is the most valuable asset in any organisation, more so in 
Indian Railway which is highly labour int ensive.  The Indian Railways with a work 
force of nearly 1.5 million is  one of the biggest employer s in the world.  To have 
the optimum output from t he workforce, higher motiva tion level and stress free 
environment is to be ensured.  Suiting the job requirement, skills of manpower 
have to be suitably developed requiring  adequate attention in their training 
facilities.   The corrective steps being taken for reducing the staff failure on Indian 
Railways include:- 
(a) Improving quality of recruitment  by Railway Recruitment Boards. 
(b) Aptitude test for selected operating categories of staff at entry level. 
(c) For updating of knowled ge of safety staff in safety related rules, 
staff are periodically spared for re fresher training in Zonal training 
institutions.  Besides, safety seminar/meetings are held from time to 
time, wherein staff are acquainted with the causes of accidents so 
that same type of error may not be repeated by them while 
performing their duty. 
(d) Simulator aided training is given to the running staff. 
(e) Rs.73.5 crores have been provided under SRSF for 
upgradation/modernization of 52 major training centres. 
(f) Periodical Medical examination is given to all train passing and 
running staff. 
 
 

(g) Drivers are subjected to br eath analyser test before they are 
booked for duty and also at ‘sign off’.  Surprise checks are also 
carried out on the run after commencement of duty. 
(h) Safety category staff vacancies are filled up on priority. 
(i) Emphasis is given on surprise inspections and ambush checks. 
(j) Greater stress is being given to  improve the condition of running 
rooms for drivers/guards. 
(k) Disciplinary action is taken agai nst the staff found guilty of any act 
or omission which resulted or woul d have ordinarily resulted in an 
accident. 
(l) Reducing over hours working. 
(m) Inspection and ambush checks. 
(n) Holding regular dialogue with gr ass-root and frontline safety 
category staff. 
  
Training 
3.2 Since Indian Railway are a labour in tensive organisation, proper training 
and motivation of its labour force, would also contribute to improving railway 
safety.  Even if the staff is disciplined and dedicated, still t here is a scope for 
improving through training and extending it to areas not yet fully covered. 
 
 The Committee has been informed t hat several training courses are 
arranged by Railways for staff to have an indepth knowledge of railway working 
and techniques, depending on the nature of  the job.  Training courses are 
conducted as Initial, Promot ional, Refresher and Specia lised courses.  Over 2 
lakhs staff and 6000 officers are trained annual ly in 191 training centers (6 for 
gazetted and 185 for non gazetted) spread a ll over the country.  According to 
Ministry a very high priority is given to  training, motivation and morale of the 
railwaymen in general. 
 
  The Railways claim  that a comprehensive training need analysis of all 
categories of staff is being done through series of meetings  with Principals of 
training centre on a regular basis.  Bas ed on the feedback, training modules are 
continuously modified/revised to suit t he training requirement of staff besides 
incorporating courses on new technology a nd better work practices.  Specialised 
courses are conducted as and when required for enhancing skill whenever new 

assets are acquired or new technolog y is adopted or for concentrating on a 
particular aspect of knowledge. 
 
3.3 Some of the steps taken by the Ministry  of Railways in this direction are as 
under :- 
Refresher Courses: Staff are regularly sent for Refresher Courses and 
Safety Camps.  Refresher Courses are conducted once in three years for 
some safety categories.  Safety category staff becoming overdue for 
refresher courses are to be taken off duty,  till such time they complete the 
training.  The importance given to re freshing and updating the knowledge 
of the employees is borne by t he fact that amongst the trainees 
undergoing training in a year, about  40% undergo Refresher Course 
training only. 
 
Crash Courses : From time to time, staff connected with train 
operations are specially screened and those found deficient  are given 
crash courses at training centers. 
 
Simulator aided training for the running staff: Effective training plays 
an important role in improving enginemanship and safety consciousness.  
In order to give a major fillip to the quality of their training Centers. 
 
3.4 During oral evidence, the Chairm an, Railway Board informed that:- 
“We have given lot of thrust to training of our Railway staff and  we 
have made a provision of nearly Rs.220 crore for it in our Corporate 
Safety Plan.” 
 
3.5 He further informed:- 
“We are training nearly two lakhs of our employees every year 
spread over nearly 175 training instit utes.  As regards the type of 
training that we give, we are gi ving both practical and theoretical 
training.  At the  end of  the training course, ther e  is a test system.  
Many trainees  fail also.  So, they are well tested and they have to 
pass that test.  Only then they will be allowed to work. 
 
 Firstly we have courses at all levels.  We have induction 
course, refresher course and advanced promotion course.  There 

are various levels of courses.  They are meant for people at various 
stages.  Running staff has to attend the refresher course 
periodically.  Unless he passes it, he will be taken off from his duty. 
 
 As regards qualified instru ctors, we get competent 
instructors who have good educ ational background and good 
acumen for training.  But at certain places of the training institutions 
people normally do not want to go there, and there we find some 
problem.  But we try to overcome those problems.   We try to get 
competent instructors in these institutes. 
  
We are conducting courses for trainers also.  We are training 
the trainers so that they becom e good trainers.  We are having 
special courses for trainer also.” 
 
3.6 During oral evidence the representativ es of the Railway Unions stated as 
under:- 
“Although training centres exists in  Indian Railways and training is 
given, I feel those modules need further improvement and the 
strategy should be to see that t he worker is updated to meet the 
requirements of the system.  Unfort unately, that type of vision is 
missing today.  So, in this context, an important suggestion is that 
talented people should be inducted as trainers.  If the trainers are 
qualitatively superior and are assigned the responsibility of bringing 
up the skills of each and every wo rker, not only at the induction 
stage but also at the stage of every promotion, naturally efficiency 
would improve.   When efficien cy and quality are improved, so far 
as the human workforce is concerned, the accident rate would 
come down.   The Government had been granting 30  per cent of 
basic pay as training allowance to instructors previously.  
Subsequently, due to economy measures, it has been brought 
down to 15  per  cent.      This needs  to  be  looked  into for at least  

restoring 30 per cent so that ef ficient people co uld be attracted 
because their involvement woul d be an added advantage to the 
training institution of Indian Railways.” 
 
3.7 The Ministry also stated that a separat e unit is being set up for training 
techniques and instructional designs which will be entrusted the job for 
development of lesson plans, training modules, etc.  Funds have also 
been allocated to various training c enters for upgrading the facilities for 
improving the living conditions in t he hostel, providing better messing 
facilities, strengthening the facilities for recreational and cultural activities, 
making good the deficiencies in respect of training aids, as also upgrading 
the Model Rooms with working models, see-though models, etc. 
  
Work Environment 
3.8 To promote devotion, dedication and  sincerity towards duties, Human 
Resource  Development (HRD) Cells ar e proposed to be constituted at Zonal, 
Divisional Headquarters invo lving dynamic and knowledgeable supervisors to 
study:- 
(i) Working habits of ground level staff 
(ii) Factors leading to short cuts 
(iii) To reduce fatigue, minimise monotony and improve safety 
consciousness. 
 
3.9 However, during oral evidence the r epresentatives of t he Railway Unions 
stated:- 
“The ten-hour duty system wa s brought into force in the year 1969.  This 
rule is needed to be reviewed bec ause of various changes.  Today, the 
speed of the train has increased, the load has increased, the number of 
signals has increased, and also the whistl e boards  have increased.  Yet,  
the driver and assistant dr iver are expected  to continuously concentrate 
on the foot plate of the locomotive without diverting his attention even for a 
minute on any other aspect.   He has to  continue like this till he  reaches 
the destination.  On account of this, there is a heavy stress on them.  This 
stress also causes safety hazards.  So, there is a  need  to review the duty 
hours  of  running  staff,  particularly  drivers  and  assistant  drivers.    The 
Justice Miyabhai Tribunal Award was considered by the Ministry of 

Railways in 1969 and orders were issu ed.  At that time, the locomotives 
were of steam and there wa s opportunity for the driver to drink half a cup 
of tea at each halt.  Now, there are no halts.   Ther e has to be total mental 
and physical concentration.  It would be humanly impossible to have such 
a concentration for such long hours.  So, there is an urgent necessity to 
think and revise the duty hours at least on high speed trains like Rajdhani 
and Shatabdi and other super fast express trains.” 
 
3.10 They further stated:-  
 
“In 1973, there was an agitation of lo co running staff in this regard 
and an agreement was reached wit h the Government of India 
because it was approved by Parliam ent.  The Driver must not work 
beyond 10 hours.  It was implemented in  1979 but subsequently, it 
was withdrawn and today a driver is forced to work even 22 or 24 
hours at a stretch.” 
 
3.11 During oral evidence, the C hairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“We have to see that they do not work under stress and strain.  
About 10 hours of duty from rolling on to rolling off and 12 hours of 
duty from signing on to signing off.  We are very strictly monitoring 
this; there are exceptions here and there; but we are monitoring to 
see that this rule is not violated to the extent possible; and we do 
not stress our drivers. 
 There are two categories parti cularly of gangmen and drivers 
which we have to take care of to reduce the stress level, apart from 
the ten hours of duty.”  
 
3.12 Regarding the working hours, t he Chairman, Railway Board further 
stated:- 
“On the issue of drivers performi ng more than ten hours of duty and 
without  power brake certificate, we are very strict because we want to 
contain the stress level of our driver s.  We will like to adhere to the ten-
hour or twelve hour duty rule.   But at  times it may be there that there may 
be emergency or accidents or some ot her unusual and untoward incident 
in connection with train operation that t he driver may be called upon to 

work beyond the duty hours.  So, that is in built in our procedure, but that 
should be as a matter of exception and not as a matter of rule.” 
 
3.13 As regards the Miyab hai Tribunal Award of 1969 there was an agreement 
which was announced on the floor of the H ouse by the then Railway Minister in 
both the Houses of Parliam ent.  Till date, this has not  been strictly implemented.  
There are a number of incidents.  Even in some cases, the running staff have to 
work for more then 14-15 hours.  When asked for reasons for non-
implementation of Miyabhai Award for mo re than 20 years.  The Chairman, 
Railway Board replied:- 
“As regards the Miyabhai Award and t he subsequent practices that we 
have been following thereon, I would like to say that we are trying to follow 
the ten hour and twelve hour duty norm.    It is in consultation with the 
Federations. 
 
In fact, earlier, it was difficult to make the exact  pr ediction/forecast 
about the trains as to when the trains  would  arrive.  It was given an 
intensive examination, an end-to-end exam ination.  It used  to be very 
difficult to foretell as to what would be the time when the train would reach 
and the driver should be called for duty.   With the implementation of the 
Freight Operation Information System (F OIS) we are able to predict when 
the train is going to be there and how much time would it take.  Further the 
maintenance of the rakes has also improved.  We are in a very good 
position to forecast when the train is  going to reach and when the driver 
should be called for duty.  Our communi cation system to call the driver for 
duty has also improved. 
 
We are going in for the crew friendly loco cabs for the drivers.  This 
also came up in the Safety Samvadh that even guards are also over-
stressed and that the type of brake van that we provide to them is very 
inhuman.   So, we are going in for t he crew friendly brake vans also in a 
big way.  We are improving the ambience and the facilities in our brake 
vans.” 
 
3.14 He further submitted that:- 

“We have already identified safety categories.  We have got nearly 
6.5 lakh posts which fall in safe ty categories and the instructions 
have been reiterated that particula rly in respect of the safety 
categories, we should do the job analysis periodically and regularly 
and wherever we feel that wo rking hours are to be changed, 
necessary action should be taken accordingly.   These items are 
discussed by our unions and feder ations also regularly with the 
Administration.  We take care of the same.”   
 
3.15 The Committee were informed that Yoga and Meditation lessons have 
also been introduced in training centres with an aim to help railwaymen in coping 
with the stresses involved with their jobs. 
 
3.16 Regarding rest, Section 133 of t he Railway Act, 1989 provides that a 
railway servant:- 
(a) Whose employment is intensive or  continuous shall, for every week 
commencing on a Sunday, be granted a rest of not less than thirty 
consecutive hours. 
 
(b) Whose employment is essentially intermittent shall, for every week 
commencing on a Sunday, be granted rest of not less than twenty-
four consecutive hours including a full night. 
 
3.17 Working hours of employees in t he Railways vary 42 hours to 72 hours 
per week. The hour of work per week are decided on the basis of job he performs 
and the strain he undergoes while doing his duty. The figures show that 
accidents on account of human failures/erro rs are consistently  reducing year 
after year.  Railway Administration is fully aware of the benefits drawn by 
providing comfortable living and proper working conditions to the staff and efforts 
in the direction are still on.” 
  

 
Crew friendly cab for locomotives 
3.18 An ergonomic design of loco cab has been developed to provide easy 
approach to various control handles/buttons .  Providing new features will ensure 
fatigue-free driving for long hours. 
 
3.19 During oral evidence, the Chairm an, Railway Board informed that:- 
“In the running train wher e next stop comes, the dr iver goes to the next 
coach and try to help himself.  We had gone into various modifications in 
our loco cab; making it more crew fr iendly, more from the point view of 
urbanism.  We want to make it more  compact and handy for the crew and 
these changes we had alr eady started effecting in  the new locos.  As 
regards this toilet facility in the cab, we have to take a final view.  Very 
recently, we had organised an exhibiti on  wherein certain foreign railways 
participated.  They had also made a provision of small toilet.” 
 
Upgradation of Running Rooms 
3.20 Running rooms should be pr ovided with certain basic amenities like clean 
toilet facilities, safe drinking water, pr oper ventilation, desert coolers, subsidized 
meals, etc.  According to the Ministry of Railways all the new running rooms 
would be built with improv ed layout and proper amenities.  The existing running 
rooms are being upgraded on an urgent basis.   
 
3.21 However, during oral evidence the r epresentatives of t he Railway Unions 
informed that:- 
“Category staff people, away from their homes, work for three or four days 
also at times.  Sometimes, people do not come.  They should have a 
proper place to stay.  Rules have been framed.    Sanctions have been 
given at some place and good arrangem ents have been done.   Except in 
a few cases, improvements have been do ne.  Improvement is required in 
the working condition of the running staff.” 

 
Upgradation of crew lobbies 
3.22 Crew lobbies also need to be upgraded by prov iding basic amenities, 
facility for proper display of various in structions, computer and software package 
for proper booking of crew and ensuring adequate rest for running staff. 
  
Recruitment 
3.23 In the Budget Speech the Railway Mi nister declared that 20000 vacancies 
in Group ‘D’ category and 3500 vacancie s in Railway Protection Force as 
constables would be filled up in Safety category during the year 2003-04 . 
 
3.24 Indian Railways are a dynamic organi sation, continua lly expanding its 
infrastructure by way of construction of ne w lines, doubling of lines, electrification 
of routes etc. apart from considerably increasing passenger and goods  services 
every year.   The Ministry have stated t hat safety category staff vacancies are 
filled up on priority basis. 
 
3.25 During the oral evidence, the Chai rman, Railway Board apprised the 
Committee:- 
“We have got the vacancies because we  had been introducing new trains.  
After introduction of the trains, we were having the process of creation of 
posts and filling up of posts.  So, last  year we have taken a decision that 
whenever we declare any new trains , immediately the posts will be 
automatically created like the running staff.  In the six monthly review, the 
posts will be automatically created and they will be  filled up.  So far as 
filling up of vacancies is concerned, we are going for an all out drive for 
this.” 
 
3.26 Hence, there is need for more and more staff in the field commensurate 
with the increase in infrastruc ture so that the basic g oal of Railways of serving 
the national  economy, providing better customer services and meeting needs of 
safety is not compromised.  In view of the above, should the rigid rightsizing 
policy in the government organisations of filling only 1% of the posts against 3% 
retirements every year, be made applicable  across all disciplines of Indian 
Railways and its field units.  Similarly,  Railway Protection Force and Railway 
Protection Special Force, which are combative forces, should be treated similar 

to the other combative forces of t he Government, which are exempt from 
rightsizing. 
 
Right Sizing of Man Power 
3.27 Since 1990s, Railways have been follo wing the policy of rightsizing   
manpower.  During this exercise, railways have succeeded in bringing down their 
staff strength from 18.07 lakhs in 1990 to 15.10 lakhs in 2002, a reduction of 
almost 3 lakhs in 12 years. 
 
3.28 As per the replies given by the repres entatives of the Railway Union in this 
regard:- 
“Railway Ministry are adopting the policy of right sizing of manpower duly 
down sizing the work force without ma king realistic study of the staff 
requirement, condition of assets, work  environment, facility of discharging 
duties efficiently etc.  The infrastructure  i.e. New Lines, Doubling of Lines, 
Electrification etc.,  are being  expanded without providing adequate 
manpower and other requirements.  Wh ile the Passenger/goods services 
are increased every year corresponding infrastructure and work force are 
not being provided.  These unrealisti c measures are causing heavy strain 
on the staff and also telling upon the efficiency of the system in general. 
 
The Ministry of Railway are adopting the policy of so-called 
rightsizing, but in fact it is downsiz ing.  The downsizin g is continuing 
despite addition of over 250 freight an d 50 passenger trains in a year.  
Such new trains are added to the syst em without any increase in the 
manpower or providing infrastructure for the maintenance of rakes.  There 
has also been an increase in the workload because of doubling of the 
lines and more number of routes ar e electrified, yet there has been no 
increase in the manpower.” 
 
3.29 They further informed that:- 
“It is happening because of surrenderin g of posts.  Posts are being 
surrendered in order to show the ec onomy.  Posts ar e being surrendered 
because of competition among officers as to which DRM surrenders more 
posts.  The competition is so serious that officers surrender lots of post 
and go away.  After that to create the post is a problem. 

 
Not only this, if a section is transferred from one division to other, 
posts in the portion of the division which is going  to other division are 
being surrendered and when other man ta kes over he will say that before  
he has joined these posts had been surrendered.” 
 
3.30 Further more:- 
“The Railway Ministry has now framed a new concept of 
benchmarking.  It is called Indian Ra ilways Bench Marking (IRBM).   
The factors like working conditi on, condition of loco-sheds or 
wagons, age of the locomotives whet her they are new or old, work 
culture, etc. are not taken into account.  It is not a scientific concept 
of benchmarking.  Efficiency  depends upon the availability of 
materials and machines, layout and infrastructure.  Suppose, in 
some place infrastructure is not modern and is not up to the 
expected standard, there definitely more manpower will be needed.  
So, without looking into all these fa cts, this is done just for the 
purpose of surrendering.” 
 
Retirement Scheme 
3.31 The Chairman, Railway Board during the oral evidence stated:- 
“For the gangmen and drivers categor y, we have gone in for safety 
related retirement scheme.  This has again come out of the Safety 
Samvadh and this is under implementat ion in its first phase.  The 
applications have come and we ar e scrutinizing them.  We are 
hopeful that this should be a popular scheme.” 
 
 He further added:- 
“The scheme in phases starting from  the stage of the staff seeking 
retirement at the age of 57 years firs t.  If we allow it right from 50 to 
57 at a time there will be a sudden s purt in vacancies.  After talking 
with the federation we have arrived at a compromised formula and 
we are going phase-wise.” 

 
Mode of Payment 
3.32 While deliberating upon t he mode of payment of salaries to all the 
categories of staff, including Group ‘D’ cate gory, by cheque, the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railways informed that:- 
“We have received instructions fr om the RBI and CVC that payment 
should be made by cheque, not only payment to staff but payment to other 
contractors etc. also.  Whatever payments are m ade, we should make it 
by cheque.  This was to be implemented by 31 st December, 2004.  After  
going into the total details we find t hat it is not possible to do it one 
hundred percent.  So, we have issued instructions that wherever this 
facility is not available, paym ent through cheque will not be made….. 
Definitely it is not being made compulsory for gangmen.” 

 
 CHAPTER –IV 
FUNDING OF SAFETY RELATED WORKS 
 
4.1 Till 2000-01, budget allocations for sa fety related works were funded from 
the Depreciation Reserve Fund and Deve lopment Fund, which are financed from 
internal resources, and the Railway Safe ty Fund, which is funded from the 
Railway’s share of the diesel cess.  From 2001-02 a Special Railway Safety Fund 
was constituted and safety related wor ks are also being financed through this 
fund. 
 
Depreciation Reserve Fund(DRF) and Development Fund(DF) 
4.2 Indian Railways for long hav e, had a system for funding 
replacement/renewal of its overaged assets.  This has been done through the 
“Depreciation Reserve Fund” (DRF), created for this specific purpose.   Annual 
need based contributions are made to th is fund from Railway revenues.  
Investments of developmental nature, as also on safety related projects have 
been done through the “Development Fund.”  Both these funds are sourced from 
internal generation of resources.  While DRF is essentially for replacement and 
renewals, Development Fund is  to meet the expenditure on safety related other 
works such as track circuiting, interlocking of level crossings, provision of lifting 
barriers, Foot over Bridges etc. 
 
4.3 Indian Railways have been spending s ubstantial amounts every year on 
safety related works basically pertaining to replacement, and renewal of critical 
assets of tracks and bridges. Railways ha ve also been constructing road over 
and under bridges at busy level crossings, and has undertaken the manning of 
level crossing at certain others. Apart from this, there has been upgradation of 
maintenance facilities at workshops or iented towards improved safety of plant 
and equipment. 
 
4.4 The Committee observed that by track renewal, Railways increase the 
carrying capacity of freight as well as passengers.   Increase in the percentage of 
growth in the traffic is more than 500 or 600, and in case of freight traffic the  
increase is more than 400 and 500 even with the existing over-aged assets and 
the  existing average speed limit.  By r eplacing over-aged assets Railways could 
have increased capacity and thereby incr eased internal generation.    When 

asked about the reasons for not properly  planning better utilization of assets 
replacing overaged assets so as to achiev e growth in traffic and in turn enhance 
internal generation.  
 
4.5 The Chairman, Railway Board explained:-   
“Nearly four-five years back, we were in a very tight situation.  We worked  
virtually at the operating ratio of 98 per cent.  With the operating ratio of 98 
per cent, there could not be any internal  generation. We have to cater to 
not only Depreciation Reserve Fund,  but also to Pension Fund and 
Development Fund.  Development Fund takes care of staff amenities, 
passenger amenities and traffic operatio nal efficiency works.  It is the 
prioritisation that we have to do.  As on 01.04.2001 our kitty in the  
Depreciation Reserve Fund was only  Rs .78 crore.   However, in 2003-04, 
the operating ratio is 92.1 per cent.  So, even after recouping all our 
Railway funds, by the end of the current  financial year we  will have more 
than 4600 crore rupees in  the Railway funds.  Particularly in the 
Depreciation  Reserve Fund, we wi ll be having  more than 2600 crore 
rupees.  Indian Railways have adopted a right  strategy.  This year also we 
are expecting an operating ratio definitel y somewhere around  92.  We  
are in a position to ensure that we are able to meet our annual arising of 
the replacement of over-aged assets with the funds of DRF.  The arrears 
in any case we are getting wiped out by Special Railway Safety Fund.” 
 
Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) 
4.6 Since the early nineties, the Railwa ys have not been able to provide fully 
for the depreciation needs due to severe  financial constraints.   The steep 
increase in the working expenses of the Ra ilways resulted, in an erosion of the 
Railways’ capacity to generate investible surpluses.  The railways had to even  
resort to drawing down fr om the balances of the DRF  to enable minimal plan 
outlays.  Consequently, there was an a ccumulation of overaged assets awaiting 
renewals.  In the wake of this, the Ra ilways Safety Review Committee (RSRC) 
recommended the grant of Rs.15000 crores to the Railways for wiping out the 
accumulated arrears of the replacement  and renewals of the safety related 
assets. 
 
 

4.7 Railway Safety Review Committee-1998, in  Part-I of their report identified 
the following arrears of asset renewal as on 01.04.99. 
Arrears of Track Renewals (BG) - 12,260 Kms. 
Distressed Bridges   - 262 Nos. 
Overaged Signalling Gears - 1,560 Stations 
Overaged Coaches (BG)  - 1,322 Vehicle Units 
Overaged Wagons (BG)  - 34,000 (in terms of  
     4-wheeler units) 
 
4.8 On the basis of RSRC’s recommendation,  a one time grant for renewal of 
these overaged assets was sought by the Mi nistry of Railways, on account of its 
inability to provide such a large quantum of  funds from within its own resources.  
A non-lapsable  Special Railway Safety Fu nd of Rs. 17000 crore was created to 
expedite the works of renewal/ replacem ent of overaged safety related assets 
within a time frame of six fiscal years.  It was decided that this fund would be 
funded through two sources viz. (i) Railwa ys’ contribution through the levy of 
‘safety surcharge’ on passenger traffi c and (ii) through additional financial 
assistance to be given by the Ministry of Finance.  The am ount so provided 
would be Rs.5000 crores and Rs.12000 crores, respectively.  The surcharge has 
been in place since 01.10.2001. 
 
4.9 The Special Railway Safety Fund t hat has been set up in 2001-02, is to 
receive funds to the tune of Rs.17,000 cror es over a six year time frame.  The 
proposed utilization of this amount over the six year period is as given below:- 
 
Item Expenditure proposed out of Total 
SRSF over six financial years  
(Rs. in crore) 
Track Renewals 7670 
Bridge Works 1722 
Signalling & Tele 
Communication 
3103 
Rolling Stock  3359 
Safety Enhancement 1146 
Total 17000 
  

 
4.10 The Ministry of Railways received Rs.1350 crores from the General 
Exchequer towards Special Railway Safety Fund for 2002-03.  The Ministry of 
Railways own contribution towards SR SF during the year was Rs.1136.32 
crores.   The total ex penditure on works under SRSF during 2002-03 was 
Rs.2486.31 crores.   
 
 During 2003-04, Ministry of Railwa ys received Rs. 1600 crores from the 
General Exchequer towards Special Ra ilway Safety Fund.  Railways own 
contribution towards SRSF was Rs.983.78  crores.  The total expenditure on 
works under SRSF during 2003-04 was Rs.2583.78 crores. 
  
The expenditure incurred during 2002-03 & 2003-04 under various SRSF 
related Plan-heads is as under:- 
 
Item Expenditure 
 2002-03 2003-04 
Track Renewals 2006.67 1934.90 
Bridge Works   151.61   157.27 
Rolling Stock   321.95  306.13 
Signal & Telecom   353.40  493.39 
Other Elec. Works       0.03      0.27 
Machinery & Plant       3.17    16.75 
Other specified works Nil      0.05 
Total Gross 2836.84         2917.76 
Credits  -350.53 -333.98 
Total Net 2486.31         2583.78 
  
 The Planning of inputs of material required for execution of works is 
possible only after the allocations in that  particular year are known, and follows 
the presentation of the annual Railway Budget.   Further, physical progress 
depends on the availability of working season, which varies from region to region.  
Physical output and expend iture in the first half of the year may not be 
proportional. 
 
  
 

 
Unlike the Revenue Expenditure, ther e is no targeted expenditure for the 
works, though every effort is made to utilize the funds in an even manner. 
 
4.11 During oral evidence, the Chai rman, Railway Board apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
“This is the fourth financial year running .  At the beginning of this financial 
year, we had completed ne arly 9,000 kms. of tra ck renewals against the  
arrears which was envis aged in October, 2001 as  16,500 kms and by the 
end of this financial year, we will be completing nearly 11,500 track kms. 
of the track renewals.  As regards t he bridges, in October, 2001 there was 
an arrear of  2,700 bridges and till the beginning of this financial year we 
had completed 1,305 bridges and by the end of this financial year, we will 
be completing 1,700 bridges in total.  Similar is the satisfactory 
performance in the case of signal and telecom gears and the rolling 
stock.” 
 
Railway Safety Fund 
4.12 A Railway Safety Fund has been created from 01.04.2001 for financing 
works related to manning of unmanned le vel crossing and for construction of 
ROBs/RUBs at busy level crossings.  This fund is financ ed mainly through 
receipts from Central Road Fund, which is funded by levying of cess of Rs.1 per 
litre on diesel and petrol.  Railways get 12 ½ % of entire petrol cess and 6 ¼ % of 
entire diesel cess.  Two separate plan-heads, viz. Ro ad Safety Works-LCs and 
Road Safety Works-ROBs/RUB have bee n created in 2000-01  for booking of 
expenditure relating to these works.   The total Railway Safety Fund in the 
Annual Plan for 2003-04 is Rs.433 crore.   For the Annual Plan 2003-04 the 
outlay for Road Safety works – LCs is Rs. 313.00 crore while that for Road safety 
works ROB/RUB in Rs.120.00. 
 
4.13. If all unmanned level crossings are to be manned, Railways require 
approximately Rs.2450 crore as Capital cost to man them and approximately 
Rs.700 crore per annum will be required to meet the ma intenance and operation 
cost.  The cost of manning with interlock ed signals will be around Rs.5500 crore.  
However, to eliminate probability of any accident at manned and unmanned level 

crossings, construction of Road over bridges and Road under bridges may be 
envisaged, but it will involve staggering amount of Rs.4,00,000 crore. 
 
4.14 A Railway Safety Fund was created for financing works related to manning 
of unmanned level crossings and for constr uctions of ROBs/RUBs at busy level 
crossings.  This fund is financed mainly through receipts from Central Road 
Fund, which is funded by levying of cess of  Rs.1 per litre  on diesel and petrol.  
Railways get 12 ½ % of entire petrol cess and 6 ¼ % of entire diesel cess.  Two 
separate plan-heads, viz. Road Safety  Works-LCs ad Road Safety Works-
ROBs/RUB have been created in 2000-01 for booking of expendit ure relating to 
these works. 
 
4.15 To reduce accidents at busy manned level crossings, Indian Railway have 
been building Road Over-bridges/Under-bridges.  In the last five years, 87 
ROBs/RUBs have been constructed at an overall cost of Rs.222 crore.  Similarly, 
Indian Railways have manned 490 unprotected level crossings at an overall cost 
of Rs.49 crore (approx.), during the last five years. 
 
4.16 During oral evidence the Chairman Railway Board stated that:- 
“If you take diesel cess, then what happens is that 50 per cent of the 
diesel cess straightway goes for ru ral development.  Of the remaining 50 
per cent, we are getting only 12.5 per cent, but only 6.25 per cent comes 
to us.  This is a very small percentage.   In case of at least one lakh level 
crossings we should go in for repl acement.  My submission to the 
esteemed Committee will be that we  should insist upon the State 
Governments to come forward so that we are able to do that.  Actually 
what is happening is that we hav e got nearly 19,200 level crossing, 
around 20,000 level crossing that ar e unmanned.  Out of the 16,500 
manned level crossing we have got ar ound 1250 level crossing where the 
DUV is more than one lakh.  These more than 1200 level crossings would 
have to be replaced.  Ther e is no other choice.  I would like to submit to 
the Committee that we should go in for replacement.  We should insist 
upon the State Governments that this is a small amount of money.” 
   

 
CHAPTER – V 
 
Modernisation & Maintenance of Safety Assets  
 
Track Circuiting  
 
 5.1 Committees are formed from time to time to examine various aspects of 
safety.  The Sikri Committee constitut ed in 1968 had specif ically recommended 
for track-circuiting.   Asked about the recommendations made by the Sikri 
Committee 30-40 years back in regard to track circuiting in all important sections, 
important stations. The Committee observed that because of non-implementation 
of certain recommendations lik e providing track circuiting  from fouling mark to 
fouling mark, accidents had taken place.    
 
5.2 While elaborating upon this the Chairman Railway Board, informed that:- 
“The track circuiting is required to cover more than a lakh of 
kilometers of track.  We can broadl y divide track circuiting  into two 
parts – track circuiting at statio ns and through track circuiting or 
continuous track circuiting.  Track circuiting at stations is further sub 
divided into several parts e.g. fou ling mark to fouling mark.  When 
we started with Sikri Commi ttee, priority was felt that at least let us 
do it fouling mark to fouling mark.  It was also looked  into as to  
which stations we should cover first because there are various 
types of stations – A, B, C, D and E – depending upon traffic 
density and all that.  Then, depending upon the station location, it is 
from home signal to the fouling ma rk and then from fouling mark to 
the advance starter and then the point  zone where the turnouts are 
located.  On this, there was an expert committee in the Railways 
and we went into prioritisation of this.  
 
5.3 He further informed that:- 
“We have already covered A, B, C and D stations so far as fouling 
mark to fouling mark track circ uiting is concerned.  As regards 
remaining locations of track circuiti ng at various stations, it is in 
various stages and our plan is that in the next four years, we will try 
to complete the station locations covering A, B and C stations.  As 
regards continuous track circuiting, we have already envisaged it in 

our Corporate Safety Plan and sanctioned 2,000 route kilometers of 
continuous track circuiting at the cost of nearly Rs. 425 crore. 
 In the Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) we have also mentioned 
that, in the coming years, we  will cover another 2,000 route 
kilometers for the continuous track circuiting at approximately same 
cost. 
 About track circuiting, it is not the only safety item.  There 
are innumerable other items also.  We have to prioritize the safety 
works.  We try to mobilize enough funds or resources, and we have 
done it in this case also.  Now, I can say that the progress in this 
field is fairly  good and satisfactory.” 
 
5.4 Further more:– 
“resource crunch has been the basic cause for not proceeding with 
these identified safety items like tr ack circuiting or renewal of the  
over-aged assets in the last three or four decades.  As regards the 
replacement of over-aged assets, we  had been strugglin g to do it.  
It is because both these works, nam ely, the replacement of over-
aged assets – which used to be c harged to the  Depreciation 
Reserve Fund – and the track circuiting works – which used to be  
charged to the Development Fund – are funds, which were to be 
funded from  the  internal generation itself……... internal generation 
over the past few years had been limited. 
   
As on date, the work is in pr ogress in 930 locations, and  we 
have already given the target of 2008-2009. It is because we have  
now got adequate funds for the r eplacement of the over-aged 
assets, and it would  also take care of some safety enhancement 
works.  Now, with Rs.17,000 crore for SRSF, we are in a position to 
take care of our safety items. 
  
In the CSP, we have also ment ioned that the track circuiting 
at stations would be carried out at another, 1,072 locations, in 
addition to these 930 locations.  We have documented in the CSP 
that we will be completing all thes e works in 9 years from now, and 

for the A, B and C category stations  we are trying to cover them by 
2008-2009.    
 
Track Maintenance  
 
5.5 Railway track is the backbone of the railway system.  Keeping railway 
track in a satisfactory stat e of maintenance, is consi dered by Railways as a very 
vital ingredient for ensuring safety.  To wards this objective, there is a well-
established system of inspection of railway track in as much as, every inch of 
track is inspected by a trained personnel ev eryday, be it a holiday or otherwise.  
There is a daily inspection of track by ke y-man who covers his beat on foot twice 
(to and fro). 
 
5.6 In addition to manual inspection, tra ck defects are also being observed by 
way of Recording Track Geometry periodi cally.  Mechanical and electronic Track 
Recording Cars are utilized depending up on the importance of  the Route i.e. 
Rajdhani and Shatabdi  route, A, B, C etc. and t he frequency for track recording 
has been specified.  To measure the riding quality of track, Oscillations are also 
recorded at specified intervals. 
 
5.7 Repair and maintenance of Rai lway track is an ongoing process. 
Maintenance works are carried out r egularly depending upon the need.  For 
ensuring safety of traffic, track is ins pected regularly and corrective action taken 
promptly wherever required.   
 
5.8 However, safety is ensured at all levels and at all times and the 
Permanent Way Supervisors are authorized to impose speed restriction as 
warranted, without any reference to their supervisors. 
  
5.9 Renewal of track is also ca rried out on age-cum-condition basis, 
depending upon availability of funds.  In certain cases, the maximum permissible 
speed of a section, is also reduced if the conditions so warrant. 
 
5.10 For detection of hidden flaws in ra ils/welds adequate number of self 
propelled unlra sonic flaw detectors have been procured. 
 

5.11 The Ministry in their wr itten replies stated that ex ecution of track renewal 
works.  Especially overdue stretches, has  got an increased emphasis with the 
setting up of Special Railwa y Safety Fund (SRSF) duri ng 2001-02, as is evident 
from the figures given below: 
 
Year Expenditure 
(Rs. in cr) 
Achievement 
(Track Km.  
In CTR Units) 
Remarks 
99-00 2042.00 3006 DRF 
00-01 2244.65 3250 DRF 
01-02 2475.32 3620 DRF+SRSF 
02-03            3298 4776 DRF+SRSF 
03-04            3370 
        (Budget) 
4986 DRF+SRSF 
04-05  4125 
(Target) 
DRF+SRSF 
04-05  1642 
(Upto Aug 04) 
DRF+SRSF 
 
5.12 During oral evidence Chairman,  Railway Board, submitted: 
”We use to a routine, rudimentary way of maintaining of tracks.  We 
have gone in a big way for mechanization.  Now tracks are 
maintained with the help of machi nes.  This has reduced the stress 
level.  Accidents on account of human failure have, therefore, gone 
down.  As mentioned the acci dents on account of human failure 
which used to be 66 per cent a few years back, has been reduced 
to 53 per cent.” 
 
5.13 He further added: 
“We have got different track structures.  It may be 60 Kg./m rail with 
90 UTS.  For all these various tr ack structures so far as age is 
concerned, some GMT has been prescribed.   GMT means Gross 
Million Tonne.  For example age of 60 Kg 90 UTS track is 800 
GMT.  Suppose annual traffic is 30 GMT for a given section.  Then 
it may read renewal in approximat ely 30 years.  In normal course 
we do not merely go by the age.   We have a system of regular 
inspection. Renewal may be on c ondition basis also.  May be, a 
track in 27 years may still be okay and we continue with it or it may 
require renewal very earlier on condition basis.  So, it is condition 
on age basis for renewal because t here are different situations.  

There may be high wear and tear on curves, or in coastal area 
corrosion is high.  So, it is based on the situation and the condition 
is also kept into consideration.  
 
Bridges 
5.14 Regarding bridges, age is not the crit eria for rebuilding/rehabilitation of 
bridges.  The number of fact ors affecting the life of a railway bridge being very 
large, it is not practicable to predict its precise life.  The sudden failure of bridges 
is very rare and therefore, on Indian Railways the replacements have been done 
on the basis of:- 
(i) Visible signs of distress in the form of cracks in the 
masonry/concrete or corrosion in the steel components. 
(ii) On account of obsolescence i.e.  the old stone slab or rail cluster 
bridges, early steel girders, screw pile bridges etc. 
(iii) When they are found inadeq uate for heavier axle loads i.e. 
overstressing becomes beyond laid down limits. 
 
However, safety is ensured at all ti mes and suitable speed restrictions are 
imposed or traffic even stopped, if warrant ed, on noticing any signs of distress 
during bridge inspections or even during any other routine inspection of track.  
The speed restrictions are imposed even by  lower grade supervisors in view of 
safety for which they need not wait for prior approval of higher authorities.  Bridge 
rebuilding/rehabilitation is an continuous process. 
 
5.15  The Ministry of Railways have stated that  there is no codal life  prescribed  
for bridges from the point of view of th eir replacement.   A number of factors 
affect the life of railway bri dge and it is not practicable to  predict its life precisely.  
Therefore,  life  of  bridge  is  not  dependent   mere  on Its  age,  but  also  on the  

physical condition.  Howeve r, the following steps have been taken in this regard 
to maintain all bridges in safe condition:- 
(i) A rigorous schedule of inspection of  bridges by various officials as 
laid down in the codes for inspection of bridges is followed. 
(ii) As a result of inspection undert aken, rebuilding/rehabilitation of 
bridges is carried out on programmed basis. 
(iii) Wherever required speed restrict ions are imposed on bridges till 
the rehabilitation/rebuilding is undertaken. 
(iv) The frequency of inspection of  distressed bridges is increased 
suitably as laid down in Bridges Manual. 
(v) Frequency of inspection of floor system of early steel bridges of 
once a year is being adhered to. 
(vi) Suitable speed restrictions hav e been imposed on all the cast iron 
pile bridges till they are rebuilt.  All the 105 cast iron pile bridges 
have been sanctioned for rebuilding. 
(vii) Guidelines have been issued for underwater inspection of bridges 
and work has started on some of the bridges. 
(viii) Guidelines have been issued for the assessment of residual fatigue 
life of steel structures. 
(ix) A talk force has been set up to further study the systems of bridge 
inspections and management, underwater inspection for bridges & 
training of bridge engineers abroad.   Action is being taken to 
upgrade and modernize the system s of inspection and 
management for bridges as well as training of Indian Railway 
Bridge Engineers and Inspecto rs in India and abroad on a 
continuous basis so that the latest  techniques of non-destructive 
evaluation of bridges, under water inspection of bridges, residual 
life assessment of bridges a nd bridges and bridge management 
shall be implemented effectively. 
(x) During the IX Plan period Rs.410 crore. Were spent for 
rebuilding/strengthening of 3400 bridges. 
(xi) Outlays for bridge rehabilitatio n/rebuilding have been increased 
substantially.  Rs.1530 crore has been earmarked for 
rehabilitation/rebuilding of bridges out of Special Railway Safety 
Fund during the period 2001-02 to 2006-07. 
 

5.16 As on 01.04.2004, there are 228 dist ressed  bridges on Indian Railways, 
all of which have been sanctioned for rehabilit ation/rebuilding.  Out of these, 169 
distressed bridges are targeted for rehabili tation/rebuilding for the year 2004-05.  
The details of distressed bridges rebuilt/rehabilitated since 1996 are as under:- 
 
Year No. of distressed bridges rebuilt/rehabilated 
1996-1997 89 
1997-1998 73 
1998-1999 104 
1999-2000 190 
2000-2001 134 
2001-2002 116 
2002-2003 343 
2003-2004 175 
2004-2005 169 (Targetted) 
 
 
5.17 During the evidence Chairman,  Railway Board emphasized: 
“All over the world nobody has determined the age…….  I have 
seen some of the bridges of 170 years old abroad quite okay……  
we have some codal life of bridges based on which we allocate 
funds under DRF…..  We have got nearly more than a lakh of 
bridges.  Many bridges are more than 100 years old.  Age is merely 
not a criterion for the replacemen t.  Many bridges, which are more 
than 100 years old, are in sound c ondition.  We have laid down a 
system of inspection of bridges.  they are inspected every year and 
during inspection if we come to know that there are some 
distressed bridges – which means bridges which show the sign of 
deterioration of physical condition – the frequency of inspection is 
increased.  Not only frequency is increased they are kept under 
rigorous watch.  If need be we impose speed restrictions.  Lately 
we have gone for the latest state of  art techniques for managing of 
bridges. we have gone for bridge management system, 
determination techniques for fatigue life and residual life of the 
bridges.  This is the latest state of art technique being followed all 

over the world.  We have impor ted techniques for under-water 
inspection of the bridges, integr ated testing of the bridges, non 
destructive testing, mapping of  unknown foundations techniques, 
etc.  A number of techniques have been adopted.   This determines 
the life of the bridge.  We will actually come to know the residual life 
of a bridge.  We have now tech niques which can determine that a 
bridge which may be 100 years old still may have the residual life of 
so many years.  We are following these techniques.     
 
Installation of Safety Devices  
5.18 Introduction of modern si gnaling system is not only promoting safety and 
minimizing the impact of human error in train operati on but also enhancing line 
capacity.  Technical back up support to the drivers has become essential with 
increasing demands of traffic due to speed of trains, congestion on routes etc.   
 
Role of RDSO to enhance Safety 
5.19 Research, Design and Standards Organisation (RDSO)  which is the 
research and design wing of Indian Ra ilways, has been making significant 
contribution in improving the safety of  train operations and maintenance.  Some 
of the major safety projects, being pursu ed by RDSO include developing Centre 
Buffer Coupler (CBC) for coaches with anti-c limbing features, digital axle counter 
using multiplexes, end of train telemetr y system, solid state interlocking system, 
in-cab signalling and modern train protection system etc. 
 
5.20 RDSO is spearheading its research in  developing Wheel Flat Detector, 
which facilitates timely action for detachment of rolling stock after getting 
information regarding wheel flats, theft-proof ‘elastic rail clips’, track friendly 
wagon bogie, derailment detection device,  and design development of detection 
system of overloading wagons etc. 
 
5.21 At present, RDSO is seized of whee l impact load detector, crashworthy 
coach design, prevention of rock falls in cuttings, datalogger for Ultra Sonic Flaw 
Detection (USFD) machines, development of track side bogie monitoring system, 
development of test-track facility, dev elopment of measuring wheel technology 
etc.  Technology mission on railway safety  is being launched in association with 
IIT/Kanpur and Department of science of Technology (Ministry of HRD) to tackle 

some burning issues like wheel flat detec tion, problem of visibility during foggy 
weather etc. 
 
5.22  The Ministry of Railways stated that the officers from RDSO also carry out 
studies  on the defects or flaws in rails/track. 
 
Anti Collision Device 
5.23 In order to prevent collisions at high speeds on Indian Railways, an Anti- 
Collision Device (ACD) – called “Rak sha Kavach’ has been indigenously 
developed by Konkan Railway Corporation Limited (KRCL).  The system consists 
of a network of micro processor based communication devices for preventing 
collisions at high speeds which may resu lt in loss of human li ves.  The system 
works on a satellite based Global Positi oning System (GPS) and deviation count 
principle for identification of track layo ut automatic speed control and braking 
features on the locomotives.  This radio based device, when installed on 
locomotives, brake-vans, stations and level crossing gates, is expected to 
provide protection to train drivers, gat eman and road users against collisions, 
train parting etc. 
  
5.24 Decision on provision of Anti Collision Devices (ACDs) would be taken 
based on the successful results of the ext ended field trials in Katihar division,  
Balli-Madgaon-Verna secti on Jallandhar Amritsar section Vishakhapatnam-
Vigayawada section.  Work of radio a nd route survey for 750 Kilometers of 
electrified route on Souther n Railway and 750 kilometers of non-electrified route 
on South Central Railways has also been sanctioned. 
 
5.25 During oral evidence the Chairman Railway Board informed that - 
“We have sanctioned nearly  3,500 kilometers of ACD, out of which 
1,730 kilometers are r oughly in the NF Railwa y and the balance in 
the Northern, Southern, Sout h-Central and South-Western 
Railways.  In Northern Railway,  we had conducted the extensive 
field trial on ACD on the Amritsar-J alandhar section.  After that, we 
took a decision to go on a commercial scale on the NF Railway.  
The work is going on well and would be completed in the current 
financial year.  We would come to know of the teething problems.  
They would be incorporated and m odifications in specifications, 

changes in procedures or changes in design, if required, would be 
effected.    In the meanwhile, we  would keep everyt hing ready.  All 
the detailed estimates wo uld be kept in readine ss.  Once we have 
learnt of the problems in the NF Railways, we would commence the 
work on the other four Railways.” 
  
Auxiliary Warning System 
5.26 Auxiliary Warning System (AWS) has be en installed to the extent of over 
599 track Kms.  Automatic Train Protecti on and Warning System is an aid, which 
provides audiovisual warning to the driver and prevent him from passing signals 
at danger.  Presently, an AWS is working on Mumbai suburban area of Western 
and Central Railways.  AWS on 128 kms st retch of Southern  Railway is in 
progress. 
 
Automatic Block Signaling and continuous track circuiting 
5.27  Automatic Block Signaling  is permissive signaling system and permits 
sending of more than one train between two stations with safety and speed, thus, 
optimising utilisation of existi ng assets.  It also provides better safety at level 
crossing gates.  Automatic Block signal ling is functional on 1375 route kms.  
Works measuring 2000 Route Kms. of Automatic Blo ck Signaling, with features 
of continuous track circuiting, hav e been proposed with a view to detect 
discontinuity in rails, caused by rail fractures, and acts of vandalism/sabotage. 
 
Block proving by axle counter 
5.28 This is a device to pr event collision in the mid-section has been made 
functional over 200 stations.  Works ar e in progress at mo re than 1000 block 
sections.  Further, the devic e is being integrat ed into panels to be installed as 
part of modernization and replacement of signaling installations.  A set of axle 
counters placed at two ends of a portion of track, count-in and count-out the 
number of axles of a train respectively.  A zero resultant count indicates, by 
inference that the portion of the track is clear.  Indian Railway have started using 
modern systems equipped with digital technol ogy, offering high immunity to 
interference and high reliability. 
 
Improved Interlocking Technology 

5.29 Mechanical and electrical lever frames in cabins are being replaced 
gradually by panel interlocki ng and solid state interl ocking with centralised 
operation of points and si gnals, thereby reducing dependence on the human 
efforts.  There is a quantum jump in  relay based panel interlocked stations 
replacing Cabin operated mechanical si gnaling system.  It has gone up to 2500 
stations from 1000 stations  during the last decade.  Route Relay Interlocked 
stations have jumped from 123 stations to 229 stations in the same period. 
 
Solid State Interlocking  
5.30 With the development of electronic/solid state technology, the use of such 
devices in signal and interlocking installations has also been adopted.  It employs 
microprocessors and software for interlocking functions, providing a high level of 
reliability, availability and safety.  The system has a built-in data logging facility 
for effective off line failure and operational analysis. 
 
Walkie-Talkie Sets to Crews 
5.31 As an interim measures prior to in troduction and prolif eration of MTRC 
(Mobile Train Radio Communication), 5 W Walkie-Talkie sets have been 
provided to drivers and guards of all the trains for comm unication in static mode 
or at low speeds.  Besides, 25W VHF sets  have also been prov ided at stations 
on Broad Gauge Double Line/Multiple Line se ctions so that train crew can 
communicate with the nearest station mast ers in the case of emergencies.  
Approximately 26,000 walkie -talkie sets to drivers and guards and 2,200 sets of 
25 W VHF sets to station staff have been provided. 
 
Mobile Train Radio Communication 
5.32 Mobile Train Radio Communication (MT RC) is the modern and state-of-art 
means of communication wherein Driver/Gu ard of a train can communicate with 
the Station Master or Section controlle r or any other maintenance/operational 
functionary in stationary or  mobile mode.  This is duplex communication wherein 
both the parties can talk simultaneously.  The works for provision of MTRC have 
been sanctioned on 2,415 km.  It will be GSM-R based MTRC system with digital 
technology, as being used by cellular networks worldwide. 
 
Overhead Alignment 

5.33 Indian Railways are having 42000 route km of overhead alignment on 
which train control and block circuits are wo rking,  Considering its many inherent 
constraints, it has been decided to r eplace overhead alignment on important 
sections on routes by underground cable.   10000 route kms of optic fibre cable 
has already been laid and works are in progress for 8000 kms. 
 
Simulators for Drivers 
5.34 Simulators are progressively being us ed for imparting training to drivers.  
These simulators replicate the effect of br aking, acceleration etc.  in the train on 
a stationary cabin of a locomotive.  Training on the simulator exposes drivers to 
intricate problems in the complex train-track dynamics and his reflexes to 
observe fast changing signals. 
 
SOS Flasher Lights 
5.35 Flasher lights have been pr ovided on all 7000 locomo tives to warn trains 
coming from opposite direction, after a derailment on double line, and prevent 
such type of collisions.  Automatic swit ching ‘On’ of the flasher lights, not 
requiring the interference of drivers and be coming operational in case of sudden 
need, have also been introduced.  Most of  the main line diesel and electric 
locomotives have already been modified. 
 
Improved Tail Lamps 
5.36 LED Type flashing Tail lamps have been provided in rear of all trains for 
better visibility to prevent rear end collision. 
 
Improved Signal Lamps 
5.37 LED based signal lamps are bei ng introduced for semaphore signals 
thereby improving their visibility as compared to conventional kerosene lit 
semaphore signals. 

 
Auto Braking Device 
5.38 ‘Dead man’s handle’ in EMU and MEMU trains is provided for automatic 
braking, if driver gets incapacitated. 
 
Modifications of rules of Operations 
5.39 Rules for train operation during foggy weather have been revised, thereby 
reducing chances of an accident during conditions of fog. 
 
Train Actuated Warning Device (TAWD) 
5.40 Development of a reliable Train Actuated Warning Device (TAWD) for 
giving audio/visual warni ng to road users about an ap proaching train has been 
under process on Indian Railways to  reduce accidents at unmanned level 
crossings. Field trials have been carried out to prove its reliability and fail-safe 
feature, apart from suitability and miscr eant prone environment.  The trials have 
been completed and few designs have been found suitable.  These devices will 
be installed at selected 100 level crossi ng gates on Indian Railway.  Further 
adoption of these devices will be consid ered after observing the performance of 
these 100 devices. 
 
 The Ministry of Railways have adopted parallel technologies such as 
auxiliary warning system for ACDs and  TPWs and TAWD.  They are running 
parallel pilot projects on each one of them for testing.  Based on the success of a 
particular technology it would be adopted by Indian Railways. 
 
Monitoring Mechanism  
5.41 All instructions and directives iss ued by concerned departments are sent 
to various agencies concerned with particular matter.  The system of test checks 
exists at the field level.  Instructi ons become part of rule books and manuals.  
Their physical implementation gets regu larly monitored through multi-level 
inspections, super-checks, and surprise scrutinies etc. 
 
 A system of “Safety Audit” is also fo llowed to detect the deficiencies in the 
system, if any.  Subsequently, remedial and suitable action is also taken. 
 

5.42 During the oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board apprised the 
Committee. 
“So far as these instructions within the Railways are concerned, this is 
being done regularly every month by  the headquarter team.  As regards 
the inter-railway safety team, we are doi ng it six monthly.  The COS is the 
coordinator.  The COS of a given Rai lway is supported by the Head of the 
departments of some concerned Depar tments like Signal, Engineering, 
Mechanical and Electrical.  They go to the other Railway and conduct 
inspection.  They have their independ ent inspections.  They normally 
cover their inspection in two days’ time, and if need be, they meet the 
General Manager and apprise him of the problems of that Railway.  The 
copies of these inspection notes are given to the Railway Board.   
 
5.43 For ensuring safety there is a daily  inspection of track by key-man who 
covers his beat on foot twice (to & fro).  There are also a scheduled inspection at 
the level of permanent way Inspector (PWI), Assistant Engineer, Divisional 
Engineer and Sr. Divisional Engineer who inspect t heir section on weekly, 
monthly and quarterly basis.   
 
 The Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“Besides these safety audits, we have given the beat to every 
Executive Director in the Railway B oard with the directions that in 
their inspections, they will cover t he safety items also during their 
safety inspections.” 
  
5.44 A Joint Inquiry Committee of officials of the Railway or Commissioner of 
Railway Safety inquires into each case of derailment.  The Inquiry Committee or 
CRS determines not only the cause of a ccident and the connected responsibility, 
but also points out any ot her irregularity that may be noticed during the inquiry.  
The officials held responsible for c ausing derailment are taken up under 
Disciplinary and Appeal rules.  Follow- up action on each of recommendation is 
taken in right earnest. 

 
CHAPTER – VI 
Safety Audit and Disaster Management 
 
Disaster Management System 
6.1 The first responsibility in case of accidents is to reach and extricate 
accident victims and organise effective tr auma case.  The basic principle of 
trauma management is speed & expediency, as most trauma patients can be 
saved within the first hour.  This hour is called “The Golden Hour.” 
   
A High-level Committee was constituted in September, 2002 to review the 
Disaster Management over the Indian Rail ways. The Committee has identified 
the technological and managerial inputs to quicken th e pace of relief and rescue 
operations.  The Committee has observed t hat it is natural and logical that the 
first relief to the affected passengers no rmally comes from the closest rural or 
urban population and it does take a couple of hours for the railway teams to 
reach the site.  The Committee has made 111 recommendations for effecting 
improvement in the existing infrastructure  and its usage for mitigation of disaster 
and for better preparedness in emergencies.  The Committee’s report has been 
accepted and all its recommendations are at various stags of implementation. 
 
6.2 Implementation of these recomm endations will strengthen the organised 
Disaster Management over Indian Railway leading to quicker rescue, relief and 
restoration operation.  The financial implications of implementing these 
recommendations will be around Rs.375 cror e.  These recommendations include 
the following:- 
 (a) Faster Response   
• Three coach high speed self-suffici ent   Self Propelled Accident 
Relief Train(SPARTs) for quicker initial response. 
• Rationalisation of ART/ARMV locations. 
• No need to obtain police clearance for rescue operations. 
• Entering into MOU with State Govts. For mutual cooperation in 
case of disasters 
• Institutionalising standing arra ngement with Armed Forces for 
ensuring quicker rescue and relief operations. 

 
 
Better facilities and equipments 
• Steam cranes to be phased out 
• Enhancing  maximum permissible speeds of ART (Accident Relief 
Train) and ARMV (Accident Relief Medical Van) 
• Better communication facilities e.g. availability of satellite phones 
and mobile exchanges, etc. 
 
(b) Expanding resources to meet requirement in major accidents 
• Formation of Disaster Management Plans at various tiers 
• Crack teams at each Zonal Rail way with containerised equipment 
for rescue and relief 
• Standby ART/ARMV gangs for use when required 
• Empowering field units to effectively tackle post disaster situation 
• Full scale disaster management exercises 
 
However, for ensuring rescue and re lief within Golden Hour, disaster 
management plans at District and State level will have to converge and 
complement the railway disaster management system.   The Railways are 
developing Disaster Management Modules. 
 
The Commission of Railway Safety 
6.3 The Commission of Railway Safety functions independent of the Ministry 
of Railways under the administrative control of the Minist ry of Civil Aviation and  
deals with matters pertaining to Safety of rail travel and train operation and is 
charged with certain regulatory, inspectori al, investigatory and advisory functions 
as laid down in the Railways Act, 1989.   The Commission is headed by a Chief 
Commissioner of Railway Safety at Lu cknow.  Working under the administrative 
control of the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety are 10 Commissioners of 
Railway Safety, each one exercising jurisdiction over one of the 9 Zonal Railways 
and the Metro Railway. 
 
Section 113 of Railways Act, 1989 requires intimation of serious accidents 
to be sent to the Commissioner of Ra ilway Safety.  Under the Statutory 
Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 1998 framed by the Ministry of Civil 

Aviation and Tourism, a statutory enquiry by the Commissioner of Railway Safety 
is obligatory in ev ery serious accident to a trai n carrying passengers which is 
attended with loss of human life, or with gr ievious hurt, as defined in the Indian 
Penal Code, to a passenger or passengers in  the train or with serious damage to 
railway property of the value exceeding Rs.25 lakhs.  While holding statutory 
enquiry, the Commission not only examines  affected passengers but also invites 
members of the public to gi ve evidence in persons duri ng the enquiry or to write 
to the Commission.  Some of the seri ous accidents at manned level crossings 
attended with loss of life or with grievous injury to persons travelling in road 
vehicles are also inquired into by the Commission of Railway Safety. 
  
6.4 During the oral evidence the Chie f Commissioner of Railway Safety 
informed that :- 
 “We work on a modest budget of Rs.2.5 crore per annum.  Our 
Headquarters is at Lucknow.  I have got nine Commissioners of 
Railways Safety placed in different  parts of the country to related 
with the Zonal Railways.  Earlier there were nine zones but today 
we have got 15 Zonal Railways.  Our main Commissions continue 
to interact with all the Zonal Railways.  We are also taking action to 
consider and increase the number  of Commissioners of Railway 
Safety depending upon the workload.” 
 
 The principal functions of the Commission of Railway Safety are:- 
• Inspection of new Railway lines pr ior to authorisation for passenger 
traffic; 
• Periodical inspection of open lines; 
• Approval of new wor ks and renewals affecti ng passenger carrying 
trains; 
• Investigations into accidents, including enquirie s into such 
accidents to passenger carrying trains as are considered to be of a 
serious nature; and  
• General advice on matters concerning safety in train operations. 

 
6.5 Regarding the role of  the Commission for inve stigation of Railway 
accidents, the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety  informed that :- 
“Once the prima-facie it is accept ed by the police, the law agencies 
that it is indeed a law and order  matter, perhaps the Commission 
does not have a much role to play about investigation.  Our role is 
mainly into the technical aspects, as to how the accident happened.  
The law and order, in spirit, is not covered from our side.  It is for 
the Committee to please consider  my suggestion that whether 
purely a law and order case – like  sabotage, arson, bomb blast on 
the track or in the train and which is accepted by the law agencies 
that it is a law and or der related matter- shoul d be inquired by the 
Commission or it can be removed from the role of the Commission.” 
 
6.6 When asked about placing the Railwa y Safety Commissioner’s Report on 
various accidents on the Table of both H ouses of Parliament, the Ministry of 
Railways stated that under ‘The Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident 
Rules, 1998’ such CRS Inquiry repor ts are confidentia l documents, and, 
therefore, these are not being tabled in both the Houses of Parliament.  However, 
Chief Commissioner of Railway Safe ty can recommend publication of CRS 
Reports to Railway Board.  In case t he Railway Board has reservations on the 
recommendations on Chief Commissioner Ra ilway Safety, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation finally decides the matter.  In  the recent past, CRS Inquiry Report on 
accident of 2301 Rajdhani Ex press near Rafiganj station on 9.9.2002 on Eastern 
Railway was published on the recommendati on of Railway Safety Commission.  
However, Ministry of Railways have been always advising Chief Commissioner of 
Railway Safety for publication of CRS enquiry Reports. 
  
 Annual Report of Commission of Railway  Safety summarizing the working 
and activities of Commission, which includ es brief details of serious accidents 
inquired into by Commission of Railway Sa fety during the year, is placed on the 
table of both the Houses of Parliament by Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
  

 
 Commission of Railway Safety has re cently started publishing 6 monthly 
periodical – ‘Railway Accident Inquiry Reports’ with effect from January, 2004 for 
public circulation.  This periodical contai ns brief information, description, cause, 
remarks and recommendations arising out of enquiries conducted by the 
Commission. 
 
6.7 All the inquiry reports of Commission of Railway Safety and any other 
Commission of Railway Safety and any other Commission specifically appointed 
for inquiry are thoroughly examined and a ppropriate action is taken on accepted 
recommendations.  They are regularly monitored. 
  
6.8 Apart from the above functions discharged by the Chief Commissioner of 
Railway Safety, he plays a vital roll for giving approval/certification for opening of 
new lines/new assets before they are fo rmally opened.   However, during oral 
evidence the CCRS submitted before the Committee as under:- 
“Normally, one month before the assets are opened, the Commissioners 
have to be given all the information by  the General Manager.  Some times 
because of some pressure, the Railwa ys give inadequate notice.  We do 
not have adequate time to go through  their documents, to ask for 
clarifications and get a satisfactory r eply from them.  We have got other 
official commitments.  We cannot just  do that in three days.  So, the 
Railways are agreeing to give us one month notice, which was being done 
earlier and which was removed later in  the rules of 2000.   While we 
inspect and give certification, we put  certain conditions.  Subject to those 
conditions, the lines can be opened.  They accepted the conditions.  But 
later on, the Railways went back and unilaterally withdrew some of the 
conditions imposed by us.    We took it  seriously with the Railway Board.    
I want to bring it to the kind att ention of the august Committee for serious 
consideration.” 
  

Announcement of Prima-Facie cause of accidents by Railways 
6.9 There are merits and demerits of announcing the prima facie cause of a 
major accident.  In some cases, the prim a facie cause of the accident can be 
easily observed from the site conditions and circumstances, and in other cases, it 
may not be practical to come to the conclusion regarding prima facie cause. 
 The railways’ customers are keen to know the prima facie cause of the 
accident at the earliest, say, within few ho urs, and they do not want to wait for 
completion of inquiry by Commission of Railway Safety. 
 Railways also realize their responsibility, in the interest of transparency, to 
let them know the prima facie cause of the accident as per their observations. 
 
If the Railways do not indicate their observations, a lot of misinformation is 
spread out, creating an adverse situation.   Thus, it becomes all the more 
necessary to indicate to the media Railways’ observations and prima facie cause, 
if possible. 
    
6.10 However, the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety during oral evidence 
submitted that :- 
“So far as Rajdhani accident is concer ned, which is very fresh in the 
memory of everybody, our humble view is that there should be no hurry on 
the part of the Railway Administrati on to come to a conclusion on the  
prima facie  cause till such a time the Commissioner of Railway Safety 
goes to the site of accident, does his inquiry and comes out with the 
report, which we do not delay.  As I said, our preliminary report comes 
within ten days.  So, there is no hurry for having to give a prima facie  
opinion by the Railway Ministry. 
The regulator or anybody from the regulatory side, if they say 
something, it handicaps us.  Immediately a doubt comes also in the 
public’s minds may be the Commissioner of Railway Safety will have to 
perhaps toe the line or whatever has been said by the regulator.  It puts us 
into embarrassment.  Our own recommendation on Rajdhani was 
precisely this.  Please never ever say  the prima facie  cause when you 
know the Commissioner of Railway Safety  is going to inquire into that.  If 
we are not going to do the inquiry, you can say whatever you want.” 
  

 
CHAPTER – VII 
Security in Railways 
 
7.1 Indian Railways are the largest organisation in the country with mostly 
open, easily accessible and unguarded assets.  These include equipments such 
as signaling, track, open line installations, overhead wires, yards, stations towers, 
etc., which are prone to theft and vanda lism.  With an adverse law and order 
situation in many parts of  the country, including terrorism saboteurs etc., the 
railway operation and safety get seriously affected. 
 
7.2 The responsibility for providing security on Indian Ra ilways has been 
assigned to two agencies i.e. the Government Railway Police (GRP) which works 
under the respective State Government and the Railway Protection Force (RPF) 
which works under the Ministry of Railways (Government of India). 
 
7.3 ‘Policing being a state subject, the security of passengers and their 
belongings in the running trains and on the Railway premises is the constitutional 
responsibility of the Stat e Government concerned which they discharge through 
the GRP (Government Railway Police).  Se curity of traveling public and their 
belongings is of a great concern.  A high Level Committee was constituted to 
recommend steps for improving the security of Passengers’ on Railways.  As per 
the recommendations of the Committee,  the RPF ACT, 1957 and Railway Act 
1989 were amended to empower the RPF to take cognizance of certain patty 
offences.   The amended Acts have now come into force w.e.f. 01.07.2004. 
 
7.4 Previously domain of RPF was to protect Railway property only.  Now 
after 01.07.2004, PRF is esco rting selected trains an d deploying manpower in 
passenger areas of some stations to supp lement the efforts of GRP to combat 
crime. 

 
7.5 During oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board intimated that:- 
“The RPF (Amendment) Act, was conceived in 2003-04.  According 
to this Act, all minor offences mentioned in this Act will be tackled 
by the RPF, who are under the administrative control of the 
Railways.  This has been implemented, for the 1 st July this year.  
The whole process was completed during 2003-04.  These are 
giving very good results.  It is just a beginning.  Right now, we are 
escorting 1288 trains with our own RPF staff, and we are tackling 
26 minor offences on our own.  It leaves the GRP or the Police to 
spare more capacity or energy to tackle IPC type of offences viz. 
offences like dacoity or robbery.  We are sharing intelligence with 
each other and we are having liaison.  This has clicked very well.” 
 
7.6  The following steps are being taken by  Railways to prevent crime against 
passengers and their belonging: 
 
(i) Anti-social elements are being re moved from Railway premises and 
trains by RPF also to supplement the efforts of GRP by deployment 
of staff in passenger areas on some stations.  Watch is being kept 
by Coach Attendants/TTEs on the passengers entering/detraining 
from the coaches and coaches are properly bolted  during their run, 
especially in night hours. 
(ii) Announcement through Public Address System and CCTV is made 
at important Railway stations to alert the travelling passengers 
against theft of their belongings etc. 
(iii) FIR forms are made availabl e with the Train Guards/Station 
Masters/RPF to facilitate the trav elling public to lodge their reports 
immediately. RPF Assistance pos ts are provided at important 
station to assist passengers in lodging FIRs with Government 
Railway Police/Local Police. 

 
(iv) Sharing of Special Intelli gence and Crime Intelligence Between 
RPF and GRP is being done at all levels. 
(v) Periodic co-ordination meetin gs with Government Railway Police 
are being held to analyze the cr ime position on Railways with a 
view to take suitable  preventive measures. 
(vi) Whenever the State Government wants to establish mobile police  
posts in the affected trains, necessary facilities  like  
accommodation etc. are being prov ided.  Approxim ately 322 such 
Mobile Police posts are functioning over the Railways.  RPF is 
deployed to assist and augment the GRP in affected sections. 
 
7.7 The Ministry of Railway stated that  the cases of crime on Railways are 
reported to, registered and investigated by the Government Railway Police 
(GRP).  RPF, however, coordinates with the GRP to supplement their efforts in 
controlling crime on railways.  While sharing the  crime intelligence, the 
vulnerable areas are identified.  However, the vulnerable areas change from time 
to time according to the rise and fall in criminal activity.  As the State Police has 
the power and responsibility of ensuring order and safety in the trains, they make 
efforts to provide escorts in important trains.  RPF now supplements the efforts of 
GRP by sharing the escorting of trains  at Zonal Level with effect  from 
01.07.2004. 
  
7.8 The Ministry of Railways submitted that in regard to  involvement of 
Railway Employees in cases of robbery/decoity, appropriate level & departmental 
action against such erring employees serves as a deterrent. 
 
Security of Lady Passengers  
7.9 Regarding the special security a rrangement for ladies in the ladies 
compartments specially during the late  hours in long distance trains they 
informed that GRP deploys lady constabl es to escort ladies compartments, 
depending upon the availability of such co nstable/manpower.  Efforts have been 
made by RPF to sensitise their staff to  this problem.  GRP and RPF staff on duty 
in the trains and on the platforms, keeps watch on the ladies compartments and 
render assistance as and when required. 
 

7.10 During oral evidence the Chairm an Railway Board informed that: – 
“We have gone for mahila squads in two or three trains, of the type 
of ‘Surakshini’ and ‘Tejaswini’, in which we depute RPF staff, who 
are all ladies.  Even the ticket che cking staff are ladies.  We are 
giving armed RPF staff and this has been very successful in 
Mumbai suburban trains.  We are extending it to various  other 
railways.  The thrust was given last  year and beginning was made 
even  earlier and this thrust areas will be kept all through.” 
 
Sabotage 
7.11 Railways pay a heavy price for adverse  law & order situation.  Law and 
order in trains, stations and railway pr emises is the res ponsibility of State 
Governments.  Railway Protection Force (R PF) is meant for protection of railway 
property and do not have powers to take action, arrest and investigate law & 
order related issues.  State Government  deploy Special Police, called GRP for 
enforcement of law and order in railway premises and trains.  Indian Railway pay 
half the cost of their expend iture to State Government.  In the last 2 years, the 
expenditure on security covering RPF, RPSF and railways’ share in 
establishment of Government Railway Police has crossed Rs.800 crore. 
 Though the number of accidents, caused by sabotage remains around 15 
accidents per year, their gravity is incalc ulable as it erodes the public faith not 
only in Railway system but also in law and order enforcing agencies.   
 
7.12 During oral evidence the Chairman Railway Board apprised the 
Committee that :- 
“Ultimately, whatever may be t he reasons for sabotage, our moral 
responsibility is to give safe travel to the passengers.  We have already 
taken a decision and formed a Committee at the Zonal and Division levels.  
The sabotage prone areas will be identif ied and by sharing the State and 
the Central Intelligence, steps will be  taken.  I had a meeting with the 
Cabinet Secretary and the Home Secretary.  He had given a clear 
directive that this intelligence wil l be shared with each other.  Track 
patrolling and identification of sabotage prone areas have already started 
at random and we have given a detailed guideline on this point.  
 

7.13 When asked whether the existing st rength of 69000 RPF is sufficient, the 
Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“This exercise was done at that time  also.  We need a total of nearly 
18,000 staff for RPF to undertake the responsibility of security of 
passengers in passenger areas and in  the running trains.  These 
amendments have been made  effective from 1 st of July this year.  So far 
we have been able to arrange nearly 9,000 staff out of the existing 
resources by redeployment.  We have gone for the end to end rake 
movements.  So, the staff which wa s deployed in the marshalling yards, 
for seal checking etc.  has been redeployed for escort ing trains,  similarly  
for deploying them on the nominated st ations, the staff already deployed 
in the parcel areas, goods points, on the platform have been redeployed 
for the purpose.  We have been abl e to man nearly 1288 trains and 179 
stations.  The remaining 1550 trains are being still manned  by GRP and 
the remaining stations are yet to be manned.  We have set up  an internal 
Committee.  They have given their re commendations.    A necessity is 
being felt of late that we will be  needing creation of some additional posts.  
Although when these amendments we re done and we approached the 
Cabinet it was decided t hat we would try to arrange these 18,000 staff by 
way of readjustment and redeployment.  Probably, some posts may need 
to be created.  We will approach the Ca binet at the appropriate time after 
we have done our exercise. 
  
Thefts and Vandalism 
7.14 There are many extraneous factors, which endanger railway safety, and 
are beyond the control of the railways.  It is a known fact that the vital 
equipments of the railways are prone to t heft and vandalism.  These include P-
Way fittings, brake gear fittings of c oaches and wagons, overhead telephone 
wires, signaling equipment, track circuiting cables, OHE wires and other electrical 
equipments, etc.  Each of these have an important bearing on safety and their 
theft invariably leads to unsafe conditions.  Theft and vandalism works as 
disincentive to deploy track mounted safe ty equipments like hot box detectors, 
axle counters etc. commonly used on developed railway systems. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
1 Indian Railways is one of the la rgest railway networks in the world 
with 63,122 Kms. of track, 7681 loco s, 44756 coaches, 2,14,760 wagons 
(Unit), hauling 14 million passengers , 1.5 MT freight, crossing 1 lakh 
signals, 8081 stations, 40,000 odd level crossings and involving 6 lakh front 
line operating and maintenance staff by running 14761 trains daily.  A 
single flaw in any of these  has the poten tial to cause a major tragedy.  The 
Committee are aware that safety is vital to railway’s operational efficiency.  
Statistics show that despite the in crease of 560% in passenger traffic and 
more then 380% in freight traffic, the number of accidents have reduced 
drastically from 2131 in 1960-61 to 325 in 2003-04.  It is also claimed safety 
index has come down from 5.50 in 1960-61 to 0.39.  But every accident 
involving loss of human lives shakes the people’s faith in the Railways and, 
therefore, the Committee f eel that statistics of acci dents should not create 
smugness in the Railway authorities.   Therefore, the Mini stry of Railways 
should make all out efforts in all areas of its operations continuously to  
achieve zero accident rate. 
 
2.  The Committee are aware that manpower is the most valuable asset 
for Indian Railways.  They were,  however, informed that ‘human failure is 
the largest single factor responsible for train accidents’.  They were also 
informed that human failures used to be of the order of 66% has come 
down now to 53%.  The Committee also note that besides the callousness 
of the employees, at times there are certain factors which are beyond their 
control such as circumstances on acco unt of weather, defective signaling 
system, defects in locomotive or vehic le, stress due to long hours of work, 
work environment and many others.  Th e Committee, therefor e, feel that a 
system which is heavily dependent on human elements needs constant 
monitoring, inspections, counseling a nd training of operational staff to 
ensure the safety by strict observance of safety manuals and 
modernization of signaling system be done in a time bound manner.   They 
are of the opinion that there is a scope for improvement through training 
and extending it to areas not yet full y covered.  Furthermore the modern 
techniques require highly intelligent,  technically qualified and thoroughly 
trained staff for handling the operati on of the safety equipments as per job 

requirement.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the drivers, 
guards, station masters and the st aff in charge of signaling and 
communications should invariably be trained, re-trained, counseled, 
monitored and continuously assessed.  They stress th at intensive training 
should be imparted to the operational st aff to keep them up dated with the 
latest developments through induction c ourses.  The staff also require self 
motivation, basic work ethics and sense of responsibility.  They emphasise 
that training should also bring about  psychological change, the vision and 
level of commitment so that it unde rgoes a positive change.  Further, 
meditation, yoga classis and recreational activities could also be promoted.    
  
3. The Committee find that training allowance to instructors has been 
cut down from 30% to 15% as an eco nomy measure by the Ministry of 
Railways.  They feel that unless proper remunerations are offered, the 
talented and well qualified candida tes would not come forward as 
instructors.  Until, highly qualified in structors are available they cannot be 
assigned the responsibility of skills upgrading of trainees/employees upto 
an appropriate level.  The  Committee, therefore, emphasise that competent 
instructors who have good educational background and good acumen for 
training should be employed with a proper pay package.  They further 
stress that even the trainers should be exposed to higher level of training 
from time to time.     
 
4. The Committee were informed that  the 10 hours of duty from rolling 
on to rolling off and 12 hours of duty from signing on to sign off are being 
maintained. However, they find that in  actual practice it is not so and at 
times the operational staff especially Gangmen and Drivers have to work 
for even 22 to 24 hours at a stretch.  The Committee believe that due to 
work stress and stifling conditions, th e life of thousands of commuters 
cannot be put to danger.  At times dr ivers have been found to be working 
for 5 consecutive days.  The Committee apprehend that these type of 
conditions would certainly affect the safety in trai n operations.  They feel 
that to promote sincerity and dedicat ion the work environment should be 
made congenial and stressfree.  The stress level of the ground level staff 
and those dealing with safety operati ons should be reduced and efforts be 
made to reduce fatigue, minimize monotony and improve safety 

consciousness.  They opine that te n hour duty system was brought into 
force way back in the year 1969 and this rule needs to be reviewed because 
of various crucial changes in th e present day circumstances such as 
increase in speed of trains, the load, number of signals and also the whistle 
boards.  They find that the driver/assistant driver  have to continuously 
concentrate and be watchful about th e track signal, speed restriction, the 
load, the rear end of the train and the behaviour of the track and 
locomotives for long hours particularly in superfast trains.  They are of the 
view that such circumstances require  total concentration, which is 
humanly impossible for such long ho urs.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the ten hour daily roster system may be reviewed in view 
of the present scenario of train speed levels, number of si gnals, load and 
whistle boards etc.   They emphasise  that it may be ensured that the 
running staff may not be put on duty for not more than 8 hours as 
continuous concentration is required by the drivers and a s light deviation, 
stress or fatigue could lead to a major disaster.  Besides, the Committee 
also stress that crew friendly cab s should be introduced or necessary 
alterations be made in the running coac hes at the time of overhauling to 
provide easy approach to various  control handle/buttons including 
provision of toilets and provide such  features that would ensure fatigue 
free driving for long hours.  They also urge the Ministry to provide certain 
basic amenities at runni ng rooms like proper hygien ic toilets facilities, 
clean drinking water, proper ventilation , desert coolers, subsidized meals 
etc.     
 
 The Committee were also apprised that at certain places there are no 
running rooms provided at the stations , with the result that drivers are 
unable to take proper rest.  They desire that these should be provided at all 
the stations on top priority. 

 
5. The Committee find that Rail way Minister had announced in his 
Budget speech to fill up the 20000 vacancies in Group ‘D’ in safety 
category and 3500 vacancies in  RPF.   They find th at due to this acute 
shortage of staff at times even th e Station Masters have to perform 
commercial duties like sale of tickets,  booking of parcels/goods, attending 
public queries etc.  They feel that in the process there could be lapse in 
train operations.  Due to shortfall in  staff of safety category, safety of 
trains/operations have to be compromi sed with.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the vacant posts in safety categories should be filled up 
urgently on priority basis.  
 
6. The Committee find that vacancies in important safety categories are 
not filled up and in the process huge backlog gets accumulated.  It has 
been alleged that a large number of posts are surrendered indiscriminately 
without any commensurate reduction in  workload of workers so as to 
reduce the expenditure on staff. They are of the view that efficiency 
depends on the availability of mate rials and machines, layout and 
infrastructure. The Committee, theref ore, urge the Ministry to give 
necessary instructions to the Zonal Ra ilway to surrender the posts only 
after an indepth analysis of the staff vis-à-vis other fact ors such as work 
load, working condition, availability of  materials, status of machines, 
layout, infrastructure etc. and not me rely as a routine practice.   They 
further emphasise that particularly po sts in safety cate gory should not be 
surrendered or curtailed without making a thorough analysis. 
 
7. The Committee are happy to note the decision of the Railways to 
automatically create posts for mainte nance and running staff as soon as 
new trains are declared.  They, how ever, emphasize that vacancies for 
additional staff for the additional wo rk after introduction of new trains, 
should be filled up within a time bound period not exceeding six months. 
 
8. The Committee note that under th e Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
(VRS) of the Railways the gangmen and drivers within the age of 50-57 
years are allowed to seek voluntary re tirement thereby giving one of his 
wards appointment on compassionate grounds.  However, they were also 
apprised that if VRS is given to a ll those in the age group of 50-57 years 

then a huge number of vacancies would arise at once.  As there are already 
a large number of existing vacancies in th e safety category, it would not be 
desirable to consider all those eligible  for VRS.  The Ministry, therefore, 
decided to first consider only those w ho are 57 years of ag e.  They are of 
the opinion that justification to extend th is facility first to all those who are 
at the age of 57 years is on the consider ation of their dete riorated physical 
condition in case of gangmen and deteri oration in the am ount of alertness 
in case of Drivers which is needed in their case due to aging effect.  The 
Committee emphasize  that this sch eme may be implemented in phases 
starting from the stage of staff seeking retirement at the age of 57 years 
first.  
 
9. The Committee observe that in order to earn more revenue, new 
trains are introduced and many express trains are converted into superfast 
ones and efforts are now made to provide for commensurate safety 
safeguards and maintenance facilities.  While doing so, proper care is also 
not taken to replace the overaged rolling st ock.  It is also observed that the 
process of modernization and renewal of track and their maintenance lacks 
the desired attention.  Moreover, most of the bridges and culverts have out 
lived their lives and have become weak.  The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend that before introducing more trains and enhancing frequency 
of the trains proper survey of the concerned routes, the capacity of the 
infrastructure to bear the additional stress including the status of rolling 
stock should be conducted. 
 
10. The Committee were informed that the number of accidents have 
reduced drastically during the pe riod 1960-61 to 2003-04 even though the 
freight and passenger traffic has in creased manifolds. They were also 
informed that accident per million trai n Kms. (a universally accepted safety 
index) has come down from 5.5. in 1960-61 to 0.39 (provisional) in 2003-04 
which compares favourably with any leading railway system in the world.  
The Committee also note that while the traffic has increased the 
commensurate increase in assets for capacity generation has not been 
there.  They feel that the system is over stretched, overstressed and has a 
direct impact on the safety of the operations in running trains.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend th at the railway network may be 

expanded alongwith upgradation of  technological installations.  The 
priorities of investment have to be made so that the valuable and scarce 
resources could be allocated for expansion, replacement, rehabilitation and 
modernization of the existing network.   
 
11. The Committee were apprised that  the track circuiting is divided into 
two parts i.e. track circuiti ng at stations and cont inuous track circuiting.  
They were also informed that fouling ma rk to fouling mark track circuiting 
has already been accomplis hed at A, B, C & D stat ions and the remaining 
locations of track circuiting at various stations is at different stages of 
implementation.  The Ministry furthe r informed that 2000 route Kms. of 
continuous tracks circuiting at the cost of nearly Rs. 425 crore and 
subsequently another 2000 Kms. will be carried out at almost the same 
cost.  The Ministry have informed the Committee that now they have 
adequate internally generated funds to be appropriated to the Development 
Fund,  in order to take care of the track circuiting.  Continuous track 
circuiting is very crucial to avoid acci dents.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that since the Ministry have adequate funds in the 
Development Fund the track circuiting works on the tracks should be 
carried out.  
  
12. The Committee observe that new trains are declared on many 
sections and at times exp ress trains are converted into superfast ones 
without studying the impact it woul d have on the already over stressed 
system.  Railway track is the backbon e of the railway system.  They note 
that the maintenance of track is a continuous process.  The Committee 
were informed that there is an estab lished system of inspection of these 
tracks and recently the tracks are being maintained with the help of 
machines.  The Committee recommend that regular inspection and surprise 
inspection by senior officers should be  conducted.  They also emphasise 
that the ultra sonic flaw detectors a nd self propelled ultr a sonic rail testing 
cars for detection of hidden flaws in rails/welds should be bought in 
adequate numbers.  They also stress that these sophisticated equipments 
be brought into regular use.   The Committee further recommend that 
adequate efforts should be made  for maintenance, renewal and 
modernization of tracks.  

 
13. The Committee are aware that  on some occasions train accidents 
have occurred due to overaged bridges.   They note that the Ministry have 
adopted the state of the art techni que for bridge management.  The 
Committee have been informed that this  helps in under water inspection of 
bridges, integrated test ing of bridges, non-destru ctive testing mapping of 
unknown foundations techniques.  This de termines the life of the bridge as 
well as the residual life of the bridge.  The Committee emphasise that 
regular inspection of the bridges shou ld be carried out by using various 
technologies adopted by the Railways  and determine their life and 
promptly carry out the necessary repairs wherever necessary.    
 
14. The Committee note that a number of steps are being taken by the 
Railways to induct safety-related technologies like track circuiting, advance 
warning system, computerized track measuring  cars, simulators for 
training of drivers, Anti Collision D evice, Auxiliary Warning System (AWS) 
solid state interlocking walkie-talkie  sets on crew, Auto Braking Device, 
Train Actuated Warning System (T AWS), Train Protection and Warning 
System (TPWS).  The Committee were apprised that nearly 3500 Km of 
ACDs have been sanctioned   for the year.  They were also apprised that it 
has been decided to first go on a commercial scale on the NF Railways and 
subsequently the rest of the stations  would be completed.  The Ministry 
informed that all the detailed estimates are being kept in readiness and 
once the problems, if any, are rectified, they would work on other Railways.  
They were also informed that the ACDs would be installed on the entire 
broad gauge system by 2013.  The Committee recommend that the routes 
which are fully saturated or more than  50% saturated should be identified, 
and installation of such devices shoul d first be made on these identified 
routes.    

  
15. The Committee observe that ther e was an accumulation of overaged 
assets awaiting renewal due to which a Special Railway Safety Fund of 
Rs.17000 crore was created in 2001- 02 for expediting the work of 
renewal/replacement of these assets relating to safety within a period of six 
years.  The safety of train operations are dependent on proper maintenance 
of the track, rolling stock and other safety assets.  These may be kept in 
working and safe condition and as such they must be renewed/replaced at 
regular intervals for smooth running, as the term of SRSF is nearing 
completion in 2006 the Committee, recommend that the work under Special 
Railway Safety Fund may be expedited so that the same may be completed 
within the stipulated time. 
 
16.  The Committee find that nearly  16%of the total accidents occur at 
the  level crossings.  Most of th ese accidents are due to carelessness of 
road users.  They also find that acci dents at manned level crossings were 
at the level of 4% of the total c onsequential train accidents, whereas 
unmanned level crossings accounted for 12% of the accidents.  The work 
related to manning of unmanned leve l crossings and construction of 
ROBs/RUBs is being financed through the  Railway Safety Fund.  As of now 
50% of the burden for construction of ROBs/RUBs is being shared by the 
State Governments, but due to fina ncial constraints they are not 
discharging their portion.   The Committee in their First Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) has inter-alia recommended that under such circumstances, the 
Railway should consider utilizing th e amount accrued from diesel cess for 
construction of approach works.  The y once again reiterate their earlier 
recommendation in this regard. 
 
17. The Committee are aware that the first responsibility in case of 
accidents is to reach and extricate the victims and arrange for their 
effective treatment.  The basic principle of trauma management is speed 
and expediency so that the victims can  be saved within the first ‘Golden 
Hour’.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railways should 
ensure an expedient system of rescue and medicare to manage the 
aftermath of accidents.  Besides, they should set up specialized public 

relation desks at the major stations falling on the routes of the trains 
involved in accident.   
 
18. The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety informed the Committee 
that normally one month notice is requi red for inspecting the assets before 
opening of assets/new lines.   However,  he submitted that at times, the 
Railways give inadequate time.  As  such they have to complete the 
inspection with a time constraint.  They were also informed that the 
Commissioner of Railway Safety is not  consulted before announcement of 
new trains.  Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety gives a conditional 
certification to start the train/new line/segment, but subsequently, the 
Railways unilaterally withdraw some of these conditions.  The Committee 
take a strong view and recommend that  sufficient notice period may be 
given to the CCRS for inspection and in no case the conditions put by the 
latter, on any project or the works, be withdrawn without consulting him as 
it may prove a major safety threat to the Indian Railways.  
 
19. The Committee note that the vita l safety equipment of the Railways 
are prone to theft and vandalism.  These  things have an important bearing 
on safety and their theft invariably leads to unsafe conditions.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the existing vacancies in the RPF 
category should be filled up without further delay.     
 
20. The Committee were given to understand during the course of the 
examination of the subject that no deta ils such as names, designation etc. 
of the GRP escorting various trains  and persons in pantry cars are 
maintained.  With the result that  in case of any mishap or untoward 
incident, even Railway staff on board are unable to trace the GRP 
personnel on duty in the absence of records.  In this context, the 
Committee emphasise that Railways in  coordination with the concerned 
authorities in GRP and Catering Department should maintain proper 
records which should be kept readily available with the train Guard/TTEs 
so that in case of any lapse, GRP personnel could be held responsible.    
 

 
21. At present the responsibility of providing security in trains and 
stations has been assigned to two ag encies i.e. the GRP and the RPF.  The 
GRP works under the respective Stat e Governments and the RPF works 
under the Ministry of Railways.  Recently the RPF Act 1957 and the 
Railways Act, 1989 were amended and the same have come into force w.e.f. 
01.07.2004.  With the Amendments made  in the RPF Act, Railways have 
given some additional responsibilities to RPF such as 
registration/investigation of the minor offences in the trains, which were 
earlier dealt with by the GRP.  Ho wever, the railways have given no 
publicity in this regard with the result the passenger do not know that such 
a responsibility has been entrusted to the RPF.  The Committee, therefore, 
emphasise that publicity to this effect may be made at stations and inside 
the trains.  Also general public must be adequately educated. 
 
22. The Committee also desire that  coordination meetings between the 
RPF and GRP may be held at regular intervals in view of the additional 
responsibilities given to RPF and the sensitive information about the law & 
order situation in the vulnerable areas on the Railway network should be 
exchanged. Further, coordination m eeting amongst Divisional Railway 
Manager (DRM), the District  Magistrate (DM), Superi ntendent of Police (SP) 
and Divisional Security Commandant (DSC) should be held regularly to 
discuss the law and order problems.  
 
23. The Committee observe that repr esentatives of the RPF association 
like other recognized federations, are also involved in Permanent 
Negotiation Machinery (PNM) and are al so the Members of Participatory 
Railway Management where the duti es and responsibilities of RPF in 
regard to security of Railway property and providing security to 
passengers are discussed.  The Committee are of the firm view that the 
involvement of RPF personnel in these participatory forums should be 
further strengthened.  
 
 
 
 

24. The Committee were informed that the Mahila squads of RPF 
‘Surakshini and Tejaswini’ are being deputed in two or three trains 
presently, which is a welcome step.  The Committee desire that the Railway 
may make sincere efforts to increase the strength of Mahila squads so that 
they may be deployed in other trains also. 
 
25. As per the existing system, pa yment of salary to the Group ‘D’ 
category of staff in particular, is made through cash.  The committee were 
informed that as per instructions issued from RBI and CVC all the monetary 
transactions either to staff or to th e contractors etc. are to be made 
through cheques only.  However, taking into account the nature of duties 
performed by the workers especially ‘D’ class workers such as gangman, it 
is very difficult for them to come to a city to collect their salaries through 
banks. The Committee are of the view that disbursement of salary through 
cheque should be made optional rath er than mandatory for the group ‘D’ 
staff.  Necessary orders to this effect  be issued to all the Zonal/divisional 
heads.  They also desire that the matter may be taken up with the RBI/CVC 
explaining the difficulties to obtain a waiver especially for Group ‘D’ 
category of staff.    
   
26. The Committee have observed th at the shifting sand dunes/sand 
drifts in western Rajastha n hampers the visibility level in running trains.  
Also due to deposition of sand on th e tracks the trains have to be stopped 
for safety reasons for hours together.  They therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should promptly take concrete measures such as plantation of 
trees on both sides all along the tracks in the affected areas and also 
develop such technology which would he lp in quick removal of sand from 
the tracks. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
December, 2004                                                    Chairman, 
Agrahanaya, 1926 Saka                             Standing Committee o n Railways 
 
 
 