 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 4
th
 Report of the Standing 
 
Committee on Rail
ways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
on ‘Passenger Amenities’]
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)
 

 
2
 
 
 
SCR No. 94
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 4
th 
Report of the Standing 
 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
 
on ‘Passenger Ame
nities’]
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.11.2005
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)
 

 
3
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
…………………….……………….
 
  4
 
INTRODUCTION
 ………………………………………………………………
 
  5
 
 
PART 
-
 I
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
 
Report………………………………………………………   6
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
Recomm
endations/Observations which have been 
 
              17
 
accepted by the Government  ………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee           37
 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
 
reply……
………………………………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 
   46
 
 
 
 
Replies of the Government  have not been accepted 
 
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…
.
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
 
               48 
 
final replies of the Government  are still awaited  …….
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2005
-
06)
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia
 
 
-
 
Chairman
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2.
 
      Shri A.Sai Prathap
 
3
 
Shri Dhirendra Agarwal
 
4
 
Shri Atique Ahamad
 
5          Shri Ajaya Kumar
 
6
 
Shri Subrata Bose 
 
7          Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
 
8.
 
Shri Kishan Lal Diler
 
9.
 
Shri Giridhar Gamang
 
10.
 
Shri Pradeep Gandhi
 
11.
 
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
 
12.
 
Shri Anwar Hussain
 
13.
 
Shri 
Mahesh Kanodia
 
14.
 
Shri C. Kuppusami
 
15.
 
Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire 
 
16.
 
Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
 
17.
 
Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
 
18.
 
Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
 
19.
 
Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
 
20.
 
Ch. Lal Singh
 
21.
 
Mohd. Tahir
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Smt. Kamla Manhar
 
23.
 
Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee
 
24.
 
Maulana Obaidull
ah Khan Azmi
 
 
25.
 
Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi
 
26.
 
Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
 
27.
 
Shri Tarini Kanta Roy
 
28.
 
Shri R. Kamraj
 
29.
 
Shri Isam Singh
 
30.
 
Shri Harendra Singh Malik
 
31.
 
Shri Abani Roy
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri John Joseph
 
 
 
-
 
Secretary
 
2.
 
Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu
 
 
-
 
Addit
ional Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri A.K. Singh
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Shri V.S. Negi
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
5.
 
Smt Archana Srivastava
 
 
-
 
Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 

 
5
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2005
-
06), having 
been authorized by the C
ommittee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004
-
05) on ‘Passenge
r Amenities’.
 
 
2.
 
The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2004 and it 
contained 28 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 
22.03.2005.  
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 08.11.2005.   
 
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee o
n Railways (2004
-
05) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix
-
II.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
                                             
BASUDEB ACHARIA
 
        November, 2005 
 
 
 
 
                                         Chairman,
 
        Agrahayana, 1927 Saka 
 
 
                        
Standing Committee on Railways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee o
n Railways (2004) on ‘Passenger Amenities’ which was 
presented in Lok Sabha on 10.12.2004.
 
 
2.
 
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 28 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
broadly
 categorized as follows:
-
 
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
–
 Para Nos. 126, 127, 128, 129, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136,  
137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 145, 146, 151 and 152.
 
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee d
o not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
–
 Para Nos.   130, 131,  
142, 143, 144, 147, 148, 149 and 150.
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
–
 Para No. 
125.
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited  
–
 Nil.  
 
 
3.
 
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on some 
of their Recommendations/Observations.
 
 
 
GUIDELINES GOVERNING PASSENGER AMENITIES
 
(Para N
o. 125)
 
 
4.
 
The Committee had noted in the aforesaid paragraph that the guidelines 
governing passenger amenities issued in 1952 were reviewed by the Railways for 
the first time in the year 1995 and the Ministry of Railways had issued revised 
guidelines und
er which the facilities which were operationally required and were an 
essential feature of the infrastructure of station such as booking office, platforms, 

 
7
 
platform shelter, lighting etc. were 
excluded from the list of passenger 
amenities and termed as ‘in
frastructure facilities’.  The facilities provided over and 
above that infrastructure facility were covered under the passenger amenity.   As 
some deficiencies were still found in the 1995 guidelines, the Ministry of Railways 
had made a further revision of
 the guidelines in 1999 to overcome these deficiencies 
and issued revised guidelines classifying the facilities to be provided at stations into 
three categories viz. ‘Minimum Essential Amenities’, ‘Recommended Amenities’ and 
‘Desirable Amenities’.    Since
 then the Railways have been following the guidelines 
of 1999 till date while providing passenger amenities.   However, the Committee 
were informed that further revision of these guidelines were made in 2003.    The 
Committee were of the opinion that in vi
ew of the change in living standard of 
people at large and technology developments the guidelines should be updated and 
reviewed regularly so that any deficiency occurring in the guidelines with the fast 
changing time could be rectified immediately. 
 
 
5.
 
I
n their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
 
“With a view to overcome the deficiencies and also to meet the present day 
passengers expectations for visible, qualitative and effective improvements on 
amenities provided at the statio
ns, Railways in 1999 reviewed the guidelines of 1995 
followed by further revision in 2003.  
 
 
 
Indian Railways has more than 8000 stations.  It has always been the 
endeavour of the Railways to provide adequate amenities to the passengers at the 
stations.  
Certain amenities are provided at the time of construction of new stations 
based on anticipated traffic.  Amenities are further augmented from time to time 
based on the needs and expectations of the traveling public and the availability of 
funds. 
 

 
8
 
Regardin
g regular update and 
review of extant guidelines, it is to be 
mentioned that such review is being carried out periodically as warranted.  The 
thrust is on providing amenities at various stations as per laid down norms.  More 
frequent changes of norms may c
omplicate the implementation and monitoring 
process.”
 
 
6.
 
 The Committee had opined that in view of the change in the living 
standard of people and technological developments the guidelines 
governing passenger amenities should be updated and reviewed regul
arly 
so that any deficiency occurring with the fast changing time could be 
rectified immediately.  The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply 
have inter
-
alia stated that regular update and review of the extant 
guidelines is carried out periodical
ly as warranted and more frequent 
changes of norms may complicate the implementation and monitoring 
process.  While not agreeing with the Ministry’s contention that the 
frequent change of norms may complicate the implementation and 
monitoring process, the 
Committee stress that the existing guidelines be 
reviewed at regular intervals of about five years so as to meet the 
passengers expectations in the fast changing time.  
 
 
DISPLAY OF STATION CATEGORY
 
(Para No. 129)
 
7.
 
The Committee had found that on number 
of occasions the basic amenities 
such as drinking water taps, lights, fans etc. are not functional in trains and at 
stations.  At the same time the passengers are unaware of the facilities/amenities 
which are actually sanctioned or available at that partic
ular station and the authority 
with whom the complaint can be lodged for rectification. The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that category of stations should be displayed appropriately at 
stations through signboards indicating the sanctioned list of facil
ities/amenities and 
those which are available together with the name, designation, telephone number of 
the officer responsible and accountable for maintaining those amenities.  They were 
of the firm view that this practice will make the passengers aware of
 the various 
amenities which they are entitled to and help them to procure the same.
 

 
9
 
 
8.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Zonal railways have been advised that the list of amenities and facilities 
available at the stat
ions be displayed at a prominent location in the station 
premises.”
 
 
9.
 
The Committee had desired that the category of particular station 
should be displayed appropriately through signboards alongwith the 
sanctioned list of facilities/amenities available a
t the station and name, 
designation and telephone number of the officer liable for maintaining 
these amenities.  The Committee in the action taken reply find that the 
Ministry of Railways have now advised Zonal Railways to take appropriate 
action in this r
egard. The Committee desire that the zone
-
wise 
implementation status of the directions issued by the Railway Board be 
intimated to them. 
 
 
TATKAL RESERVATION SCHEME
 
(Para No. 134)
 
 
10.
 
The Committee were informed that the facility of ‘Tatkal Reservation’ w
hich 
was available on 110 Mail/Express trains in nominated classes only was being 
extended to all the trains by 14 November, 2004.   The Committee had noted that of 
late the charges for tatkal reservation had been raised drastically to Rs.150/
-
 and 
Rs.300/
-
 for sleeper class and first class respectively.   The Committee had desired 
to know the logic in drastic and abrupt raising of the charges for ‘Tatkal 
Reservation.’   They would also like to be apprised of the status of extension of the 
scheme to other t
rains.
 
 
11.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The Tatkal Reservation Scheme, which was first introduced in December, 
1997 had a number of shortcomings like availability of this scheme in limited 
number of trains, string
ent condition of issuing of ticket on the authority of Identity 
Card and carrying the same proof during journey accommodation going vacant and 

 
10
 
its misuse etc.   To  remove these 
shortcomings and to make this scheme 
more user friendly it was decided to revi
se this scheme completely.  Accordingly, 
Tatkal Scheme was revised and issued in August 2004.  One of the major change 
made in this scheme was that the condition of production of proof of identity by the 
passenger booth at the time of booking ticket and al
so during the journey has been 
removed.  In order to prevent the misuse of this facility by unscrupulous elements, 
the tatkal charges had to be enhanced during peak rush period when there is a 
great demand for reservations.  The scheme has already been ext
ended in almost all 
the trains.  A few trains left will be covered within this month itself i.e. January, 
2005.  It may be mentioned that there is a positive response from the users for the 
new Tatkal Scheme.”
 
 
12.
 
The Committee in the above paragraph had 
noted inter
-
alia that the 
‘Tatkal Reservation Scheme’  available on 110 mail/express trains, is 
being extended to all the trains by 14
th
 November, 2004.  They desired to 
be apprised of the status of the extension of scheme to other trains.  The 
Ministry of
 Railways in their action taken reply have stated that the 
‘Tatkal Reservation Scheme’ introduced in December 1997 had a number 
of shortcomings and to remove those shortcomings and also to make the 
scheme more user friendly, the scheme was revised in Augus
t 2004.  The 
Ministry also stated that the scheme has already been extended to almost 
all the trains and a few trains left will be covered by January 2005. The 
Committee  note that in Metropolitan cities most of the tickets under 
‘Tatkal Reservation Scheme
’ are booked by the agents/touts particularly 
and  genuine passengers including the Members of Parliament are denied 
of these tickets when approached being exhausted.  Further they are  
astonished to find that  the agents/touts are selling the tatkal ticke
ts on 
payment of higher  amount to the passengers.  The Committee, therefore, 
disapprove the manner in which such a sensitive issue is dealt with by the 
Railways and desire that concrete steps be taken to ensure that the 
scheme is not misused by unscrupulo
us elements. They also recommend 
that  wherever there is a long queue before the Tatkal Reservation 

 
11
 
Counters,   additional windows may 
be opened to avoid inconvenience 
to the passengers.
 
 
ENQUIRY SYSTEM
 
(Para No. 135)
 
 
13.
 
In this paragraph, the Committee 
had noted that the enquiry system 
consisting of Public Address System, Electronic Train Display Board, Auto Answering 
System, Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS), National Train Enquiry System 
(NTEs) and the Staff manning the enquiry counters play a v
ital role in enhancing the 
customer friendly image of Railways.  However, the behaviour of front line staff at 
the enquiry booths were often found to be improper to the extent of being, rude 
and non
-
cooperative at times.    Sometimes the information given 
by them are also 
found to be incorrect.  The Committee found that 9 per cent of the complaints 
received were regarding improper behaviour of the Railway staff and 7 per cent 
were regarding the enquiry.  Although to improve the enquiry system by minimizing 
the human interface, though Railway have started computerized enquiry system   
and non telephone based enquiry system is also being planned, yet the Committee 
opined that the human factor can not be eliminated completely.   The Committee 
had, therefore, st
ressed that the front line staff manning the enquiry booths must 
be imparted training for effecting improvement in their behavior/attitude before 
being deployed to man these counters so that they are available at the counters 
alert with updated information
, well behaved, helpful and courteous in their 
approach while dealing with customers.  The Committee had also emphasized that 
at ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ category stations enquiry system should function round the clock and 
at the same time more telephone lines should
 be provided at the enquiry offices so 
that the public in general and passengers in particular may not face inconvenience.
 
 
14.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“The complaints regarding enquiry both face to face and tel
ephone, are 
mainly on account of non
-
dissemination of correct and updated information.  
Improper and non
-
cooperative behaviour of the frontline staff has also been a cause 
of concern.  In order to reduce the human interface the Railways are setting up 
Inte
grated Train enquiry System (ITES) in all the telecom circles of the country with 

 
12
 
mega IVRS in each telecom circle 
equipped with large number of 
telephone lines catering to rail enquiry needs of the whole circle round the clock.  
Besides this, training is 
also imparted to the staff found deficient in working 
knowledge and courtesy.  In addition, a new system of on
-
job
-
training to frontline 
staff is being developed for a number of important stations so as to train such staff 
in dealing appropriately with the
 passengers.”
  
 
 
15.
 
The enquiry system and the staff manning the enquiry counters play 
a vital role in enhancing the image of Railways.  Generally it is found that 
the behaviour of front line staff are improper, rude and non
-
cooperative 
and the informatio
n aired through them are also found to be incorrect.   
The Committee had, therefore, stressed that the frontline staff manning 
the enquiry booths be imparted training for improvement in their 
behaviour/attitude before being deployed to man these counters. 
   The 
Committee had also emphasized upon the functioning of enquiry system 
round the clock at A, B, C category stations.  
 
 
The Committee note that certain steps are being initiated by the 
Ministry of Railways in this direction.     However, they stress t
hat the 
training should be a continuous process and the same be imparted to the 
staff manning the enquiry counters at regular intervals.  
 
 
CLEANLINESS
 
(Para No. 138)
 
 
16.
 
The Committee noticed that the Indian Railway carries over 13 million 
passengers dai
ly.  The cleanliness was supposed to be checked strictly at different 
levels from the supervisors in charge at the stations to officers of different 
departments located at stations, divisions or headquarters.  However, the 
cleanliness in trains and at stat
ions was not maintained properly.  Given the 
mammoth size of the Railways, it is not physically possible for the Railway Board to 
verify and check each and every station and train.  Nevertheless, the Committee had 
desired that a system of random checking b
y special inspection teams might be 
conceived at the Railway Board level and based on the feed back of reports of those 

 
13
 
teams, corrective measures might be 
taken to improve the cleanliness at 
stations as well as in trains.  They had urged the Railways to e
xtend further the 
innovative and mechanized cleaning method of Ratlam type to other stations as well 
at the earliest.   They had emphasised that control discharge type and modular type 
toilets might be installed in new coaches and in coaches which were sen
t to the 
coaching depots for maintenance.  The Committee had also recommended that 
manual & physical cleaning of tracks at stations, platforms and trains might be 
carried out regularly till the aforementioned systems were installed.   They had also 
desired
 that cleanliness should be ensured by spraying of bleaching powder etc. so 
that no stench was there.  Special attention should be given towards the cleanliness 
as well as maintenance of the toilets.   Since the year had been declared as a 
cleanliness year
 by the Railways, the Committee had desired that the precincts of 
the Railway Stations including the tracks be kept thoroughly neat and clean as that 
it would provide desirable environment  to the tourists/passengers from all over the 
world.    
 
 
17.
 
In th
eir Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
At Stations
:
-
 
“Cleanliness is a continuous process and all out efforts are being made to 
ensure a satisfactory level of sanitation at stations.  With a view to improve the 
standard of cleanlin
ess in Railway premises and on trains, a number of initiatives 
have been taken which include introduction of mechanized cleaning, provision of 
washable aprons, provision of ‘Pay & Use’ toilets, special drives etc.  Besides this, 
there is a long established
 system of conducting inspections by various officers at 
the railway stations to monitor cleanliness.  These inspections range from the level 
of supervisors to senior officers.  The purpose of inspections is not only to ensure 
regular cleanliness but also 
to identity weak areas and take remedial measures.  
Moreover, various railways also undertake drives from time to time particularly 
during rush seasons to have greater impact.  Inter division cleanliness competition 
scheme has also been launched where the 
stations will be awarded points in 
selected aspects of cleanliness and the division obtaining maximum points will be 
awarded.
 

 
14
 
In Trains:
-
 
18.
 
Instructions have been issued by Railway Board to set up one Clean Train 
Station on Ratlam pattern in each Railway
 within the current financial year i.e. 2004
-
05. Further, as per integrated Railway Modernisation Plan 2005
-
2010, issued in 
November 2004, 50 more Clean Train Station shall be set up in the next 5 years to 
improve the general cleanliness of trains. 
 
 
 
Indi
an Railways have also embarked upon the project of “Green Toilets” by 
providing environmental friendly toilet systems in 8000 coaches of Indian Railways 
in the next five years to ensure that no discharge is made openly to the track.  
 
 
 
Also 5000 coaches s
hall be fitted with controlled discharge toilets to keep the 
track near the station clean.
 
 
 
In addition, detailed guidelines have been issued to Railways to upgrade the 
infrastructure for improper hygiene and cleanliness at terminals during maintenance 
of
 coaches.”
 
 
19.
 
The Committee had recommended that manual and physical 
cleaning  of tracks at stations, platforms and trains may be carried out 
regularly till the innovative and mechanized cleaning method of 
Ratlam/Bhubaneswar type, coaches with control di
scharge type and 
modular type toilets are installed.  The Committee had desired that a 
system of random checking by special inspection teams may be conceived 
at the Railway Board level, so that the cleanliness is ensured at stations 
premises as well as on 
trains.  
 
 
The Committee note that certain steps have been taken by the 
Railways for ensuring cleanliness at stations and on trains as well.  
However, they are of the view that upkeep of cleanliness is a continuous 
process and requires regular monitoring w
ith multiple checks conducted 
at different levels.  Hence they desire that a system of random checking 
by special inspection teams may be conceived, work areas be identified 

 
15
 
and corrective measures be taken 
to maintain and improve cleanliness 
levels both a
t stations and on trains.
 
 
VACANCIES IN THE CATEGORY OF SAFAIWALAS
 
(Para No. 139)
 
 
20.
 
In the above paragraph the Committee had found that due to shortage of 
‘safaiwalas’, the cleanliness on the stations premises and in trains were hampered 
considerably.  
The Committee therefore, recommended that vacancies in the 
category of ‘safaiwalas’ be filled up on priority basis so that the cleanliness may not 
suffer further.   
 
 
21.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have inter
-
alia stated  that 
ins
tructions have been issued to General Managers of all Zonal Railways for filling up 
of vacancies of ‘Safaiwalas’ immediately.  In exigencies of work they are also 
empowered to engage substitutes against vacant posts of ‘Safaiwalas’.
 
 
 
22.
 
After considering
 the action taken reply, the Committee desire that 
the vacancies of ‘Safaiwalas’ filled up Zone
-
wise and also the substitute 
‘safaiwalas’ engaged against the vacant post during the year 2005 so far 
be placed before them at the earliest.   
 
 
WAITING ROOMS A
T STATIONS
 
(Para No. 141)
 
 
23.
 
In the above paragraph the Committee had noted that waiting rooms at 
stations lake basic facilities/amenities and if at all these amenities are available, they 
are inoperative.   The Committee had recommended that the station
s Managers may 
be made accountable for providing/ maintaining the amenities in the waiting rooms 
and any lapse on this account be taken up seriously.   
 
 
24.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated that Zonal Railways have 
been suitably advise
d about compliance of the recommendation of the Committee.
 
 

 
16
 
25.
 
The Committee desire that 
the status of the compliance of the 
Railway Board advice/instruction by each Zonal Railways be 
communicated to them.
 

 
17
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT 
HAVE BEEN 
 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
(Para No. 126)
 
 
 
 
The Committee had found that under the extant guidelines, Railways had 
categorized their entire 8018 stations into 6 categories (category ‘A’ to ‘F’) on the 
basis of the passenger earnings to provide
 the amenities on that particular station.    
The yardstick for providing the facilities was linked with the category of station.   
The Committee were informed during the evidence that the Railways transport 60 
per cent of total Railway passengers every da
y on Suburban Railways, that is why 
Railways had taken into account the annual passenger earnings as a guiding factor 
while going for the 1999 circular that categories the stations.   Though the 
passenger earnings of some stations might not be substantial 
or upto the requisite 
level to place a particular station in a higher category, the Committee were of the 
view that factors like geographical location, religious importance and commercial 
significance of the place might be considered while deciding the cat
egorization.    
Similarly, there were other categories also like the places where educational 
institutes for specialized studies were located in remote areas and the suburban 
stations where the number of passengers were more but the earnings were less due 
to various concessions provided, such stations also require desired level of amenities 
because they were frequently used by a large number of passengers during peak 
hours/ periods.  Hence, the Committee were of the view that the categorization of 
stations 
might not be done merely on the basis of the earnings but the relative 
importance of station such as number of tickets sold at that station also be duly 
considered while making such categorizations.   The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps ta
ken in this regard.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Though categorization of stations into A to F category has been done on the 
basis of the annual passenger earnings of the station, the stations of tourist 
im
portance, important junction stations are kept in category B even if these stations 
do not fulfill earning criteria.  The power has been given to the General Managers to 
put such stations in ‘B’ category.  Moreover, the norms for quantum of various 
ameniti
es to be provided at each category of stations has been linked to the number 
of passengers handled at that station.  it will thus be appreciated that while 
categorizing the stations and providing various passenger amenities, the earnings, 
number of passeng
ers handled and the importance of the station is adequately 
taken into consideration.  
 
 
(Para No. 127)
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that more than 90 per cent of the stations are in 
‘E’ & ‘F’ category.  Those stations were used mostly by the rural people/peo
ple 
residing in remote areas.  Moreover, the stoppage of train at those stations was also 
very less and for short time.    Besides, usually the passengers did not board the 
train instead they only got down at those stations as the duration of stoppage was 
very less, with the result the passenger earnings from such stations is very less 
though number of passengers using those stations was much more.  Taking into 
account that the Railways were the service providers,  the Committee had opined 
that larger secti
ons of passengers should get satisfactory amenities at all stations.  
Keeping that in view, the Committee had desired that at least basic facilities like 
water coolers, FOBs, platform shelters, waiting hall, announcement system in 
English, Hindi and region
al languages about arrival/departure schedule of trains in 
both E and F category stations and some other facilities at ‘F’ category stations such 
as seating arrangements, lavatories, urinals, fans etc. might be provided at those 
stations on priority basis.
  They had also impressed upon the Ministry to chalk out 
an action plan for upgradation of those stations over a given period of time 

 
19
 
depending on usage of those station by 
passengers, to a higher category and 
provide amenities accordingly. 
 
 
 
In their Act
ion Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Norms have been laid down for provision of Minimum Essential Amenities 
(MEA) for various categories of stations, based on passenger traffic earnings at the 
station(s).  ‘E’ category stations are th
e stations with earnings less than Rs. 1 cr. per 
annum and ‘F’ category stations are Halts.  Basic amenities like drinking water, 
waiting hall, seating arrangements, shady trees, urinal and latrine, rail level platform 
and light wherever power supply exist
s, are being provided at ‘E’ and ‘F’ category of 
stations.  Norms have also been laid down for “Recommended Amenities” which is a 
factor of passenger traffic at the station and railway has been endeavouring to 
provide the “Recommended Amenities”  also at v
arious stations in a phased manner 
as per the availability of funds.  Necessary instructions to zonal railway in this regard 
already exist.”
 
 
MODEL STATIONS
 
(Para No. 128)
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that in 1999 the Ministry of Railways had selected 
61 stat
ions as model stations in different Zones to provide higher level of passenger 
facilities.  They had appreciated that as of now 317 stations had been selected in 
various Zones to be developed as model stations by March 2008, so that  they might 
function as
 trend setters for other stations for the purpose of providing passenger 
amenities.  In that regard Railways had prepared an action plan also.   The 
Committee had been apprised that so far 61 stations had been provided with 
upgraded amenities.   The criter
ia adopted for selection of those model stations 
depends on the importance and significance of the station rather than the category 
of the station.   The Committee had, however, felt that there could be many more 
aspects also such as population growth, geo
graphical location and educational 
significance in determining the criteria for selection of model stations.  They had 
urged the Ministry to review and make the basis/criteria more elaborate, transparent 
with well defined parameters in regard to the  selec
tion of Model stations.    They 

 
20
 
had also desired that the development 
work of the remaining selected model 
stations be taken on priority basis by fixing Zone
-
wise targets for each year so that 
maximum number of those stations could be developed much before
 the targeted 
date of March, 2008.   The Committee had also emphasised that in the case of those 
stations which would be categorized afresh as model station, the 
infrastructure/facilities should be developed within a period of two years.
 
 
 
The Committee ha
d also noted that every year new stations were being 
included in the list of model stations.  They had, therefore emphasized that the 
amenities on the stations selected earlier as model station should be provided in a 
time bound manner.
 
 
 
In their Action T
aken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The suggestion of the Committee regarding criteria to be adopted for 
selection of model stations will be kept in view while making deliberations on the 
subject.  As regards completion of development wor
k of the remaining selected 
model stations to be taken up on priority basis so that maximum number of these 
stations can be developed much before the target date of March, 2008, all efforts 
will be made to complete the works as expeditiously as possible.”
 
 
DISPLAY OF STATION CATEGORY
 
(Para No. 129)
 
7.
 
The Committee had found that on number of occasions the basic amenities 
such as drinking water taps, lights, fans etc. are not functional in trains and at 
stations.  At the same time the passengers are unaware
 of the facilities/amenities 
which are actually sanctioned or available at that particular station and the authority 
with whom the complaint can be lodged for rectification. The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that category of stations should be displaye
d appropriately at 
stations through signboards indicating the sanctioned list of facilities/amenities and 
those which are available together with the name, designation, telephone number of 
the officer responsible and accountable for maintaining those ameni
ties.  They were 

 
21
 
of the firm view that this practice will 
make the passengers aware of the 
various amenities which they are entitled to and help them to procure the same.
 
 
8.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Zonal rail
ways have been advised that the list of amenities and facilities 
available at the stations be displayed at a prominent location in the station 
premises.”
 
 
TICKETING
 
(Para No. 132)
 
 
 
During oral evidence, the Committee were informed that internet kiosk 
syst
em for ticketing had been introduced in 2001
-
02 in more than 100 major cities.  
As on date those were functioning at 120 locations all over the country and it had 
become quite popular now.  Nearly 3500 passengers were using that facility 
everyday.  The tic
ket was delivered to the person by courier and  if one happens to 
be in Delhi he could also collect from one of the nominated counters at Delhi.  The 
Committee were further informed that this system was well hailed by the users and 
there was a popular dema
nd for extension of   internet time period from 0400 hours 
to 2300 hours in place of 0800 hours to 2200 hours.    Taking the above facts into 
account, the Committee had desired that this network might be expanded further to 
other cities also so that more a
nd more passengers could use that facility rather 
than waiting in queues for long hours.   Keeping in view the popularity of the system 
they had also urged the Railways to extend the time period of the internet ticketing 
from 0400 hours till 2300 hours at 
the earliest.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Reservation on Internet has since been extended to more than 125 cities 
and is being continuously extended to other parts of the country.  Extension of 
working hours for
 Internet booking is also proposed.”
 
 
 

 
22
 
 
(Para No. 133)
 
 
 
The Committee were informed that a pilot project had been initiated in Delhi 
regarding booking tickets through SMS on Mobiles.  They were also apprised that 
this facility is being extended to other S
tates such as Andhra Pradesh after the 
success of the pilot project in Delhi.   The Committee felt that people have easy 
access to mobiles in the present times.    They were of the opinion that this would 
not only be the easiest method for the passengers t
o book the tickets but also would 
reduce the queues at the booking counters.   They, therefore, emphasised that the 
facility for booking tickets through SMS on mobiles should be extended all over the 
country at the earliest. 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, 
the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) developed and 
offered Web Service to access booking and inquiry services to all Mobile phone 
service providers.  Till date two service providers have develope
d and implemented 
applications for accessing IRCTC’s web services and these are M/s Reliance Infocom 
and M/s HUTCH.  Other service providers have also expressed interest and are in 
the process of developing appropriate Applications.  This facility has been
 extended 
to most of the states of the country. 
 
 
(Para No. 134)
 
 
 
The Committee were informed that the facility of ‘Tatkal Reservation’ which 
was available on 110 Mail/Express trains in nominated classes only was being 
extended to all the trains by 14 Nov
ember, 2004.   The Committee had noted that of 
late the charges for tatkal reservation had been raised drastically to Rs.150/
-
 and 
Rs.300/
-
 for sleeper class and first class respectively.   The Committee had desired 
to know the logic in drastic and abrupt 
raising of the charges for ‘Tatkal 
Reservation.’   They would also like to be apprised of the status of extension of the 
scheme to other trains.
 

 
23
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The Tatkal Reservation Scheme, which w
as first introduced in December, 
1997 had a number of shortcomings like availability of this scheme in limited 
number of trains, stringent condition of issuing of ticket on the authority of Identity 
Card and carrying the same proof during journey accommoda
tion going vacant and 
its misuse etc.   To  remove these shortcomings and to make this scheme more user 
friendly it was decided to revise this scheme completely.  Accordingly, Tatkal 
Scheme was revised and issued in August 2004.  One of the major change ma
de in 
this scheme was that the condition of production of proof of identity by the 
passenger booth at the time of booking ticket and also during the journey has been 
removed.  In order to prevent the misuse of this facility by unscrupulous elements, 
the ta
tkal charges had to be enhanced during peak rush period when there is a 
great demand for reservations.  The scheme has already been extended in almost all 
the trains.  A few trains left will be covered within this month itself i.e. January, 
2005.  It may b
e mentioned that there is a positive response from the users for the 
new Tatkal Scheme.”
 
 
(Para No. 135)
 
 
 
The enquiry system consisting of Public  Address System, Electronic Train 
Display Board, Auto Answering System, Interactive Voice Response System (IV
RS), 
National Train Enquiry System (NTEs) and the Staff manning the enquiry counters 
play a vital role in enhancing the customer friendly image of Railways.  However, the 
behaviour of front line staff at the enquiry booths were often found to be improper 
t
o the extent of being, rude and non
-
cooperative at times.    Sometimes the 
information given by them was also found to be incorrect.   During the examination 
of the subject, the Committee were informed that 9 per cent of the complaints 
received were regard
ing improper behaviour of the Railway staff and 7 per cent 
were regarding the enquiry.   The Committee had opined that to improve the 
enquiry system by minimizing the human interface, though computerized enquiry 
system had been started by the Railways and 
non telephone based enquiry system 
was also being planned such as enquiry through website, SMS, Radio, TV etc., yet 

 
24
 
the human factor could not be 
eliminated completely. The Committee 
had, therefore, stressed that the front line staff manning the enquiry bo
oths must 
be imparted training for effecting improvement in their behavior/attitude before 
being deployed to man those counters so that they were available at the counters 
alert with updated information, well behaved, helpful and courteous in their 
approac
h while dealing with customers.  The Committee had also emphasized that 
at ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ category stations enquiry system should function round the clock and 
at the same time more telephone lines should be provided at the enquiry offices so 
that the public
 in general and passengers in particular may not face inconvenience.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The complaints regarding enquiry both face to face and telephone, are 
mainly on account of non
-
dissemination of co
rrect and updated information.  
Improper and non
-
cooperative behaviours of the frontline staff has also been a 
cause of concern.  In order to reduce the human interface the Railways are setting 
up Integrated Train enquiry System (ITES) in all the telecom c
ircles of the country 
with mega IVRS in each telecom circle equipped with large number of telephone 
lines catering to rail enquiry needs of the whole circle round the clock.  Besides this, 
training is also imparted to the staff found deficient in working k
nowledge and 
courtesy.  In addition, a new system of on
-
job
-
training to frontline staff is being 
developed for a number of important stations so as to train such staff in dealing 
appropriately with the passengers.”
  
 
 
 
(Para No. 136)
 
 
 
The Committee had no
ted that the information aired through the enquiry 
booths/display boards, voice recording system regarding the arrival/departure time 
schedule of trains based on the details provided by control office or central enquiry 
and from operating staff on duty are
 found to be delayed, incorrect and 
incomprehensible as the process of transmission of information was very long and  
passes through many hands before being announced.  The voice recording system 
particularly was so bad that it became difficult to know the
 exact timings of the 

 
25
 
trains.  They also found that there was 
lack of cooperation between the 
coaching/commercial control staff and the enquiry staff. Besides, the audibility of 
the announcements made on stations is  very poor. The Committee had, therefore
, 
strongly recommended that immediate rectification regarding transmission of 
information be made and co
-
operation between the coaching/commercial control 
staff and enquiry staff enhanced.  They had emphasised that all out efforts be made 
to ensure that di
splay through that system was clear comprehensive, accurate and 
timely.  The Committee had desired that some system should be developed to 
provide updated information.   The arrival and departure of the train should be 
electronically displayed at all the p
latforms.  They had also stressed that the 
announcements should not be made hurriedly it should be at a proper pace, 
accurate and audible to commuters.    
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“In order to enhance coordin
ation between Coaching/Commercial Control 
staff and enquiry staff and to eliminate the problem of improper transmission of 
information, a National Train Enquiry System has been developed to provide 
updated information to all the sub systems.  It has been m
ade available in all the 
control offices where updated position is fed into the computer system.  Moreover, a 
separate project for computerization of train charting in divisional control offices is 
also in progress which will make the enquiry data almost o
n line eliminating the 
present shortcomings.
 
 
 
As there were deficiencies in the present telephone enquiry system (IVRSs) 
and complaints continued to be received, a new integrated train enquiry system 
(ITES) has been developed combining the manual and IVRS
 enquiry systems with 
250/500 telephone lines.  Two such systems have been installed at Patna & 
Bangalore recently as pilot projects.  All types of enquiry facilities, manual as well as 
computerized are made available to passengers through the ITES. It is 
proposed to 
install such ITES in all the telecom circles in near future so as to cover the whole of 
Indian Railways.
 
 

 
26
 
 
As regards proper announcements 
at the railway stations, instructions exist 
with the Railways for proper upkeep and use of Public Address
 System, ensuring 
quality announcements, selection of proper persons, providing adequate training 
etc. which have been reiterated to the Railways.  In addition, more and more 
computerized systems for announcements are being planned at important stations.”
 
 
(Para No. 137)
 
 
 
The Committee had found that announcements were made in a very few 
superfast trains only.    They had suggested that a brief announcement should be 
made in the train about the approaching station with its topography, historical 
background
, cultural, tourist and pilgrimage significance  to make the commuters 
aware about the place even if they were not getting down there and make their 
journey interesting.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Announcements
 are not feasible in all trains due to operational and 
infrastructural constraints.  Instructions have been reiterated for incorporating the 
element of historical, cultural, tourist and pilgrimage significance of important 
enroute stations while making ann
ouncements in those trains where announcements 
system exists.”
 
(Para No. 138)
 
 
 
The Indian Railway system carries over 1.3 million passengers daily.  The 
cleanliness was supposed to be checked strictly at different levels from the 
supervisors in charge at 
the stations to officers of different departments located at 
stations, divisions or headquarters.  However, it was a common experience that the 
cleanliness in trains and at stations was not maintained properly.  Given the 
mammoth size of the Railways, the 
Committee did appreciate that it was not 
physically possible for the Railway Board to verify and check each and every station 
and train.  Nevertheless, the Committee desired that a system of random checking 
by special inspection teams might be conceived at
 the Railway Board level and 

 
27
 
based on the feed back of reports of 
those teams, corrective measures might 
be taken to improve the cleanliness at stations as well as in trains.  They had urged 
the Railways to extend further the innovative and mechanized clea
ning method of 
Ratlam type to other stations as well at the earliest.   They had emphasised that 
control discharge type and modular type toilets might be installed in new coaches 
and in coaches which were sent to the coaching depots for maintenance.  The 
C
ommittee had also recommended that manual & physical cleaning of tracks at 
stations, platforms and trains might be carried out regularly till the aforementioned 
systems were installed.   They had also desired that cleanliness should be ensured 
by spraying 
of bleaching powder etc. so that no stench was their.  Special attention 
should be given towards the cleanliness as well as maintenance of the toilets.   
Since this year had been declared as a cleanliness year by the Railways, the 
Committee had desired tha
t the precincts of the Railway Stations including the 
tracks be kept thoroughly neat and clean as that would provide desirable 
environment  to the tourists/passengers from all over the world.    
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
 stated:
-
 
 
 
“
Cleanliness at Stations:
-
 
 
 
Cleanliness is a continuous process and all out efforts are being made to 
ensure a satisfactory level of sanitation at stations.  With a view to improve the 
standard of cleanliness in Railway premises and on trains,
 a number of initiatives 
have been taken which include introduction of mechanized cleaning, provision of 
washable aprons, provision of ‘Pay & Use’toilets, special drives etc.  Besides this, 
there is a long established system of conducting inspections by va
rious officers at 
the railway stations to monitor cleanliness.  These inspections range from the level 
of supervisors to senior officers.  The purpose of inspections is not only to ensure 
regular cleanliness but also to identity weak areas and take remedia
l measures.  
Moreover, various railways also undertake drives from time to time particularly 
during rush seasons to have greater impact.  Inter division cleanliness competition 
scheme has also been launched where the stations will be awarded points in 

 
28
 
sele
cted aspects of cleanliness and the 
division obtaining maximum points will 
be awarded.
 
 
In Trains:
-
 
 
 
Instructions have been issued by Railway Board to set up one Clean Train 
Station on Ratlam pattern in each Railway within the current financial year i.e. 
2004
-
05. Further, as per integrated Railway Modernisation Plan 2005
-
2010, issued in 
November 2004, 50 more Clean Train Station shall be set up in the next 5 years to 
improve the general cleanliness of trains. 
 
 
 
Indian Railways have also embarked upon the 
project of “Green Toilets” by 
providing environmental friendly toilet systems in 8000 coaches of Indian Railways 
in the next five years to ensure that no discharge is made openly to the track.  
 
 
Also 5000 coaches shall be fitted with controlled discharge 
toilets to keep the 
track near the station clean.
 
 
 
In addition, detailed guidelines have been issued to Railways to upgrade the 
infrastructure for improper hygiene and cleanliness at terminals during maintenance 
of coaches.”
 
 
(Para No. 139)
 
 
 
The Committe
e were also informed that due to shortage of ‘safaiwalas’ the 
cleanliness on the station premises and in the trains is hampered considerably.  
They had, therefore, recommended that the vacancies in the category of ‘safaiwalas’ 
might be filled up on priorit
y basis so that the cleanliness might not suffer on that 
account.  They had emphasized that the decision of the Government for automatic 
creation of posts as soon as the new trains were declared should be implemented 
forthwith.  
 
 
 
 

 
29
 
 
In their Action Taken 
Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“Instructions have been issued to General Managers of all Zonal Railways for 
filling up of vacancies of ‘Safaiwalas’ immediately.  In exigencies of work they are 
empowered to engage substitutes against vacant 
posts of ‘Safaiwalas’.  As regards 
creation of Posts, the General Managers are empowered to create non
-
gazetted 
posts with matching surrender, in consultation with their FA & CAOs.”
 
 
(Para No. 140)
 
 
 
The Committee were further informed that the response to
 the ‘Pay & Use’ 
toilets at the station premises had been commendable.  Considered the fact, the 
Committee had desired that the Railway should explore more possibilities of setting 
up of ‘Sulabh Sauchalayas’ in collaboration with the ‘Sulabh International’
  or any 
other non
-
governmental organisation so as to maintain certain level of cleanliness in 
and around station premises.   Apart from that they had stressed that in case of 
deliberate shirking of work by delinquent employees, punitive or deterrent actio
n 
must be taken against them. 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“There has been a concerted and sustained effort to bring about a perceptible 
improvement in cleanliness.  One of the initiatives taken to improve cleanl
iness is by 
introduction of ‘Pay & Use’ scheme of toilets.  At present, this facility has already 
been extended to at about 450 stations.  The Ministry of Railways has issued policy 
guidelines regarding ‘Pay & Use’ toilets to encourage and facilitate proli
feration of 
the scheme on the Zonal Railways wherever found feasible and justified.
 
 
 
It is informed that suitable disciplinary action is taken against the staff found 
lacking in performance of cleaning duties.”
 
 

 
30
 
 
WAITING ROOM/RETIRING ROOM
 
(Para No. 141)
 
 
 
As per the category of station, facilities/amenities were provided at stations.  
Those facilities include provision of waiting rooms at A, B&D categories of stations.  
Instructions were there to keep the waiting rooms open round the clock. However, 
the C
ommittee were informed that sometimes just to avoid the misuse by the 
miscreants, those rooms were kept under lock and key by the Incharge/Station 
Manager.  It was generally noticed that the waiting rooms at stations lacked basic 
facilities/amenities and i
f at all those amenities were available, they were 
inoperative.  The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Station Managers 
might be made accountable for providing/maintaining the amenities in the waiting 
rooms and any lapse on that account should be 
taken up seriously.
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Zonal railways have been suitably advised about compliance of the 
recommendation of the Committee.”
 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING AND TOURISM CORPORATION (IRCTC)
 
(Para
 No. 145)
 
 
 
IRCTC had been established in 2001 to take care of the catering activities of 
Indian Railways and it had taken over all catering activities of Indian Railway either 
franchised or departmental alongwith the staff which was deployed at the time o
f 
take over.   IRCTC emphasised that all the staffers from private caterers besides the 
staff taken over from the department by IRCTC should be imparted professional 
training in sanitation and hygiene.  
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that still a dual system o
f catering exists in the 
railways.  The IRCTC was further engaging private contractors for fulfilling the 
catering demands of the Indian Railways.  There were so many complaints received 
by the Railways against those private contractors regarding the quali
ty and quantity 
of the foodstuff provided by those contractors.  The Committee had further 

 
31
 
observed that under the extant policy 
thousands of static and mobile catering 
workers, who were taken over by the IRCTC at the time of taking over of Railway 
caterin
g activity, were likely to be rendered surplus on reversion to Railways.  The 
Committee had, therefore, emphasized that the earlier system of dual catering 
should continue.  They had also stressed that extant policy with regard to awarding 
of contracts by 
IRCTC to private operators should be reviewed at the earliest.  The 
Committee had urged the Ministry to check regularly the quality of food served in 
the trains as well as at stations, besides the prices of the food items supplied by 
those contractors shou
ld be regulated and monitored regularly so that the food 
items were not overpriced.   Special effort should be made to ensure that those 
were prepared in hygienic condition and the quality was not allowed to suffer at any 
cost.   The Committee had also des
ired that vending machines for beverages should 
be installed at ‘A’ and ‘B’ stations.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“Indian Railway and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (IRCTC) has been formed to 
function as an extended arm 
of Indian Railways to upgrade, professionalise and 
manage the catering and hospitality services at stations, on trains and other 
locations.  It also seeks to promote domestic and international tourism through 
development of budget hotels, special tour pack
ages etc. The main objective of the 
government to form the IRCTC is to get these services functional through public 
private partnership and to reduce liabilities of the Railways.
 
 
Right from the inception of railways, catering services have been traditiona
lly 
managed with dual system and majority of the services are managed by private 
licensees.  After careful evaluation and comparison of privately managed and 
departmentally managed catering, the government took a conscious policy decision 
for freezing depa
rtmental catering activity.  It has been government policy, fight 
from 1992 that ‘
In future no catering/vending units should be taken up for 
departmental management and all the new units both static and mobile should be 
managed by Licensees only’.  
Further
 1992 policy states that although existing 
departmental units could be privatized keeping in view the various problems 

 
32
 
involved,  mostly the staff problem, the 
privatization has to be undertaken in 
phases.  Catering policy of 2000 also stipulates that ‘
In 
future no catering/vending 
units should be taken up for departmental management and Licensees should 
manage the services’.
  Catering policy of 2004 also reiterates that ‘
In future no 
catering/vending units should be taken up for departmental management and
 
Licensees should manage the services’.
 
 
IRCTC alongwith private catering will continue to manage departmental 
catering operation, upgrade and make them financially sound by any retrenchment 
of departmental staff and consequent to the de
-
departmentalizatio
n of catering 
units, the existing staff will be re
-
deployed suitably.  Further, IRCTC have generated 
approximate 6682 number of employment opportunities by licensing out the catering 
units over Indian Railways.  In addition, there are employment opportunit
ies in Train 
side vending and sale of specific items at stations also.
 
 
Regarding improvement and quality of food, IRCTC has initiated necessary 
steps to bring out improvement in services, personal hygiene, upgradation of base 
kitchen and over all quality 
of services.  Since June
-
2002, IRCTC has formulated a 
manual on ‘Hygiene and Quality Standard’ which is part of all bid documents and is 
under overall implementation by the private contractors.  IRCTC has also arranged 
training programme for licensee and d
epartmental staff.  Handbook for catering 
staff for Personal and Service hygiene has been prepared for the guidance of field 
staff.  1327 number of departmental staff have been given training at reputed 
national and regional Training Institutes.  In additi
on 125 number of cooks, 
including from Parliament House, have been trained.
 
 
Improvement of quality of food is a continuous process and IRCTC has 
initiated several long term measures such as design of one prototype of pantry car 
to improve food quality and
 hygiene. Some of the catering units managed under 
IRCTC have also been certified as ISO units.  Further, IRCTC managed units are also 
subject to inspection of various authorities in railways and IRCTC also undertakes 
inspections on catering activities at 
station and on board trains.  Detailed follow up 
action is initiated on shortcoming noticed.
 

 
33
 
 
As regards beverages, till date, IRCTC has awarded licences for 113 number of 
Automatic Vending Machines (AVMs) at class A & B stations.  Since, this is an 
ongoin
g process, IRCTC will award more licences for AVMs at class A & B stations”.
 
 
(Para No. 146)
 
 
 
The Committee had found that out of 680 Mail Express trains pantry car had 
been made available on 234 trains only.  During the evidence it was submitted that 
all
 the 17 Sampark Kranti Express Trains would also be provided with pantry cars.  
They were also informed that as per the number of coaches manufactured every 
year provision of pantry cars were made accordingly.  The Committee had desired 
that Ministry of Ra
ilways should make efforts to enhance manufacture of pantry 
coaches so that at least pantry cars might be made available in all long distance 
trains, where journey of more than 15 hours was involved.  They had also 
emphasised that necessary steps might be 
taken at the earliest in order to provide 
hygienic food with quality assurance to the passengers of long distance trains rather 
than providing food from train side vending.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“Railways pro
vide catering services to the passengers through static catering 
units as far as possible.  Wherever it is not possible to provide satisfactory services 
through static catering units certain criteria are laid down for providing pantry cars 
in mail/express 
trains, other than Rajdhani Express trains where it is a part of train 
composition, subject to availability of pantry cars.  These criteria are:
-
 
 
*
 
Pantry cars are attached in long distance Mail/Express trains covering 
a journey of more than 24 hours each
 way.
 
*
 
At least 10 sleeper class coaches are in the trains formation.  
 
*
 
At least 200 meals comprising lunch or dinner for supper
-
fast trains 
and 150 meals for mail/express trains are expected to be served.
 

 
34
 
*
 
There are less number of 
stoppages where it i
s not possible to 
provide catering services through static units enroute, etc.
 
 
As regards, allotment of pantry cars, 26 nos. of pantry cars were produced 
and allotted during 2003
-
04 and 61 nos. of pantry cars planned for production 
during 2004
-
05 and 44 n
on. Of pantry cars have been projected for production for 
the year2004
-
05.   So far as Sampark Kranti Express trains are concerned, all the 
Sampark Kranti trains except Kathgodam Sampark Kranti have been allotted pantry 
cars and the trains are being introd
uced with pantry car since the date of their 
introduction.
 
 
Service of hygienic food with quality assurance to the passengers of long 
distance trains is ensured through regular inspections to monitor quality of food with 
a view to provide hygienic food thr
ough pantry cars as well as train side vending.” 
 
 
 
(Para No. 151)
 
 
 
The Committee were informed that in order to enhance the life of a coach 
rake, renovation was done at Bhopal after 10 or 12 years of use which was called as 
mid
-
life rehabilitation of coa
ches.  That gives a lease of another 15 years’ life for the 
coach.    Roughly 350 coaches of Mail/Express Trains per year were sent to Bhopal   
for renovation, as that was the capacity.   Railways had now proposed to increase it 
to 425.  That renovation wa
s carried out only in case of the coaches of long distance 
trains.  The coaches of passenger trains were being taken care of locally by 
Intermediate Overhaul (IOH) and Periodical Overhaul (POH) which was done after 
every 18 months.  The Committee had noted
 that the coaches of the long distance 
trains and the passenger trains got renovation/ overhauling but there was no set 
procedure/pattern for renovation/overhauling of coaches of local trains.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desired that atleast IOH/POH of 
the coaches of the 
local/suburban trains might be carried out regularly.
 
 
 
 
 

 
35
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Coaches running in local/passenger trains are overhauled every 18 months 
whereas these running in Express 
trains are overhauled every 12 months.
 
 
 
For enhancing the reliability, availability and level of passenger amenities of a 
coach, mid life rehabilitation (MLR) of coaches is being done between 12
-
15 years of 
age.  As against approximate requirement of 1600
 midlife rehabilitation, the present 
capacity is only 450.  further expansion to 1000 coach per year capacity is under 
examination.”
 
 
 
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE
 
(Para No. 152)
 
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that Automatic Teller Machines(ATMs) were 
installed at
 40 important stations to facilitate the passengers to withdrew cash 
through their credit cards and perform other activities.  They were informed that 
ATMs were installed and operated by reputed Banks which were selected through 
press advertisements.  The 
Committee had urged the Ministry to take steps to tie up 
with various Nationalized/Private Banks to extend that facility of ATMs to the 
passengers at all the other important stations as well at the earliest.
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of 
Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
 
“Installation of Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs) on zonal railways and its 
proliferation is a continuous process.  In this direction, the following steps have 
been taken and the scheme liberalized:
-
 
 
(i)
 
In the original scheme for in
stallation of ATMs, there was a condition 
that only those Banks were allowed to install ATMs who had at least 3 
ATMs operating in the city serving the station where it is proposed to 
install the machine.  This condition has now been waived completely.
 
 

 
36
 
 
(ii)
 
Ea
rlier ATMs were allowed to be installed only on ‘A’ class stations.  
Now this condition has been liberalized and zonal railways have been 
authorized to take decision to install ATMs at stations other than ‘A’ 
class stations also.”
 
 

 
37
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
RECOMMEND
ATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’ REPLIES
 
 
  
 
 
UTILISATION OF FUNDS
 
(Para No. 130)
 
 
 
The Committee were constrained to note that for the last several years the 
funds allocated for passenger amenities
 were not being utilized fully by the 
Railways.   They were informed by the Ministry of Railways that because of slow 
progress of work due to contractual problems, delay in finalisation of plans and 
estimates, difficulty in executing works under traffic co
nditions, regulation on plan 
expenditure imposed in the course of the year, the funds could not be utilized fully 
in some years.  With regard to the finlisation of plan and estimates, the Committee 
were informed that the proposal for passenger amenities li
ke other Plan Heads was 
scrutinized by different Committees such as Standing Passenger Amenities 
Committee of Zonal Railway, Standing Committee on Passenger Amenities in 
Railway Board, Additional Members Committee and at Board level.   The Committee 
had fe
lt that this was a very lengthy process which consumes a lot of time.  The 
planning itself takes a substantial portion of time during the financial year thereby 
causing delay in completion of projected works resulting in cost and time over runs.   
The Comm
ittee had, therefore, desired that an action plan must be prepared by all 
Zonal Railways well in advance so that the fund was allotted in time and works 
completed within the same financial year. 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have 
stated:
-
 
 
 
“It is a fact that funds utilization against passenger amenities head has been 
below the targeted level in the last few years due to various factors.  However, 
Railways were impressed upon during the last GMs meeting to expedite the progress 
of 
work and to ensure that funds to the extent allocated must be spent in full.”
 
 

 
38
 
 
(Para No. 131)
 
 
 
The Committee were apprised that for full utilization of allotted fund, a  
decision had been taken by Railway Board that henceforth, each Zonal Railway 
would p
lan 15 percent to 20 percent more works than what was budgeted during 
the year and Zonal Railways would be responsible for financial management.   By 
planning excess works the Zonal Railways would fully utilized the funds allotted for 
passenger amenities. 
   The Committee had appreciated the decision of the Ministry 
of Railways according to which the responsibility of financial management now rest 
on the Zonal Railways, which would review the fund utilization status every month 
rather than every quarter of 
the year.  They were hopeful that under this new 
methodology the Railways, would be able to spend all the funds allocated to them 
under the head ‘Passenger Amenities’ instead of surrendering unutilized funds at the 
end of the year.   They had desired that 
the directions in this regard might be given 
to all Zonal Railways and scrupulously  implemented so as to complete all the 
projected works as per the time schedule.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the completion status of the projects as well a
s the utilization of the funds during 
the financial year. 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
 
“Board have already instructed all Zonal Railways to ensure full utilization of 
funds under Plan Head ‘Passenger Amenities’.
  All efforts are being made to 
complete passenger amenities works in a time bound manner and utilize the funds 
fully.  It is expected that utilization of funds shall be better this year than the 
average of the performance in previous years.”
 
   
 
(Para No.
 142)
 
 
 
The Committee had also found that there are no separate ladies retiring room 
at ‘B’ & ‘D’ categories of stations.  They were of the view that during late nights and 
odd hours the women passengers cold not relax in the presence of waiting male co
-

 
39
 
pa
ssengers in the common waiting 
rooms.  They had, therefore, desired 
that separate ladies retiring rooms be provided in ‘B’ & ‘D’ category stations also.
 
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The retiring rooms at railwa
y stations can be availed of by any passenger 
including lady passengers.  Moreover, retiring rooms are allotted full on payment of 
prescribed charges.  At present there are no separate ladies retiring room anywhere 
on Indian Railways.  As such, it is not c
onsidered desirable to provide separate 
rooms for lady passengers at B & D category  stations.  In case separate retiring 
room is earmarked for lady passengers, it is most likely to be under
-
utilized.”
 
 
COMPLAINTS
 
(Para No. 143
 
 
 
The Committee had observed
 that there was no proper system of registration 
of complaints at Railway stations.  They were informed that the complaint books 
were available with the Guards at stations, Superintendent if he was present in train, 
RPF personnels and in coaches.    Howeve
r, in practice those complaint books were 
not supplied to the complainants on demand by the railway staff nor the complaint 
books were available/to be seen in the coaches.  Moreover, the procedure for 
disposal of those complaints was also not transparent. 
  The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that a system of registering the complaints might be developed  
at each of the Zonal and Regional level so that every complaint was duly recorded.   
Further, they had stressed that adequate publicity be made about th
e availability of 
complaint books, the manner in which complaint could be lodged, on a display board 
at a prominent place in each and every coach.  They desired that AGM and ADRM 
who had been appointed as the incharge of public grievance cell in the Zone a
nd 
Region respectively should review the status of disposal of complaints every month. 
The Committee had also desired that the status/outcome/action taken on those 
complaints, may be communicated to the complainants in a time bound manner 
within three mont
hs. 
 

 
40
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“On Indian railways, there is a laid down system of registration of complaints 
by passengers.  At all stations, a complaint cum suggestion book is maintained with 
the Station Mana
ger/Station Superintendent. In trains, Guards of passenger and 
Mail/Express trains carry such complaint books.  In addition, the Manager of the 
pantry car is also required to make the complaint book available to passengers on 
demand.  The complaints/sugges
tions given by the traveling public are duly 
acknowledged at the time of registration.  Each complaint/ suggestion is then 
investigated/examined properly and a replay is sent to the complainant.  The AGMs 
at Zonal Railways and ADRMs at divisional level fun
ction as nodal agencies for public 
grievances who review the performance and position of public complaints regularly.  
Even at Railway Board’s level, this aspect is emphasized during various meetings 
which zonal Railways attend in the Board.” 
 
 
TRANSFERS
 
(
Para No. 144)
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that though the policy of rotational transfer of staff 
on commercial seats was there but those were not strictly followed in practice.  The 
person deployed on one seat was allowed to continue there for years together
.  
That might develop personal vested interests leading to corruption.  Many a times it 
had been found that the touts operate in connivance with the railway staff.   The 
Committee were of the opinion that the surveillance maintained by the vigilance 
depart
ment needs to be further strengthened.  They had empasised that Railway 
should ensure that as per the instructions no person was allowed to hold a sensitive 
post for more than three years and the policy of rotational transfers may be strictly 
followed in l
etter and spirit.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“In terms of existing instructions, Railway employees holding sensitive posts 
and who frequently come into contract with public and/or contractors/suppliers are 
require
d to be transferred every four years.  A comprehensive list of the sensitive 

 
41
 
posts for the purpose of periodical 
transfer was drawn and circulated to the 
Railways vide letter dated 27.9.89.  Instructions regarding periodical transfers have 
been reiterated 
to the Railways from time to time.  In June 1996 while reiterating 
the instructions, the Railways were directed that in the first instance staff holding 
sensitive posts who have stayed continuously in the same post for five years or 
above, should immediate
ly be transferred from the same.  Pursuant to discussion in 
the meeting with the Standing Committee on the Railways these instructions have 
been further reiterated vide Board’s letter dated 26.11.96.
 
 
 
Special instructions exist that Ticket Checking staff 
as also other staff in mass 
contact areas, detected to be indulging in malpractices should be sent on inter
-
divisional transfer as a matter of policy.
 
 
 
Member (Traffic), Railway Board vide his d. o. letter dated 19.8.04 addressed 
to General Managers, has 
issued instructions to shift the staff worming on sensitive 
posts for long duration in the same place, particularly in parcel offices & goods 
sheds/sidings.”
 
 
FOOT OVER BRIDGES
 
(Para No. 147)
 
 
 
The foot over bridges (FOB) were provided to connect the platf
orms with the 
area having main habitation of the city.  The Committee had found that over the 
years as a result of increase in population, the cities had developed on the other 
side of the stations, but no extension of FOB connecting other side of the stat
ion 
had been constructed, which causes great inconvenience/ safety hazards to the 
passengers.  They had felt that necessary guidelines in this regard should be issued 
to all the Zonal Railways that such stations should be identified where the city had 
deve
loped on the other side while the FOBs had not been extended so far.    The 
Committee had desired that extension of FOB be provided in those identified places 
on priority basis.  They also had desired that the expenditure on FOB might be 
incurred as an int
egral part of rail infrastructure and not from ‘Passenger Amenities 
Head’.
 
 

 
42
 
 
The Committee had also observed 
that at certain stations there were high 
level platforms and FOBs where it became difficult for the heart patients and 
handicapped to climb.  Simil
arly, the booking counters were also situated at 1
st
 or 
2
nd
 Floor of the building in some places.  They had, therefore, recommended that 
ramp type FOBs should be provided  atleast at the busy stations for the 
handicapped persons and passengers suffering fr
om heart ailment, arthritis, 
asthmatic disease etc.  Also booking counters for such passengers should be 
provided at ground floor.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The foot over bridges are provided to connect variou
s platforms with the 
entry/exist points keeping in view the safety of passengers.  Normally, FOBs are 
provided upto the booking office in the circulating area at all the important stations.
 
 
 
As regards extension of FOBs to other side of station where the 
city develops 
on the other side, Railways review the demands on case
-
to
-
case basis and sanction 
the work of second entry, along with provision of booking offices on the other side 
also, wherever the traffic needs justify the same.
 
 
 
Initially when a FOB is
 constructed it is charged under Plan Head ‘Traffic 
Facilities’.  Only additional FOBs are provided under the Plan Head “Passenger 
Amenities”.
 
 
 
As per the persons with disabilities (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES, PROTECTION 
OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION) Act 199
5, the slope of the ramp type FOB’s  
should be 1 in 12 or flatter which requires lot of space on platforms.  It is not 
possible for the railways to extend this facility at every station due to space 
constraints.  However, Railways have already been directe
d to provide ramps 
wherever feasible subject to availability of funds.”
 
 
 
 

 
43
 
 
(Para No. 148)
 
 
The Committee had also observed that in certain stations the booking 
windows were provided only at one side of those station after they had been 
extended or their c
ategory had been  raised due to increase in population on the 
other side of the city.  They were of the opinion that this causes inconvenience to 
commuters and might lead to mishappening, accidents or evasion in buying a ticket.  
They had stressed that Rai
lway should identify such stations Zone
-
wise and open 
the booking windows on either side of the stations also.  They had also emphasised 
that in such cities more number of booking offices be set up to facilitate passengers 
to buy Railway ticket as that wou
ld ultimately increase revenue of Railways.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“There is already a system of providing booking windows on the other side of 
the station also as and when there is sizeable increase in the 
traffic. Infact booking 
windows have also been opened at many stations on both sides of the stations.  
However, due to constraints of space and availability of additional staff and funds, it 
is not feasible to extend this facility at all stations.
 
 
 
As reg
ards opening of additional booking window at various places, it may be 
stated that it is a regular exercise and additional windows are opened subject to 
traffic justification.” 
 
 
RAISING OF LEVEL OF PLATFORMS
 
(Para No. 149)
 
 
 
The Committee had found that d
ue to adoption of uni gauge system in Indian 
Railways i.e. gauge conversion from NG and MG to BG or due to change in 
classification of stations or material modification works such as new line works or 
doublings, at stations the platform level had become lo
wer than even the level of 
tracks.  They had found that this is hazardous for the passengers.  They had been 
informed that instructions had been given that there should be no rail level 
platforms and at least middle level platforms should be constructed.  
The Committee 

 
44
 
had recommended that the height of the 
platform should be raised at all the 
stations on priority basis.  They had desired that the expenditure on those works 
should be incurred from the funds allotted for rail infrastructure rather than from 
‘Passenger Amenities’ head.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Instructions already exist to provide medium level patforms during all new 
gauge conversion works.  These instructions have been extended to all the new 
wo
rks of construction of double lines and new lines, subject to availability of funds.  
Instruction have also been issued to restore the level of platforms chargeable 
against the estimates of works wherever the level goes down on account of change 
of sleeper
s or lifting of track due to any other reason.”
 
 
COACH MAINTENANCE
 
(Para No. 150)
 
 
 
 Every passenger was a valued customer for Railways irrespective of the 
strata in society from which he came.  In fact IInd class passengers contribute a 
major portion of R
ailways income, hence the amenities provided to those 
passengers had a vital importance.    The Committee were informed that there was 
a well equipped system in place to ensure proper upkeep of those passenger 
amenities on day to day basis and also complet
e overhaul on periodic basis.  They 
were also apprised that day to day maintenance of rakes was carried out in washing 
lines at coaching depots which were equipped with facilities like pit pressurized air, 
electric charging facility, watering hydrants, lig
hting arrangements.  Further the 
trains leave washing line only after a detailed check in fully fit condition, ready for 
service such as all missing fittings were replaced and damaged ones were repaired.   
However, the Committee had observed that the facil
ities in  II Class/General 
compartment coaches were ill maintained.  It had been noticed that in some of the 
trains there were no lights/fans or they were not in working condition.  These 
deficiencies could be attributed to lack of maintenance/poor supervi
sion.  The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that a system of surprise checks by the 

 
45
 
SMs/higher officers might be introduced 
to oversee the maintenance work before 
the train was brought to the platform and at the stations.  That team might also be 
auth
orized to fix the responsibility on the delinquent employees in case any lapse 
was found so that appropriate action could be taken against them.
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“In order to make railways safer and mo
re responsive to rail users, so that 
prescribed standards of amenities are made available to all passengers, inspections 
are carried out by HODs of Mechanical discipline as per the schedule prescribed vide 
Board’s letter No. 98/AM(ME)/inspections dated 10.
11.98 viz. minimum three 
inspections per month by all HODs.  These are in addition to inspections conducted 
by other junior officers.
 
 
 
Each case where a deficiency in service is noticed.  Corrective action is taken 
by Indian Railways.  This includes inves
tigation, system improvement, if any, making 
up the deficiency and fixing up responsibility etc.”
 
 
 
 
 

 
46
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
CATEGORISATION OF STATI
ON
 
(Para No. 125)
 
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that the guidelines governing passenger amenities 
issued in 1952 were reviewed by the Railways for the first time in the year 1995 and 
Ministry of Railways issued revised guidelines under which the facilities wh
ich were 
operationally required and were an essential feature of the infrastructure of station 
such as booking office, platforms, platform shelter, lighting etc. were excluded from 
the list of passenger amenities and termed as ‘infrastructure facilities’. 
 The facilities 
provided over and above that infrastructure facility were covered under the 
passenger amenity.   As some deficiencies were found in the guidelines issued in 
1995 such as scale/quantum of amenities to be provided, whether the additional 
faci
lities as per norms would be a continuous process with growth of passenger 
traffic etc., the Ministry of Railways had made a further revision of the guidelines in 
1999 to overcome these deficiencies and issued revised guidelines classifying the 
facilities 
to be provided at stations into three categories viz. ‘Minimum Essential 
Amenities’, ‘Recommended Amenities’ and ‘Desirable Amenities’.  Since then the 
Railways were following those guidelines of 1999 till date while providing passenger 
amenities.   Howeve
r, the Committee were informed during evidence that further 
revision of those guidelines were made in 2003.  The Committee were of the opinion 
that in view of the change in living standard of people at large and technology 
developments those guidelines sho
uld be updated and reviewed regularly so that 
any deficiency occurring in the guidelines with the fast changing time could be 
rectified immediately.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
47
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
 
 
“With a view to overcome 
the deficiencies and also to meet the present day 
passengers expectations for visible, qualitative and effective improvements on 
amenities provided at the stations, Railways in 1999 reviewed the guidelines of 1995 
followed by further revision in 2003.  
 
 
 
Indian Railways has more than 8000 stations.  It has always been the 
endeavours of the Railways to provide adequate amenities to the passengers at the 
stations.  Certain amenities are provided at the time of construction of new stations 
based on anticipate
d traffic.  Amenities are further augmented from time to time 
based on the needs and expectations of the traveling public and the availability of 
funds.
 
 
 
Regarding regular update and review of extant guidelines, it is to be 
mentioned that such review is b
eing carried out periodically as warranted.  The 
thrust is on providing amenities at various stations as per laid down norms.  More 
frequent changes of norms may complicate the implementation and monitoring 
process.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OB
SERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
BASUDEB ACHARIA
 
November, 2005 
 
 
 
 
                                               Chairman,
 
Agrahayana, 192
7 Saka  
 
 
                  
Standing Committee on Railways
 