          
38 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 33rd Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Industrial 
Relations & Staff Welfare in Railways’] 
  
 
 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)  

 2 
 
 
SCR No.: 133 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 33rd Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Industrial 
Relations & Staff Welfare in Railways’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.10.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.10.2008 
 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)  
 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
          
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………   1 
           
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been   14 
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 22 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   23 
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  30  
final replies of the Government  are still awaited  ……. 
 
 
PART – II 
 
APPENDIX 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on    31  
Railways held on 02.09.2008 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government     33 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the  
33rd Report  of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Industrial Relations and 
Staff Welfare in Railways’  
  
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2008-09) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.         Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Smt. Suman Mahato 
7. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8.        Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9. #Vacant 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
11.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
12.       Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
13.       Ch. Lal Singh 
14.       Shri Ananta Nayak 
15.       Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
16.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
17.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19.       Shri Manik Singh 
20.       Shri K. Subbarayan  
21.       Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.      Shri Motilal Vora 
23. Shri Nandi Yellaiah  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri N. Balaganga 
29. Shri Abani Roy  
30. *Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
     31. Vacant 
__________________________________________________________________ 
#Shri Kishan Lal Diler passed away on 04.09.2008 (Ref.: LSS Bulletin No. 6009 dated 11th 
September, 2008). 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 12.08.2008 (Bulletin No. 45235 dated 14.08.2008). 
 

 5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Secretary 
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the St anding Committee on Railways (2008-09), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty Eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the  Thirty Third Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08) on ‘Industrial Relations & Staff 
Welfare in Railways’. 
 
2. The Thirty Third Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 14.09.2007 
and presented to Lok Sabha on 19.11.2007. It contained 17  
recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 31.12.2007.   
  
3. The Committee considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the 
same at their sitting held on 2.09.2008.    
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2008 -09) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in 
Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
22 September, 2008                                                   Chairman, 
31 Bhadrapada, 1930 Saka                     Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 

 7 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee dea ls with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 
Thirty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08) on 
‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’.  The Report was 
presented to Ho n’ble Speaker on 14.9.2007 and to Lok Sabha on 
19.11.2007.  Simultaneously, the   Report was also laid in Rajya Sabha.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on all 
the 17 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  Thes e 
have been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1,2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14  and 16.   
                 (Total : 12) 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Com mittee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para No. 17.      (Total : 1)  
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos. 4, 5, 7 and 15.        (Total : 4) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -  
 
NIL    
 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government 
on some of their recommendations/observations.   

 8 
A. Holding of Union elections by the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(CLC) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
1.4 Suggestion has been made in different quarters that holding of 
secret ballot should be entrusted to the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(CLC) at the Centre  a s in the case  of   Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
who have  held union elections with the assistance of observers provided 
by the CLC organization.  The Ministry of Labour have however, held that 
they have neither the power nor the manpower to conduct elect ions 
especially for lakhs of Railway employees posted throughout the length 
and breadth of the country.  The Committee trusted that the above 
suggestion would be taken note of and such steps taken as would ensure 
free and fair elections. 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“The elections under secret ballot system for giving recognition to 
trade unions on the Railways have been conducted under the 
supervision of a Committee headed by a retired Chairman, Railway 
Board appointed specially by the Ministry of Railways for this from 
26.11.2007 to 28.11.2007 and results declared.” 
 
 
1.6 The Committee feel  happy to note  that the Railways have 
successfully conducted the  elections under the secret ballot system 
for giving recognition to trade unions.   However, they find that the 
mandate of  the  high level Committee constituted by the Ministry 
of Railways under the Chairmanship of former Chairman, Railway 
Board was to frame the modalities for the conduct of secret ballo ts 
in order to recognize the Unions, to formulate the code of 
conduct/discipline for the elections and  to function as a nodal body 
for the conduct and the supervision of the secret ballot and to 

 9 
suggest the mechanism for arbitration where disputes arise o ut of 
the election. The term of the Committee was  from the date of 
constitution to  two months from the date of holding elections or 
one year , whichever was  earlier. Since,  the job assigned to this 
high level  Committee has been accomplished,  the Comm ittee 
wonder how the future elections to recognize Unions would be 
conducted in the absence of  a nodal body.  It is in this context,  the 
Committee suggested   to entrust the job of  holding of secret ballot 
to the Chief Labour Commissioner. The reply of the Ministry is 
silent in this regard. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier  observation that in order to provide equal opportunities to 
all unions and to hold  free and fair elections, the Ministry of 
Railways should take the assistance of th e Chief Labour 
Commissioner organization at the Centre.  They would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. The Committee , further 
desire that the details of the  complaints received, if any,  in respect 
of  the secret ballot held in Novemb er, 2007 and action taken 
thereon  may also  be intimated to them. 
 
 
B. Recognition of Unions of Railway Production Units and Metro 
Railway, Kolkata. 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
1.7 The Committee observed that the Production Units under the 
Ministry of  Railways  such as Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, Diesel 
Locomotive Works, Integral Coach Factory, Rail Wheel Factory and Rail 

 10 
Coach Factory etc. though  they qualify  to be called ‘factories’ and 
entitled to have unions, the Ministry of Railways do not se em to be 
favourably inclined to allow these units to have unions.  Similarly, there 
is no recognized Union in Metro Railway, Kolkata.  In order to enable the 
workers in these units to exercise their trade union rights and to enable 
their participation in ‘ Permanent Negotiating Machinery’, the Committee 
emphatically urged the Railways to reconsider their stand in the matter 
in consultation with the Ministry of Labour.  They also  recommended 
that the unions of the Production Units as well as the Metro Railwa y, 
Kolkata should be allowed to participate in the secret ballot. 
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“The existing grievances redressal machinery in the production 
units and MTP Railway is working satisfactoril y.   All General 
Managers and Chief Personnel Officers of the Production Units in 
the meeting held with Board on 10.8.1998 have  reached consensus   
to continue with the existing system of Staff Councils and meetings 
of the Board with Staff Councils.  The full Board in their meeting   
held on 11.10.1996 had also decided not to change the existing 
system of Staff Councils in Production Units. 
 
With a view to facilitate Federations in building up their 
following in the Production Units, thereby enhancing thei r 
influence in these Units, the Board, in the year 1992 permitted the 
Federations to have one Zonal Secretary in the  Production Units 
so that these Federations get the feel of the pulse of the workers 
and they could  take up issues concerning Production U nits.  Both 
the Federations viz., All India Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF) and 
National Federation of Indian Railwaymen (NFIR) have also agreed 
with the present system of Staff Councils in the  Production Units 
in the year 2004.  Further,  both the Federat ions  have also been 
allowed to take up the broad based general issues like  bonus, pay 
scales, general establishment rules, welfare schemes etc. in respect 
of Production Units and MTP Railway in  the Permanent 
Negotiating Machinery (PNM) and  Joint Consul tative  
Machinery/Departmental Council  meetings.   The present system 
of Staff Council is a well established system and any change will 
lead to disturbance in industrial relations. The subject of Staff 
Council has   found acceptance, both with the managem ent and 
the workers.  At present, the institution of Staff Council is 
maintaining harmonious industrial relations in Production Units.” 

 11 
 
1.9 The Committee find from the Action Taken Reply of the 
Ministry of Railways that nothing has been mentioned in the r eply 
about  measures taken to allow the Unions of the Production Units 
as well as Metro Railway, Kolkata to participate in the secret ballot.  
The Committee expect the Ministry to furnish details in this regard 
without delay. 
 
C. Working hours of Loco Running Staff 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
1.10 The Committee taking note of the complaint of All India Loco 
Running Staff Association (AILRSA) about non -implementation of 
government’s commitment given 35 years ago in 1973 about 10 hour duty 
for loco running staff  in blatant violation of the Hours of Employment 
Regulation (HOER)  urged inter -alia that working hours of Loco Running 
Staff be restricted forthwith to 8 hours.   
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“The working hours of railway servants including running staff on 
Railways are regulated in accordance with the provisions contained 
in Railways Act, 1989.  Employment of railway servants has been 
classified into four categories namely, Intensive, Continuous, 
Essentially Intermittent and Excluded.  The maximum statutory 
hours of work for employment classified as Intensive, Continuous 
and Essentially Intermittent are 45, 54 and 75 per week 
respectively.  
  Running staff on the Indian Railways are classified as 
‘Continuous’ and they are statutorily required to work for 54 hours 
a week on an average in a two weekly period of 14 days.  But the 
rostered hours of this category of employees have been fixed at 104 
hours in a two weekly period of 14 days including prepar atory and 
complementary time. 
In 1969, the Railway Labour Tribunal under the 
Chairmanship of Justice N.M. Miabhoy was set up.  One of the 

 12 
terms of reference to the Tribunal related to review of the Hours of 
Employment Regulations, including running duty at  a stretch for 
running staff.  In regard to running duty at a stretch, the Tribunal 
after detailed consideration made the following recommendations in 
August, 1972. 
 “ Running duty at a stretch of running staff should not 
ordinarily exceed 10 hours but suc h duty may extend to a 
maximum period of 12 hours, provided the concerned 
administration gives at least two hours notice before expiration of 
10 hours to the staff that it will be required to perform running 
duty for two hours more, provided further that t he total maximum 
hours of duty from ‘signing on’ to  ‘ signing off ’ does not exceed 14 
hours provided further that the total maximum hours will be 
progressively reduced by half an hour every two years from the date 
of this Report till the target of 12 hours is reached, i.e. at the end of 
eight years from the date of this Report, the total maximum hours 
of duty at a stretch from signing on to  signing off shall not exceed 
12 hours.” 
  Certain Loco running staff of Trivandrum Division had 
filed the case in t he Kerala High Court challenging Ministry of 
Railways letter No. E(LL) 77/HER/29 dated 3.4.81 .The 
CAT/Ernakulam vide their judgement dated 10.1.92 struck down 
the above -mentioned letter and had issued detailed guidelines for 
issue of instructions. Based o n the guidelines, instructions were 
issued vide Ministry of Railways letter No. E(LL)91/HER/11 dated 
13.4.92 which provides as under:- 
 
1. The overall duty at a stretch of running staff from ‘ signing 
on’ should not ordinarily exceed 12 hours and they shou ld be 
entitled to claim relief thereafter. 
2. The running duty at a stretch should not ordinarily exceed 10 
hours from the departure of the train and the staff should be 
entitled to claim relief thereafter. 
3. In operational exigencies the running duty may  be extended 
beyond 10 hours within overall limit of 12 hours provided a due 
notice has been given to the staff by the Controller before the 
completion of 8 hours of running duty. 
4.    If a train does not reach, within the overall limit of 12 hours, 
its n ormal crew changing point/destination of the train/or the 
place where a relief has been arranged and such point is 
approximately one hour’s journey away, the staff shall be required 
to work to that point. 
5. In exceptional exigencies of accidents, floods, agitations, 
equipment failure etc. the staff may be required to work beyond the 
limits prescribed above.  In such cases, the Controller should 
suitably advise the staff. 

 13 
Due to the very nature of their duties and keeping in view 
round the clock operation o f the Railways, running staff cannot be 
put on daily fixed roster. 
All efforts are made to contain the duty hours within the 
parameters laid down and the position is monitored at Divisional, 
Zonal and Railway Board levels.  The position regarding drivers 
duty on fortnightly basis is monitored by Crew Controllers and 
Divisional Officers to ensure that it is within the rostered 104 hours 
in a two weekly period of 14 days. Power Controllers are also 
required to work in close coordination with Section Controlle rs to 
ensure implementation of 10 hours duty rule.  In addition to this 
Ministry of Railways have issued instructions to the Railways 
stating that periodic Joint Meetings are required to be held with the 
recognised Unions/Federations on this issue of imple mentation of 
10-hours duty rule. 
The rule provides that the overall duty at a stretch of running 
staff from signing on should not ordinarily exceed 12 hours.  From 
the information available for the months of January to December 
2006 on the Railways, an ave rage of 88.1% trips were completed 
within 12 hours from  ‘signing on’ to ‘signing off’‘.   Further an 
average of 87% trips were completed within 10 hours from 
departure of the train and also that an average of 76.7% was 
achieved in respect to completion of  trips within 10 hours from 
signing on to signing off.  Keeping in view the constraints and the 
large rail network, this is not a mean achievement. 
It would not be out of place to mention that in emergency 
situations like floods, accidents, abnormal detent ions of trains or 
unforeseen incidents it becomes unavoidable to book the staff 
beyond rostered hours for which the running staff is compensated 
monetarily and paid overtime allowance as per rules. 
10 hour stipulated running time from wheel movement to 
wheel stoppage is intended to be the maximum running time. This 
also includes stoppage time of trains at signals and stations etc.  
However, in reality, the actual running time may be much less 
depending upon the availability of relief or termination of train .  In 
case the maximum running time is reduced, the average running 
time per day of a driver in a fortnightly period will be much less.  In 
addition to requirement of more drivers it may lead to problems of 
provision of additional running rooms, crew lobbi es and 
accommodation to the drivers. 
 
 
1.12 The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry that the  
Railway Labour Tribunal under the Chairmanship of Justice N.M. 
Miabhoy in 1972  as well as the CAT/Ernakulam guidelines of 1992  

 14 
have laid down that the  running duty for the loco staff at a stretch 
should not exceed 10 hours except in operational exigencies.   
However,  the Committee were given to understand that  this 10 
hours running duty for loco staff is calculated from ‘wheel 
movement’ to ‘wheel stoppage’. Considering the strenuous nature of 
duty of loco running staff,  the Committee desire that this 10 hours 
running duty should instead  be counted from  ‘signing on’ to 
‘signing off’ and the running duty at a stretch  should not exceed 8 
hours.   The Committee would await the response of the Ministry of 
Railways in this regard.   
 
D. Grievances of RPF Association 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
1.13 All India RPF Association had expressed in their Memorandum to 
the Committee that RPF authorities do not im plement the PNM decisions 
and Railway Board’s orders.  Another point raised by them was related to 
augmentation of the strength of the RPF by 24,000 as assessed by 
Railway administration and announced in 2006 and also suggested that 
Railway Protection Forc e personnel to the extent possible be posted 
within the respective State they belong to and there should be a time 
limit for the tenure of the RPF staff posted to Railway Protection Special 
Force.  The Committee desired that these issues should be looked i nto at 
the highest level and the grievances redressed. 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:-   
 
“Instructions have been issued to divisional and zonal authorities 
to implement PNM decision and Railway Board’s ord ers.  So far as 
augmentation of the strength of the RPF is concerned, a proposal 
for creation of 2661 posts is pending in the Ministry of Finance.  
Regarding remaining posts proposals are awaited from a few zones 

 15 
and then it will be put up for the consider ation of the Board.  
Regarding transfer of RPSF personnel to RPF a Committee has 
been constituted to formulate policy.  The Committee has 
submitted its Report and it is under consideration.” 
 
 
1.15 The Committee from the reply of the Ministry find that a 
proposal to create 2661 post of RPF, out of the 24,000 post as 
assessed and announced by the Railway Administration in 2006 for 
augmentation of the strength of RPF, is pending in the Ministry of 
Finance and for remaining posts proposals from a few Zones are  yet 
to be received for consideration by the Board.  The reply of the 
Ministry does not throw any light as to since when the proposal is 
pending in the Ministry of Finance for clearance and the efforts 
made by Railways in this regard. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Railways should take up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance without any further delay and the outcome be informed to 
them. They further hope that Railways will finalise the creation of 
the remaining posts also at the earliest after obtaining the proposals 
from the respective Zones and the position intimated to them. The 
Committee also desire that the outcome of Report submitted by a 
Committee constituted to formulate the policy for transfer of RPSF 
personnel to RPF be apprised to them. 
 
E. Central Railway Hospitals in new Zones 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
1.16 The Committee found that new Central Hospitals have been 
established only in two Zones namely East Central Railway (at Patna) 

 16 
and East Coast Railway (at Bhubaneswar) out of seven  newly created 
Zones and in rest of the five new Zones, divisional hospitals have been 
upgraded into the Central Hospital, although  a representative of the 
Ministry of Railways while deposing before them had stated that the 
Railways have recognized the ne ed to create separate Zonal hospitals in 
the seven newly created Zones. The Committee hoped that steps will be 
taken to set up separate Central Hospital in all the new Zones. 
 
1.17 In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways has stated as 
under:- 
“A decision was taken by the Ministry of Railways (Board’s letter 
No.2004/H/5/10(2) dated 9.8.2004) to create a new Central 
Hospital for  East Central Railway at Patna as there was no 
Railway hospital and to upgrade the existing divisional hospitals at 
the remaining six newly formed zones to the level of Central 
hospitals to have quality Medicare and avoid duplication of the 
resources.” 
 
1.18   The Committee would desire to be informed of the Zone -wise  
status of implementation of the decision taken by the Railway Board 
with regard to the upgradation of the existing Divisional Hospitals 
to Central Hospital and the time frame set to achieve the same.  
 
F. Mobile hospitals for each Divisional Hospital. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 
1.19    The Committee observ ed that at present, there is one mobile 
hospital in each Zone. The Committee felt that this facility needs to be 
extended to cover other areas also and accordingly recommended that 
arrangements be made for exclusive mobile hospital in each division and 
a blood bank in every divisional hospital. 
 
1.20 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 

 17 
“A Pilot project was started to provide one Road Mobile  Medical 
Van on each of the Railway Zone. The experiment has proved to be 
successful. Railways are contemplating to extend this facility to 
other areas. As per guidelines of the Drug Controller, Blood Banks 
are provided at the hospitals having a minimum annual 
requirement of 2000 bottles. Provision of Blood Banks at divisional 
Railway hospitals which meet this stipulation can be considered.” 
 
 
 
1.21 The Committee are glad to note that after successful 
experiment of a pilot project of Road Mobile Medical Van on each of 
the Railway Zone, Railways are considering to extend this facilit y to 
other areas also.  The Committee would like to be informed of the 
details of the divisions where the facility of Mobile Medical Van has 
been provided so far and the steps taken to provide this facility in 
the remaining divisions.  
 
G. Full time Doctors for Indian System of Medicines. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
1.22 The Committee found that unlike the full time doctors for the 
Indian System of Medicine in Central and State Government hospitals 
and Primary Health Centers, the Railways have only part -time doctors. 
The Committee recommended  that steps should be taken for providing 
full-time doctors for Indian System of Medicine and also for popularizing 
these systems.  
 
1.23 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 
“Unlike Health Ministry and CGHS, State Government etc. Health 
care in Railways cannot be treated as a core function.  Railway 
medical services have been developed to meet specific needs of the 
organization and the services include medical certification of 
fitness, especially safety related staff, curative services for a wide 

 18 
variety of conditions, emergency medical care, accident rescue and 
relief work, immunization etc. These services cannot be provided  
by Indian System of Medicine & Homeopathy (ISM & H) 
practitioners as their curriculum is different.  Hence, their services 
cannot be integrated with Indian Railway Medical Services.” 
 
1.24.  Not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry,   the 
Committee  desire that to provide comprehensive health care to 
Railway employees and their family members, Railways should take   
immediate steps to  depute full time doctors for Indian system of 
Medicine & Homoeopathy (ISM&H). They further desire that all 
efforts should be made to  popularize these systems amongst the 
Railway employees and  their dependent family members so that 
they also are benefited by these systems.  
 
H. Utilizing of Metro Hospital, Kolkata  
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
1.25 The Committee observed that the Metro Hospital at Kolkata which 
has all the  modern equipments and good facilities is not being utilized 
properly due to shortage of Medical and Paramedical staff. They desired 
that Kolkata Metro Hospital should be fully utilized both indoor as well 
as outdoor facilities and urgent steps be taken to  provide adequate 
number of Medical and Paramedical staff to the Hospital. 
 
1.26 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
“Steps are being taken by The Chief Medical Director, Eastern 
Railway to provide adequate medical facilities at Metro hospital at 
Kolkata, utilizing the complete infrastructure and medical 
equipments.” 
 

 19 
1.27  The Committee note from the reply that the Ministry of 
Railways have neither given any details about the steps taken in 
providing adequate number  of medical and para medical staff to 
Kolkata Metro Hospital nor the details about the utilization of the 
indoor as well as outdoor facilities of the Hospital. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the details in this regard including the 
number of medical and para medical staff  added to the Hospital. 

 20 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 It transpired during the Committee’s examination of Industrial 
Relations and Staff We lfare in Railways that the system of 
verification of Members, adopted by the Railways over the years, for 
recognition of unions has been pronounced by Madras High Court as 
‘incorrect’.  Recognition of unions used to be granted by the Zonal 
Railways on mini mum 30% membership of non -gazetted employees 
verified on the basis of returns filed by the claimants.  Obviously, 
the system was not foolproof to check dual membership.  On the 
High Court’s direction to devise a method to establish exclusive 
membership of an employee to a union, the Railways have since 
decided to go in for secret ballot.  According to Delhi High Court 
order, the secret ballot should be held within six months from 
22.03.2007 i.e. before 21 September, 2007.  Though only a few days  
are left for the court’s time limit to end, there appears to be no sign 
of the Railways completing the process of elections within the 
deadline.  The Committee feel that this task could have been 
completed as stipulated by the Court, had the work been handled 
with a sense of urgency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A  Committee headed by Sh. C.L.Kaw, Chairman, Railway Board 
(Retd.), has been formed for conducting and supervising the secret ballot. 
The modalities for conducting the elections have been finalized.  The 
Hon’ble High Court, New Delhi vide order dated 28.9.2007 has further 
granted two months time to hold the elections.  The polling for elections 
has been held from 26.11.2007 to 28.11.2007 and results declared. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Panel, headed by a former Railway Board Chairman, Shri 
C.L. Kaw, which is the nodal body for conducting and supervising 
the secret ballot to recognize unions is reported to have since 
framed the modalitie s for the election.  The Committee hope that 
the Railway Administration will take expeditious decision on the 
modalities under intimation to the Committee. 

 21 
 
Reply of the Government 
After finalizing the modalities, the polling for elections has been 
held from 26.11.2007 to 28.11.2007 and results declared. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
There are two unions recognized by the Railways viz. All India 
Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF) and Nation al Federation of Indian 
Railwaymen (NFIR) which have affiliates in all the Zonal Railways.  
The recognized unions enjoy a host of facilities including free passes 
which are not available to other registered unions.  One of the 
Railway associations which ap peared before the Committee has 
made a suggestion that recognition of the existing unions should be 
withdrawn atleast one year ahead of the secret ballot.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, there should be a level playing field for 
all the unions-recognized as well as registered - which participate in 
the secret ballot .  The Committee hope that appropriate steps will 
be taken to ensure this. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The modalities for conducting the Secret Ballot have been 
finalized. As per the modalities th e existing recognized trade 
unions/federations shall continue to remain as recognized 
unions/federations till election process is completed and their further 
future will depend upon as to how they fare in the elections. The 
facilities available to the reco gnized unions will continue only on the 
condition that these facilities will not be used for elections purposes. In 
case a complaint is received in this connection and on investigation the 
complaint is found to be correct, that recognized Trade union again st 
whom that complaint was received will be liable to be punished.  
Accordingly, the  polling for elections has been held from 26.11.2007 to 
28.11.2007 and results declared. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 22 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
One of the main grievances of the unions relates to non -
implementation/undue delay in implementation of the agreements 
arrived at in the meetings of Departmental Council and in the 
meetings of Permanent Negotiating Machinery (PNM) whic h operate 
at different levels and tiers.  The Committee have been informed 
that the PNM meetings are not held as frequently as prescribed in a 
number of divisions.  Similarly, in the case of All India RPF 
Association too, the PNM meetings are not held regu larly at Zonal 
and Divisional levels.  At the Board level also, the meetings have not 
been held with All India RPF Association for the last one year.  The 
data furnished by the Ministry in this regard also brings out this 
fact.  These reflect the failures of Railway authorities at divisional 
levels.  The deposition by Labour Secretary indicates that Railway 
disputes constitute five to six percent of total disputes received in 
the Labour Ministry.  The Committee desire that causes for this 
state of affairs s hould be gone into at high level and remedial 
measures taken to ensure that the Industrial Relations mechanism 
functions efficiently and effectively at all levels including the RPF 
by adhering to the laid down periodicity of meeting and time -bound 
implementation of the decisions arrived at such meetings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i)   On receipt of agenda items, these items are examined by the concerned Directorates in 
Board’s office by obtaining the information from Zonal Railways.  Besides items bearing 
effect on other Ministries/Departments viz. Ministry of Finance, DOP&T, Health and 
Ministry of Labour etc. necessary clarifications/ views are obtained and items are 
considered accordingly as per the extant rules and on the merit of the case which is time 
consuming.    However, all out efforts are made to implement the decision arrived in the 
meetings at the earliest. 
(ii)    So far as holding of PNM meetings as per prescription  at zonal/division levels is 
concerned, necessary instructions have been reiterated to Zonal Railways vide Board’s letter 
No.  E(LR)I/2007/NM1-10 dated  04.10.2007.   
(iii) Insofar as RPF is concerned, instructions have been issued to Zonal 
and Divisional Authorities to hold PNM as per schedule.  Efforts are also 
being made to have PNM at Railway Board level in the near future. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 23 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
All India RPF Association has also expressed its grievance that 
RPF authorities do not implement the PNM decis ions and Railway 
Board’s orders.  One of the points raised by AIRPF in their 
memorandum relates to augmentation of the strength of the RPF by 
24,000 as assessed by Railway administration and announced in 2006.  
There is also a suggestion that Railway Prote ction Force personnel to 
the extent possible be posted within the respective state they belong 
to and there should also be a time limit for the tenure of the RPF staff 
posted to Railway Protection Special Force.  The Committee desire 
that these issues shou ld be looked into at the highest level and the 
grievances redressed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Instructions have been issued to divisional and zonal authorities to 
implement PNM decision and Railway Board’s orders.  So far as 
augmentation of the strength o f the RPF is concerned, a proposal for 
creation of 2661 posts is pending in the Ministry of Finance.  Regarding 
remaining posts proposals are awaited from a few zones and then it will 
be put up for the consideration of the Board.  Regarding transfer of RPS F 
personnel to RPF a Committee has been constituted to formulate policy.  
The Committee has submitted its Report and it is under consideration. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 One of the  objectives of the mechanism of Participation of 
Railway Employees in Management (PREM) instituted in 1994 is to 
facilitate effective and meaningful participation of employees in the 
management process.  According to AIRF and NFIR, the PREM has 
become a so rt of ritual and there has been no real 
participation/involvement of employees before issues of 
significance are decided.  It has been stated that the decisions 
regarding outsourcing of certain functions, Public Private 
Partnership and such other matters h ad no prior involvement of 
PREM.  The Committee have been informed that in vital matters 
workers are not taken into confidence.  The Member Staff, Railway 
Board admitted during oral evidence that there is positive room for 

 24 
improvement.  The Committee trust  that the Railway management, 
taking note of its past failures, would take care to see that the 
PREM achieves its objectives and gives the Railway employees a 
sense of real involvement in the managerial process. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
                 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
         There was shortfall in utilization of funds for staff welfare to 
the tune of Rs 50 cr. in 200 5-06 and Rs. 57 cr. in 2006 -07.  The 
under utilization under the head ‘staff quarters’ involving 
construction of new quarters and works in progress is stated to be 
about Rs. 46 cr. in 2003 -04 and in the range of Rs. 13 cr. to Rs 29 
cr. in the subsequent ye ars and is attributed to steep hike in prices 
of raw materials, failures of contractors etc.  The Committee note 
that these are the reasons, which are repeated year after year, for 
failure to achieve targets.  In order to overcome these problems,  a 
suggestion has been made that there should be a suitable price 
escalation clause inbuilt into the contracts which would avert 
contract failures.  There is stated to be also delay in holding 
meetings by the Railways in deciding the works programme 
concerning staff quarters.  The Committee desire that such delays 
should be avoided and appropriate steps taken to ensure full 
utilization of allotted funds and timely completion of projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Regarding the suggestion for price escalation clause being in built into 
the contracts, suitable directions to Zonal Railways already exist. 
Works Programme is an annual exercise which take place on scheduled 
programme basis and sanction of new works is advised only after the 
Budget is passed by the Parliame nt. Efforts are being made by the 
Railways to ensure that funds allotted under staff welfare schemes under 
Plan Heads 51(Staff Quarters) and 52 (Staff Amenities) are utilized fully 
and not surrendered  for improving staff satisfaction.   

 25 
Railways have been  directed suitably and specifically asked to utilize the 
funds allotted under Plan Heads ’51 & ‘52’ fully so that it could not be  
surrendered further. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
        The Committee have been informed that allocation under Staff 
Benefit Fund for recreational facilities to ‘officers and supervisory 
staff’ is disproportionate  to their strength as compared to the 
allocation in this respect for the rest of the employee s.  The 
Committee have been assured that this aberration will be corrected.  
The Committee would await the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A decision has been taken to segregate the welfare activities aimed at 
officers from the scop e of Staff Benefit Fund and the present allocation 
meant for the ‘recreational facilities for officers and supervisory staff’ has 
been kept with the SBF to be utilized towards recreational facilities for the 
staff/supervisory staff only. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee find that though there is requirement of sanctioning 
of around Rs 450 -500 cr. every year under the Corporate Welfare 
Plan for maintenance and improvement of st aff quarters,  the total 
funds allocated under this plan is just Rs. 344.22 cr.  in 2007 -08.  
The Committee would like to be informed of exact allocation and 
utilization of funds under the plan during 2006 -07.  Considering the 
fact that the staff quarters in some of the Railway colonies are in 
dilapidated condition, the Committee feel that the fund allocation 
for improvement of quarters should be stepped up to match the CWP 
projection of about Rs. 450 cr. every year.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submit ted that the Corporate Welfare Plan(CWP) (2007 -2016) 
was prepared and issued to Railways for implementation on 21.10.2006 

 26 
only.  Hence no allocation could be specifically made under this Plan 
during 2006-07.   
Though there was shortfall in the allocation o f adequate funds 
under the Corporate Welfare Plan during 2007-08, efforts will be made to 
ensure that from the next year onwards maximum possible allotment of 
funds under the CWP will be made to match the projection of funds of 
the Plan. Railways have been  directed and specifically asked to propose 
maximum works under CWP through their regular Works Programmes. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
   
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that new Central Hospital s have been 
established only in two out of seven newly created Zones and in rest 
of the five new Zones, divisional hospitals have been upgraded into 
the Central Hospital. The Zones which are having new Central 
Hospitals are East Central Railway (at Patna) and East Coast Railway 
(at Bhubaneswar). A representative of the Ministry of Railway 
deposed before the Committee that the Railways have recognized 
the need to create separate Zonal hospitals in the seven newly 
created Zones. The Committee hope that steps will be taken to set 
up separate Central Hospital in all the new Zones.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
          A decision was taken by the Ministry of Railways (Board’s letter 
No.2004/H/5/10(2) dated 9.8.2004) to create a new Central Hospital for  
East Central Railway at Patna as there was no Railway hospital and to 
upgrade the existing divisional hospitals at the remaining six newly 
formed zones to the level of Central hospitals to have quality Medicare 
and avoid duplication of the resources.   
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 At present, there is reportedly one mobile hospital in each 
Zone. The Committee feel that this facility needs to be extended to 
cover other areas also and accordingly recommend that 
arrangements be made for exclusive mobile hospital in each division 
and a blood bank in every divisional hospital.  

 27 
 
Reply of the Government 
         A Pilot project was started to provide one Road Mobile  Medical Van 
on each of the Railway Zone. The experiment has proved to be 
successful. Railways are contemplating to extend this facility to other 
areas. As per guidelines of the Drug Controller, Blood Banks are provided 
at the hospitals having a minimum annual requirement of 2000 bottles. 
Provision of Blood Banks at divisional Railway hospitals which meet this 
stipulation can be considered. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Metro Hospital at Kolkata which has all the mo dern 
equipments and good facilities is not being utilized properly due to 
shortage of Medical and Paramedical staff. The Committee desire 
that Kolkata Metro Hospital should be fully utilized both indoor as 
well as outdoor facilities and urgent steps be tak en to provide 
adequate number of Medical and Paramedical staff to the Hospital.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
          Steps are being taken by The Chief Medical Director, Eastern 
Railway to provide adequate medical facilities at Metro hospital at 
Kolkata, utilizing the complete infrastructure and medical equipments.  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 28 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee find that out of 367 educational institutions 
on Railways, there has been only one degree college and the rest are 
at the level of senior secondary/secondary/middle/Primary schools. 
The Committee suggest, that the  desirability of setting up 
professional colleges with the courses of study and curriculum 
designed to meet the specific requirements of Railways be 
examined. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Provision of educational facilities is primarily the responsibility of 
State Governments and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(Department of Education) as per Article 346(3) – item 25 of list 3 i.e. 
Concurrent list (Seventh Schedule) of the Constitution of India.  
However, Railways have provided educational facilities t o the limited 
extent within the constraints of available resources,  purely as a measure 
of staff welfare to meet the needs of wards/children of Railway employees 
only at such places where there is a concentration of Railway employees 
and the educational f acilities provided there at by other agencies – both 
Government (State/Central) and private, are found inadequate or are 
totally absent resulting in hardships or inconvenience to them. However, 
with the passage of time and creation of educational facilitie s both by 
States/Private agencies such a situation has ceased to exist. As a matter 
of policy now Railways have decided to encourage opening of Kendriya 
Vidyalayas in Civil Sector in Railway colonies instead of opening their 
own schools. 
Educational facili ties provided by the Railways are generally 
confined to Primary/Middle and Secondary/Higher Secondary/Senior 
Secondary standards. The Railways do not normally enter into the field of 
College and Technical education owing to their extant policy keeping in 
view the far reaching administrative and financial implications. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 

 29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
A suggestion has been made in different quarters that holding 
of secret ballot should be entrusted to the Chief Labour 
Commissioner (CLC) at the Centre.  The Ministry of Labour have 
however, held that they have neithe r the power nor the manpower 
to conduct elections especially for lakhs of Railway employees 
posted throughout the length and breadth of the country.  The 
Committee learn that Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited have held 
union elections with the assistance of obs ervers provided by the 
CLC organization.  The Committee trust that the above suggestion 
would be taken note of and such steps taken as would ensure free 
and fair elections. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The elections under secret ballot system for giving recogn ition to 
trade unions on the Railways have been conducted under the 
supervision of a Committee headed by a retired Chairman, Railway 
Board appointed specially by the Ministry of Railways for this from 
26.11.2007 to 28.11.2007 and results declared. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Production Units such as Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, 
Diesel Locomotive Works, Integral Coach Factory, Rail Wheel 
Factory and Rail Coach Factory etc.  which are under the Ministry 
of Railways do not have unions.  Similarly, there is no recognized 
union in Metro Railway, Kolkata.  Though these production units, 
according to Labour Secretary, would qualify to be called ‘factories’ 
and entitled to have unions, the Ministry of Railways do not seem to 
be favourably inclined to allow these units to have unions.  The 
Committee have emphasized in their earlier Reports the need for 
the production units to have unions.  In order to enable the workers 
in these units to ex ercise their trade union rights and to enable 
their participation in ‘Permanent Negotiating Machinery’, the 
Committee would urge the Railways to reconsider their stand in this 
matter in consultation with the Ministry of Labour.  The Committee 

 30 
recommend tha t the unions of the production units as will as the 
Metro Railway, Kolkata should be allowed to participate in the 
secret ballot. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The existing grievances redressal machinery in the production units 
and MTP Railway is working satis factorily.   All General Managers and 
Chief Personnel Officers of the Production Units in the meeting held with 
Board on 10.8.1998 have  reached consensus   to continue with the 
existing system of Staff Councils and meetings of the Board with Staff 
Councils.  The full Board in their meeting   held on 11.10.1996 had also 
decided not to change the existing system of Staff Councils in Production 
Units. 
With a view to facilitate Federations in building up their following 
in the Production Units, thereby enhanci ng their influence in these 
Units, the Board, in the year 1992 permitted the Federations to have one 
Zonal Secretary in the  Production Units so that these Federations get 
the feel of the pulse of the workers and they could  take up issues 
concerning Produ ction Units.  Both the Federations viz., All India 
Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF) and National Federation of Indian 
Railwaymen (NFIR) have also agreed with the present system of Staff 
Councils in the  Production Units in the year 2004.  Further,  both the 
Federations  have also been allowed to take up the broad based general 
issues like  bonus, pay scales, general establishment rules, welfare 
schemes etc. in respect of Production Units and MTP Railway in  the 
Permanent Negotiating Machinery (PNM) and  Joint  Consultative  
Machinery/Departmental Council  meetings.   The present system of 
Staff Council is a well established system and any change will lead to 
disturbance in industrial relations. The subject of Staff Council has   
found acceptance, both with the management and the workers.  At 
present, the institution of Staff Council is maintaining harmonious 
industrial relations in Production Units. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 

 31 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 All India Lo co Running Staff Association (AILRSA) has 
complained about non-implementation of government’s commitment 
given 35 years ago in 1973 about 10 hour duty for loco running staff.  
This is in blatant violation of the Hours of Employment and 
Regulation (HOER).  The Committee had also recommended in an 
earlier report that the working hours of Loco Running Staff should be 
only 8 hours.  The Committee urge that working hours of Loco 
Running Staff be restricted forthwith to 8 hours.  AILRSA has also 
reported that the  Loco Running Staff Grievance Committee(LRSGC) 
was unilaterally abandoned by the Ministry of Railways in 1981 and 
pleaded that LRSGC, which existed earlier for having regular dialogue 
at different levels for redressal of grievances should be revived or 
reconstituted at the earliest.  The Committee recommend that the 
AILRSA’s request be considered without delay. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The working hours of railway servants including running staff on 
Railways are regulated in accordance with the provision s contained in 
Railways Act, 1989.  Employment of railway servants has been classified 
into four categories namely, Intensive, Continuous, Essentially 
Intermittent and Excluded.  The maximum statutory hours of work for 
employment classified as Intensive, C ontinuous and Essentially 
Intermittent are 45, 54 and 75 per week respectively.  
  Running staff on the Indian Railways are classified as ‘Continuous’ 
and they are statutorily required to work for 54 hours a week on an 
average in a two weekly period of 14 days.  But the rostered hours of this 
category of employees have been fixed at 104 hours in a two weekly period 
of 14 days including preparatory and complementary time. 
In 1969, the Railway Labour Tribunal under the Chairmanship of Justice 
N.M. Miabhoy was  set up.  One of the terms of reference to the Tribunal 
related to review of the Hours of Employment Regulations, including 
running duty at a stretch for running staff.  In regard to running duty at 

 32 
a stretch, the Tribunal after detailed consideration made  the following 
recommendations in August, 1972. 
 “ Running duty at a stretch of running staff should not ordinarily 
exceed 10 hours but such duty may extend to a maximum period of 12 
hours, provided the concerned administration gives at least two hours 
notice before expiration of 10 hours to the staff that it will be required to 
perform running duty for two hours more, provided further that the total 
maximum hours of duty from ‘signing on’ to  ‘ signing off ’ does not exceed 
14 hours provided further that t he total maximum hours will be 
progressively reduced by half an hour every two years from the date of 
this Report till the target of 12 hours is reached, i.e. at the end of eight 
years from the date of this Report, the total maximum hours of duty at a 
stretch from signing on to  signing off shall not exceed 12 hours.” 
  Certain Loco running staff of Trivandrum Division had filed 
the case in the Kerala High Court challenging Ministry of Railways letter 
No. E(LL) 77/HER/29 dated 3.4.81 .The CAT/Ernakulam vide their 
judgement dated 10.1.92 struck down the above-mentioned letter and 
had issued detailed guidelines for issue of instructions. Based on the 
guidelines, instructions were issued vide Ministry of Railways letter No. 
E(LL)91/HER/11 dated 13.4.92 which provides as under:- 
1. The overall duty at a stretch of running staff from ‘ signing on’ 
should not ordinarily exceed 12 hours and they should be entitled to 
claim relief thereafter. 
2. The running duty at a stretch should not ordinarily exceed 10 
hours from the departure of the train and the staff should be entitled to 
claim relief thereafter. 
3. In operational exigencies the running duty may be extended beyond 
10 hours within overall limit of 12 hours provided a due notice has been 
given to the staff by the  Controller before the completion of 8 hours of 
running duty. 
4.    If a train does not reach, within the overall limit of 12 hours, its 
normal crew changing point/destination of the train/or the place where a 

 33 
relief has been arranged and such point is app roximately one hour’s 
journey away, the staff shall be required to work to that point. 
5. In exceptional exigencies of accidents, floods, agitations, equipment 
failure etc. the staff may be required to work beyond the limits prescribed 
above.  In such cases, the Controller should suitably advise the staff. 
Due to the very nature of their duties and keeping in view round 
the clock operation of the Railways, running staff cannot be put on daily 
fixed roster. 
All efforts are made to contain the duty hours with in the 
parameters laid down and the position is monitored at Divisional, Zonal 
and Railway Board levels.  The position regarding drivers duty on 
fortnightly basis is monitored by Crew Controllers and Divisional Officers 
to ensure that it is within the rost ered 104 hours in a two weekly period 
of 14 days. Power Controllers are also required to work in close 
coordination with Section Controllers to ensure implementation of 10 
hours duty rule.  In addition to this Ministry of Railways have issued 
instructions to the Railways stating that periodic Joint Meetings are 
required to be held with the recognised Unions/Federations on this issue 
of implementation of 10-hours duty rule. 
The rule provides that the overall duty at a stretch of running staff 
from signing on  should not ordinarily exceed 12 hours.  From the 
information available for the months of January to December 2006 on the 
Railways, an average of 88.1% trips were completed within 12 hours from  
‘signing on’ to ‘signing off’‘.   Further an average of 87% t rips were 
completed within 10 hours from departure of the train and also that an 
average of 76.7% was achieved in respect to completion of trips within 10 
hours from signing on to signing off.  Keeping in view the constraints and 
the large rail network, this is not a mean achievement. 
It would not be out of place to mention that in emergency situations 
like floods, accidents, abnormal detentions of trains or unforeseen 
incidents it becomes unavoidable to book the staff beyond rostered hours 

 34 
for which the ru nning staff is compensated monetarily and paid overtime 
allowance as per rules. 
10 hour stipulated running time from wheel movement to wheel 
stoppage is intended to be the maximum running time. This also includes 
stoppage time of trains at signals and stat ions etc.  However, in reality, 
the actual running time may be much less depending upon the 
availability of relief or termination of train.  In case the maximum running 
time is reduced, the average running time per day of a driver in a 
fortnightly period w ill be much less.  In addition to requirement of more 
drivers it may lead to problems of provision of additional running rooms, 
crew lobbies and accommodation to the drivers. 
The Loco Running Staff Grievance Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Minister of State for Railways was set up to discuss and 
settle grievances which were agitating the minds of Locomen in 1973. The 
Committee was wound up in 1975 after completing the specified allotted 
work.  The facility of informal discussion with All India Loco Runn ing 
Staff Association was withdrawn in the wake of 1981 strike by this 
Association. 
It is the policy of Ministry of Railways not to encourage category 
wise unions.  The existing recognized unions which represent all 
categories of employees represent the gr ievances of all categories of 
railway employees.  Instructions also exist to give patient hearing by 
administration at its convenience whenever asked for by the 
representatives of loco running staff or other such organizations.   
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 
 The Committee find that unlike the Central and State 
Government hospitals and Primary Health Centers, which have full 
time doctors for the Indian System of Medicine, the Indian R ailways 
have only part-time doctors. The Committee recommend that steps 
should be taken for providing full -time doctors for Indian System of 
Medicine and also for popularizing these systems.  

 35 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Unlike Health Ministry and CGHS, Stat e Government etc. Health 
care in Railways cannot be treated as a core function.  Railway medical 
services have been developed to meet specific needs of the organization 
and the services include medical certification of fitness, especially safety 
related staff, curative services for a wide variety of conditions, emergency 
medical care, accident rescue and relief work, immunization etc. These 
services cannot be provided  by Indian System of Medicine & 
Homeopathy (ISM & H) practitioners as their curriculum is d ifferent.  
Hence, their services cannot be integrated with Indian Railway Medical 
Services. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 36 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
22 September, 2008                                            Chairman, 
31 Bhadrapada, 1930 Saka                     Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 

 37 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2008-09) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 2 nd September, 2008 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1540  hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
7. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
11. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Motilal Vora 
14. Shri Nandi Yellaiah  
15. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
17. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18. Shri N. Balaganga 
19. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Deputy Secretary - II 

 38 
 
 
2. xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Reports 
on the action taken by the Governme nt on the recommendations/observations contained in 
33rd and 34 th Reports on ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’ and 
‘Suburban and Metro Railways’ respectively.  The Committee adopted these Reports with 
minor modifications and authorized t he Chairman to finalise these Reports and present the 
same to the House.   
 
4. xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
      ------     -----    ------ 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 39 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECO MMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVTIONS CONTAINED IN THE 33 RD REPORT (14 TH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS & STAFF WELFARE IN RAILWAYS’ 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations         17 
 
 (i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted     
  by Government         12 
(Vide recommendations/observations)  
   
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16 
 
  Percentage of total        70% 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  01 
desire to pursue in view of Government replies      
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
   Para No. 17 
 
Percentage of total        06 
 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    
  which replies of Government have not been accepted by the   04 
Committee which require reiteration.  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
Para Nos. 12, 13, 16 and 18 
 
Percentage of total        24% 
    
 
 (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of   
  Government are still awaited.        
(Vide Recommendations/observations) 
   
NIL 
 
  Percentage of total        NIL 
   
 
 
 