           
 33 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
‘INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND STAFF WELFARE IN RAILWAYS’ 
 
 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
12 September, 2007/ 21 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 2 
 
SCR No. 121       
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  ‘INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND STAFF WELFARE IN RAILWAYS’ 
 
 
Presented to HS on …………..14.09.2007 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………..2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……….……2007 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
12 September, 2007/ 21 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
                   PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….………………………        (iii) 
  
 INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………       (iv) 
       
PART-I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
I  History of Trade Unions……………………………………………….           1 
           
II Recognition of Trade Unions ……………………..…………… …..            2 
III Industrial Relations……………………………………………………..          9 
 
A.        Permanent Negotiating Machinery……………………………       10 
     B. Participation of Railway Employees in Management………        16 
C. Departmental Council/Joint Consultative Machinery ………        18 
 
IV Staff Welfare…………………………………………………………….        20 
 
A.   Staff Benefit Fund………………………………………………        23 
B.  Corporate Welfare Plan and Staff Quarters…………………        25 
C.  Medicare…………………………………………………………       28 
D. Education Facilities……………………………………………         31 
 
PART - II 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee…….. ……..      35 
 
              PART – III 
 
APPENDICES …………………………………………………………………..   
 I Name of recognized unions/associations…………………………….       40 
 II Number of PNM Meetings at Divisional and Zonal Level…………..       42 
 III Details of CWP Works proposed and approved for 2007-08……….      47 
  
Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on Railways  
held on 21.06.2007,  13.07.2007,  23.07.2007,  03.08.2007,  
22.08.2007, 29.08.2007 and 12.09.2007………………………………………...  48 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2007 -08) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
      
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.          Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7.        Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.        Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.        Ch. Lal Singh 
13.        Shri Ananta Nayak 
14.        Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15.        Shri A. Sai Prathap 
16.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17.        Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.        Shri Manik Singh 
19.        Shri K. Subbarayan  
20. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
     31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Rashmi Roy    - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 (iv) 
 
 
 
 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty 
Third Report of the Committee on ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) on 21.06.2007, 13.07.2007, 03.08.207 and 29.08.2007, All India 
Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF), National Federation of Indian Railwaymen (NFIR), All 
India RPF Association (AIRPFA), All India Loco Running Staff Association, All India 
OBC Railway Employees’ Federation, All India SC & ST Railway Employees 
Association on 23.07.2007 and Ministry of Labour on 22.08.2007.    
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
12.09.2007.  Minutes of the sittings held on 21.06.2007, 13.07.2007, 23.07.2007, 
03.08.2007, 22.08.2007, 29.08.2007 and 12.09.2007 form Part -III of the Repor t.  For 
facility of reference, the recommendations/observations of the Committee have been 
presented in thick type. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board), Ministry of Labour and Railway T rade Unions/Associations 
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and information which 
the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Industrial 
Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’ and sharing with them  the issues concerning 
the subject which came up for discussion during evidence. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
12 September, 2007                                                  Chairman, 
21 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka                              Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 6 
 
PART-I 
      BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
I.  History of Trade Unions 
 
 History of Trade Unions in Indian Railways dates back to 1897.  In the 
beginning, on the Indian Railways there was no esta blished structure or system 
for Industrial Relations.  Agitations were mostly the source of workers’ demand 
with the management.  In 1897, a Union of Railway employees by the name of 
Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants in India & Burma came up as a seq uel 
to a strike by the guards of that Company.  Between 1897 and 1919, a large 
number of unions sprang up and many of them cut across staff categories and, 
therefore, laid the framework of the broad labour fronts.  These unions were 
functioning in isolation and there was growing consciousness that the labour was 
not unified enough to negotiate from a position of strength.  Ill -organized 
protests and isolated agitations continued to take place on different Railways for 
some localized and immediate demand wit hout any long term class 
consciousness and gain.  In 1925, all the unions came together to from All India 
Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF), which continue to exist even today.   
1.2 Indian National Railway Workers’ Federation (INRWF) was formed in 1947 
and it was granted facilities for consultation in December, 1949.  In 1952 both 
the federations were merged and this resulted in the emergence of a single 
federation for labour on the Railways, which called itself the National Federation 
of Indian Raiwaymen (NF IR).  This was perhaps the most noteworthy feature in 
the Indian Railway’s labour movement.  But unfortunately, during the 
subsequent years there came a phase of deterioration in the labour movement, 
thereby depriving the Railway workers of having a unifie d labour representation.  
A maturity in approach was noticed subsequently during the first half of 1950s, 
but it was shortlived.  In 1955, some former Members of the AIRF held a 
separate convention.  That resulted in the revival of AIRF in August, 1957.  
Though considerable efforts were made by the then Railway Ministers in 1957 
and in 1973 -74 to unite both the recognized Railway Federations viz., AIRF and 
NFIR but amalgamation couldn’t materialize.  Both these unions have affiliates in 

 7 
all the zonal railwa ys, which are recognized by the General Managers.  
Zone-wise names of the recognized unions/associations are given in Appendix I.  

 8 
 
II. Recognition of Trade Unions 
2.1 Rules for recognition of Unions/Associations of non -gazetted Railway 
employees are set out in Part B of Chapter XXV of Indian Railway Establishment 
Manual (IREM) Vol. II. Conditions precedent to the recognition of a union by 
Railway Administration are as follows:- 
A) The Union must consist of a distinct class of Railway servants and 
must not be  formed on the basis of any caste, tribe or religious 
denominations or of any group within or section of such caste, tribe 
or religious denominations; 
B) All the Railway servants of the same class must be eligible for 
membership; 
C) The Union must be registered under the Trade Union Act, 1926; 
and 
D) The Union should have a membership of at least 30% of the non -
gazetted employees whom it seeks to represent.  The support of 
30% staff being assessed on the basis of annual returns filed by 
them with the respective Registrar of Trade Unions. 
The minimum percentage of membership for grant of recognition of 
Unions was raised from 10% to 15% in 1961 and later on to 30% in 1985 on the 
recommendations of the Railway Reforms Committee.   
2.2 The Ministry of Railways stated in a written reply that generally, as a  
practice, the recognition of the Unions has been given by the General Managers 
on the basis of returns filed by the claimants with the Registrar of Trade Unions.   
    
2.3 It has been stated by the Ministry of Railways  that instructions were 
issued by the Railway Board on 26.06.2002 to consider recognition of affiliates of 
Bharatiya Railway Mazdoor Sangh(BRMS), on the principle of ensuring minimum 
30% minimum membership on concerned Zonal Railways on the basis of annual  
returns filed by them.   This consideration for recognition was challenged by 
Southern Railway Mazdoor Union (SRMU) in the Hon’ble High Court/Madras who 
set aside the order dated 26.06.2002 and observed that the current system of 
verification of membershi p of the Unions was not correct and a method should 
be devised to ensure representative character of the Unions and to establish 

 9 
exclusive membership of Railwaymen to Unions through a well -defined concrete 
system.  The Hon’ble Court discussed ‘Check -off Sy stem’ and ‘Secret Ballot 
System’ for the same. 
2.4 The judgment of Madras High Court was contested by way of two Special 
Leave Petitions (SLPs) - one filed by BRMS and the other by the Railway Ministry.  
Both the SLPs were dismissed.  While dismissing the SLP filed by the 
Department, the Supreme Court is stated to have observed on 08.03.2004 as 
under: 
 “…….. The High Court’s reasoning for requirement of 30% 
membership exclusively for the membership of the staff with the union is 
upheld.  The High Court has correctly relied upon the decision of this 
Court in Food Corporation of India Staff Union Versus Food Corporation of 
India represented in AIR 1995 SC 1344 to hold that the method was 
natural, rationale and viable alternative.” 
 
2.5 It has been stated by the Ministry of Railways that the issue of adopting a 
method of establishing exclusive membership of a Railway employee to a union  
was examined in detail by the Railway Board.  Hon’ble MR reportedly ordered 
that Railway Administration should go for Secret Ba llot and only those unions 
should be recognized who get the support of minimum 35% of the staff. 
2.6 Subsequently, a Full Board decision was stated to have been taken on the 
modalities to conduct elections through Secret Ballot to give recognition to 
Unions which, inter -alia, stated that it should not be mandatory for Unions to 
achieve a minimum of 35% votes of the total votes polled.  In lieu, the two 
Unions ranking first and second based on total votes achieved should be given 
recognition.  Similarly, for  the purpose of giving recognition to Federations, the 
unions achieving first and second rank on the basis of total votes achieved on all 
India basis should be given recognition.  As the norm of 35% minimum votes 
was not to be adhered to in this process, t he papers were reportedly put up for 
obtaining the approval of Hon’ble MR to the Board’s decision of constituting a 
Committee on Secret Ballot and revised system of giving recognition to Unions. 
2.7 In the meantime, in a court case filed by BRMS in Delhi H igh Court, the 
Hon’ble High Court is stated to have ordered on 01.12.2006 to complete the 
process of holding election through Secret Ballot within a period of six months 
and the Railway should not interfere with the percentage i.e. 30% of the said 
strength required for recognition of a Union as elucidated by the Hon’ble 

 10 
Supreme Court in their Order dated 08.03.2004. The Ministry of Railways 
have stated that on the Railway Board’s application, the Hon’ble High Court, 
Delhi vide Orders dated 22.03.2007 restor ed the power of Railway Board to fix 
the percentage for recognition and further directed to hold elections within six 
months’ time w.e.f. 22.03.2007. 
2.8 Consequently, the Ministry of Railways have constituted a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Shri C.L .Kaw, (Retired, Chairman, Railway Board) for 
holding the Secret Ballot for recognition of Railway Trade Unions. 
 The Terms of Reference of the Committee are as under: 
i) to frame the modalities to conduct the secret ballot to recognize 
the Unions; 
ii) to form cod e of conduct/discipline for the elections on the lines of 
Code of discipline of Ministry of Labour suitable for Indian Railways; 
iii) to function as a nodal body for conducting and supervising the 
secret ballot; and  
iv) to suggest the Mechanism for arbitration on disputes arising out of 
elections.  
2.9 The term of the High Level Committee under Shri C.L. Kaw will be from 
the date of Constitution of the Committee to two months from the date of 
holding election or one year whichever is earlier.  This Committee has be en 
constituted as a nodal body for conducting and supervising the secret ballots for 
the first time.  The modalities like periodicity of elections, etc., will be decided by 
the Committee.   
2.10 It has been stated that views/suggestions of many of the Trad e Unions 
have been received which will be kept in view at the time of framing the 
modalities for conducting the Secret Ballot.   
2.11 The report of Kaw’s Committee is stated to be under finalization(as on 
29.08.2007).  It has been stated that the Committee  has given the modalities 
and those are being examined by the Railways.   
2.12 The Committee pointed out in the context of secret ballot for deciding the 
recognition of Unions, that the two recognized unions get a number of facilities 
such as free passes t o travel and campaign, which are not available to other 
registered unions and suggested that there should be level playing field for all 

 11 
the unions to make the election fair.  A representative of the Ministry of 
Railways said in response that this aspect i s being looked into by Kaw’s  
Committee. 
2.13 The All India Loco Running Association has suggested that before holding 
election at least for one year the unions should be derecognized.  
2.14 A suggestion was made by some of the representatives of Railway U nions 
when they appeared before the Committee that holding of proposed secret ballot 
should be entrusted to Chief Labour Commissioner.  Asked about the views of 
the Ministry of Labour, in this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour stated 
during oral evidence as under:- 
“In the  Central sphere there is no law for either verification of 
trade unions’ membership or recognition of trade unions.  In a 
limited number cases, in respect of small establishments, secret 
ballot elections are held as per Code of Discipline.  According to this 
Code of Discipline, which has no statutory force, elections can be 
held by Secret Ballot if the management and all the registered 
trade unions operating in the establishment give their consent for 
such secret ballot elections.  In case of Railways, there are number 
of registered trade unions which may or may not give consent for 
secret ballot.  I may also mention that the Railway have not 
accepted the Code of Discipline. 
 Of course, the main issue is that we have no manpower……..  
There is no possibility for us to make verification because we do 
not have any power under the law.” 
 
2.15 To a pointed query as to whether, if the Railway management approached 
the Chief Labour Commissioner, he would be able to undertake the verificatio n 
exercise, the Labour Secretary said that it was not the assigned role of the 
Central Labour Commissioner to conduct this kind of verification and explained as 
under:- 
“As per the Trade Union Act of 1926, which has been amended from time 
to time, the Cent ral Government is, of course, the appropriate authority 
for Trade Unions whose objects are not confined to one State, and the 
State Governments are the appropriate authority for the rest of the Trade 
Unions.  In 1952, there has been some arrangement whereb y the Central 
Government delegated its power of registration to the State Governments.  
The Registrars have been appointed by the State Governments, and these 
Registrars are Registrars for Trade Unions in the Central sphere.  Even 
though it may be an Under taking technically for purposes of conciliation, 
and it is the Chief Labour Commissioner who will intervene if there is any 
dispute.  It is the State Government, which has appointed Registrars for 
purposes of registration, and by the Executive instructions , the State 

 12 
Governments under whose territorial jurisdiction the head office of 
the Trade Union in the Central sphere is located, is empowered to register 
the Trade Union.  This is the position legally and otherwise in terms of 
both logistics, and in terms of the work that the CLC is expected to do. 
 The CLC is expected to be constantly watching over what is 
happening in industrial relations in the Central sphere.  Just as in the 
State Government, they have Labour Commissioners for those 
Undertakings and in dustries for which the appropriate government are 
State Governments.  Therefore, the CLC who has offices like the Regional 
Labour Commissioners, etc. are watching out for this also.  In addition, I 
would say that compliance of laws for instance of the Buil ding and other 
construction workers and conciliation in central sphere are their activities 
and recognized workload.    
 Registration of Trade Union, actually is not being done by CLC’s 
organization.  This is the factual position with regard to this issue.”  
 
  The Ministry of Labour stated in a written reply in this regard,  
 
“The largest union in respect of which the CLC(C) Organisation held secret 
ballot election is in Food corporation of India in 2002 involving 60,000 
workers as per the direction of Hon ’ble High Court/supreme Court.  When 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. (BSNL) authorities approached the Ministry to 
conduct secret ballot election in BSNL involving 4 lakhs employees posted 
across the country, the requirement of polling personnel assessed was 
more than 10,000.  The strength of officers of the CLC(C) Organisation in 
position i.e. 130 LEO(C), 58 ALC(C), 28 RLC(C), 16 Dy.CLC(C) was found 
absolutely inadequate to perform the task of secret ballot election in 
BSNL.  Accordingly, Ministry of Labour have  decided that BSNL authority 
may hold the election and officers of CLC(C) Organisation would work as 
observers to ensure a free & fair election.  Two elections have already 
been held in BSNL with the assistance of the Observers provided by the 
CLC(C) Organisation. 
 Railway is five time bigger the number in terms of manpower with 
nearly 4000 railway stations, 11000 railway crossings, with innumerable 
establishments, many of them in remote areas.  The strength of the 
CLC(C) Organisation cannot match with the massive task of secret ballot 
election for nearly 19/20 lakh employees posted throughout the length 
and breadth of the country.” 
 
 A representative of the Ministry of Labour stated in this connection as 
under:- 
“I am having less than 100(one hundred) Group  A officers under me.   
Command and control will be very difficult because Railways is a vast 
organization.  At best, we can be observers, if needed and as we have 
done in case of BSNL, who were having four lakh employees”.   
 
2.16 When enquired, how verif ication was done in BSNL and how the election 
was conducted, the witness said, 

 13 
“The employer took all the guidance from us and they conducted 
the elections themselves.  We have provided them with 100 odd observers 
to observe that it is free and fair.”’  
 
To a query about the periodicity of holding elections, a representative of 
the Ministry of Labour stated during evidence as under:- 
“IT would suggest that it is better to have four years because two years 
will be too short for such a gigantic task.  As per the code of discipline, 
the period is two years. ; But BSNL people did after four years.” 
 
2.17 When the Committee desired to know whether Secret Ballot elections can 
be completed before 22.09.2007, a representative of NFIR during evidence 
submitted the following:- 
“It would not be possible because first of all the voters list should be 
prepared; photo ID card should be prepared; voters list should be made 
available to all the registered Unions, etc.  Thereafter, they should be 
given time to raise objection , and then time schedule should be decided.  
We have yet to receive the voters’ list.  Therefore, it may not be possible 
to hold elections before 22 September 2007.” 
 
2.18 There are a number of production units in Indian Railways like 
Chittaranjan Locomoti ve Works, Diesel Locomotive Works, Rail Coach Factory, 
Integral Coach Factory, Rail Wheel Factory, etc.  These production units do not 
have unions and they have only staff council.  Pointing out that the workers in 
these units are not in a position to rais e their grievances in PNM meetings and 
that this would be possible, if they are allowed to form their own union, the 
Committee enquired from the representatives of the Ministry of Labour as to 
whether they consider these production units as factories.  In response, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour said, 
“I have not gone into the way these production units are being run – 
whether as departmental undertakings or otherwise.  I would feel that as 
we define it under our law, they would qualify to be called ‘fac tories’, 
thereby they would be entitled.  I am giving my first reaction to this – that 
they would be entitled to have unions.  Our law is very clear in its 
definition of factory.  That is related to power and the number of people.  
I am sure they are using power.”  
 
2.19 When this matter was raised during oral evidence of the Ministry of 
Railways, a representative of the Ministry stated, 
“Sir, in 1969 this issue had again been raised by our recognized unions 
and this issue was taken right up to the Cabinet level and the Cabinet had 
agreed with the view that the Staff Council should continue and the 

 14 
Industrial Disputes Act should not be applicable. It was a very 
thoughtful decision in the production units.” 
  
 The witness added, 
 
“In 2002, the Federation has again raised this issue in the PNM and the 
Departmental Council, the JCM.  In 2004, it went to the full Cabinet again 
and this view was retained that the Staff Council should continue.  The full 
Cabinet took a decision in 2004” 

 15 
 
III. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
 
3.1 The Indian Railways employs the largest number of staff in the country.  
It has a total staff strength of 14.1 lakhs.  It is a unique organization, which lays 
stress on staff welfare and thorough industrial relation machinery.  The Industrial 
Relations on Indian Railways have a very well structured mechanism at all levels 
of the organization.  The main pillars of Industrial Relations are Permanent 
Negotiating Machinery (PNM), Departmental Council (DC -JCM), Participation of 
Railway Employees in Manageme nt (PREM) and Staff Councils for Production 
Units. 
3.2 Industrial Relations on Indian Railways ensures free and frank exchange 
of views between the organized labour and the management at all levels to 
ensure greater transparency in the decision making proc ess.  Besides 
participating in the meetings of the PREM(Participation of Railway Employees in 
Management) group at the Apex, Zonal and Divisional levels, leaders of both the 
recognized Federations also participate in General Managers’ and Chief Personnel 
officers’ Conferences held at the Railway Board Level.  Participation of the 
recognized Unions in Principle/Divisional Officers’ Meeting had also been ensured 
at the Zonal/Divisional levels, resulting in effective and meaningful involvement 
of staff in achieving the corporate objectives. 
3.3 It is also responsibility of Industrial Relations Directorate to see that the 
extant orders/policies issued by the Government of India for the welfare of 
employees and their families are implemented in its true spirit.  In addition, 
facilities which are given to Federation for attending the meetings at different 
levels, coordination of references from recognized Unions, deputation of railway 
employees to Unions, Worker’s Education Scheme, proper implementation of 
payment of Wages Act, Factory Act, ID Act, Workmen Compensation Act, 
Minimum Wages Act etc., all policies matter relating to application of existing as 
well as fresh labour laws to railway staff, persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection  of Right and Full Participation), Human Right 
Commission Act, 1999 etc. also fall within the jurisdiction of Industrial Relations 
Directorate.  

 16 
3.4 According to the NFIR, while Industrial Relations by and large are 
satisfactory, the negotiating agreements  reached are not implemented in true 
spirit.  The following are the important points which reportedly lead to strained 
Industrial Relations: 
(i) Indiscriminate surrender of posts without consulting the organized 
labour. 
(ii) Non-creation of new posts for additional assets and new services.  
(iii) Insistence of matching money value for creation of new posts. 
(iv) Non compliance of norms of IRBM laid down by Railway Board for 
determining the requirement of staff. 
(v) Staff are heavily over burdened more particularly in coaching 
maintenance activities, S&T Department, Electrical Department, 
Diesel/Electric Loco Sheds and Track Machine Organizations. 
(vi) Large number of vacancies in Safety and Operational categories. 
(vii) Imparting of training facility i.e. pre -promotional training to all 
employees 
(viii) Large number of workforce made to work 12 hours a day. 
(ix) Running staff are put to heavy stress and strain due to longer hours on 
duty. 
 
A. Permanent Negotiating Machinery (PNM) 
  
3.5 The system of Permanent Negotiating Machinery was evolved in 
December, 1951 as a result of talks between the Railway Board and organized 
labour for dealing with disputes between Railway Labour and the Administration.  
3.6 The machinery is envisaged in three tiers; one at the Railway level, the 
recognized Unions having access  to divisional officers and subsequently to 
officers at the headquarters including the General Manager ; at the next tier 
matters not settled at Railway level will be taken up by the respective 
Federations with the Railway Board ; and at the third tier , i n cases in which 
agreement is not reached between the Federation and the Railway Board and 
the matters are of sufficient importance, reference will be made to an ad hoc - 
Railway Tribunal composed of representatives of the Railway Administration and 
labour presided over by a neutral Chairman.   

 17 
 
3.7 The procedure laid down for the working of the PNM is stated to be as 
follows:- 
 
(i) At the divisional level the Divisional officers should meet the 
branches of the recognized unions which may be established in t he 
divisions, at least once in two months and oftener if necessary.  Each 
workshop will be considered as a division.  The particular branches which 
should meet the Divisional officers should be agreed upon between the 
General Manager and the union.  Maximu m number of subjects for 
discussion is 30.  The detailed procedure of arranging these meetings 
should be agreed upon with the Union, but this should include a provision 
that the branch should supply in sufficient time before the meeting the 
subjects which it proposed to raise at the meeting with memoranda 
setting out its point of view.  This would enable the Divisional Officers to 
examine the questions and be prepared to take part in a useful discussion. 
(ii) At the Railway Headquarters, the General Manger or the Assistant 
Deputy General Manager in charge of staff will meet the unions at least 
once a quarter and oftener if necessary.  
(iii) All disciplinary matters and subjects like promotion, transfer etc. of 
individual members of the staff which do not inv olve any general principle 
will be excluded from the scope of the discussions at all these levels, 
except at the discretion of the officer concerned.  If, in an integrated unit, 
there is disparity between the existing privileges in matter and agreement 
cannot be reached with the Union on a uniform application of some 
procedure, the matter should be referred to the Railway Board for further 
instructions.  Pending the receipt of these instructions, the general rule 
set out above should be followed.  
(iv) At the Railway level, subjects will comprise those, which are within 
the powers of the officers concerned 
 (v) Questions concerning pay scales, allowances etc. will only be 
discussed between the Federation and the Railway Board and not at lower 
levels.  
(vi) At the Board level, negotiations will be between the Railway Board 
and the two Federations and for this purpose, there will be half yearly 
meetings between the Railway Board and the Federations. 
(vii) When a matter which is raised for discussion at the divisional  level 
is not settled by agreement, it may be raised at the Zonal level, for further 
negotiation.  Similarly, a matter not settled at the Zonal level may be 
brought up by the two Federations to the Railway Board for discussion.  
All subjects brought up for  discussion at the various levels should be 
disposed of as expeditiously as possible. 
(viii) If, after discussions between the Railway Board and the 
Federations, agreement is not reached between the two sides on any 
matters of importance, such matters may be referred to an adhoc Railway 
Tribunal which will be set up for dealing with them at the Centre.  This 
tribunal will consist of an equal number of representatives of Railway 
labour and the Railway Administration with a neutral Chairman.  The 
Tribunal wil l be enabled to make such investigations as they deem 
necessary before they give their decision.  

 18 
(ix) It would be open to Government to accept, reject or modify 
the decision of the Tribunal. 
(x) Matters which were settled by agreement or in which Governme nt 
ultimately accept the decision of the Tribunal, it will not be open to the 
Federation to raise the same issues again for a period of two years.  In 
those cases in which Government have rejected or modified the decision 
of the Tribunal, the issue may be raised at the end of one year. 
 
3.8 Explaining the delay in implementation of decisions taken in PNM, a 
representative of the AIRF stated during evidence: - 
“When PNM was envisaged, the whole idea was that grievances can be 
discussed across the table and d isposed of across the table in the same 
meeting or at the most in the second meeting.  But in practice, we can 
find that in PNM there are cases where minutes of the meeting are issued 
after two or three months.  It is not according to what exactly happened  
in the meetings.  They get the approval of the Members before they write 
the minutes. It is the Government’s way of functioning.  Then, after that 
they say that they are examining it.  So, it has become a sort of ritual.  As 
far as the PNM scheme is conce rned, we are happy with the Scheme, but 
we are unhappy with the implementation part. 
The meeting is held with two recognized federations.  If one federation 
takes a position which is against the stand taken by another federation, 
then they get an opportuni ty to play against each other.  It is the reason 
for the delay.  Administration takes full advantage of that situation.  If the 
implementation of the scheme is proper, then things can be sorted out.  
We must have secret ballot system.  If there is only one  federation, then 
these kinds of things will not happen.  The Administration will not get an 
opportunity to delay it.” 
 
A representative of NFIR stated in this connection during evidence:- 
 
“It is a fact that meetings are held by and large regularly as per  the 
schedule drawn.  But all these issues are not being resolved within the 
reasonable time.  So, the machinery is needed to be further geared up in 
order to resolve the issues quickly so that down the line benefit may reach 
employees and thereby the cred ibility of the Permanent Negotiating 
Machinery can be maintained.  
 But at Divisional level, in some Divisions there is no seriousness in 
implementing this Permanent Negotiating Machinery and also in holding 
formal dialogue with the organizations.  This is  an area where there is a 
need to take corrective steps.”  
 
 
 
3.9 During the evidence, a representative of All India RPF Association 
submitted that in 2003 -04, the PNM was extended to All India RPF Association 
alongwith NFIR & AIFR.  The meetings are not h eld regularly at Divisional and 

 19 
Zonal levels and the decisions of meetings are not implemented. At the 
Board level also, the meetings have not been held with All India RPF Association 
for the last one year.  
 
The AIRPF Association in its memorandum submitted that:- 
“Due to this indifferent attitude of the ADG/DG/RPF, regular PNM 
meetings at Zonal and Divisional levels have not been convened by the 
concerned RPF authorities out of fear of being grudged by the boss.  As a 
result, the genuine grievances/demand s of the RPF staff have remained 
unheard/unsolved and discontentment infused amongst them adversely 
affecting their efficiency and morale.  
Since, no penal action was taken against the deputationist erring 
administrative officers of RPF, they have delibera tely been disregarding 
Railway Board’s orders and not implementing unanimous decisions taken 
by the PNM meetings in favour of RPF Staff under the chairmanship of 
Member Staff, Railway Board.” 
 
3.10 One of the points raised by AIRPF in their memorandum rela tes to 
augmentation of the strength of the RPF by 24,000 as assessed by Railway 
administration and announced in 2006. 
 
3.11 A representative of the All India SC -ST Railway Employees Association 
when appeared before the Committee stated that though the Asso ciation is 
recognized for participation but the meetings are not formal and neither the 
minutes were circulated.  
 
3.12 The number of representatives of Unions/Federations permitted to attend 
the PNM Meetings is 25 at Boards level and 20 at Head Quarter le vel and 
Divisional level. 
 
3.13 There are four meetings held every year (two meetings with each 
Federation-All India Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF) & National Federation of 
Indian Railwaymen (NFIR) at Railway Board’s level.  The number of meetings 
which ha ve taken place at the Board level during the last three year are as 
under: 
Year No. of meetings prescribed  With AIRF With NFIR 
2004 2 2 2 

 20 
2005 2 1 2 
2006 2 2 2 
 
3.14 The details of number of meetings prescribed at Zonal level and Divisional 
level and the actual number of meetings held during the last three years are 
given in Appendix –II.  It may be observed therefrom that the number of PNM 
meetings held in a number of Zones and divisions is less than the prescribed 
number. 
Number of PNM meetings are ac counted as per calendar year and not 
financial year. 
3.15 As regard the role of the Ministry of Labour in Railway disputes, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour stated as under:- 
“The Railways are also an industry under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
and, therefore, the provisions of this Act, are applicable to those 
employees of the Railways who come within the definition of workmen 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  I am mentioning this so as to 
clear the framework in which we people come into the picture and where 
we are not in the picture. 
 Sir, there was an agreement as far back as 1952, between the 
Labour Ministry and the Railway Board that conciliation officers of the 
Ministry of Labour are not required to intervene in disputes concerning 
workmen of Railways unless the procedure established in the permanent 
negotiating machinery is totally exhausted.  However, the Railways being 
a public utility service, the conciliation officers of the Labour Ministry have 
no option but to intervene if the dispute is accompanied by a strike notice.  
So, if there is a strike notice, we have no option.  We understand then 
that the Permanent Negotiating Machinery has not worked and we then 
have to intervene.  From 1991, the industrial disputes raised under 
Section 2(A) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 by an individual 
workman against termination of his services may also be entertained.   
 When the Railway employees approach the officers of the central 
industrial relations machinery, that is, Chief Labour Commiss ioner’s 
Organization under this Ministry, efforts are made to settle the dispute 
through conciliation.  If the conciliation fails, then the Conciliation Officer 
sends Failure of Conciliation Report, which is commonly known as FOC, 
along with his recommenda tion whether the dispute is fit for adjudication 
or not.  The Ministry then refers those cases for adjudication where it is 
satisfied that there is an industrial dispute and then references takes place 
to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, CGIT as  we call them or 
the Labour Court.  During the last three years, the total number of 
disputes received from the Railways constitutes five to six percent of the 
total disputes that we have received in our Ministry.”   
 

 21 
3.16 In a memorandum, All India Loco R unning Staff Association 
complained about non-implementation of government’s commitment given thirty 
five years back for 10 hrs. duty.  It has been stated that only about 50% staff 
could reportedly be relieved within 10 hours duty.  To a query, whether the  
Ministry of Labour has received any such complaint from All India Loco Running 
Staff Association, the Ministry of Labour stated in a written reply as follows:- 
“The Office of the CLC(C) have not received any complaint of non -
implementation of Government’s  decision for ten hours duty.  The hours 
of work in Railway Administration is guided by Hours of Employment & 
Regulation (HOER).  The workmen who are required to put in 6 or more 
hours of sustained attention are known as continuous with 48 hours work 
in a week.  The workmen who are required to put in sustained attention 
for less than 6 hours are classified as “essentially intermittent” with 
ordinarily 60 hours of work in a week.  However, in case of ‘C’ class Gate 
man/Chowkidar in Railway Rest House the hou rs of work is 72 hours per 
week provided the workman is given a quarter within a radius of 5 KM. 
 However, driver, fireman whose work is intensive have been 
classified as intensive with 6 hours of work in a day.  If a workman has 
complaint that he is wrongly classified he can approach the RLC(C) of area 
who is ex -officio Supervisor of Railway Labour for his re -classification.  
RLC(C) after hearing the parties and getting the job analysis conducted, if 
necessary may recommend for re -classification of the wor kmen to the 
General Manager of the Railway.  If any workmen is aggrieved with the 
decision of the RLC(C) he may approach the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.  The decision on appeal is binding on the Railway 
Administration.  Accordingly, if loco running Association has any complaint 
they may approach the RLC(C) of the area, endorsing a copy to the 
CLC(C) for prompt and effective action on the complaint.” 
 
 
B. Participation of Railway Employees in Management (PREM) 
3.17 With a view to give an increased sen se of involvement and to facilitate a 
meaningful and effective participation of workers in the managerial process 
Indian Railways have a permanent forum designated as PREM (Participation of 
Railway Employees in Management).  It was set up on 23rd March 199 4 after 
restructuring the erstwhile set up of CEG (Corporate Enterprise Groups), 
established in September, 1972.  
 The broad objectives of PREM are:- 
 To evaluate the functioning of the Railways and exchange data and ideas 
on ways and means for improving th e efficiency and viability of the 
enterprise; 

 22 
 Appraise the investment programme, particularly in 
regard to housing and other welfare services; 
 Identify areas and devise action oriented methods for maximizing 
organizational effectiveness, the use of technol ogy and towards building 
up the image of the Railways as a service organization; 
 To facilitate effective and meaningful participation of Railway employees 
in the management process; 
 To give them a sense of involvement and pride in the organisation’s 
works; and  
 To discuss and identify the measures for improving the quality of service 
to the rail passengers and safety of operation.  
 
3.18 PREM is a three -tier body functioning at the Apex, Zonal and Divisional 
levels.  Besides the members representing the top  management from 
administrative side, four representatives from National Federation of Indian 
Railwaymen (NFIR) and All India Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF), two 
representatives each from Federation of Railway Officers’ Association (FROA) and 
Indian Railway Promotee Officers’ Federation (IRPOF) and two representatives 
from the All Indian RPF Association (AIRPFA) are members of PREM Group. 
The meeting of PREM group is held once in a quarter at the all three 
levels i.e. Apex/Railway Board, Headquarters/Zonal and Divisional levels.  
3.19 The PREM Group is a forum of substance as it has worked a lot to improve 
industrial relations over the Indian Railways.  PREM is the only forum, which 
offers participation of all the major recognized Unions/Federatons of Indian  
Railways who represent various segments of Railway employees at a single 
platform.  The unique aspect of this forum is that it does not sort out staff 
grievances but discuss and decide the policies to be adopted over the Indian 
railways for its betterment.   
 
3.20 Regarding the functioning of PREM, a representative of the AIRF 
submitted as under:- 
“As far as PREM is concerned, actually speaking, this scheme was thought 
of in terms of consulting the railway men and participation of railway men 
in seeing how the railways can be run best.  That was the idea behind the 
whole thing.  It has really resulted in something like ritual.   Generally the 

 23 
time is wasted in taking up those issues like punctuality, courtesy, 
budget, etc.  We have raised this issue a coupl e of times.  We have said 
that everything which they do like privatization, outsourcing etc. should be 
brought out here.  We should not get the information through the 
newspapers and the media.  It is not through media and the newspaper 
report that we shou ld get the information and talk about it.  So, once or 
twice, some issues were brought out.  Generally, they are not discussed.” 
 
A representative of NFIR stated in this connection as under:- 
 
“If it is not a real participation and it is no participation.  There is 
participation on paper; we attend meetings.  But there is no involvement, 
there is no real consultation, there is no sharing of full information and 
there is no action to know our views and there is no discussion on the 
views expressed by those members who are in the PREM. 
 Of course, we are contributing for productivity.  The cooperation 
from the members for the purpose of increasing the productivity is there 
and we never lagged behind in giving support to the system.  But PREM is 
needed to be fu rther fine-tuned for ensuring purposeful dialogue on each 
and every drafted policy.” 
 
3.21 The Committee enquired during the evidence of the Ministry of Railways 
whether the purpose for which the PREM was set up is being served or not.   
The committee, cit ing specific examples, further enquired whether or not the 
question of handing over supply of bed rolls  to contractors, handing over of 
departmental catering to contractors and such other matters were discussed in 
the PREM meetings.  In response, the Member Staff, Railway Board stated,  
  
“I agree with you that there is positive room for improvement.” 
 
 
C. Departmental Council/Joint Consultative Machinery  
3.22 The object of the Departmental Council is to promote harmonious 
relations and secure the greates t measure of cooperation between the Central 
Government in its capacity as employer, and the general body of its employees 
in matters of common concern and further to increase the efficiency of the public 
services, combined with the well -being of those emp loyed.  The scope of the 
council includes all matters relating to conditions of service and work, welfare of 
the employees and improvement of efficiency and standard of work, provided 
however, that in regard to recruitment, promotion and discipline, consul tation 
will be limited to matters of general principles.  

 24 
3.23 Matters affecting Central Government employees generally, and 
matters relating to categories of staff common to two or more departments and 
not grouped together in a single Departmental Council  shall be dealt with by the 
National Council.  
3.24 The council consists of a Chairman (Member Staff, Railway Board) and six 
members on the official side.  On the staff side, there shall be 30 members 
(15each nominated by AIRF and NFIR).   
3.25 The Committ ee desired to know whether the JCM meetings are 
meaningful in resolving the disputes.  A representative of the NFIR submitted as 
under:- 
 
“These Departmental Councils’ JCM meetings are also dealing with hours 
of employment regulations, leave, pay and allow ances and related issues.  
While it is true that two meetings in a year are held………. many issues are 
dragged on and decisions are not taken on time. 
 Secondly, where decisions are taken, implementation part is very 
poor.  In this context, there is need tha t the Government should take this 
machinery very seriously for ensuring and generating greater satisfaction 
among the staff.” 
 

 25 
 
IV. STAFF WELFARE 
  
4.1 The Welfare schemes on the Railways cover a wide range of amenities like 
educational facilities, staff canteens, distress relief, recreational facilities, etc.  
The major facilities and benefits provided as a measure of welfare to the 
employees and their families on the Railways are residential quarters, medicare, 
educational facilities, Staff Benefit Fund,  indigenous system of Medicine, Holiday 
Homes/convalescent Homes, staff canteens, recreational facilities, pension 
adalats, uniforms, travel facilities, ex -gratia compensation, incentives to sports 
persons, compassionate ground appointment, redeployment of  surplus staff etc.  
Over 46% of the staff enjoy the benefit of subsidized housing.  More than 6.1 
lakh employees are housed in Railway Quarters.   
 
4.2 Giving details of the general welfare activities undertaken by the Railways, 
the Ministry furnished following information:- 
To encourage the latent talent amongst Railwaymen and their wards, 
Cultural programmes are arranged as part of the welfare activities.  Inter -
Divisional Cultural Competitions in dance, drama and music are organised 
by the Zonal Railways. 
 
Considering the large work force on the Railways, Staff canteens have 
been set up on the Railways to provide wholesome and subsidized meals 
to employees at their work places.  Statutory Canteens have been opened 
as a matter of statutory obligation in r ailway establishments, which are 
governed by Factories Act and have a staff strength of more than 250. 
 
Railways lay great emphasis on recreational activities and provide 
excellent facilities.  For this purpose they have established Institutes/Clubs 
with sports and library facilities.  
 
Long-standing disputes or delays, if any, in the settlement of dues of 
superannuated employees are decided on the spot in Pension Adalats 
organized by Zonal Railways on 15th December every year.  This has 
caught on as a novel means of redressing grievances. 
 
About 7.2 lakh employees get uniforms/protective clothing on Railways.  
Detailed Dress Regulations are prescribed for the different categories of 
staff. 
 
Serving Railway employees are issued privilege passes and Privilege Ticket 
orders according to their scale.  In addition, Residential Card 
Passes/Concessional Season Ticket Orders are also issued on certain 

 26 
sections for Railway employees who commute by train to work.  
Retired Railway employees are also entitled to Post -Retirement 
Complimentary Passes. 
 
Based on Government (Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare)’s 
notification regarding Ex -Gratia Scheme for civilian employees, Railway 
Board circulated Scheme of Ex. Gratia Compensation for families of 
Railway Servants who die in harness in the performance of their bona fide 
official duties under various circumstances.  The Compensation in cases of 
death due to accidents or violence by terrorists/anti -social elements is Rs. 
5 lakhs each, while in case of death during ene my action in war, border 
skirmishes, or action against militants/terrorists, etc. is Rs. 7.50 lakhs.  
 
Indian Railways have provided a wide range of incentives to Railways 
sportspersons for their outstanding performances in competitions held at 
various lev els.  Cash awards and additional increments have also been 
given to coaches who have contributed in outstanding manner.  
 
A dependent family member of a Railway servant dying in course of duty 
or in harness or who is retired on medical ground is considered  for 
appointment on Compassionate Ground in various Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ 
categories subject to the candidate fulfilling the eligibility criteria 
prescribed for the post for which he/she is being considered.  
 
With the rapid modernization of Indian Railways, pha sing out of Steam 
Traction resulting in closure of Steam Loco Sheds and closure of Goods 
Sheds and Transshipment Yards, etc. a large number of regular staff are 
being rendered surplus.  In terms of extant policy the staff rendered 
surplus are not to be ret renched.  Instead, they have to be retrained and 
redeployed in alternative jobs.  Utilization and redeployment of surplus 
staff is given the highest priority and their absorption has precedence over 
all other modes of recruitment including screening of Cas ual Labour and 
substitutes, and direct recruitment.  
  
4.3 The position regarding fund allocation as per Revised Estimates, Actual 
and Shortfall with regard to “Staff Welfare” is observed to be as under:- 
      (Figures in crores of Rupess) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actuals Shortfall 
2004-05 1518 1530 1511 19 
2005-06 1695 1744 1694 50 
2006-07 1993 1938 **1881 57 
**(provisional) 
 
 

 27 
4.4 The shortfall in utilization of funds for staff welfare as compared to 
the revised estimate has been as much as Rs.50 crore in 2005-06 and over Rs.57 
crores in 2006 -07.  The main reasons for under utilization with respect to 
residential quarters are stated to be -steep hike of raw materials including fuel, 
steel & cement, floods in Eastern States, failure of con tractors, inadequate 
response to tenders, etc.  
 
4.5 The Committee observed that there had been under utilization of funds 
allotted year after year and the same reasons are repeated every year for 
shortfall in utilization.  The Committee inquired in this connection that in order to 
overcome the problem of sudden hike in prices of raw -material and the resultant 
contract failures, why a suitable provision for renegotiation of contract be 
incorporated in the initial agreement.  Responding to this suggestion, a  
representative of the Ministry of Railways stated:- 
“Once the contract has been fixed, there are terms and conditions and 
there are no procedures available for negotiating the prices within the old 
contract.  I wish there were.  I accept what you have suggested.” 
 
 Another representative of the Ministry of Railways stated in this 
connection,  
“As regards, staff quarters and staff amenities, normally the General 
Manager of the Railways is supposed to hold meetings with federations to 
arrive at the works to be done.  These meetings do not get done in time.  
There is always a big time lag in doing this…   This is the one area which 
we have to address now.” 
  
 
A. Staff Benefit Fund  
4.6 A unique feature of welfare schemes on  the Railways is establishment of a 
Staff Benefit Fund in the year 1931.  The fund provides assistance to employees 
and their dependents for their education, relief during times of distress, 
treatment in indigenous system of medicine, development of sports, scouts, 
cultural and recreational activities etc.  At present, Railways make an annual 
contribution @ Rs. 35/ - per capita to the Fund.  This amount is allocated to the 
following activities on per capita basis as under:- 
(i) General activities viz. Education, recreation, amusement, cultural, relief 
of distress, sickness and miscellaneous items:- 
 

 28 
(a)    Education     
 Rs.4.75 
(b)  Recreation other than sports   Rs.2.25 
(c)  Promotion of Cultural Activities   Rs.0.50 
(d)  Relief of distress, sickness, etc.   Rs.7.50 
(e)  Women empowerment activities   Rs.0.50 
(f)  Miscellaneous     Rs.0.50 
 
(ii)      Sports activities       Rs.5.00 
(iii)      Scouts activities       Rs.3.50 
(iv)      Recreational facilities to Officers and Supervisory staff Rs.3.00 
(v)      Indigenous system of medicine including Homoeopathy Rs.2.50 
(vi)      Immediate relief in times of crisis arising out of natural  
     calamities        Rs.3.00 
(vii) Training for developing occupational skills of physically 
/mentally challenged wards especially girls of railway   
employees.               Rs.2.00 
 
Total                 Rs.35.00 
 
4.7 It transpired during oral evidence of the Ministry of Railways that the 
Railways’ annual contribution to SBF was raised to Rs.226 last year as a one time 
measure and this year the contribution has been brou ght down to Rs.35 per 
capita.   
4.8 Asked about the reason for increasing per capita contribution to Rs.226 in 
the year 2006 -07 and reducing it to Rs.35 in 2006 -07, the Ministry stated in a 
written reply that as an appreciation of the continuous hard work of railway 
employees in effecting a historic turnaround in the financial position of the 
Railways, the Hon’ble Minister of Railways, in his Budget Speech for the year 
2006-07, proposed an increase in the contribution to Staff Benefit Fund (SBF) for 
the fin ancial year 2006 -07 by almost 9 times, from the level of Rs.26 per 
employee to Rs.226 per employee.  This was a one-time measure only. 
 
 
 
 
4.9 When the committee desired to know the basis for increasing the 
allocation abruptly for the staff welfare, a repr esentative of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) informed during the evidence as under:- 
 

 29 
“The SBF, Staff Benefit Fund, has been over the years below Rs.30.  
Even in the earlier year it was Rs.30 which we raised to Rs.35. This 
Rs.226 was announced by  the hon.  Minister as a one time gesture since 
the Railways turned around and we earned a lot of profit.  As a gesture to 
the staff, as a one -time benefit, he gave this.  It was not the intention 
that we jump from Rs.26 to Rs.226.  So, it is a one -time benefit only.  It 
will remain at the same level of Rs.30 which we raised to Rs.35.”   
 
4.10 When the Committee enquired as to why in spite of increase in the 
Railway surplus, the per capita allocation for staff welfare has been reduced, a 
representative of the Railway Board stated:- 
“The reason here is that 2005-06 really saw, from what we were earlier, a 
real turnaround.  The profit was more.  Of course, you are right this year 
it is still more.  But during this interim period, we took a conscious 
decision in 2006 that we will have a separate corporate welfare plan, and 
there we planned to spend about Rs.5,000 crore over the next 10 years. 
Every year we will contribute about Rs.500 crore.  So, this year, other way 
it has been taken care of.  We added some oth er welfare activities also.  
We will have increased the capacity of some holiday houses and one new 
at Goa, we are making at all the major stations committee halls, houses 
attached to hospital, to keep the families of the relatives of the patients 
who get admitted to hospitals.  Since those measures got regularly 
sanctioned, this was not put through the Staff Benefit Fund.  But we are 
spending in totality quite a lot of amount.    
 
4.11 The Committee were informed by union representatives that the per 
capita amount allocated under Staff Benefit Fund for recreational facilities to 
officers and supervisory staff is Rs.3, whereas for Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ staff 
who constitute vast majority of staff strength, the allocation is just Rs.2.20. 
 
 A representative of the Railway Board said in this connection, 
“We got the representation from our staff federations also.  They did point 
out that the total money is Rs.3 and it should be apportioned as per the 
staff strength of officers and staff, whatever proportion it comes to.  Yes, 
there was an aberration.  We took a conscious decision to correct this.  I 
think the orders will be out soon.” 
 

 30 
4.12 The SBF on each zonal Railway is administrated by a Committee with 
members drawn from official side as well as staff side w hich ensures that the 
benefit percolate to deserving employees within the constraints of funds.  For the 
year 2007-08, the expenditure under SBF is estimated at Rs.8.0943 crore.  The 
Staff Benefit Fund and the activities under this scheme are continuous in  nature 
and are not for a specified period.   
  
B. Corporate Welfare Plan and Staff Quarters 
4.13 Corporate Welfare Plan (CWP) (2006 -15) has been prepared as a staff 
welfare scheme and issued on 23.10.2006 to pay special attention towards 
maintenance and i mprovement of staff quarters with particular emphasis on 
substandard quarters lacking basic amenities.  
4.14 As regards the objective of the CWP, a representative of the  Railway 
Board submitted during evidence as under:- 
“The objective of the Corporate We lfare Plan was to deal with 
substandard quarters, to deal with substandard quarters, to deal with 
dilapidated quarters, to deal with amenities missing in colonies.  The plan 
is sanctioned according to such requirements.  It is on the need base and 
there is no other criteria for Zone -wise distribution of the sanctions.  It is 
on the basis of actual need; whatever they need, that will be sanctioned.  
It is on the basis of the assessment of the Railways, from whom we 
receive the proposals earlier we used to receive small bits for replacement 
of staff quarters, but now a complete stock of such requirement was 
taken and that assessment was done.” 
 
4.15 The total requirement of funds for works planned to be taken up over a 
10 year period under CWP has been estimat ed to be in the range of Rs.4000 -
5000 crore.  This will require sanctioning of New Works under CWP to the tune 
of around Rs.450-500 Crore every year under the Works Programme.   
 
4.16 Zonal Railways have been asked to propose the CWP works accordingly as 
per their projections made earlier over the 10 year period from 2006 -07 to 2015-
16 for sanction in the Annual Works Programme under the relevant Plan Heads 
viz. Staff Quarters (PH-51) and Staff Amenities (PH-52). 
 
4.17 The quantum of works proposed every year would be roughly one tenth of 
Railways’ total requirements suitably adjusting the sanctions already covered in 
Pink Book 2006 -07 and with suitable annual increase taking into account 

 31 
Railway’s spending capacity to ensure that funds, once allotted, are n ot 
surrendered. 
 
4.18 The total funds allocated for Works Programme under Corporate Welfare 
Plan during 2007 -08 is stated to be Rs.344.22 crore under Plan Head 51 & 52. 
The details of CWP works proposed and approved for 2007 -08 are given in the 
Statement i n Appendix -III.  It may be seen therefrom that the total no. of 
proposals received under Staff Quarters and Staff Amenities under Corporate 
Welfare Plan was 278 and no. of works approved under CWP under Plan Head 51 
& 52 is 236.  The total cost of the prop osals received was Rs.544.24 crore and 
the total cost of the works sanctioned is Rs.344.24 crore.  The proposals which 
are justified from the Staff amenities and requirement of the Staff Quarters point 
of view are generally sanctioned and provision of fund s are made in the Annual 
Grant.  
 
4.19 Railways propose new works for new quarters under Plan Head 51 every 
year in the Annual Works Programme.  These works are scrutinized and 
approved subject to availability of funds.  
  
4.20 During the visit of the Comm ittee to some of the Railway colonies, it was 
observed that a number of staff quarters were in dilapidated condition and 
marked by the poor maintenance. 
 
4.21 Allotment & Expenditure under Plan Head 51 (Staff Quarters) for 
construction of new quarters/Work s in Progress during 10 th Five Year Plan is 
stated to be as under:- 
Plan 
Head 
Year Original 
allotment 
Revised 
allotment 
Expenditure Shortfall 
as 
compared 
to original 
allotment 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
51 2002-03 65 70.65 56.49 8.51 Cr. 13% 
51 2003-04 75.2 70.93 45.59 29.61 Cr. 39.4% 
51 2004-05 75.2 65.47 46.04 29.16 Cr. 38.7% 
51 2005-06 80.15 86.92 66.96 13.19 Cr. 16.45% 
51 2006-07 115.55 115.50 87.84 27.66 Cr. 24% 
 

 32 
Under the Plan Head 51 (Staff Quarters) during the years 2002 -03 to 
2006-07 there is sh ortfall in actual expenditure ranging from 13% to 39% as 
compared to original allotment.   
 
4.22 In general, no project/schemes, with regard to Staff Quarters and Staff 
Amenities under Plan Heads 51 & 52, were affected significantly due to under -
utilization of funds.  However, transit accommodation for officers Type IV – 24 
units at a cost of Rs.3.21 crore at Pune and replacement of K Type sub -standard 
quarters, Type 1 -75 units at a cost of Rs.1.97 crore at Pakni, Boroti & Dudhani 
got affected to some extent due to under-utilization of funds. 
4.23 When the Committee enquired about the shortfall in utilization funds 
meant for construction, repair and maintenance of staff quarters and staff 
welfare, Member Electrical, Railway Board replied that the difference in the 
Revised Expenditure and Actual Expenditure is because of the ambitious targets 
set.   
4.24 The budget allotment has increased significantly over previous years with 
regard to Staff Welfare.  The actual expenditure with regard to Staff Welfare is 
on an increasing trend.  The expenditure on Staff Welfare in 2005 -06 increased 
by 12.14% as compared to 2004 -05.  The expenditure on Staff Welfare in 2006 -
07 increased by 10.99% as compared to 2005 -06 and reflects better fund 
utilization despite local constraints. 
 
Housing Satisfaction 
Railway Strength Housed Housing 
    
CLW 13364 9376 70.16 
CR 89076 33377 37.47 
DLMW 3732 1718 46.03 
DLW 6159 3696 60.01 
ECOR 47970 24239 50.53 
ECR 76780 40929 53.31 
ER 102107 42703 41.82 
ICF 13064 3003 22.99 
NCR 65557 27859 42.50 
NE 61046 28173 46.15 
NF 72391 53095 73.34 
NR 163369 69878 42.77 
NWR 52354 30057 57.41 
RCF 6825 3597 52.70 

 33 
RDSO 2797 2017 72.11 
RE 1884 301 15.98 
RWF 2305 830 36.01 
SC 96665 49456 51.16 
SE 87037 49042 56.35 
SEC 42139 23665 56.16 
SR 106258 28913 27.21 
SWR 33319 12424 37.29 
WC 56249 28372 50.44 
WR 109338 49546 45.31 
Summary for the ‘year’ = 2005-06 (24 detail records) 
Sum 13,11,785 6,16,266 46.98 
 
C. Medicare 
4.25 Indian Railways also provide comprehensive health care to its employ ees 
and their family members, including retired people joining RELHS Scheme.  A 
three tier system of medical care, primary care at health unit level, secondary 
care at sub-divisional/divisional hospitals and tertiary care at Zonal level through 
Central Hospitals is being provided. 
4.26 The Medical service of Indian Railways has two major functions. 
(i) Industrial Medicine: Attending to Railway accident victims, medical 
treatment to traveling sick passengers, medical examination of 
candidates/employees and control on mandays loss on sick account 
etc. 
(ii) Comprehensive health care:  Rendering comprehensive health care 
to Railway employees and their family members and retired 
beneficiaries who join RELHS Scheme.   
4.27 When the Committee enquired about the pro vision of first -aid box and 
other emergency medicine, a representative of the Railway Board submitted 
during the evidence that in long distance trains the first -aid box is available with 
guard and Railway staff viz., TTE. Guards are given basic First-aid training.   
4.28 A three tier system of medical care i.e. primary care at health 
unit/Dispensary level, secondary care at sub -divisional/Divisional hospitals/Zonal 
level and tertiary health care at some zonal hospitals, is being provided.  This 
service is p rovided through 121 Railway hospitals and 586 health units.  In 
addition, railways have tie -up with Govt. and Private Hospitals of repute for 
tertiary care as per the need. 

 34 
4.29 The Committee desired to know reasons for the Indian Railways not 
having full time doctors from the Indian Systems of medicine.  A representative 
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) stated during their evidence:- 
“These facilities were not being patronized by the people.  We did have 
Homoeopathy and Ayurveda Dispensaries.  A ccording to my personal 
knowledge, at Mughal Sarai, nobody went to the Homoeopathic doctor 
who was there.  We gave him one railway quarter and even telephone 
also, but the attendance of people who came to consult him was zero.  
Even the Welfare Organizations were giving free medicines, but even that 
was not patronized.  Same is the case with Ayurveda.  However, wherever 
it gets the trust of the people, surely there is a case to consider that.  If 
we have received any such requests from people, we will defin itely 
consider it.” 
 
4.30 To make further improvement in the health care delivery system, 
following three important steps have been taken recently:- 
1. Powers have been delegated to medical officers of the health units 
located 75 Kms. away from railway hos pitals to get common 
pathological tests, X-ray, etc. done at health unit level. 
2. A scheme for engagement of honorary visiting specialists has been 
introduced.  Under this scheme, specialist doctors, from outside 
Railways, can be engaged on monthly paymen t basis.  They will 
visit railway hospitals on regular basis to provide specialized 
services.  
3. Powers have also been delegated to the Hospital In -charge to call 
specialist doctors from outside railways on case -to-case basis on 
payment.   
  
4.31 In-house medical treatment, outsourcing of specialist/super specialist 
services and facility of private hospital for referring patients will give adequate 
cover and quality patient care.   
4.32 Pointing out that Kolkata Metro Hospital is not fully utilized and tre atment 
of indoor patients has been dispensed with, the Committee enquired whether 
there is any move to handover the Hospital to private parties.  In response, the 
Ministry of Railways stated in a post evidence reply, as under:- 
“There is no move to privati ze Metro Hospital.  There is a possibility of 
taking over the infrastructure of Metro Hospital by Eastern Railways, B.R. 
Singh Hospital, Sealdah for starting some specialty for which the existing 
infrastructure of Metro Hospital is suitable.  This process may take 
sometime.  It will not be possible to provide secondary care services in 
the fields of Medicine, Surgery, Gynecology, Pediatrics, etc at the Metro 
Hospital due to shortage of Medical and Para Medical staff in the Metro 
Hospital.” 
 

 35 
4.33 When the Co mmittee enquired about the facility of mobile hospital, a 
representative of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) replied during the 
evidence that there is one in each zone to be extended to at least one in one 
division to cover larger areas.  
4.34 The details of the proposals for construction of accommodation, for 
relatives of indoor patients admitted in Metropolitan cities, are as under:- 
Mumbai:- At present there is 40 rooms accommodation available in 
Jagjivan Ram hospital/Mumbai Central and 8 rooms a ccommodation in Dr. 
B. AM Hosptial/Byculla on Central Railway.  In this Works Programme 
2007-08, Rs. 3 crores have been sanctioned for construction of rest house 
for the patients relatives/attendants at Central Hospital, Byculla and 
Rs.1.5 crores at Agarpada for Jagivan Ram Hospital, Mumbai Cental. 
 
Chennai:-76 room are available in Railway hospital/Perambur, Chennai 
for patients’ relatives.  
 
Kolkata:- On Eastern Railway the site for construction of 50 bedded 
resthouse for patients’ relatives has been sele cted and the proposal for 
sanction has been sent to the competent authority.  Plan and estimate for 
above construction is under preparation.  On South Eastern Railway, the 
estimate and plan for construction of 50 rooms accommodation for 
relatives/attendants of indoor patient is under preparation.  
 
New Delhi:- Facilities of 44 bedded resthouse for patient 
relatives/attendants are available in Northern Railway Central Hospital 
(NRCH)/New Delhi.  Another proposal for 50 bedded rest-house for patient 
relatives/attendants at Northern Railway Central Hospital (NRCH)/New 
Delhi is in pipeline.   
 
4.35 To a query by the Committee during evidence whether Railways are 
proposing for preparing Health Card and regular health check -up for its 
employees, the Ministry of Ra ilways (Railway Board) agreed to the suggestion 
and also proposed inclusion of employees’ family health parameters and regular 
health check-up of its employees. 
4.36 Pointing out that Zonal Hospitals at new zones are yet to be fully 
augmented, a representa tive of the NFIR suggested that there is a need to 
create super-specialty facilities at least in the centralized hospitals. 
4.37 Seven Zones were created newly in October, 2002/April, 2003.  The 
Committee observed that a new Central Hospital has been creat ed in only two 
new Zones viz., at Patna in East Central Railway and at Bhubaneshwar in East 
Coast Railway.  In five other new Zones, Divisional Hospitals have been 

 36 
upgraded into the Central Hospital.  The Committee enquired as to why a 
separate Central Hos pital should not be set up in each of the newly created 
Zonal Railways.  Responding to the query, a representative of the Ministry of 
Railways said,  
 “Sir, you are very right.  The need is there. It should not be that a 
Divisional Hospital becomes a Central Hospital that is not the idea.”   
 
Pointing out during oral evidence of the Ministry of Railways that a patient 
died due to non-availability of blood in Agra recently, the Committee emphasized 
the need for having a blood bank in each and every Divisiona l Hospital.  
Responding to the suggestion, a representative of the Ministry of Railways said 
that there is some logistics involved in setting up a blood bank and pointed out 
that blood has a life and it has to be used in 120 days. 
 
D. Education Facilities 
4.38 Education is a State subject on Concurrent List and the provision of 
educational facilities is the responsibility of Ministry of Human Resource 
Development and State Governments.  However, purely as a welfare measure 
Railways had in the past provided schools upto Senior Secondary level at places 
having sizeable concentration of Railway employees and where the educational 
facilities provided by other agencies were either non -existent or inadequate to 
meet the requirements of railway employees’ wards.   
4.39 Provision of educational facilities is primarily the responsibility of State 
Governments and Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of 
Education) as per Article 346(3) – item of list 3 i.e. Concurrent List (Seventh 
Schedule) of the Constit ution of India.  However, Railways have provided 
educational facilities to the limited extent within the constraints of available 
resources, purely as a measure of staff welfare to meet the needs of 
wards/children of Railway employees only at such places w here there is a 
concentration of Railway employees and the educational facilities provided there 
at by other agencies – both Government (State/Central) and private, are found 
inadequate or are totally absent resulting in hardship or inconvenience to them.  
However, with the passage of time and creation of educational facilities both by 
States/Private agencies such a situation has ceased to exist.  As a matter of 

 37 
policy now Railways have decided to encourage opening of Kendriya 
Vidyalayas in Civil Sector in Railway colonies instead of opening their own 
schools.  
4.40 Educational facilities provided by the Railways are generally confined to 
Primary/Middle and Secondary/Higher Secondary/Senior Secondary standards.  
The Railways do not normally enter the field o f College and Technical education 
owing to their extant policy keeping in view the far reaching administrative and 
financial implications.  
4.41 As at present there are 367 educational institutions on Railways 
comprising of one Degree College, 53 Senior Se condary Schools/Intermediate 
Colleges, 45 High Schools, 17 Middle Schools and 251 Primary/Austerity Type 
Primary Schools. 
4.42 Besides aforesaid Schools, Ministry of Railways has been successful in 
getting 68 Kendriya Vidyalayas established in Railway colo nies/areas.  Of these 6 
are in Project Sector (i.e. all capital, recurring and non -recurring expenditure has 
to be borne by the Railways) and 62 in Civil Sector (i.e. Railways just provide 
land, temporary accommodation and residential accommodation to 50% of KVS 
staff on nominal lease basis).  Another three proposals for opening of Kendriya 
Vidyalayas in civil Sector at Dahod/Gujarat, Nanded/Maharashtra and 
Rangiya/Assam have been referred to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) for 
their concurrence. It may be submitted that there is no formal agreement with 
KVS for opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas.  Wherever there is demand from the 
Railway employees for provision of educational facilities, the same is examined in 
Railway Board and after creation of necessary infrastructure as per requirements 
of KVS, the proposal is referred to them for concurrence.  
4.43 There are a few privately managed schools (normally by employees’ 
cooperative efforts) and State run schools functioning in Railway colonies to 
cater to the needs of children of Railway employees. In deserving case and on 
fulfilling necessary requirements, Railways assist such privately managed schools 
by way of providing land on lease basis, helping in 
construction/repair/maintenance of infrastructure and by issuing financial grants 
and subsidy.   

 38 
4.44 In the matter of admission of children to Railway Schools, a 
reservation of 15% for SC and 5% for ST is prescribed. Also 3% of the seats are 
reserved for Physically Handicapped children. 
4.45 At present there ar e 1,30,601 children studying in Railway schools which 
include 97,095 wards of Railway employees and 33,506 non -Railway wards.  The 
total number of teachers in Railway schools is 5426 and strength of Non-teaching 
staff is 1187. 
4.46 The actual expenditure o n provision of educational facilities on Railways 
during the year 2005 -06 was about Rs.88 crores.  For 2006 -07, the expenditure 
is about Rs.100 crores subject to finalization of accounts.  The Budget estimate 
on educational facilities for the year 2007-08 is projected at Rs.113 crores.  
4.47 Railways also extend financial help to the wards of needy Railway 
employees and a sum of Rs.4.75 per capita has been earmarked in Staff Benefit 
Fund for the purpose. When the Committee desired to know about the 
availability of education facility, a representative of NFIR stated during the 
evidence:- 
“Unfortunately, wherever there are railway schools and railway colleges, 
the policy of the Railway Ministry as of now is to try to create conditions 
to close them down.  This  is totally an unhealthy approach on the part of 
the Railway Ministry.  It is requested that whatever schools and colleges 
existed in 1992, at least they should see to it that they are augmented, 
they are further strengthened and teaching staff is posted t here.  You try 
to attract more and more wards of employees so that they can have 
education and thereby, also become better citizens.” 
  
4.48 Technical Scholarships are also granted for Railway employees’ wards for 
pursuing professional/technical education.  The amount equivalent to 50% of the 
sum spent of technical scholarships in the preceding year is drawn from revenue 
over and above the Staff Benefit Fund entitlement.   
4.49 When the committee desired to know whether the Railways do not plan to 
set-up pr ofessional colleges for its employees despite having enough 
infrastructure, the Member Staff, Railway Board submitted before the Committee 
as under:- 
“Even the degree college that we have today is based on the past 
decision.  The point is education being the State as well as Central subject 
we would not like to interfere with it.  First of all, it will become a liability 
which we cannot take charge of.  Secondly, we cannot obviously do 
justice to a job of this nature.  Basically, schools have been made for the 

 39 
far flung areas of the Indian Proliferating further through education 
is not our mandate and is not really desirable.”  
  

 40 
 
                                                 PART - II 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. It transpired durin g the Committee’s examination of Industrial 
Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways that the system of verification 
of Members, adopted by the Railways over the years, for recognition of 
unions has been pronounced by Madras High Court as ‘incorrect’.  
Recognition of unions used to be granted by the Zonal Railways on 
minimum 30% membership of non -gazetted employees verified on the 
basis of returns filed by the claimants.  Obviously, the system was not 
foolproof to check dual membership.  On the High Court’s direction to 
devise a method to establish exclusive membership of an employee to 
a union, the Railways have since decided to go in for secret ballot.  
According to Delhi High Court order, the secret ballot should be held 
within six months from 22.03.2007 i .e. before 21 September, 2007.  
Though only a few days are left for the court’s time limit to end, there 
appears to be no sign of the Railways completing the process of 
elections within the deadline.  The Committee feel that this task could 
have been compl eted as stipulated by the court, had the work been 
handled with a sense of urgency. 
2. The Panel, headed by a former Railway Board Chairman, Shri C.L. 
Kaw, which is the nodal body for conducting and supervising the secret 
ballot to recognize unions is repo rted to have since framed the 
modalities for the election.  The Committee hope that the Railway 
Administration will take expeditious decision on the modalities under 
intimation to the Committee. 

 41 
3. There are two unions recognized by the Railways viz. All 
India Railwaymen’s Federation (AIRF) and National Federation of 
Indian Railwaymen (NFIR) which have affiliates in all the Zonal 
Railways.  The recognized unions enjoy a host of facilities including 
free passes which are not available to other registered uni ons.  One of 
the Railway associations which appeared before the Committee has 
made a suggestion that recognition of the existing unions should be 
withdrawn atleast one year ahead of the secret ballot.  In the opinion 
of the Committee, there should be a lev el playing field for all the 
unions – recognized as well as registered - which participate in the 
secret ballot.   The Committee hope that appropriate steps will be 
taken to ensure this. 
4. A suggestion has been made in different quarters that holding of 
secret ballot should be entrusted to the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(CLC) at the Centre.  The Ministry of Labour have however, held that 
they have neither the power nor the manpower to conduct elections 
especially for lakhs of Railway employees posted throughout the length 
and breadth of the country. The Committee learn that Bharat Sanchar 
Nigam Limited have held union elections with the assistance of 
observers provided by the CLC organization.  The Committee trust that 
the above suggestion would be taken not e of and such steps taken as 
would ensure free and fair elections. 
5. The Production Units such as Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, 
Diesel Locomotive Works,  Integral Coach Factory, Rail Wheel Factory 
and Rail Coach Factory etc. which are under the Ministry of Railways 

 42 
do not have unions.  Similarly, there is no recognized union in 
Metro Railway, Kolkata.  Though these production units, according to 
Labour Secretary, would qualify to be called ‘factories’ and entitled to 
have unions, the Ministry of Railways do not seem to be favourably 
inclined to allow these units to have unions.  The Committee have 
emphasized in their earlier Reports the need for the production units to 
have unions.  In order to enable the workers in these units to exercise 
their trade union rights and to enable their participation in ‘Permanent 
Negotiating Machinery’, the Committee would urge the Railways to 
reconsider their stand in this matter in consultation with the Ministry 
of Labour.  The Committee recommend that the unions of the 
production units as well as the Metro Railway, Kolkata should be 
allowed to participate in the secret ballot.  
6. One of the main grievances of the unions relates to non -
implementation/undue delay in implementation of the agreements 
arrived at in the meetings of Departmental Council and in the meetings 
of Permanent Negotiating Machinery (PNM) which operate at different 
levels and tiers.  The Committee have been informed that the PNM 
meetings are not held as frequently as prescribed in a number of 
Divisions.  S imilarly,  in the case of All India RPF Association too, the 
PNM meetings are not held regularly at Zonal and Divisional levels.  At 
the Board level also, the meetings have not been held with All India 
RPF Association for the last one year.  The data furni shed by the 
Ministry in this regard also brings out this fact.  These reflect the 
failures of Railway authorities at divisional levels.  The deposition by 

 43 
Labour Secretary indicates that Railway disputes constitute five to 
six percent of total disputes rec eived in the Labour Ministry.   The 
Committee desire that causes for this state of affairs should be gone 
into at high level and remedial measures taken to ensure that the 
Industrial Relations mechanism functions efficiently and effectively at 
all levels including the RPF by adhering to the laid down periodicity of 
meetings and time -bound implementation of the decisions arrived at 
such meetings. 
7. All India Loco Running Staff Association (AILRSA) has 
complained about non -implementation of government’s comm itment 
given 35 years ago in 1973 about 10 hour duty for loco running staff.  
This is in blatant violation of the Hours of Employment and Regulation 
(HOER).  The Committee had also recommended in an earlier report 
that the working hours of Loco Running Sta ff should be only 8 hours.  
The Committee urge that working hours of Loco Running Staff be 
restricted forthwith to 8 hours.  AILRSA has also reported that the Loco 
Running Staff Grievance Committee (LRSGC) was unilaterally 
abandoned by the Ministry of Rail ways in 1981 and pleaded that 
LRSGC, which existed earlier for having regular dialogue at different 
levels for redressal of grievances should be revived or reconstituted at 
the earliest.  The Committee recommend that the AILRSA’s request be 
considered without delay. 
8.   All India RPF Association has also expressed its grievance that 
RPF authorities do not implement the PNM decisions and Railway 
Board’s orders.  One of the points raised by AIRPF in their 

 44 
memorandum relates to augmentation of the strength of  
the RPF by 24,000 as assessed by Railway administration and 
announced in 2006. There is also a suggestion that Railway Protection 
Force personnel to the extent possible be posted within the respective 
state they belong to and there should also be a time limit for the tenure 
of the RPF staff posted to Railway Protection Special Force.  The 
Committee desire that these issues should be looked into at the 
highest level and the grievances redressed. 
9. One of the objectives of the mechanism of Participation of 
Railway Employees in Management (PREM) instituted in 1994 is to 
facilitate effective and meaningful participation of employees in the 
management process.  According to AIRF and NFIR, the PREM has 
become a sort of ritual and there has been no real 
participation/involvement of employees before issues of significance 
are decided.  It has been stated that the decisions regarding 
outsourcing of certain functions, Public Private Partnership and such 
other matters had no prior involvement of PREM.  The Committee h ave 
been informed that in vital matters workers are not taken into 
confidence.  The Member Staff, Railway Board admitted during oral 
evidence that there is positive room for improvement.  The Committee 
trust that the Railway management, taking note of its past failures, 
would take care to see that the PREM achieves its objectives and gives 
the Railway employees a sense of real involvement in the managerial 
process.  

 45 
10. There was shortfall in utilization of funds for staff 
welfare to the tune of Rs. 50 cr. in 2005-06 and Rs. 57 cr. in 2006 -07.  
The under utilization under the head ‘staff quarters’ involving 
construction of new quarters and works in progress is stated to be 
about Rs. 46 cr. in 2003-04 and in the range of Rs. 13 cr. to Rs. 29 cr. in 
the subsequent years and is attributed to steep hike in prices of raw 
materials, failures of contractors etc.  The Committee note that these 
are the reasons, which are repeated year after year, for failure to 
achieve targets.  In order to overcome these problems, a suggestion 
has been made that there should be a suitable price escalation clause 
inbuilt into the contracts which would avert contract failures.  There is 
stated to be also delay in holding meetings by the Railways in deciding 
the works programme concernin g staff quarters.  The Committee 
desire that such delays should be avoided and appropriate steps taken 
to ensure full utilization of allotted funds and timely completion of 
projects. 
11. The Committee have been informed that allocation under Staff 
Benefit Fund for recreational facilities to ‘officers and supervisory staff’ 
is disproportionate to their strength as compared to the allocation in 
this respect for the rest of the employees.  The Committee have been 
assured that this aberration will be corrected.   The Committee would 
await the action taken in this regard. 
 
12. The Committee find that though there is requirement of 
sanctioning of around Rs. 450 -500 cr. every year under the Corporate 
Welfare Plan for maintenance and improvement of staff quarters, th e 

 46 
total funds allocated under this plan is just Rs. 344.22 cr. in 2007 -
08.  The Committee would like to be informed of exact allocation and 
utilization of funds under the plan during 2006 -07.  Considering the 
fact that the staff quarters in some of the Rai lway Colonies are in 
dilapidated condition, the Committee feel that the fund allocation for 
improvement of quarters should be stepped up to match the CWP 
projection of about Rs. 450 cr. every year. 
13. The Committee note that new Central Hospitals have bee n 
established only in two out of seven newly created Zones and in rest of 
the five new Zones, divisional hospitals have been upgraded into the 
Central Hospital.  The Zones which are having new Central Hospitals 
are Eastern Central Railway (at Patna) and Ea st Coast Railway (at 
Bhubaneswar).  A representative of the Ministry of Railway deposed 
before the Committee that the Railways have recognized the need to 
create separate Zonal hospitals in the seven newly created Zones. The 
Committee hope that steps will be taken to set up separate Central 
Hospital in all the new Zones. 
14. At present, there is reportedly one mobile hospital in each Zone.  
The Committee feel that this facility needs to be extended to cover 
other areas also and accordingly recommend that ar rangements be 
made for exclusive mobile hospital in each division and a blood bank in 
every divisional hospital. 
15. The Committee find that unlike the Central and State 
Government hospitals and Primary Health Centres, which have full time 
doctors for the Indian System of Medicine, the Indian Railways have 

 47 
only part -time doctors.  The Committee recommend that steps 
should be taken for providing full -time doctors for Indian System of 
Medicine and also for popularizing these systems.   
16. The Metro Hospital at Kolkata which has all the modern 
equipments and good facilities is not being utilized properly due to 
shortage of Medical and Para Medical staff.  The Committee desire that 
Kolkata Metro Hospital should be fully utilized both indoor as well as 
outdoor f acilities and urgent steps be taken to provide adequate 
number of Medical and Paramedical staff to the Hospital. 
17. The Committee find that out of 367 educational institutions on  
Railways, there has been only one degree college and the rest are  at 
the level of senior secondary/secondary/middle/Primary schools.  The 
Committee suggest, that the desirability of setting up professional 
colleges with the courses of study and curriculum designed to meet the 
specific requirements of Railways be examined.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
12 September, 2007                                   Chairman 
21 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka             Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 

 48 
 
 PART - III  
APPENDIX-I 
(Vide Para No. 1.2 of Chapter I) 
Names of recognized unions/associations 
Railway Affiliate Unions of AIRF Affiliate Unions of NFIR 
Central National Railway Mazdoor Union Central Railway 
Mazdoor Sangh 
Eastern Eastern Railwaymen’s Union Eastern Railwaymen’s 
Congress 
Northern Northern Railwaymen’s Union Uttariya Railway 
Mazdoor Union 
North Eastern N.E. Railway Mazdoor Union N.E. Railway 
Employees Union 
Northeast Frontier N.F. Railway Mazdoor Union N.F. Railway 
Employees Union 
Southern Southern Railway Mazdoor 
Union 
Southern Railway 
Employees Sangh 
South Central  South Central Railway Mazdoor 
Union 
South Central Railway 
Employees’ Sangh 
South Eastern  South Eastern Railwaymen’s 
Union 
South Eastern 
Railwaymen’s Congress 
Western Western Railway Employees 
Union 
Western Railway 
Mazdoor Sangh 
East Central East Central Railway Karamchari 
Union 
East Central Railway 
Men’s Congress 
East Coast  East  Coast Railway Shramik 
Union 
East Coast Railway 
Shramik /Congress 
North Western  North Western Railway 
Employees Union 
Utter Paschim Railway 
Mazdoor Sangh 
South Western  South Western Railway Mazdoor 
Union 
South Western Railway 
Employee Sangh 
West Central  West Central Railway Employees 
Union 
West Central Railway 
Mazdoor Sangh 
North Central  North Central Railwaymen’s 
Union 
North Central Railway 
Employees Sangh 
South East Central  South East Central 
Railwaymen’s Union 
South East Central 
Railway Mazdoor 
Congress 
 
All India Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes Railway Employees Association. 
All India OBC Railway Employees Association. 

 49 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3.13 of Chapter III) 
 
NO. OF PNM MEETINGS AT ZONAL LEVEL 
 
Rlys. No. of 
meeting 
Prescribed 
Name of 
the union 
Meeting held during the last three years 
   2004 2005 2006 
Central 04 CRMS 04 03 04 
04 NRMU 04 04 04 
Eastern 04 ERMU 03 02 02 
04 ERMC 02 02 02 
Northern 04 NRMU 03 03 04 
04 URMU 03 04 Nil 
N.C.R. 04 NCRMU 01 02 03 
04 NCRES 02 01 Nil 
N.E. 04 NERMU         
       02                  03                      0 04 NFREU 
N.F. 04 NFRMU        02 03 02 
04 NFREU 02 02 01 
Southern 04 SRES 03 02 03 
04 SRMU Nil 01 Nil 
S.C. 04 SCRES 04 03 03 
04 SCRMU 04 03 04 
S.E. 04 SERMU 03 03 04 
04 SERMC 03 03 04 
S.E.C. 04 SECRMU 04 03 02 
04 SECRMC 03 03 03 
S.W.R. 04 SWRES 01 03 02 
04 SWRMU 04 03 02 
Western 04 WREU 04 03 04 
04 WRMS 04 03 04 
W.C.R 04 WCREU 04 03 04 
04 WCRMS 04 03 04 
N.W.R. 04 NWREU 04 03 04 
04 UPRMS 04 03 04 
E.C.R. 04 ECRKU 04 04 03 
04 ECRMC 03 03 03 
East 
Coast 
04 ECRSU      
       07                   05                     06 04 ECRSC 
 
 
 

 50 
 
PNM MEETINGS AT  DIVISIONAL/WORKSHOP LEVEL. 
Rly. *No. of 
meetings 
Prescribed  
Name of 
the union 
Meeting held during the last three 
years 
 2004 2005 2006 
Central 30 CRMS 28 29 28 
30 NRMU 25 30 26 
Eastern 24 ERMU 25 16 19 
24 ERMC 13 11 20 
Northern 30 NRMU 30 30 26 
30 URMU 25 21 14 
N.C.R. 18 NCRMU 14 12 12 
18 NCRES 17 10 03 
N.E. 18 NERMU         
       27                 23                 17                 18 NEREU 
N.F. 30 NFRMU 16 14 10 
30 NFREU 16 11 10 
Southern 30 SRES 16 13 14 
30 SRMU 14 10 10 
S.C. 36 SCRES 30 23 24 
36 SCRMU 26 25 24 
S.E. 24 SERMU 13 11 13 
24 SERMC 17 12 14 
S.E.C. 18 SECRMU 20 18 13 
18 SECRMC 19 18 17 
S.W.R. 18 SWRES 17 14 11 
18 SWRMU 16 12 13 
Western 36 WREU 31 26 29 
36 WRMS 31 26 28 
W.C.R. 18 WCREU 28 24 27 
18 WCRMS 27 20 23 
N.W.R. 24 NWREU 32 30 27 
24 UPRMS 37 24 29 
E.C.R. 30 ECRKU 26 25 23 
30 ECRMC 24 27 21 
East Coast 18 ECRSU  
      27                  26               27 18 ECRSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 51 
 
Full form of Abbreviations: 
NRMU  : *National Railway Mazdoor Union 
CRMS  : **Central Railway Mazdoor Sangh 
ERMU  : *Eastern Railwaymen’s Union 
ERMC  : **Eastern Railwaymen’s Congress 
 
NRMU  : *Northern Railwaymen’s Union 
URMU  : **Uttariya Railway Mazdoor Union 
NERMU : *N.E. Railway Mazdoor Union 
NEREU : **N.E. Railway Employees Union 
NFRMU : *N.F. Railway Mazdoor Union 
NFREU : **N.F. Railway Employees Union 
SRMU  : *Southern Railway Mazdoor Union 
SRES  : **Southern Railway Employees Sangh 
SCRMU : *S.C. Railway Mazdoor Union 
SCRES  : **S.C. Railway Employees Sangh 
SERMU : *S.E.Railwaymen’s Union 
SERMC : **S.E. Railwaymen’s Congress 
WREU  : *Western Railway Employees Union 
WRMS  : **Western Railway Mazdoor Sangh 
ECRKU : *East Central Railway Karamchari Union 
ECRMC : **East Central Railwaymen’s Congress 
ECRSU : *East Coast Railway Shramik Union 
ECRSC  : **East Coast Railway Shramik Congress 
NWREU : *North Western Railway Employees Union 
UPRMS : **Uttar Paschim Railway Mazdoor Sangh 
SWRMU : *South Western Railway Mazdoor Union 
SWRES : **South Western Railway Employees Sangh 
WCREU : *West Central Railway Employees Union 
WCRMS : **West Central Railway Mazdoor Sangh 
NCRMU : *North Central Railwaymen’s Union 
NCRES : **North Central Railway Employees Sangh 
SECRMU : *South East Central Railway Mazdoor Union 
SECRMC : **South East Central Railway Mazdoor Congress 
 
   *affiliate Unions of AIRF 
   **Affiliate Unions of NFIR  
 

 52 
 
APPENDIX-III 
(Vide Para No. 4.18 of Chapter IV) 
Details of CWP works Proposed & approved for 2007-08 
 
Number and cost of proposed CWP 
works 
Number and cost of approved  
Railway Total No. of 
Works 
Total Cost 
(in crore) 
Total No. of 
Works 
Total Cost (in 
crore) 
CLW 2 1.97 1 1.29 
CR 27 89.55 14 26.40 
ECO 9 41.87 6 14.64 
ECR 19 24.05 17 24.05 
ER 11 31.04 12 22.88 
ICF 3 8.53 3 5.79 
NCR 14 17.61 12 16.74 
NE 3 4.47 2 1.98 
NF 43 62.46 43 49.32 
NR 35 76.21 27 52.26 
NWR 17 21.15 12 9.69 
RCF 2 4.05 1 76 
SC 31 26.09 24 21.36 
SE 5 5.74 7 6.00 
SEC 2 7.89 2 3.95 
SR 10 18.06 11 17.15 
SWR 11 31.21 11 15.05 
WCR 18 26.97 15 25.04 
WR 16 45.22 16 29.78 
Total 278 544.24 236 344.22 
  
 
 
 

 53 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21 st June, 2007 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1615 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
4. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
5. Shri Anwar Hussain 
6. Shri Manik Singh 
7. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
8. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
9. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
10. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
15. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
16. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
17. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik   - Deputy Secretary-II 

 54 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Ramesh Chandra  Member Electrical, Railway Board & 
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
2. Shri K.C. Jena   Member Staff, Railway Board &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
3. Shri V.N. Mathur   Member Traffic, Railway Board &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
4. Shri R. K. Rao   Member Mechanical, Railway Board &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and officers to the 
sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) briefed the Committee on the subject ‘Industrial 
Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’ and responded to the points raised by the 
Members.   
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 55 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committe e sat on Friday, the 13 th July, 2007 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1630  hrs. in Committee Room  ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
7. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
8. Shri Manik Singh 
9. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
11. Shri K. Subbarayan 
12. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
14. Shri Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
19. Shri Isam Singh 
20. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
21. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik   - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Sunita    - Under Secretary 
 
 

 56 
  
 Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Ramesh Chandra  Member Electrical, Railway Board & 
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2.  Shri K. C. Jena   Member Staff, Railway Board & Ex-officio  
Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
3. Shri R. K. Rao   Member Mechanical, Railway Board &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Shri S. K. Vij    Member Engineering, Railway Board &                             
                                       Ex-officio Secretary  to the Govt. of India. 
  
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) on the subject ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in 
Railways’.  It transpired that the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) had not come prepared to clarify the points raised by the 
Members. The Committee, therefore, decided to adjourn the meeting to  a later 
date.   
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 57 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23 rd July, 2007 from 1200 hrs.  to 1500 hrs. 
and 1530 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
5. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
8. Shri Giridhar Gamang  
9. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
10. Ch. Lal Singh 
11. Shri Manik Singh 
12. Shri Ananta Nayak 
13. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
14. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
15. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
17. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
18. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
19. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
20. Shri Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
21. Shri Isam Singh 
22. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
23. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 

 58 
 
 
2 The Committee held discussion on ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare 
in Railways’ with the office bearers of each of the six Railway Employees’ 
Federations/Associations shown below.  The discussion was held one after the 
other during the time shown against each, after the Chairman drew their 
attention to the Direction 58 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.  
 
Representatives of All India Railwaymen’s Federation   
(From 1200 hrs. to 1315 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri Umaraomal Purohit, President 
2. Shri J.P. Chaubey, General Secretary 
3. Shri Rakhal Das Gupta, Asstt. General Secretary  
4. Shri S.G. Mishra, Asstt. General Secretary 
5. Shri Salil Lawrence, Asstt. General Secretary 
6. Shri J.R. Bhosale, Treasurer 
 
Representatives of National Fe deration of Indian Railwaymen (NFIR)                    
(From 1315 hrs. to 1400 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri Guman Singh, President  
2. Shri M. Raghavaiah, General Secretary 
3. Shri B.C. Sharma, Vice President 
Representatives of All India RPF Association        
(From 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri U.S. Jha, IPF(Int.), Railway Board and General Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjay Singh, IPF/RPF Post/Fatuha and General Secretary 
3. Shri K.K. Singh, IPF/SIB/HWH and General Secretary 
4. Shri Raghubar Singh, SI/SIB/BSL and Asstt. Secy/AIRPFA 
 
Representatives of All India Loco running Staff Association                                
(From 1530 hrs. to 1620 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri S.K. Dhar, General Secretary 
2. Shri M.N. Prasad, Joint Secretary General 

 59 
 
Representatives of All India SC & ST Railway Employees ’ Association             
(From 1625 hrs. to 1650 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri Jas Ram Harnotia, President 
2. Shri Ram Avtar Meena, Sr. Vice President 
3. Shri Ashok kumar, General Secretary  
4. Shri B.L.Bairwa, Addl. General Secretary 
5. Shri Bhagwan Anand Kharat, Treasurer 
 
Representatives of All India O.B.C. Railway Employees’ Federation                  
(From 1650 hrs. to 1715 hrs.) 
 
1. Shri Vasudev Yadav, General Secretary 
2. Shri Virender Singh, Vice President 
3. Shri Bhoop Singh, Joint Secretary 
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 60 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3 rd August, 2007 from 1500 hours to                        
1715  hours in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
5. Shri Manik Singh 
6. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
7. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
9. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
10. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
12. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
13. Shri Isam Singh 
14. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
15. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik   - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 

 61 
 
  Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Ramesh Chandra  Member Electrical, Railway Board & 
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
(Holding A dditional Charge of 
Chairman, Railway Board) 
 
2. Shri S.K.Vij    Member Engineering, Railway Board &                                          
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
      
3. Shri R. K. Rao   Member Mechanical, Railway Board &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India  
 
4. Shri V.N. Mathur   Member Traffic, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways on the subject ‘Ind ustrial Relations and Staff Welfare in 
Railways’.  The evidence remained inconclusive. 
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
4. Thereafter, the sitting being the last, during the term of the Committee 
(2006-07), the Chairman placed on re cord his appreciation of the contribution 
made by Members in the work of the Committee.  The Members then thanked 
the Chairman for the smooth conduct of the sittings of the Committee and for his 
guidance and encouragement in effectively discharging the fun ctions of the 
Committee.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 62 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 nd August, 2007 from 1430 hrs. to                        
1615  hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
5. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
6. Ch. Lal Singh 
7. Shri Manik Singh 
8. Shri Ananta Nayak 
9. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
10. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
11. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
13. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary – II 
4. Smt. Sunita   - Under Secretary  

 63 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR 
 
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai  Secretary (L&E) 
 
2. Shri S. Krishnan  Additional Secretary (L&E) 
 
3. Ms. Gurjot Kaur  Joint Secretary 
 
4. Shri S.K. Mukhopadhyay CLC(C) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Labour to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Labour on the subject ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways’.    The 
evidence was concluded.    
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
4. The Committee decided to cancel t he oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Railwa ys on the above mentioned subject which had been 
scheduled to be held the same day at 1530 hrs. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 

 64 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29 th August, 2007 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1610  hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
4. Ch. Lal Singh 
5. Shri Ananta Nayak 
6. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
7. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
8. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
9. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
10. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary – II 
4. Smt. Sunita   - Under Secretary  

 65 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
1. Shri K.C. Jena  - Member Staff, Railway Board &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. Shri S.K. Vij   - Member Engineering, Railway Board & 
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
  
3. Shri R.K. Rao   - Member Mechanical, Railway Board & 
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
  
4. Shri V.N. Mathur  - Member Traffic, Railway Board & 
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India.  
 
2. The Committee took further oral evidence of  the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways on the subject ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in 
Railways’.    The evidence was concluded.    
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 66 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12 th September, 2007 from 1100 hours to                        
1200  hours in Committee Room  ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
5. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
6. Shri Anwar Hussain 
7. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
8. Shri Manik Singh 
9. Shri Ananta Nayak 
10. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
11. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
12. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
14. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
16. Shri A. Elavarasan 
17. Shri Isam Singh 
18. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
19. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary-II 

 67 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following draft Reports with 
some amendments as per Annexure:- 
(i) Performance of New Railway Zones 
(ii) Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare in Railways 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports after 
making consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the 
Ministry of Railways or otherwise and present the same to the Hon’ble Speaker, as 
the House is not in Session. 
 
4. The Committee also proposed to undertake  local study visit to Gannaur, 
Sonepat, Narela and Bahadurgarh on 05.10.2007 to see the adequacy of  
‘Passenger Amenities’ available at these Railway stations.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   
 
  
 

 68 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
AMENDMENTS/MODIFICATIONS MADE BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
IN THE REPORT ON INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND STAFF WELFARE IN RAILWAYS 
 
Sl. Page Para  Line  Additions/Modifications 
No. No. No.  No. 
1 2 3  4   5 
 
(I)  xxx   xxx   xxx 
  
  xxx   xxx   xxx 
       
(II) 33rd Report on Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare 
 
1. 8 2.20  -  Delete the para 
       
2. 35 3  10  Add “which participate in the secret ballot” after the 
      word registered.  
 
3. 38 8  5  Add “there is also a suggestion that RPF personnel 
to the extent possible be posted within the 
respective State they belong to and there should also 
be a time limit for the tenure of the RPF staff posted 
to the RPSF”. 
 
4. 41 after  -  Add the following new para 
  para 16    “The Committee find that out of 367 educational 
institutions on Railways, there has been only one 
degree college and the rest are at the level of senior 
secondary/ secondary/middle/primary schools.  The 
Committee suggest that the desirability of setting up 
professional colleges with the courses of study and 
curriculum designed to meet the specific 
requirements of Railways be examined.” 
      
     -------- 
 
 
 