           
19 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2005-06) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 5th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Safety & Security in Indian Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka) 

 2
 
 
SCR No.101  
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2005-06) 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 5th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Safety & Security in Indian Railways’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………..2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on …………2006 
             
  
             
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka) 
 

 3
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
  
 
CHAPTER I   Report……………………………… ………………………   1        
    
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Obs ervations which have been  
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Obser vations in respect of which  
   Replies of the Government   have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which final  
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways  
 held on 19.05.2006 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 4
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2005-06) 
   
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.      Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5        Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7        Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
11. Shri Anwar Hussain 
12. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
13. Shri C. Kuppusami 
14. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
15. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
16. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
19. Ch. Lal Singh 
20. Mohd. Tahir 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidu llah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
26. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
27. Shri R. Kamraj 
28. Shri Isam Singh 
29. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
30. Shri Abani Roy 
31. Vacant 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary  
4. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director  
5. Shri A.K. Kaushik    - Assistant Director  
6. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
(iii) 

 5
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2005-06), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report of the Committee on Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Firth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004-05) on ‘Safety & Security in Indian Railways’. 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lo k Sabha on 22.12.2004 and it contained 26 
recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 00.00.2005.   
  
3. The Committee considered  and adopted the Draft Acti on Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 19.05.2006.    
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Fifth Repo rt of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(2004-05) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                BASUDEB ACHARIA 
19  May, 2006                                                         Chairman, 
29 Jyaistha, 1928 Saka                          Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
(v) 

 6
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations and observations contained in the 5 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004-05) on ‘Safety & Security in Indian Railways’.  The Report 
was presented in Lok Sabha on 22.12.2004 and laid in Rajya Sabha simultaneously.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 26 recommendations/observations contai ned in the Report.  These have been 
broadly categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government – 1,  2,  6,  8, 10, 11 ,  12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 
26. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies – Para Nos. 3, 4, 7, 9, 14, 15, 
17, 18 and 25.        
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration Para No. – 5.      
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies are still 
awaited  Para Nos. – nil.     
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Ac tion Taken by Government on some of 
their recommendations/observations. 
 
A. Vacant posts in Safety categories (Para No. 5) 
4. The Committee in this paragraph had found that Railway Minister had announced 
in his Budget speech to fill up the 20000 vacancies in Group ‘D’ in safety category and 
3500 vacancies in RPF.   They found that due to this acute shortage of staff at times 
even the Station Masters had to perform comme rcial duties like sale of tickets, booking 
of parcels/goods, attending public queries etc.  They felt that in the process there could 
be lapse in train operations.  Due to shortf all in staff of safety category, safety of 
trains/operations had to be compromise d with.  The Committee, therefore, had 

 7
recommended that the vacant posts in safety categories should be filled up 
urgently on priority basis.  
 
5. In their Action Taken Reply, the Mini stry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 “Occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process.  Standing 
procedure already exists to conduct selections /suitability/trade tests regularly for filling 
up vacancies timely, especially in safety categories. 
 
There were about 78,564 vacancies in Safety Categories in All Indian Railways as 
on 01.11.2004 as against the sanctioned strength of 6,31,536.  This works out to about 
12.44% of the sanctioned strength.  The sanctioned strength includes not only the bare 
requirement for operation but also Rest Givers, Leave Reserve and provision for training 
etc.  In case of Safety Categories, these ad ditional provisions have been liberally made 
in order that work does not suffer, even if there are time gaps between arising of 
vacancies and filling up of the same.  While  every efforts is made to reach the ideal 
state of “zero vacancy”, yet merely because vacancies exist in safety categories, it 
cannot be construed that safety has been affected.  
 
 Further, with a view to facilitate filling up of vacancies in safety categories these 
categories have been exempted from the purview of rightsizing.” 
 
6. The Committee find that against the sanctioned strength of 6,31,536 
staff  in safety categories in Railway s which includes Leave Reserve, Rest 
Givers and provision for training etc ., there were about 78,564 vacancies as 
on 01.11.2004 constituting about 12.44%  of the sanctioned strength.   
According to the Ministry of Railways  provisions of  Leave Reserve, Rest 
Givers and provision for training etc. are made liberally in case of safety 
categories in order that work does no t suffer, even if there are time gaps 
between arising of vacancies and fillin g up of the same.  The near existence 
of vacancies in safety categories can not be construed that safety is being 
affected.  The Committee are of the co nsidered view that such a large 
number of vacancies in the safety categories certainly do affect the safety 
and operation of trains.  They find that Railways are subjecting their 
employees in safety category to perform strenuous duties continuously in the 

 8
absence of the Rest Givers and Leave Reserve etc.  The Committee while  
reiterating their earlier recommendatio n for filling up of all the existing 
vacancies in safety categories on urge nt and priority basis would like to be 
apprised of  the Zone-wise status of the number of vacancies that existed as 
on 01.11.2004 and the number of vacanci es filled up by each zone so far 
alongwith the steps being taken to fill up the remaining vacancies. 
 
B. Road Over/Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) (Para No. 16) 
 
7. In the above paragraph the Committee fo und that nearly 16% of the total 
accidents occur at the  level crossings.  Most of th ese accidents were due to 
carelessness of road users.  They had also found that accidents at manned level 
crossings were at the level of  4% of the total consequent ial train accidents, whereas 
unmanned level crossings accounted for 12% of  the accidents.  The work related to 
manning of unmanned level crossings and construction of ROBs/RUBs was being 
financed through the  Railway Safety Fund.  50% of the burden for construction of 
ROBs/RUBs was being shared by the Stat e Governments, but due to financial 
constraints they were not discharging thei r portion.   The Co mmittee in their First 
Report (14
th Lok Sabha) had inter-alia recommend ed that under such circumstances, 
the Railways should consider utilizing the amount accr ued from diesel cess for 
construction of approach wo rks.  They had once again reiterated their earlier 
recommendation in that regard. 
 
8.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 During the last five years i.e. 1999- 2000 to 2003-04, there have been 2026 
consequential train accidents, out of which 68 were at manned level crossings and 388 
at unmanned level crossings which accounts for 3.36% at manned level crossings and 
19.15% at unmanned level crossing i.e. around 22.51% of total consequential train 
accidents.   
Cause-wise analysis of manned and unman ned level crossings accidents  are as 
under: 
Unmanned Level Crossing  -  100% due to Failure of Other than Railway staff.  
 
Manned Level Crossings  -   55.58% due to Failure of Railway staff. 
         41.18% due to fail ure of Other than Railway Staff. 
         2 . 9 4 %  d u e  t o  combination of Factors.  

 9
 
9. Construction of Road Over/Under Bri dges is a joint venture of State Govts and 
Railways.  Railways construct bridge prop er over the tracks and approaches are 
constructed by the State Govt. Railways m eet cost of their po rtion of work of 
ROBs/RUBs from the allocation received from  Central Road Fund (CRF)  under Plan 
Head-30 which is at present to the tune  of Rs. 300-350 Cr.  These funds are not 
sufficient to meet the Railways’ requirements for execution of Railway  portion of work.  
At present Railways have already a liability  of 436 sanctioned works of ROBs/RUBs in 
progress on cost sharing basis.  Approximate cost of Railway’s portion of these works is 
Rs. 2500 Cr.  With the meager allocation of  Rs. 300-350 Cr. from CRF for this purpose, 
it will take Railways years to complete even the sanctioned works.   
 
10. In addition, there are 1252 level crossing s having traffic density of more than 
one lakh TVUs i.e. qualifying for replacem ent by ROBs/RUBs on co st sharing basis for 
which proposals have to be sponsored by the respective State Govts. 
 
11. For these works, Railways will require at least Rs. 7500 Cr for Railways’ portion 
of work. It will not be possible for Railways to bear the cost of approaches unless.  
Funding to Railways is increased substantially  from the Central Road Fund.  However, 
Chief Secretaries of  State Govts.  has been addressed by this Ministry vide ME’s D.O. 
No. 97/CE-I/BRO/158(Policy) PT. Dtd. 8.1.2005 in which State govts. has been 
requested to participate in joints efforts towards expeditious construction and 
completion of ROB/RUBs works with an a rrangement where part of State Govt. share 
towards cost of ROB/RUBs would be set off against their receivable funds from the 
Railways on account of cost of  GRP dues.  State Govt. are also requested to divert a 
part of fund received by them from Centra l Road Fund to the Railways.  Under this 
arrangement full construction work including the bridge portion and approaches shall be 
done through single agencies of PSU under the Ministry of Railways. Consent of most of 
the State Govts. is still awaited. 

 10
 
12. In case Railways has to meet the entire cost of ROB/RUB following points needs 
to be considered: 
i) Railways share out of Diesel & Petrol Cess is enhanced to meet the additional 
funds for approach work. 
ii) Ministry of Railways is exempted fr om paying towards the Diesel & Petrol 
Cess and instead utilize the same towards construction of ROBs/RUBs. 
 
Manning of unmanned level crossing: 
 
13. To improve the safety at unmanned leve l crossing stress is given to manning of 
unmanned level crossing.  Policy for mannin g of unmanned level crossing has been 
revised in June, 2003.  During last thr ee years i.e. 2001-02 to 2003-04, 287, 147 & 95 
unmanned level crossings has been manned.  Progress has been less in the year 2003-
04 due to change in policy of manning.  In  current year 211 unmanned level crossings 
has been identified for manning and up to Dec.2004, 86 level crossing has been 
manned.”  
 
14. The Committee further note from the statement made by the  Minister of State in 
the Ministry of Railways  on 25.08.2005 under Directio n 73 A on the status of 
implementation of recommendations contained in the 5 th Report that the proposal for 
utilizing the amount accrued from diesel an d petrol cess for construction of approach 
work has been sent to Ministry of Finan ce and Planning Commission and is at present 
under consideration and approval. 
 
15. The Committee find from the Action  Taken reply that the Ministry of 
Railways have requested to Chief Secr etaries of State Governments to  
participate in joint efforts towards ex peditious construction and completion 
of ROB/RUB works with an arrangement  where part of the State share 
towards cost of ROB/RUB be set of ag ainst their receivable funds from the 
Railways on account of cost of GRP dues and also by divertin g a  part of the 
fund received by them from Central Road Fund  to the Railways so that entire 
construction work including the bridge  portion and approaches  be done 
through single agency under the Ministry.  In this regard  replies from most 
of the State Governments are still awaited by Railways.  The Committee, 

 11
therefore, desire that the matter may again be taken up with the  
respective State Governments and outcome of the same may be apprised to 
them.   They further desire that the outcome of the proposal sent to the  
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for utilizing the amount 
accrued from diesel and petrol cess for construction of approach work be also 
placed before them. 
  
C. Publicity of new responsibilities  assigned to RPF  (Para No. 21) 
 
16. The Committee in this paragraph had found that the responsibility of providing 
security in trains and statio ns had been assigned to two agencies i.e. the GRP and the 
RPF.  The GRP works under the respective State Governments and the RPF works under 
the Ministry of Railways.  Recently the RPF Act, 1957 and the Railways Act, 1989 were 
amended and the same have come into force w.e.f. 01.07.2004.  With the Amendments 
made in the RPF Act, Railways had given some additional responsibilities to RPF such as 
registration/investigation of the minor offen ces in the trains, which were earlier dealt 
with by the GRP.  However, the railways had given no publicity in that regard with the 
result the passenger do not kn ow that such a responsibility had been entrusted to the 
RPF.  The Committee therefore, had emphasised  that publicity to th at effect might be 
made at stations and inside the trains.  Also general public must be adequately 
educated. 
 
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“All the Zonal Railways have been directed to take necessary steps in this regard 
so that the common public could be able to  know more about the new responsibilities 
assigned to RPF personal under the amendment RPF Act, 1957, 1989.” 
 
18. The Committee find that Railways has directed the Zonal Railways to 
take  necessary steps towards publicis ing the new responsibilities assigned 
to  RPF personnel  such as registration/ investigation of minor offences in the 
trains after the amendment of RPF Ac t, 1957 and the Railway Act, 1989.  
They feel that mere issuance  of th e direction to the Zonal Railways will not 
serve the purpose behind making  the above recommendation.  They, 
therefore, desire that the ground level implementation by each Zonal 

 12
Railways of the direction issued by the Ministry be placed before them at 
the earliest. 
 
D. Coordination meetings between the Railway officials with State 
authorities. (Para No. 22) 
 
19. The Committee in this paragraph had desired that coordination meetings 
between the RPF and GRP might be held at re gular intervals in view of the additional 
responsibilities given to RPF and the sensitive information about the law & order 
situation in the vulnerable areas on the Railway network should be exchanged. Further, 
coordination meeting amongst Divisional  Railway Manager (DRM), the District 
Magistrate (DM), Superintendent of Police (SP) and Divisional Security Commandant 
(DSC) should be held regularly to discuss the law and order problems.  
 
20. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Coordination meetings/conferences be tween GRP Chiefs and RPF Chiefs are 
held regularly at all levels to discuss cr ime related matters and proper escorting of 
passenger trains.  The results of these m eetings/conferences have been encouraging 
and fruitful.” 
 
21. The Committee are surprise to note that  the Ministry of Railways have 
replied to only part of their recomme ndation whereas the concerned Ministry 
is required to take action and furnish the reply thereof on every aspect of the 
recommendation.  The Committee fi nd that the essence of their 
recommendation has not been seriously ta ken by the Ministry. They feel that 
coordination in respect of law and order situation should also be held at 
Divisional level invariably by holding regular meetings of DRM, District 
Magistrate, Superintend of Police as recommended earlier.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 
E. Sand dunes/sand drifts (Para No. 26) 
22. In this paragraph the Committee  had observed that the shifting sand 
dunes/sand drifts in western Rajasthan hamp ers the visibility level in running trains.  
Also due to deposition of sand on the trac ks the trains had to be stopped for safety 

 13
reasons for hours together.  They therefore, recommended that the Ministry 
should promptly take concrete measures such  as plantation of tr ees on both sides all 
along the tracks in the affected areas and also develop such technology which would 
help in quick removal of sand from the tracks. 
 
23. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Central Arid Zone Research Inst itute (CAZRI), Jodhpur has been 
approached for stabilization of sand dunes in the area and held a number of 
meetings with them for seek ing their collaboration in stabilization of sand dunes 
located along track by way of suitable plantation.  They have also been 
requested to submit the Project Report for stabilization of sand dunes at few 
locations and to render technical guidance and also to monitor the project. 
 In the meanwhile, Railway has take n preventive measures such as 
removal of sand heaps by mechanical  measures and by manual labour.  
Plantation of Babool has also been trie d in some locations but it has not been 
found to be very effective.”   
 
24. The Committee feel happy to note that Railways have taken certain 
preventive measures such as   removal of sand  heaps on track mechnically 
as well as by manual labour, plantation of trees along the tracks in the 
effected areas.   They also find that Railways have requested Central Arid 
Zone Research Institute (CAZRI) Jodhpu r to submit the project Report for 
stabilization of sand dunes and also to render technical guidance.  The 
Committee desire that the project report  submitted by the Central Arid Zone 
Research Institute (CAZRI) Jodhpur be placed before them. 

 14
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Improvement in Safety Measures to achieve Zero Accident Rate 
(Para No. 1) 
 
 Indian Railways was one of the largest railway networks in the world with 63,122 
Kms. of track, 7681 locos, 44756 coaches, 2,14,760 wagons (Unit), hauling 14 million 
passengers, 1.5 MT freight, crossing 1 lakh signals, 8081 stat ions, 40,000 odd level 
crossings and involving 6 lakh front line operating and maintenance staff by running 
14761 trains daily.  A single flaw in any of these had the potential to cause a major 
tragedy.  The Committee were  aware that safety is vital to railway’s operational 
efficiency.  Statistics show that despite th e increase of 560% in passenger traffic and 
more than 380% in freight traffic, the number of accidents had reduced drastically from 
2131 in 1960-61 to 325 in 2003-04.  It was also claimed safe ty index had come down 
from 5.50 in 1960-61 to 0.39.  But every accident involving loss of human lives shakes 
the people’s faith in the Railways and, theref ore, the Committee had felt that statistics 
of accidents should not create smugness in the Railway authorities.   Therefore, the 
Ministry of Railways should ha ve made all out efforts in all areas of its operations 
continuously to achieve zero accident rate. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 “As a result of sustained and intensif ied efforts, the number of consequential 
train accidents has come down from 2131  in 1960-61, 325 in 2003-04 and further to 
175 (provisional) during the period April to December 2004 as compared to 260 during 
the corresponding period of last year reflecting a reduction of 32.69%. 
 
 Safety is the prime concern of Indian Railways and adoption of new measures to 
improve safety is a continuous process.  The measures being taken by Indian Railways 
to minimize incidence of acci dents include adoption  of suitable modern technology for 
interlocking and signaling systems, up-gradation of standards of track and rolling stock, 
modernization of maintenance practices, repl acement of overaged assets, up-gradation 

 15
of training aids like simula tors, checks on observance of safety precautions and 
provision of Anti Collision Device.” 
 
Provision of Intensive Training to Operating Staff (Para No. 2) 
 
  The Committee were aware that manpower is  the most valuable asset for Indian 
Railways.  They were,  however, informed that ‘human failure is the largest single factor 
responsible for train accidents’ .  They were also informed that human failures used to 
be of the order of 66% has come down now to 53%.  The Committee had also noted 
that besides the callousness of the employees, at times there were certain factors which 
were beyond their control such as circumst ances on account of weather, defective 
signaling system, defects in locomotive or vehicle, stress due to long hours of work, 
work environment and many others.  The Co mmittee had, therefore, felt that a system 
which is heavily dependent on human elements needs constant monitoring, inspections, 
counseling and training of operational staff to  ensure the safety by strict observance of 
safety manuals and modernization of signaling system be done in a time bound 
m a n n e r .    T h e y  w e r e  o f  t h e  o p i n i o n  t h a t there had been a scope for improvement 
through training and extending it to area s not yet fully covered.  Furthermore the 
modern techniques require highly intellig ent, technically qual ified and thoroughly 
trained staff for handling the operation of the safety equipments as per job 
requirement.  The Committee had, therefore,  recommended that the drivers, guards, 
station masters and the staf f in charge of signaling and communications should 
invariably be trained, re-trained, counsel ed, monitored and continuously assessed.  
They had stressed  that intensive training should be imparted to the operational staff to 
keep them up dated with the latest developments through induction courses.  The staff 
also requires self-motivation, basic work ethi cs and sense of respon sibility.  They had  
emphasised that training shou ld also bring about psychological change, the vision and 
level of commitment so that it  undergoes a positive change .  Further, meditation, yoga 
classis and recreational activities could also be promoted.    
  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Continuous training of sta ff at various stages is being given due attention to 
cater to the rising customer expectations, to assimilate rapid technological changes 
taking place within the system and also to provide the necessary motivation to the staff.  

 16
Training plan for the railway staff is divi ded into initial, promotional, refresher 
and specialized type of courses.  Training courses have been designed  both for officers 
and staff to continuously upgrade their knowledge and skills.  
 
A comprehensive training need analysis of all categories of staff is done through 
a series of meeting with principals of traini ng centers on a regular basis.  Based on the 
feedback received, training modules are mo dified/revised to suit the training 
requirement of staff.   
Some of the measures taken by the Railways are: 
(a)  Setting up a Central Training Advisory Committee consisting of Heads of 
Departments, staff representatives, Principals of Training Centres/Training Managers.  It 
is chaired by GM/AGM. 
(b)  Defining the responsibilities of Officers/Supervisors, and employees in 
relation to training and development efforts.  
(c)  Provision of funds with an aim to up grade and make good the deficiencies in 
respect of training aids, Model Rooms/work ing Models, see/through models, etc.  To 
make efforts to improve the living conditions  in the hostels, provide better messing 
facilities and strengthen the recreational and cultural activities in the training centers. 
(d)  Training in ‘Customer Care’ for cate gories of staff comi ng in contact with 
p u b l i c  h a s  b e e n  o r g a n i z e d .   T h i s  i s  a r r a n g e d  w i t h  s p e c i a l  e m p h a s i s  o n  b e h a v i o u r a l  
aspects of customer-service provider interface. 
(e) ‘Simulator-Training’ is also being a rranged on the simulators.  Locomotive 
Simulators which are complete mock ups of  locomotives cabs give the trainees a 
complete on the job practice. 
(f)  Adoption of Multi-media interactive package on the railway especially for the 
Group ‘C’ staff relating to safety and technical matters like Air Brake System is being 
given. 
(g)  Introduction of First Aid and Disast er Management courses for the front line 
staff, has been made mandatory. 
(h)  Introduction of Yoga and Meditation classes in training centers with a view 
to help railwaymen to cope with the stress involved while accomplishing their jobs. 

 17
(i)  Minimum pass marks have also been prescribed for initial, refresher and 
promotional courses so that the staff undergoing these co urses maintain the requisite 
seriousness while undergoing these courses.” 
 
(Para No. 6) 
 The Committee had found that vacancies in important safety categories were not 
filled up and in the process huge backlog got accumulated.  It had been alleged that a 
large number of posts were surrendered in discriminately without any commensurate 
reduction in workload of workers so as to reduce the expenditure on staff. They were of 
the view that efficiency depends on the av ailability of materials and machines, layout 
and infrastructure. The Committee had, therefor e, urged the Ministry to give necessary 
instructions to the Zonal Railway to surrender the posts only after an indepth analysis of 
the staff vis-à-vis other factors such as wo rk load, working condit ion, availability of 
materials, status of machines, layout, infras tructure etc. and not merely as a routine 
practice.   They had further emphasised that particularly posts in safety category should 
not be surrendered or curtailed without making a thorough analysis. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Railway is both a capital and labour in tensive industry.  Although railways are 
focusing on rightsizing initiatives, yet surrend er of posts is generally not being resorted 
to in areas pertaining to safe ty, operating, running maintenance, security of trains, etc.  
Here, the Railways are found to be in consta nt pressure of additional manpower on 
account of introduction of new trains/augme ntation of services, additional number of 
stations and passenger reservation system, improvement of passenger amenities, new 
lines, doubling of lines, creati on of new assets, such as Loco/Goods/Wagon sheds, etc.  
Thus surrender of posts is normally being resorted to in non-core activity areas only 
after detailed workstudy/job analysis and no t in a routine manner.  Railways have been 
advised to review the strength of all catego ries of staff critically using benchmarking 
principle.  Adoption of new technology in certain areas vi z. modern track structure, 
modern signaling system, computerization, etc. is resulting in generation of requirement 
of staff in new areas.  For expeditious re quirement in important safety categories, 
instructions have been issued  to Zonal Railways/Production Units for placing indents in 
accordance with fixed schedules.  RRBs have also been advised to follow the prescribed 

 18
calendar of evens and complete various stages of requirement wi thin the stipulated 
period of time giving top priority to safety category panels.”  
 
(Para No. 8) 
 The Committee had noted that under the Vo luntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) of 
the Railways the gangmen and drivers within  the age of 50-57 years were allowed to 
seek voluntary retirement thereby givi ng one of his ward s appointment on 
compassionate grounds.  Howeve r, they were also apprised that if VRS is given to all 
those in the age group of 50-57 years then a huge number of vacancies would arise at 
once.  As there were already a large numb er of existing vacancies in the safety 
category, it would not be desirable to consider  all those eligible for VRS.  The Ministry, 
therefore, decided to first consider only those who are 57 years of age.  They were of 
the opinion that justification to extend this facility first to all those who were at the age 
of 57 years is on the consider ation of their deteriorated physical cond ition in case of 
gangmen and deterioration in the amount of  alertness in case of Drivers which had 
been needed in their case due to aging effect.  The Co mmittee had emphasized that 
that scheme might be implemented in phases  starting from the stage of staff seeking 
retirement at the age of 57 years first.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
The Ministry of Railways have introduced the Safety Related Retirement Scheme 
for Drivers and Gangmen within the age group of 50 to 57 years.  This scheme is being 
implemented in a phased manner.  In the first phase, Drivers and Gangmen in the age 
bracket of 55 to 57 years will be considerd, for voluntary retirement under the scheme.”  
 
(Para No. 10) 
 The Committee were informed that the number of accidents had reduced 
drastically during the period 1960-61 to 2003-04 even though the freight and passenger 
traffic had increased manifolds. They were also informed that accident per million train 
Kms. (a universally accepted safety index) had come down from 5.5. in 1960-61 to 0.39 
(provisional) in 2003-04 which compares favoura bly with any leading railway system in 
the world.  The Committee had also noted that while the traffic had increased the 
commensurate increase in assets for capacity generation had not been there.  They had 

 19
felt that the system was over stretched, overstressed and had a direct impact on 
the safety of the operations in running  trains.  The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the railway network might be expanded alongwith upgradation of  
technological installations.  The priorities o f  i n v e s t m e n t  h a d  t o  b e  m a d e  s o  t h a t  t h e  
valuable and scarce resources could be allocated for expansion, replacement, 
rehabilitation and modernization of the existing network.   
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The Indian Railways is taking all possi ble measure to enhance capacity, replace 
and rehabilitate old assets and modernize exis ting network subject to availability of 
resources.  It is pertinent to point out th at the Railway is not merely a commercial 
organization but also have social responsibility towards development of rail 
infrastructure in the remote and backward  areas of the country.  as a result, the 
Railway also has a large number of unrem unerative projects.  However, Railway has 
recently initiated an Integrated Railway Modernization Plan id entifying various activities 
with different time frame for implementation of the plan.  This will bring in much 
needed rehabilitation and technological up grad ation of existing assets.  All efforts are 
being made to execute the sanctioned work s already on had to additional generate 
capacity.” 
 
(Para No. 11) 
 The Committee were apprised that the trac k circuiting is divided into two parts 
i.e. track circuiting at stations and continuous track circuiting.  They were also informed 
that fouling mark to fouling mark track circuiting has alre ady been accomplished at A, 
B, C & D stations and the remaining locations of  track circuiting at various stations is at 
different stages of implementation.  The Ministry further informed that 2000 route Kms. 
of continuous tracks circuiting at the co st of nearly Rs. 425 crore and subsequently 
another 2000 Kms. will be carried out at al most the same cost.  The Ministry have 
informed the Committee that no w they have adequate intern ally generated funds to be 
appropriated to the Development Fund, in order to take care  of the track circuiting.  
Continuous track circuiting is very crucia l to avoid accidents.  The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended th at since the Ministry ha d adequate funds in the 
Development Fund the track circuiting works on the tracks should be carried out.  
 

 20
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
 “The work of providing continuous Track Circuiting has been sanctioned on 2000 
Route Kms and the work  has been taken in hand.  Effo rts shall be made to provide 
adequate funds for the work. Appropriation to Development Fund is made out of the 
‘excess’ left after meeting the dividend liabilit y.  Thus, the level of appropriation to this 
fund is linked to availability of internally generated resour ces in a financial year.  The 
appropriation shall be done based on the progress of the work as well as availability of 
funds in the financial year under Annual Plan.”  
 
(Para No. 12) 
 The Committee had observed that new trains were declared on many sections 
and at times express trains were converted into superfast ones without studying the 
impact it would had on the already over  stressed system.  Railway track is the 
backbone of the railway syst em.  They had noted that the maintenance of track was a 
continuous process.  The Committee were informed that there was an established 
system of inspection of those tracks and recently the tracks were being maintained with 
the help of machines.  The Committee had recommended that regular inspection and 
surprise inspection by senior officers should be conducted.  They had also emphasised 
that the ultra sonic flaw detectors and self  propelled ultra sonic rail testing cars for 
detection of hidden flaws in ra ils/welds should be bought in adequate numbers.  They 
had also stressed that those sophisticated eq uipments be brought into regular use.   
The Committee had further r ecommended that adequate e fforts should be made for 
maintenance, renewal and modernization of tracks.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
Repair and maintenance of Railway track is an on-going process.  Maintenance 
works are carried out regularly depending upon the need.  For ensuring safety of traffic, 
track is inspected regularly and corrective ac tion taken promptly wherever required.  
Speed restrictions are also imposed for ensu ring safety, if the situation so warrant.  
Track renewals are also under taken depend ing upon the need of  renewal and subject 
to availability of funds & resources.   
 
 

 21
 
Detailed instructions regarding inspectio ns already exists in the form of 
‘Inspection Manual’ which is available with th e P. Way staff of zonal railways.  Senior 
Officers of the zonal railways have been authorized to co nduct inspections at regular 
intervals and are also expected to see that the junior officers are carrying out their 
scheduled of inspections properly.  Sr. DENs have also been instru cted to hold regular 
meeting with ADENs to discuss the progress of work in their jurisdiction.   
 
Safety is ensured at all levels and at all times and field P. Way Supervisors are 
authorized to impose speed restriction as warranted, with out making any reference to 
their supervisors.  With this in view, it can be appreciated that there is no stretch of 
track that is not inspected at regular intervals. 
 
However, the following steps have also b een taken for improving safety on IR as 
far as track is concerned: 
1. Regular inspection of track at various levels is undertaken.  
2. For monitoring track geometry an d running characteristics of track, 
sophisticated track recording cars and oscilliograph cars are being used. 
3. Training to railway staff is provided immediately after their recruitment 
and thereafter their knowledge is refreshed periodically.  Seminars/ 
workshops/ field demonstrations ar e also organized for Permanent way 
staff from time to time to enhance/update their knowledge.  
4. Patrolling of railway track by ga ngmen is carried out at vulnerable 
locations during monsoon, summer and winter. 
5. The specifications of rail steel have been upgraded and are in conformity 
with the International Union of Railways (UIC) specifications. 
6. Ultrasonic Flaw Detectors are used to  detect hidden flaws in the rail.  Two 
number of Self Propelled Ultrasonic Ra il Test Cars (SPURT) are also being 
procured which will be able to detect hidden flaws, while running at 
higher speed. 
7. Mechanized maintenance of track is  being introduced progressively, for 
better and improved maintenance. 
8. The track structure is being upgraded on a planned basis. 

 22
9. To keep the track in good condit ion, track renewals are carried out 
whenever it becomes due for renewal subject to availability of funds.”  
 
(Para No. 13) 
 The Committee were aware that on some occasions train accidents had occurred 
due to overaged bridges.  They had noted that the Ministry had adopted the state of 
the art technique for bridge management.  The Committee had been informed that this 
helps in under water inspection of bridge s, integrated testing of bridges, non-
destructive testing mapping of unknown foun dations techniques.  This determines the 
life of the bridge as well as the residual life of the bridge.  The Committee had 
emphasised that regular insp ection of the bridges should  be carried out by using 
various technologies adopted by the Railw ays and determine their life and promptly 
carry out the necessary repairs wherever necessary.    
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Safety of bridges is accord ed high priority on the In dian Railways.  a well laid 
down system of multi-tier inspection of br idges is followed on  Indian Raiwlays.  
All the bridges including old and stressed  bridges are inspect ed thoroughly once 
a year at various levels, as laid do wn in Railway Codes and Manuals.  For 
stressed bridges, an increased frequency of inspections has b een laid down in 
the Manuals.  The steel Superstructures of all bridges are subjected to detailed 
technical checks once every five years an d once a year for the floor system of 
early steel girders.  The in spection of substructures of bridges is done by close 
visual inspection and hammer tappings to check for any cracks or hollowness of 
masonry.  Bridges showing signs of distress like cracks etc. are classified as 
distressed bridges and after more detaile d inspection planned for placement and 
major repairs.  If required, suitable speed restriction is imposed on the bridges 
till the repairs are carried out. 
 
Guidelines have been issu ed for underwater inspection of bridges and work has 
started on some of the bridges.  guidelines have also been issued for the assessment of 
residual fatigue life of steel structures.  As per task force report set up for this purpose 
and decision taken by Board, pilot projects ha ve been initiated in the various field of 
latest techniques of non-dest ructive evaluation of bridge s, under water inspection of 

 23
bridges, residual life assessment of bridges and Bridge Management System before 
large scale implementation on Indian Railways.  In addition research projects have been 
taken up as per corporate safety plan in va rious areas related to health monitoring of 
bridges, residual life estimation etc. in a ssociation with professional technical institute 
like IITs, in the country.  This will impr ove the monitoring of bridges as well as 
assessment of remaining residual life of bridges.” 
 
(Para No. 16) 
  The Committee had found that nearly 16% of the total accidents occur at the  
level crossings.  Most of thos e accidents were due to carele ssness of road users.  They 
had also found that accidents at manned level crossings were at the level of 4% of the 
total consequential train accidents, whereas unmanned level crossings accounted for 
12% of the accidents.  The work related to manning of unmanned level crossings and 
construction of ROBs/RUBs was being financed through the  Railway Safety Fund.  As of 
now 50% of the burden for construction of  ROBs/RUBs was being shared by the State 
Governments, but due to financial constraints they were not discharg ing their portion.   
The Committee in their First Report (14
th Lok Sabha) had inter-alia recommended that 
under such circumstances, the Railway should consider ut ilizing the amount accrued 
from diesel cess for construction of approa ch works.  They had once again reiterated 
their earlier recommendation in that regard. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 During the last five years i.e. 1999- 2000 to 2003-04, there have been 2026 
consequential train accidents, out of which 68 were at manned level crossings and 388 
at unmanned level crossings which accounts for 3.36% at manned level crossings and 
19.15% at unmanned level crossing i.e. around 22.51% of total consequential train 
accidents are as under: 
Unmanned Level Crossing  -  100% due to Failure of Other than Railway staff.  
 
Manned Level Crossings   -   55.58% due to Failure of Railway staff. 
          41.18% due to failure of Other than Railway Staff. 
           2 . 9 4 %  d u e  to combination of Factors.  
 

 24
 As Committee is aware, construction of Road Over/Under Bridges 
is a joint venture of State Govts and Railways .  Railways construct bridge proper over 
the tracks and approaches ar e constructed by the State Govt. Railways meet cost of 
their portion of work of ROBs/RUBs from the allocation received from Central Road 
Fund (CRF)  under Plan Head -30 which is at present to the tune of Rs. 300-350 Cr.  
These funds are not sufficient to meet the Railways’ requ irements for execution of 
Railway portion of work.  At present Railways have already a liability of 436 sanctioned 
works of ROBs/RUBs in progress on cost sharing basis.  A pproximate cost of Railway’s 
portion of these works is Rs . 2500 Cr.  With the meager allocation of Rs. 300-350 Cr. 
from CRF for this purpose, it will take Ra ilways years to complete  even the sanctioned 
works.   
 In addition, there are 1252 level crossing s having traffic density of more than 
one lakh TVUs i.e. qualifying for replacem ent by ROBs/RUBs on co st sharing basis for 
which proposals have to be sponsored by the respective State Govts. 
 For these works, Railways will require at least Rs. 7500 Cr for Railways’ portion 
of work. It will not be possible for Railways to bear the cost of approaches unless.  
Funding to Railways is increased substantially  from the Central Road Fund.  However, 
Chief Secretaries of  State Govts.  has been addressed by this Ministry vide ME’s D.O. 
No. 97/CE-I/BRO/158(Policy) PT. Dtd. 8.1.2005 in which State govts. has been 
requested to participate in joints efforts towards expeditious construction and 
completion of ROB/RUB would be set off against their receivable funds from the 
Railways on account of cost of  GRP dues.  State Govt. are also requested to divert a 
part of fund received by them from Centra l Road Fund to the Railways.  under this 
arrangement full construction work including the bridge portion and approaches shall be 
done through single agencies of PSU under the Ministry of Railways. Consent of most of 
the State Govts. is still awaited. 
 
 In case Railways has to meet the entire  cost of ROB/RUB following points needs 
to be considered: 
i) Railways share out of Diesel & Petrol Cess is enhanced to meet the additional 
funds for approach work. 
ii) Ministry of Railways is exempted fr om paying towards the Diesel & Petrol 
Cess and instead utilize the same towards construction of ROBs/RUBs. 

 25
 
Manning of unmanned level crossing: 
To improve the safety at unmanned level crossing stress is given to manning of 
unmanned level crossing.  Policy for mannin g of unmanned level crossing has been 
revised in June, 2003.  During last thr ee years i.e. 2001-02 to 2003-04, 287, 147 & 95 
unmanned level crossings has been manned.  Progress has been less in the year 2003-
04 due to change in policy of manning.  In  current year 211 unmanned level crossings 
has been identified for manning and up to Dec.2004, 86 level crossing has been 
manned.”  
(Para No. 19) 
 The Committee had noted that the vital safety equipment of the Railways were 
prone to theft and vandalism.  Those things  had an important be aring on safety and 
their theft invariably leads to unsafe conditions.  The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the existing vacancies in  the RPF category should be filled up 
without further delay.     
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
The process of filing up of 10,751 vacancie s of Constables in RPF/RPSF is in full 
swing through out India.  Nine Recrui tment Committees have been engaged to 
complete the work expeditiously.  Recruitm ent has been completed in Gujarat, Andhra 
Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir,  Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, 
Chandigarh, Daman & Diu, Dadar & Nagar Haveli.   Recruitment id on in Uttar Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Chattisgarh, Maharashtr a, N.F. Region and West Bengal.  The 
process of recruitment in Biha t and Jharkhand will be initia ted soon after elections are 
over.  Vacancies for the state of Rajasthan have been notified an d the recruitment has 
commenced w.e.f. 16th February.” 
 
(Para No. 20) 
 The Committee were given to understand during the course of the examination 
of the subject that no details such as names, designation etc. of the GRP escorting 
various trains and persons in pantry cars are maintained.  With the result that in case of 
any mishap or untoward incident, even Railway  staff on board were unable to trace the 
GRP personnel on duty in the absence of r ecords.  In this context, the Committee had 

 26
emphasised that Railways in coordination with the concerned authorities in GRP and 
Catering Department should maintain prop er records which should be kept readily 
available with the train Guard/ TTEs so that in case of any lapse, GRP personnel could 
be held responsible.    
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 “In this connection GRP Chief’s have already been reques ted by the Zonal 
Railways to issue instruction to  GRP personnel to furnish the names of the escort party 
to the guard of the train. 
 
 As per G&SR, the Guard is the Incharge  of the train.  The details of GRP 
personnel escorting the train sh ould therefore, remain with  the Guard of the train who 
is always available in SLR, so that in ca se of any need/emergen cy, the information is 
centrally available.”  
 
(Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee had found that the responsib ility of providing security in trains 
and stations had been assigned to two agen cies i.e. the GRP and the RPF.  The GRP 
works under the respective State Governments and the RPF works under the Ministry of 
Railways.  Recently the RPF Act, 1957 and the Railways Act, 1989 were amended and 
the same have come into fo rce w.e.f. 01.07.2004.  With the Amendments made in the 
RPF Act, Railways had given some addition al responsibilities to RPF such as 
registration/investigation of the minor offen ces in the trains, which were earlier dealt 
with by the GRP.  However, the railways had given no publicity in that regard with the 
result the passenger do not kn ow that such a responsibility had been entrusted to the 
RPF.  The Committee therefore, had emphasised  that publicity to th at effect might be 
made at stations and inside the trains.  Also general public must be adequately 
educated. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“All the Zonal Railways have been directed to take necessary steps in this regard 
so that the common public could be able to  know more about the new responsibilities 
assigned to RPF personal under the amendment RPF Act, 1957, 1989.” 
 

 27
 
(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee had desired that coordina tion meetings between the RPF and 
GRP might be held at regular in tervals in view of the addition al responsibilities given to 
RPF and the sensitive information about the law & order situation in the vulnerable 
areas on the Railway network should be exchanged. Further, coordination meeting 
amongst Divisional Railway Manager (DRM), the District Magistrate (DM), 
Superintendent of Police (SP) and Division al Security Commandant (DSC) should be 
held regularly to discuss the law and order problems.  
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Coordination meetings/conferences be tween GRP Chiefs and RPF Chiefs are 
held regularly at all levels to discuss crime related matters and proper escorting 
of passenger trains.  The results of these meetings/conferences have been 
encouraging and fruitful.” 
 
(Para No. 23) 
 The Committee had observed that repres entatives of the RPF association like 
other recognized federations, were also involved in Permanent Negotiation Machinery 
(PNM) and are also the Members of Participatory Railway Management where the duties 
and responsibilities of RPF in regard to s ecurity of Railway property and providing 
security to passengers were discussed.  The Committee were of the firm view that the 
involvement of RPF personnel in those pa rticipatory forums should be further 
strengthened.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The representatives of the RPF asso ciations are involved in permanent 
negotiation machinery (PNM) where they can present and discuss their views.  
The Ist meeting was held on 10.3.2004.”  

 28
 
(Para No. 24) 
 The Committee were informed  that the Mahila squads of RPF ‘Surakshini and 
Tejaswini’ were being deputed in two or three trains presently, which had been a 
welcome step.  The Committee had desired that the Railway might make sincere efforts 
to increase the strength of Mahila squads so that they might be deployed in other trains 
also. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
 “Efforts are being made to increase th e strength of Lady Constables.  The 
process of filling up of 10,751 va cancies including lady Constables in RPF/RPSF is in full 
swing to augment the strength of the Force.” 
 
(Para No. 26) 
 The Committee had observed that the shifti ng sand dunes/sand drifts in western 
Rajasthan hampers the visibility level in runnin g trains.  Also due to  deposition of sand 
on the tracks the trains had to be stopped for safety reasons for hours together.  They 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry should promptly take concrete measures 
such as plantation of trees on  both sides all along the trac ks in the affected areas and 
also develop such technology which would help in quick removal of sand from the 
tracks. 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Central Arid Zone Research Inst itute (CAZRI), Jodhpur has been 
approached for stabilization of sand dunes in the area and held a number of 
meetings with them for seek ing their collaboration in stabilization of sand dunes 
located along track by way of suitable plantation.  They have also been 
requested to submit the Project Report for stabilization of sand dunes at few 
locations and to render technical guidance and also to monitor the project. 
 
In the meanwhile, Railway has take n preventive measures such as 
removal of sand heaps by mechanical  measures and by manual labour.  
Plantation of Babool has also been trie d in some locations but it has not been 
found to be very effective.”   

 29
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Deployment of Highly Qualified Instructors 
(Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee had found that training al lowance to instructors had been cut 
down from 30% to 15% as an economy measure by the Ministry of Railways.  They had 
felt that unless proper remunerations were  offered, the talented and well qualified 
candidates would not come forw ard as instructors.  Until, highly qualified instructors 
were available they couldnot be assigned  the responsibility of skills upgrading of 
trainees/employees upto an  appropriate level.  The Committee had, therefore, 
emphasised that competent instructors wh o had good educational background and 
good acumen for training should be employe d with a proper pay package.  They had 
further stressed that even the trainers should  be exposed to higher level of training 
from time to time.     
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
The reduction of the training  allowance to the instructor s/trainers in the training 
centers has been based on the Government of India’s instructions dated 9.7.92 and not 
by Ministry of Railways.   
 
Apart from the grant of Training Allo wance, the instruct ors are provided the 
following incentives:- 
(a) The Principal/instructors are allowe d reimbursement of the cost of Books, 
Journals, etc purchased by them upto a ceiling limit of Rs. 400 per quarter. 
(b) Officers/staff on their posting to tr aining centers as fa culty are permitted 
to retain railway quarter at the previo us place of posting for a period not 
exceeding 2 years on payment of normal rent. 
 

 30
(c) The Principal of the Main Training Centre catering to the training 
 needs of Group ‘D’ & ‘D’ staff are entitled  to sumptuary allowance at the rate of 
 Rs. 200/- per month. 
 
 Trainers are selected by a selection committee consisting of 3 HODs which 
includes the head of the co ncerned training centre taking  into consideration their 
service records, educational qualification,  professional backgr ound, competency and 
having the following attributes:- 
- good communicator 
- sensitive to and concerned with needs of people 
- self starter and motivator patient and resilient  
- open minded and perceptive  
- honest 
- committed and motivated 
 
The selected trainers are highly dedica ted employees who have lot of working 
experience in their fields.  They also undergo “Training of Trainers” programme 
organized by the Department of Personnel an d Training.  This improves their training 
skills and helps them to communicate better with the trainees using the modern aids, 
etc. 
There is also a provision of guest speake rs/lecturers from with the organization 
and from outside, to provide inputs in both technical and managerial fields.” 
  
  (Para No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee were informed that the 10 hours of duty from rolling on to rolling 
off and 12 hours of duty from signing on to  sign off were being maintained. However, 
they had found that in actual  practice it was not so and at  times the operational staff 
especially Gangmen and Drivers had to work for even 22 to 24 hours at a stretch.  The 
Committee had believed that due to work stress and stifling conditions, the life of 
thousands of commuters cannot be put to dang er.  At times drivers had been found to 
be working for 5 consecutive days.  The Committee had apprehended that those type of 
conditions would certainly affect the safe ty in train operatio ns. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that the ten hour daily roster sy stem might be reviewed in 

 31
view of the present scenario of train speed levels, number of signals, load and whistle 
boards etc.   They had emphasised that it might be ensured that the running staff 
might not be put on duty fo r not more than 8 hours as continuous concentration is 
required by the drivers and a slight deviation, stress or fatigue co uld lead to a major 
disaster.  Besides, the Committee had also st ressed that crew friendly cabs should be 
introduced or necessary alterations be made  in the running coaches at the time of 
overhauling to provide easy approach to various control handle/buttons including 
provision of toilets and provide such features  that would ensure fatigue free driving for 
long hours.  They had also urged the Mini stry to provide certain basic amenities at 
running rooms like proper hygienic toilets facilities, clean drinking water, proper 
ventilation, desert coolers, subsidized meals etc.     
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Mini stry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“The Hours of Employment Regulations were introduced in the year 1931 
keeping in view the provisions of the ILO Convention No. 1 of 1919 relating to hours of 
work and convention No. 3 of 1 921 relating to periodic test of industrial workers.  The 
running staff to whom the 10 hour duty rule is applicable were at that time not brought 
within the scope of these re gulations.  It was in 1946 that the Ministry of Labour 
referred the Hours of Employment Regulations to Justice Rajadhyksha for adjudication.  
On the basis of the award given by the Justice Rajadhyaksha, the Hours of Employment 
Regulations were revised in April 1951 when for the first time the running staff 
were brought within the purview of the Hours of Employment.  
 
The Adjudicator, Justice Rajadhyaksha had recommended that running staff 
may be classified as ‘Continuous’ and their hours of employm ent should be limited 
to 54 hours a week on the average in any mo nth.  However, as the running staff are 
not employed on a fixed daily roster, unlike other staff, the Adjudicator recommended 
that the duty hours at a stre tch should be calculated from  the actual departure of the 
train till its arrival at destination station,  which should not exceed 10 hours, and that 
they should be entitled to claim relief af ter 12 hours provided they have given two 
hours notice for relief to the Controller. These provisions were incorporated in the 
Subsidiary Instructions fram ed under the Hours of Employment Regulations. Later on, 

 32
the staff were brought within the aver aging clause and their rostered and 
statutory hours of work were limited to 104/108 hours in a period of 14 days. 
 
In 1969, the Railway Labour Tribunal un der the Chairmanship  of Justice N.M. 
Miabhy was set up.  On e of the terms of reference to th e Tribunal related to review of 
the Hours of Employment Regulations, includ ing running duty at a stretch for running 
staff.  In regard to running duty at a st retch, the Tribunal afte r detailed consideration 
made the following recommendations in August, 1972. 
“Running duty at a stretch of running staff should not ordinarily exceed 10 
hours but such duty may extend to a ma ximum period of 12 hours, provided the 
concerned administration gives at least two hours notice before expiration of 10 
hours, provided further that the total maximum hours of duty from ‘signing on’ to 
‘signing off’ does not exceed 14 hours pr ovided further that the total hours will 
be progressively reduced by half an hour  every two years from the date of this 
Report till the target of 12 hours is reac hed, i.e. at the end of eight years from 
the date of this report, the total maximum hours of duty at a stretch from 
signing on to signing off shall not exceed 12 hours.”    
 
 Certain Loco running staff of Trivandrum Division had filed the case in the Kerala 
High Court challenging Ministry of Railwa ys letter No. E(LL) 77/HER/29 dated 3.4.81.  
The highlights of Board’s letter dated 3.4.81 were challenged are as under:- 
 
i. The under mentioned peri ods will count for duty. 
(i) Engine attendance ti me as prescribed; and 
(ii) Time taken from starting station upto crew changing station including 
intermediate detentions. 
 
ii. The following peri od will not count:- 
a) From Bahar line to the station at  the starting point, pre-departure 
detentions and traveling pilot; and  
b) At the terminal station, from the statio n to be shed; where the destination     
point is other than a station say, ya rd, a convenient po int or area would 

 33
have to be locally demarcated as the destination station for 
the purpose of 10 hour rule.  
 
The CAT/Earnakulam vide their judgement dated 10.1.92 struck down the above-
mentioned letter and had issued detailed guidelines for issue of instructions.  Based on 
the guidelines, instructions  were issued vide Minist ry of Railways letter No. 
E(LL)91/HER/11 dated 13.4.92 which provides as under:-  
I. The overall duty at a stretch of runn ing staff from ‘signing on’ should not 
ordinarily exceed 12 hours and they should be entitled to claim relief 
thereafter. 
II. The running duty at a stretch should  not ordinarily exceed 10 hours from 
the departure of the train and the sta ff should be entitled to claim relief 
thereafter. 
III. In operational exigen cies the running duty ma y be extended beyond 10 
hours within overall limit of 12 hour s provided a due notice has been 
given to the staff by the Controller before the completion of 8 hours of 
running duty. 
IV. If a train does not reach, within th e overall limit of 12 hours, its normal 
crew changing point/destination of the train/or the place where a relief 
has been arranged and such point is approximately one hour’s journey 
away, the staff shall be required to work to that point. 
V. In exceptional exigenci es of accidents, floods,  agitations, equipment, 
failure etc. the staff may be required to work beyond the limits prescribed 
above.  In such cases, the Controller should suitably advise the staff. 
 
 Due to the very nature of their duties and keeping in vi ew round the clock 
operation of the Railways, running staff cannot be put on daily fixed roster. 
 All efforts are made to contain the duty  hours within the parameters laid down 
and the position is being monitored at Divisional, Zonal and Railway Board levels.  They 
position regarding drivers duty on fortnightly basis is monitored by Crew Controllers and 
Divisional Officers to ensure that it is wi thin the rostered 104 ho urs in a two weekly 
period of 14 days.  Power Controllers are al so required to work in close coordination 
with Section Controllers to ensure implementati on of 10 hours duty rule.  In addition to 

 34
t h i s  M i n i s t r y  o f  R a i l w a y s  h a v e  i s s u e d  instructions to the Railways stating that 
periodic Joint Meetings are required to be held with the Federati ons on this issue of 
implementation of ten hours duty rule.   
 
The rule provides that the ov erall duty at a stretch of running staff from signing 
on should not ordinarily ex ceed 12 hours.  From the information available for the 
months of January to September 2004 on the Railways, an average of 87.8% trips were 
completed within 12 hours from ‘signing on’ to ‘signing o ff’.  Further an average of 
87.6% trips were completed within 10 hours fr om departure of the train and also that 
an average of 77% was achieved in respect of  completion of trips within 10 hours from 
signing on to signing off.  Keeping in view  the constraints and the large rail network, 
this is not a mean achievement.  
 
 It would not be out of place to mention that in emergency situations like folds, 
accidents, abnormal detentions of trai ns or unforeseen incidents it becomes 
unavoidable to book the staff beyond restor ed hours for which the running staff is 
compensated monetarily and paid overtime allowance as per rules.   
 
 In terms of Hours of Employment the details of periodic rest available to running 
staff are detailed below:- 
  Rest at Headquarters     Period of Rest 
 
 (i) for duty of less than 8 hours   : 12 hours  
 (ii) for duty of 8 hours or more  : 16 hours  
 
 Rest at Outstation 
 
 (i) for duty of less than 8 hours  : 6 hours 
 (ii) for duty of 8 yours or more  : 8 hours 
 
10 hour stipulated running time from wheel movement to wheel stoppage is 
intended to be the ma ximum running time.  This includes  stoppage time of trains at 
signals and stations etc.  However, in real ity, the actual running time may be much 
lesser depending upon the availa bility of relief or terminatio n  o f  t r a i n .   I n  c a s e  t h e  
maximum running time is reduced, the averag e running time per day of a driver in a 
fortnightly period will be much less.  In addition to requirement of more drives it may 

 35
lead to problems of provision of addi tional running rooms, crew lobbies and 
accommodation to the drivers.  
 
 As per extant instructions, the Gangmen in the Civil Engineering Department are 
employed on daily roster of 8 hours for atte nding to preparatory and/or complementary 
work. 
 
 Regarding introduction of crew friendly cabs, it is stated that the programmes for 
making new friendly cabs have already been adopted.  With regard to running rooms a 
Committee was constituted to suggest impr ovements in the conditions of running 
rooms.  The Railways have been advised to take action on the recommendations of the 
Committee.  It may, however, be added that  the running rooms are planned for by the 
Railways, wherever necessary. 
 
 The existing instructions have withstoo d the test of time.  However, the whole 
gamut of the issue pertaining  to running staff including duty hours applicable under 
Hours of Employment Regulations is unde r consideration of the Running Allowance 
Committee.  Further course of action will be decided on submission of the said Report.”  
 
(Para No. 7) 
 The Committee were happy to note the decision of the Railways to automatically 
create posts for maintenance and running staff as soon as new trains were declared.  
They had, however, emphasized that vacanc ies for additional staff for the additional 
work after introduction of new trains, should be filled up within a time bound period not 
exceeding six months. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“General Managers are empowered to f ill up vacancies in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ 
categories as per their requirement keeping in view Government’s policy regarding 
restriction on annual intake in the context of rightsizin g of manpower. Vacancies in 
various categories are filled up either by direct recruitment from the open market or by 
promotion of staff working in  the lower grades.  While calculating vacancies for the 
purpose of requirement, the existing as well as anticipated vacancies over the next one 
year, the training period prescribed for that  post, the lead time required by RRB for 

 36
completing the recruitment process etc. are taken into account.  This provide 
sufficient cushion to take care of the existing as well as anticipated vacancies.   
 
As far as safety category posts are co ncerned, these have been exempted from 
the purview of rightsizing and instructions ha ve been given to the General Managers to 
fill up all vacancies in these categories on priority.”  
 
Para No. 9) 
 The Committee had observed that in or der to earn more revenue, new trains 
were introduced and many express trains were converted into superfast ones and 
efforts were made to provide for commens urate safety safeguards and maintenance 
facilities.  While doing so, proper care was also not taken to replace the overaged 
rolling stock.  It was also observed that the process of modernization and renewal of 
track and their maintenance lacks the desired attention.  Moreover, most of the bridges 
and culverts had out lived their lives and had become weak.  The Committee had 
therefore, strongly recommend ed that before introducing more trains and enhancing 
frequency of the trains proper survey of the concerned routes, the capacity of the 
infrastructure to bear the additional stress including the status of rolling stock should be 
conducted. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
Now passenger carrying trains are introd uced on demand from passengers.  
Requests for introduction of trains are constantly received fr om members of the 
Divisional Railway Users Consultative Comm ittee, Zonal Railway Users Consultative 
Committee. Passenger Associations, Hon’bl e MPs, MLAs and other other VIPs and 
dignitaries.  These requests are studied in detail.  Demands for new train far exceed the 
resources available.  Trains services are, therefore, provided in a phased manner 
subject to availability of resources and operational feasibility.  
 
A new train is introduced based on the following factors:- 
a) Availability of demand     d) Availability of Rolling Stock 
b) Availability of path     e) Manpower requirement  
c) Availability of maintenance infrastr ucture f) Impact on freight traffic  
 

 37
 As these trains are introduced on th e sections where the passenger trains 
are already running and the route is fit for passenger services, their introduction will not 
cause any safety hazard.  Moreover, trains are made superfast not only to earn revenue 
but also to reduce the traveling time for the benefit to traveling public and augment the 
line capacity.  Based on the assessment of the line capacity ava ilable vis-à-vis that 
required in the foreseeable future, proposals for augmentation of line capacity on 
different routes are made by Zonal Railway s every year and are finalized through the 
Annual Works Programmes.  While planning for augmentati on of capacity, time for 
maintenance blocks is taken into consideratio n.  Moreover, trains announced in Budget 
are introduced during the course of the financial year and after the entire infrastructure 
facilities are completed.  
 
 Repair and maintenance of Railway trac k and bridges is an ongoing process.  
Maintenance and repair works are carried ou t regularly depending upon the need.  For 
ensuring safety of traffic, track and bridges are inspected regularly and corrective action 
taken promptly as and when required.  If th e situation warrants, speed restrictions are 
also imposed for ensuring safety till the repair works are completed.  Track renewals 
and rehabilitation/rebuilding of bridges ar e also undertaken base d on the need of 
renewal and subject to availability of funds & resources. 
 
 Detailed instructions regarding inspection of track and bridges exists in the form 
of laid down codes and manual’s.  These in spections are carried ou t at the prescribed 
intervals by various levels of supervisors and officers.  Based on the inspections the 
works for rehabilitation/rebuilding of bridge s and renewal of track are carried out.  A 
Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) was created in the year 2001-02, with the corpus of 
Rs. 17000 crores to wipe out the renewals  and 8% is earmarked for the bridge 
rehabilitation programme.  The works take n up under the SRSF are planned to be 
completed by 31.3.2007.  As a result the renewal works for track and bridges have 
stepped up.  Track renewals which were ea rlier around 3000 Km. in a year, have gone 
up to 4986 Km. during the ye ar 2003-04.  Approx. about 2700 bridges are taken up for 
rehabilitation-rebuilding out of the SRSF. 
 

 38
 Further an Integrated Railway Mode rnization Plan has been framed in 
November 2004 which includes programmes for modernization of track as well as 
bridges.  Emphasis has been laid on the modernization of inspection, maintenance and 
management systems for track and bridges. 
 
 The above measures are helping Railways,  run more number of trains.  The day 
to day problems of finding adequate main tenance blocks etc, are being sorted in 
coordination meetings at various levels on the Zonal Railways.  
 
 Moreover, overaged coaches are not allowe d to remain in commercial service.  
These are condemned and replac ed by new manufacture of coaches.  The shortfall in 
maintenance infrastructure is reviewed to make good the shortfall.  This is an ongoing 
process and works are sanctioned based on the funds availability.”  
  
(Para No. 14) 
 The Committee had noted that a number of steps were being taken by the 
Railways to induct safety-related technolo gies like track circuiting, advance warning 
system, computerized track measuring  cars, simulators for training of drivers, Anti 
Collision Device, Auxiliary Warning System (A WS) solid state interlocking walkie-talkie 
sets on crew, Auto Braking Device, Trai n Actuated Warning System (TAWS), Train 
Protection and Warning System (TPWS).  Th e Committee were apprised that nearly 
3500 Km of ACDs have been sanctioned   for th e year.  They were also apprised that it 
had been decided to first go on a co mmercial scale on the NF Railways and 
subsequently the rest of the stations would be completed.  The Ministry informed that 
all the detailed estimates were  being kept in readiness and once the problems, if any, 
were rectified, they would work on other Railways.  They were also informed that the 
ACDs would be installed on the entire broad gauge system by 2013.  The Committee 
had recommended that the routes which we re fully saturated or more than 50% 
saturated should be identified, and installation  of such devices should first be made on 
those identified routes.    
  

 39
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:-  
“Following modern signalin g system are being provided on important section of 
Indian Railways to improve safety and enhance line capacity: 
S 
N 
Item  Quantum of work  Time frame 
of 
Completion  
1. Provision of Train Protection and 
Warning System (TPWS) to 
prevent cases of ‘Signal Passed 
At Danger’ 
300 Track Kms of section on 
North Central and Southern 
Railways  
March, 2006 
2. Provision of modern electronic or 
relay based centralized operation 
of signals and points replacing 
overaged signaling assets at 
stations  
927 stations under Special 
Railway Safety Fund (SRSF), 
 
 
About 620 stations under plan 
head 33 & joint works  
March, 2007 
for SRSF 
works. 
 
March 2013 
for other 
sanctioned 
works. 
3. Provision of Train Management 
System (TMS) or Centralised 
Traffic Control (CTC) system for 
suburban sections 
• Provision of TMS ON 
Mumbai suburban 
section of Central 
Railway. 
• Provision of CTC 
System on 
Ghaziabad-Kanpur 
section of North 
Central Railway at 
Tundla. 
March, 2008 
4. Provision of Block Proving by 
Axle Counter (BPAC) to prove 
electronic clearance of the block 
section to enhance safety and 
improve line capacity 
1550 Block  Sections  March, 2013. 
5. Provision of continuous Track 
Circuiting with Automatic Block 
Signalling (ABS) to enhance 
safety and improve line capacity 
2000 Route Kms of selected 
sections  
March, 2010 
6. Provision of Anti collision Device 
(ACD) with Signal Passed at 
Danger prevention feature  
• Work is sanctioned 
on 3465 Route Kms 
of important and 
busy sections of 
North East Frontier, 
Northern, Southern, 
South Central, South 
Western Railways.  
• Further works on 
about 6000 Route 
March, 2005 
for NFR work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2010 
for balance 

 40
Kms of busy sections 
on various railways 
shall be taken in 
hand subsequently 
works.  
7. Train Actuated Warning Device 
(TPWD) 
90 Gates  June, 2005 
8. Modernization of Signalling & 
Telecommunication system on 
Ghaziabad-Kanpur section   
(i) Provision of electronic 
interlocking at all stations on 
the section. 
(ii) Provision of Continuous 
Track Circuiting with Automatic 
Block Signalling on the section  
(iii) Provision of Computer 
based Centralised Traffic 
Control (CTC) system for the 
section at Tundla  
(iv) Provision of Global System 
of Mobile Communication – 
Railways (GSM-R) based 
Mobile Train Radio 
Communication system on 
Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dec, 2008 
 
  
 Further provision of these equipments on important routes will be undertaken on 
traffic requirements and availability of funds.   
 
(Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee had observed that there wa s an accumulation of overaged assets 
awaiting renewal due to which a Special Railway Safety Fund of Rs.17000 crore was 
created in 2001-02 for expediting the work of renewal/replacement of these assets 
relating to safety within a period of six years.  The safety of train operations was 
dependent on proper maintenance of the trac k, rolling stock and other safety assets.  
Those might be kept in working and safe  c o n d i t i o n  a n d  a s  s u c h  t h e y  m u s t  b e  
renewed/replaced at regular intervals for smooth running, as the term of SRSF was 
nearing completion in 2006, the Committee had recommended that the work under 
Special Railway Safety Fund might be expedi ted so that the same might be completed 
within the stipulated time. 

 41
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Mini stry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“A non-lapsable “Special Railway Safe ty Fund” (SRSF) of Rs. 17000 Crore has 
been set up to wipe out the arrears in renewal of over aged assets such as track, 
bridges, rolling stock, signaling gears etc and for certain safety enhancement works 
within a fixed time frame of 6 years.  The SRSF came into existence in October, 2001. 
 
Considerable progress has been made in the execution of works sanctioned 
under SRSF and efforts are on to complete the works, within the stipulated time frame.   
 
The head-wise physical targets and pe rformance under SRSF since 2001-02 till 
2003-04 are as given below: 
 
Type of Assets  Physical Targets  Physical performance from 
2001-02 till 2003-04  
Track Renewals   16538 CTR – 
• 12376 on BG, 
• 4162 on MG 
8937.65 CTR units 
Bridge works 2700 bridge  1306 Bridges 
Signaling & 
Telecommunications  
1448 stns complete,  
911 stns casual renewals  
Complete renewal=441 stns, 
Casual Renewal =102 
Rolling Stock  Diesel locos 
• BG-93, 
• NF-6; 
Coaches  
• BG 186 
• MG 520 
• NG 157, 
Wagons 7698 (Vus) 
DMU 12, 
EMU 599, 
OHE Ins. Car 52, 
Self Prop. ART 60; 
24 locos, 
 
 
 
Coaches – 
• 238 BG coaches 
(including EMU, 
DMU, OHE cars) 
• 30 MG coaches,  
• 19 NG Coaches,  
 
974 wagons 
  

 42
 
 The physical targets and performance, head-wise, during the year 2004-05 upto 
February 2005, are given in the following table. 
  
Type of Assets  Physical Targets  
2004-05 
Cumulative Actual  
Physical performance April’ 
05-Feb’ 05  
Track Renewals   3200 CTR Kms. 2489.75 CTR Kms. 
Bridge works 411 Nos.  333 Nos. 
Signaling & 
Telecommunications  
Signalling gear renewals:- 
*  Complete Renewal 350    
    stns. 
* Casual Renewal 250    
   stns. 
*  Track Cktg. 800 locations   
 
 
*  Complete Renewal 147    
    stns. 
* Casual Renewal 216    
   stns. 
* Track Circuiting 601 
locations   
 
Rolling Stock  • BG Dsl locos 45, 
• NG Dsl loco 2, 
• BG Coaches 174, 
• MG Coaches 24 
• NG coaches 20, 
• OHE car 5, 
• AC EMU 72,  
• AC/DC EMU 33,  
• Wagons 2901 
• BG Locos 29, 
 
 
 
• NG Coaches 5, 
• OHE Insp. Car 4  
• AC EMUs 75,  
• AC/DC EMU – 19,  
• Wagons 2728 
    
 
(a)  The head-wise details of financial allocation made and expenditure 
incurred since 2001-02 till 2003-04, under Special Railway Safety Fund is 
as given below: 
 
 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 
Plan 
Heads 
Revised 
Grant  
Actual 
Expenditure  
Budget 
Grant  
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Budget 
Grant  
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Provisional) 
Track 
Renewals  
1403.15 1347.63 1661.00 1897.09 2006.67 1829.10 1853.89 1943.81
Bridge 
Works  
61.74 44.15 143.30 156.77 151.61 217.00 187.52 157.09
Rolling 
Stock 
60.00 127.62 280.00 240.00 321.95 218.66 250.13 306.14
Signal & 
Telecom 
Works  
193.77 155.92 505.00 447.23 353.40 470.00 475.00 495.04
Other 
Electrical 
Works  
.. .. 0.50 0.50 0.03 1.00 0.60 0.80

 43
Machinery  0.01 0.00 9.00 3.26 3.17 13.00 22.12 16.22
Other 
Specified 
Works  
.. .. 0.50 0.50 .. 1.00 3.35 0.05
Total 
Gross 
1718.67 1675.31 2599.30 2745.35 2836.84 2749.76 2792.60 2919.19
Credits  318.67 241.03 389.30 435.35 350.54 439.10 441.94 335.41
Total Net 1400.00 1434.28 2210.00 2310.00 2486.31 2310.66 2350.66 2583.77
 
 The head-wise details of financial a llocation made and expenditure incurred 
during the year 2004-05, upto January, 2005,  under Sepcial Railway Safety Fund is 
given in the tabe below: 
 
Plan Head  Financial Targets (Net) 
2004-05 RE (Rs. in 
crore)  
 
Actual Financial 
Performance (Net)  
April’ 04 – January’ 05 
Track Renewals   1715.48 1380.25 
Bridge works 320.1 175.3 
Signaling & 
Telecommunications  
663 
 
361 
 
Rolling Stock  918 460.84 
Machinery & Plant 9.94 12.67 
Other Electrical Works  0.6 0.46 
Other Special Works  17.88 2.31 
Total 3645 2393.16 
 
  
(Para No. 17) 
 Keeping in view that the fi rst responsibility in case of accidents was to reach and 
extricate the victims and arrange for their effective treatment, the Committee had 
recommended that the Railway s should ensure an expedi ent system of rescue and 
medicare to manage the aftermath of accidents.  Besides, they set up specialized public 
relation desks at the major stations falling on the routes of the trains involved in 
accident.   
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry  of Railways have stated that disaster 
management teams have been formed at di visional level by the zonal Railways and 
training is being provided as to how to take  quick action in case on Railway accident. 
The Ministry have further stated that the sy stem for providing timely rescue and relief 
service to passengers involved in train accidents has evolved over a period of 150 years 
over IR.  There are 174 accident relief medical equipment vans (ARME) and 185 
accident relief trains, which ar e positioned at strategic cover area within a distance of 

 44
150-200 kms. and thus may take around 2 t 3 ho urs to reach the site of accident.  As 
the Railways are spread out over a vast geograph ical area, it is normally not possible to 
maintain rescue and relief equipment and team s at every station.  ARMEs can only be 
located at stations having adequate medical ba ckup facilities.  Therefore, the first help 
normally arrives from the community in vicinity and civil administration in case of 
railway accidents. 
 
 The Ministry have further stated that in order to review the disaster management 
system over Indian Railways and recommendat ions for strengthening and streamlining, 
a High Level Committee was constituted.  The Committee identified a number of 
technological and managerial inputs to quicken the pace of relief an d rescue operations 
which are being introduce/implemented in a phased manner.  To ensure the expedient 
system of rescue and medicate to manage aftermath of accident, Railways and district 
a d m i n i s t r a t i o n  h a v e  t o  j o i n  h a n d s  t o  w o r k  in close coordination.  Therefore, all the 
divisions over IR have drawn up their di saster management plans, which include 
leveraging the local, civil, private and army  resources in terms of rescue and medical 
relief infrastructure.  In addi tion all the zonal railways, a ll the zonal railways training 
institutes are conducting focused course s on disaster management for different 
categories of staff/supervisors as a part of  their regular training programmes and also 
as separate courses.  In addition, to br ing about a significant improvement in the 
quality of training on disaster manageme nt, it has been decided to review and 
strengthen existing disaster management modules as well as to set up a state of the art 
institute of rescue and medical relief  at Bangalore with the help of a 
consultant/organisation engaged in setting up/running such training facilities. 
 
 They have also stated that on receipt of information of train accident 
involving/suspecting casualties of passenger s, Accident Relief Medical Equipment Vans 
(ARMVs) and Accident Relief Trains (ARTs) ar e rushed to the site of accident on top 
priority along with doctors, paramedical staff, rescue workers and engineers.  These 
ARMVs and ARTs are optimally located on th e Indian Railway network to reach within 
reasonable time.  However, being rail boun d and dependent on location of accident, 
such railway relief is not always available with in first golden hour.  It is the on board 
Railway and non-Railway resources, assistance from nearby areas, and medical & fire 

 45
fighting resources of civil ad ministration which are availa ble within the first golden 
hour for achieving better expediency in Trau ma Management of victims within the first 
golden hours.  Ministry of Home Affairs,  which is the nodal Mi nistry of Disaster 
Management in the country, has taken several initiatives to upgrade the civil, medical 
and fire fighting capability.  Civil admi nistrations have been forming Emergency 
Response Teams and even the local village level population is being trained on Disaster 
Management.  For harnessing such useful capability, Ministry of Railways is coordinating 
with Ministry of Home Affairs at the central level for expeditiously making available such 
resources like medical and fire services, emergency response teams etc. also for the 
railway accidents involving casualties of passengers.  Similar coordination is being made 
by Zonal Railways with the ci vil administration. As a ge neral policy of Accident 
management, in case of Railway Accidents in with casualties occur, is that of rapid 
evacuation after rendering immediate and n ecessary first aid trea tment.  The medical 
teams move to the accident site by the firs t available mode either by Accident Relief 
Medical Van or Road Ambulance or even by any other vehicle.  It is stated that on the 
recommendation of Railway Safety Review Co mmittee, instructions have already been 
issued to impart training on first-aid to ticket checking staff.  The provisions of First-Aid 
have also been incorporated in the duty list of ticket checking staff.”      
   
(Para No. 18) 
 The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety  informed the Committee that normally 
one months’ notice was required for inspecting the assets before opening of assets/new 
lines.   However, he had submitted that at times, the Railways give  inadequate time.  
As such they had to complete  the inspection with a time co nstraint.  They were also 
informed that the Commissioner of Railw ay Safety was not consulted before 
announcement of new trains.  Chief Commission er of Railway Safety gave a conditional 
certification to start the train/new line/ segment, but subsequently, the Railways 
unilaterally withdrew some of these condit ions.  The Committee took a strong view and 
recommended that sufficient notice period might be given to the CCRS for inspection 
and in no case the conditio ns put by the latter, on an y project or the works, be 
withdrawn without consulting him as it may prove a major safety threat to the Indian 
Railways. 
 

 46
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Minist ry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“This recommendation consists of three parts 
(i) that sufficient notice period ma y be given to CCRS for inspection, 
(ii) in no case, condition put by CCRS on any project or the works be 
withdrawn without consulting him as it  may prove major safety threat to 
the Indian Railways. 
(iii) Need for consultation with CRS  for introduction of new trains.  
 
For part (i), it is to state that necessary administrative instructions on the subject 
have already been issued to all the Zonal Railways to ensure subm ission of necessary 
documents to CRS normally one month in  advance from the date of proposed 
inspection by CRS for openin g of a section.  Necessary amendment to the Railways 
(Opening for public carriag e for passengers) Rule 2000 has also been made and 
published in gazette notification of 27 th January, 2005 read along with the corrigendum 
issued in the gazette notification dated 16th February, 2005. 
 
Regarding part (ii) of the recommendatio n, it is submitted that normally due 
consideration is given to all the recommend ations of the CRS/CCRS .  In fact, before 
issuing the confirmation of the opening of a new line, the co mpliance to the CRS 
observations are obtained from the Railways.  in case of any technical/administrative 
reasons, if the recommendat ions of the Commission can not be accepted/implemented 
then the Commission is advised of the same with reasons.  The Commission is also free 
to discuss the issue with the Ministry (concerned Boar d Member) for a review of the 
views of the Ministry.  
 
 For part (iii) it is stated that as pe r current instructions, New passenger trains, 
comprising of rolling stock already in use and at speeds already permitted on a 
particular zonal Railways, can be introduced  without needing any further consultation 
with CRS Introduction of a new passenger trai n consisting of new type of rolling stock, 
is, however, done in consultation with CRS is processed through CRS.” 
  

 47
 
(Para No. 25) 
 As per the existing system, payment of salary to the Group ‘D ’ category of staff 
in particular, was made through cash.  Th e committee were info rmed that as per 
instructions issued from RBI and CVC all the mo netary transactions either to staff or to 
the contractors etc. were to be made thro ugh cheques only.  However, taking into 
account the nature of duties performed by the workers especially ‘D’ class workers such 
as gangman, it was very difficult for them to  come to a city to collect their salaries 
through banks. The Co mmittee were of the view that di sbursement of salary through 
cheque should be made optional rather than mandatory for the group ‘D’ staff.  
Necessary orders to that effect  be issued to all the Zonal/ divisional heads.  They had 
also desired that the matter might be ta ken up with the RBI/CVC explaining the 
difficulties to obtain a waiver especially for Group ‘D’ category of staff.    
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
 “The decision to switch over to the scheme of payment of salary through 
BCS/Bank/Cheque has been taken by Board in light of directives received from CVC, RBI 
and assigning of additional work of Security to RPF. 
 However, with a view to mitigate the prob lems of way side staff, staff posted at 
remote locations, wayside stations, smaller towns etc., where banking facilities are not 
adequate and ECS/direct credit facility is not available have already been exempted 
from the above scheme vide instructions issued in August 2004.  The General Managers 
have been directed to person ally look into the matter to identify such areas so that 
there is no instance of delay in payment of salary or debi ting any collection charges to 
any of the staff while putti ng in place a sound grieva nce redressal mechanism to 
monitor difficulties/problems put forth by staff for prompt resolution thereof to their 
satisfaction.  Railways have also been advi sed to liaise with banks to facilitate opening 
of bank account by staff to arrange direct crediting of salary to their bank account. 
 It may thus be seen that  adequate safeguards have already been provided to 
exempt the staff posted at remote locations in view of the diffic ulties/ground realities 
faced by such staff.”   
      
  

 48
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Para No. 5) 
 The Committee had found that Railway Minister had announced in his Budget 
speech to fill up the 20000 vacancies in Group ‘D’ in safety category and 3500 vacancies 
in RPF.   They found that due to this acute shortage of staff at times even the Station 
Masters had to perform commercial duties like sale of tickets, booking of parcels/goods, 
attending public queries etc.  They felt that in the process there could be lapse in train 
operations.  Due to shortfall in staff of safe ty category, safety of trains/operations had 
to be compromised with.  The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the vacant 
posts in safety categories should be filled up urgently on priority basis.  
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Minist ry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 “Occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a continuo us process.  Standing 
procedure already exists to conduct selections /suitability/trade tests regularly for filling 
up vacancies timely, especially in safety categories. 
 
 There were about 78,564 vacancies in Safe ty Categories in All Indian Railways as 
on 01.11.2004 as against the sanctioned strength of 6,31,536.  This works out to about 
12.44% of the sanctioned strength.  The sanctioned strength includes not only the bare 
requirement for operation but also Rest Givers, Leave Reserve and provision for training 
etc.  In case of Safety Categories, these ad ditional provisions have been liberally made 
in order that work does not suffer, even if there are time gaps between arising of 
vacancies and filling up of the same.  While  every efforts is made to reach the ideal 
state of “zero vacancy”, yet merely because vacancies exist in safety categories, it 
cannot be construed that safety has been affected.  
 
Further, with a view to facilitate filling up  of vacancies in safety categories these 
categories have been exempted from the purview of rightsizing.” 

 49
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
- N I L –  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                       (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
19th May, 2006                                                              Chairman, 
29 Jyaistha, 1928 Saka                          Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
  

 50
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19 th May, 2006 from 0930 hours to 1000  hours in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri A. Sai Prathap  
3. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
4. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
5. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Anwar Hussain 
8. Shri C. Kuppusami 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
10. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
11. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
12. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director  

 51
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draf t Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations contained in the 5 th Report on ‘Safety & 
Security in Indian Railways’ and adopted the same without any modification.  
 
3. The Committee authorized the  Chairman to fina lise the Report and present the same to the 
House. 
 
4. xxx    xxx    xxx. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 52
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNEMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 5TH REPORT 
2004-05 (14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘SAFETY & SECURITY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS’ 
 
Total Number of Recommendations/Observations    36 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by  
 t h e  G o v e r n m e n t          1 6  
 (Vide recommendations/observations) 
 Para Nos.1, 2, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12,  13, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 
 P e r c e n t a g e   o f  T o t a l          6 1 . 6 %  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 (Vide recommendations/observations)      9 
 Para Nos.3, 4, 7, 9, 14, 15, 17, 18 and 25 
 P e r c e n t a g e  o f  T o t a l          3 4 . 7 %  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
 Government  have not been accepted by the Committee which 
 Require reiteration. 
 (Vide recommendations/observations)      1 
 Para No. 5 
 P e r c e n t a g e  o f  T o t a l          3 . 7 %  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which final replies 
 of Government are still awaited. 
 (Vide  recommendations/observations) 
 Para No. Nil 
 