 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
 
(2004
-
05)
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 6
TH
 Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways
 2005 on Rail Network in North East 
Region 
–
 Expansion and Investment]
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
August, 2005/Sravana, 1926 (Saka) 
 

 
2
 
 
 
SCR No. 91
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAI
LWAYS
 
(2004
-
05)
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the  6
TH
 Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways 2005 on Rail Network in North East 
Region 
–
 Expansion and Investment]
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2005
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August, 2005/Sravana, 1926 (Saka)
 

 
3
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
…………………….……………….
 
  4
 
INTRODUCTION
 ………………………………………………………………
 
  6
 
 
PART 
-
 I
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
 
Report………………………………………………………   7
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 
              
17
 
accepted by the Government  ………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee           25
 
do not desire to pursue in view of the G
overnment’s
 
reply……………………………………………………….
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 
   31
 
 
 
 
Replies of the Government  have not been accepted 
 
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…
.
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
 
               37 
 
final replies of the Government  are still awaited  …….
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2004
-
05)
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia
 
 
-
 
Chairman
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
2.
 
     Sh
ri A.Sai Prathap
 
3
 
Shri Dhirendra Agarwal
 
4
 
Shri Atique Ahamad
 
5         Shri Ajaya Kumar
 
6
 
Shri Subrata Bose 
 
7         Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
 
8.
 
Shri Kishan Lal Diler
 
9.
 
Shri Giridhar Gamang
 
10.
 
Shri Pradeep Gandhi
 
11.
 
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
 
12.
 
Shri Anwa
r Hussain
 
13.
 
Shri Mahesh Kanodia
 
14.
 
Shri C. Kuppusami
 
15.
 
Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire 
 
16.
 
Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
 
17.
 
Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
 
18.
 
Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
 
19.
 
Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
 
20.
 
Ch. Lal Singh
 
21.
 
Mohd. Tahir
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Smt. Kamla Manhar
 
23.
 
Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee
 
24.
 
M
aulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
 
 
25.
 
Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi
 
26.
 
Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
 
27.
 
Shri Tarini Kanta Roy
 
28.
 
Shri R. Kamraj
 
29.
 
Shri Isam Singh
 
30.
 
Shri Harendra Singh Malik
 
31.
 
Shri Abani Roy
 

 
5
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri John Joseph
 
 
 
-
 
Secretary
 
2.
 
Dr.(Smt.) P.K.
 Sandhu
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri V.S. Negi
 
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
5.
 
Shri Pankaj Kumar Sharma
 
-
 
Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (200
4
-
05), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twelfth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee
 on Railways (2004
-
05) on ‘Rail Network in North East Region 
–
 
Expansion and Investment.’
 
 
2.
 
The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 02.03.2005 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 01.03.2005 and it contained 12 recommendations/observations.  
The Ministry of
 Railways have furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the 
recommendations/observations on 03.06.2005.  
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the 
same at their sitting held on 28.07.2005.   
 
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action ta
ken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004
-
05) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix
-
II.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
                             
BASUDEB ACHARIA
 
August, 2
005
 
 
 
 
              
 
                                 Chairman,
 
Sravana, 1926 Saka 
 
 
 
                 
Standing Committee on Railways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 

 
7
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
REPORT
 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommen
dations and observations contained in the                 
6
th
 Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2004
-
05) on ‘Rail Network in 
North East Region 
-
 Expansion and Investment’.  The Report was presented in 
Lok Sabha on 02.03.2005 and laid in Rajya S
abha on 01.03.2005  .
 
 
2.
 
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 12 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been broadly categorized as follows:
-
 
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations which have be
en accepted by the 
Government 
–
 Para Nos. 5.2, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9  and  5.12.
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
–
 Para Nos. 
5.1, 5.6 and 5.11.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observati
ons in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
–
 5.3 and 5.4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
are still awaited  Para No. 
–
5.10.
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committe
e desire that final reply in respect of the 
recommendation for which only interim reply has been given by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously.
 
 
4.
 
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on 
some of their recomme
ndations/observations.
 
 

 
8
 
 
 
 
Funds for projects enroute to N.E. Region
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Para No.5.3)
 
 
5.
 
The Committee had found that  funds earmarked exclusively for                      
Northeast Region are  being invested by the Railways on projects taken up in 
oth
er than North Eastern Region of Northeast Frontier Railway on the justification 
that the investment in these projects would remove the bottlenecks, enhance 
smooth movement  of traffic in Northeast Region and also the capacity. The 
Committee  while not appr
oving of the diversion of funds specifically earmarked 
for the Northeast Region on projects taken up on a part outside the Region had 
recommended that the funds for projects enroute to Northeast Region should be 
given priority and sanctioned from Railway B
udget and not from the funds 
earmarked for the Region.
 
 
6.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have 
inter
-
alia
 
stated 
that there are only 2 doubling projects in progress between Malda and New 
Jalpaiguri and the works are being executed on 
priority.  Since the doubling of 
these leftover sections will add to throughput enhancement in the Northeast 
Region, it would be appropriate to consider the investment as made in Northeast 
Region.
 
 
 
 
7.
 
The Committee note that under  the ‘New Initiatives’
 announced in 
1996 by then Prime Minister   for the  overall development of Northeast 
Region, all the Union Ministries/Departments are required to earmark                  
10 per cent of their Budget for the specific programmes in Northeast 
Region. The Com
mittee are of the firm view that since the New Initiative 
was meant for the Northeast Region only, the amount so earmarked cannot 
be invested on projects taken up outside the territorial jurisdiction of 
Northeast Region.  They, therefore, do not  approve o
f Ministry’s view that 
the amount spent on removing bottlenecks enroute to Northeast Region be 
considered investment as made in Northeast Region. While emphatically  

 
9
 
reiterating their earlier recommendation,   the Committee desire  that the 
Railways should
 immediately stop the practice of such diversion of funds 
specifically earmarked for Northeast Region on projects which fall outside 
the Northeast Region to which funds can be provided from the normal 
Railway Budget. However, the Committee are of the view 
that the feeder 
lines to Northeast Region viz.  New Maynaguri
-
Jogighopa new line and New 
Jalpaiguri
-
New Bongaigaon gauge conversion projects  should be 
adequately funded from the funds earmarked exclusively for the Northeast 
Region as these projects would 
remove the enroute bottlenecks besides  
enhancing smooth movement of traffic and capacity after completion.
 
 
Economic viability of projects in N.E. Region 
 
(Para No. 5.4)
 
 
8.
 
The Committee found that out of the 16 surveys (12 new lines and 4 
gauge conversi
on)  undertaken in the region during the last five years,10 
proposals (8 new lines and 2 gauge conversion)  were shelved while 3 proposals 
(1 new line and 2 gauge conversion) included in the Budget and 3 proposals for 
which surveys done for new lines were 
still under examination.  They were 
apprised that during economic feasibility study if an expected Internal Rate of 
return of 14 per cent is shown by the project only then it is considered to be 
economically viable and is included in the budget, otherwise 
the proposal is 
shelved.  The Committee were of the view that because of the lack of railway 
infrastructure, economic and industrial development  in Northeast Region are not 
commensurate with the other States.   They found that there are some projects 
whic
h though not financially  viable but are socially desirable or necessary on 
account of strategic considerations and general development of the Region. 
 
They were of the opinion that Internal Rate of Return of 14 per cent  is too 
high for determination of e
conomic viability of projects particularly for Northeast 
Region. Moreover, it is also not commensurate with the normal prevailing interest 
rate on which it is based.     The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
norms of financial viability for projec
ts in Northeast Region should be relaxed 

 
10
 
since development and expansion of rail network in the region is imperative for 
socio economic development apart from strategic relevance.  They also strongly 
recommended that the economic viability of a project sho
uld be determined on a 
more rational and realistic basis keeping in view the prevailing interest rate. 
Therefore, the criteria adopted to ascertain the economic viability i.e. Internal 
Rate of Return of projects should be reviewed at the earliest.
 
 
9.
 
In t
heir Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“Prior to 1969, financial appraisal of Railway projects was done on the 
conventional system, taking into account a cut 
–
 off return of 6% assuming that to 
be the dividend rate.   However, lat
er on, it was considered necessary that the 
productivity from the capital should be improved and one of the ways was to 
undertake new investments only when the returns are higher.  It was therefore 
decided to set up a Committee in 1968 which would examine 
and recommend 
suitable methods of project evaluation and cost benefit analysis to 
supplement/supplant the conventional method of assessment of financial viability 
of projects.  The Committee recommended that the rate of return be so fixed for 
the Railway i
nvestment as to leave a surplus, after meeting the dividend liability, 
sufficient to cover Capital formation out of internal resources. The rate of return 
was enhanced to 10% in July, 1969.
 
 
10.
 
Ministry of Finance vide their office memorandum dt. 23/8/198
4 laid down 
that only those projects with a financial rate of return exceeding 12% should be 
posed to PIB for the consideration in future.  In the background of Ministry of 
Finance’s letter the rate of return was further increased to 12%.  Consequent on 
th
e reduction in budgetary support and limitation on internal generation of 
resources, Railways were required to resort to market borrowing, which was 
done through Indian Railway Finance Corporation and the lease charges were at 
the rate of 14.5%.  This led 
to further increase in ROR from 12% to 14%.
 
 

 
11
 
11.
 
The issue of revision of rate of return has also been deliberated upon by a 
number of high
-
powered Committees.  Their recommendations are summarized 
below:
-
 
1)
 
The Railway Freight and Fare Committee (Dec. 1993)
 
recommended vide para no. 8.6.9 of their report that Indian 
Railways might have to earn a minimum of 16% return if it were to 
meet its investment needs. 
 
 
2)
 
Standing Committee on Railways (2001) 
in the ninth report have 
stated as under “The Committee are of
 the firm opinion that the 
time has come to stop the blanket liberty presently in practice in the 
Railway Board to distribute the largesse resulting in spreading the 
rare resources thinly.  They are of the opinion that those projects 
which are near complet
ion stage/viable must get priority.  The 
projects which are socially desirable be taken up only when 
matching funds are either assured by the States concerned or the 
Central Government.  They strongly recommend that existing 
priority or on
-
going projects b
e reviewed critically and it must not be 
a mere categorization of projects but realistic enough in terms of 
funding requirement.”
 
 
3)
 
One of the recommendations of 
Railway Safety Review 
Committee, 
1998 better known as Khanna committee (para 2.3.2) 
which submi
tted its Report in Feb 2001,  is as following:
 
 
“Financial justification should be the only consideration for 
approving and prioritizing an investment proposal.  Further 
projects which yield a minimum return of 20 percent, slightly 
more than the prevailing
 market rate of interest, should 
henceforth be undertaken.”
 
 
4)
 
 
Rakesh Mohan Committee 
in Chapter IV of their Report, have 
observed that Indian Railways are at a crossroads.  All the 

 
12
 
indications are that Indian Railways is facing a financial crisis and 
witho
ut a strategic change in direction its future  as a viable entity is 
dim.  There is a need for a more focused investment programme 
that enhances IR’s productivity and which expands its capacity to 
cope with traffic growth projected.  Investment expenditure
s that do 
not result in additional revenues must be eschewed.  At another 
place in the same Chapter, the Committee has drawn attention to 
the great difficulties IR faces in keeping up adequate level of 
investments.  The problem has been compounded in the c
hange in 
investment  priorities where attention has been given to un 
remunerative projects.  Also projects funded out of internal 
resources need to be selected through a rigorous screening 
process and identified as being of the highest organizational prior
ity 
on which the limited internal resources should be invested.  It has 
also been observed by the Committee that “an inherent conflict of 
approach is evident in the promotion of an investment strategy that 
perpetuates resource constraint”.  
 
 
12.
 
Railways 
are conscious of their responsibilities towards socio
-
economic 
and industrial development of backward areas not connected by a reliable 
transport network.  Regardless of the benchmark of 14% many projects on Indian 
Railways including works on NE region are
 sanctioned on socio economic and 
developmental considerations.  At present, 6 new line projects and 5 gauge 
conversion projects which are not financially viable are being executed in North 
Eastern region.  Jiribam
-
Imphal road (Tupul), Kumarghat
-
Agartala n
ew line 
projects and Lumding
-
Silchar
-
Jiribam gauge conversion project have recently 
been declared as National Projects.  The cost of Senchoa
-
Silghat gauge 
conversion work is being funded by Ministry of Defence on strategic 
consideration. 
 
 

 
13
 
13.
 
The prescrib
ed cut
-
off rate of return being followed in Indian Railways for 
determining the financial viability of projects constitutes not only the cost of 
capital but also provision for capital formation, risk factors etc.  Besides paying 
dividend to General revenue
, the Indian Railways are required to make 
provisions for Depreciation Reserve Fund (DRF), Pension Fund and 
Development Fund (DF).  Since Railways have initiated a plan to cater to the 
modernization, operational improvement and throughput enhancement for 
q
uantum jump in the traffic expected on Indian Railways, it has become 
imperative that adequate surplus is generated to take care of the requirements of 
Development Fund (DF).
 
 
14.
 
It is also relevant to point out here that only about 47% of the total Plan 
Expenditure of IR, which is Rs. 15349 crores in 2005
-
06, gets Budgetary support 
from the Central Government (including contribution to SRSF and Railways 
Share out of diesel cess).  The balance 53% has to be necessarily funded 
through internally generated s
urplus and other market borrowings.  There is a 
crying need to increase the internal generation of resources for financing projects 
(through DRF, DF etc).  Therefore only those projects, which are capable of 
generating high returns, need to be taken up.  T
o enable selection of such 
projects, it is necessary to keep the cut off percentage of ROR at sufficiently high 
level and this justifies 14% ROR as cut off percentage for selecting projects for 
investment”.
 
 
15.
 
The Committee appreciate the fact that India
n Railways have taken 
up  many projects in Northeast Region on  socio
-
economic and 
developmental considerations although majority of these projects are not 
financially viable. They also note the concern and endeavour of the Indian 
Railways to improve their
 precarious financial condition. However, they still 
feel that the prevailing 14 per cent cut off rate of return for determining the 
financial viability of projects  is not at all commensurate with the normal 
prevailing market interest rate on which it is 
actually based. Therefore, 

 
14
 
keeping in view the socio
-
economic and industrial development of the 
region, the Committee stress that in case of Northeast Region the cut off 
rate of return of 14 per cent should not be applied strictly for evaluation of 
project
s. They also desire to be apprised of the outcome of the examination 
of surveys done during the last five years in respect of Sivok
-
Giellikhola 
(narrow gauge), Dimapur
-
Kohima and Azra
-
Byrnihat new line projects.
 
 
Fund for Bogibeel Rail cum Road Bridge
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Para No.5.7)
 
 
16.
 
The Committee found that the Rail cum Road Bridge across the river 
Brahamaputra at Bogibeel is to be funded on cost sharing basis by Ministry of 
Surface Transport and Highways and Ministry of Railways.  The construction of 
this Bridge h
as been inordinately delayed due to non
-
availability of their share of 
funds by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and the completion target has 
been deferred from 2005 to 2008
-
09.  The Committee were also apprised that 
discussion with the World Bank 
Authorities indicated that since the project 
requires heavy investment and is financially unviable, it  could be considered if it 
is posed as a socio
-
economic project of the Government rather than a Railway 
Sector Project.  Accordingly, the position was ad
vised to the Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance.  The Committee had emphasized that the 
Railways should further persuade the Ministry of Finance to project this mega 
bridge project as a socio
-
economic project of the Government of India to 
the 
World Bank.  In case the funding of the project from World Bank does not 
materialize the Railways should approach the Ministry of Finance to declare it as 
a national project.
 
 
17.
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated that t
he 
funds for this project are not likely to be available through World Bank funding.  
Considering the importance of the mega bridge project, 
Government is being 
approached for providing funds for the project as an additionality.
 

 
15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Merging of Bogibeel R
ail
-
cum
-
Road Bridge and Rangia
-
Murkongselek 
Gauge Conversion Projects 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.9)
 
 
18.
 
The Committee had found that gauge conversion of                                    
Rangia
-
Murkong
-
Selek section of Northeast Frontier Railway is also
 linked up 
with the Bogibeel bridge.  On southern side of the bridge there is broad gauge 
line while across the bridge is meter gauge.  They had felt that Bogibeel bridge 
will be meaningless if gauge conversion of this connecting section on North side 
is n
ot taken up simultaneously with adequate financial arrangement.  Further 
these two projects are important from the point of connectivity between remote 
areas of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh besides defence movement.  The 
Committee, therefore, had recommende
d that both Bogibeel project and Rangia
-
Murkong
-
Selek gauge conversion project should be considered in totality as a 
single project to tackle the flood control, gauge conversion etc. with provision of 
adequate funds from Railway budget/alternative funding.
  
 
 
19.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated that the 
Government is being approached for providing funds for Bogibeel rail
-
cum road 
bridge as an additionality to the normal Railways plan.  Regarding gauge 
conversion of Rangia
-
M
urkongselek, it is mentioned that since major portion of 
the line was constructed on strategic considerations, Ministry of Defence had 
been approached for providing funds for the projects through Defence funding.  
However Ministry of Defence, though endors
ed the strategic importance of the 
line, have not agreed to fund the project through Defence funds.  
The matter will 
now be taken up for consideration of the Government for providing funds 
for this project.
 

 
16
 
 
20.
 
The Committee appreciate the fact that Minis
try of Railways are 
pursuing the matter with the Government for grant of additional funds for 
Bogibeel rail
-
cum road bridge as well as gauge conversion of strategically 
important Rangia
-
Murkongselek project.  The Committee desire that in case  
the Railways
 are unable to procure additional funds for these two projects 
they should approach the Ministry of Finance to declare these Projects as 
National Projects.  
 
 

 
17
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
Budget Al
lotment for NE Region
 
(Para No. 5.2)
 
 
 
The Committee noted that  for computing the investment to be made by 
the Railways in Northeast Region, a fraction of ¾ is presently being applied to 
the total expenditure incurred by Northeast Frontier Railway  as unt
il  recently out 
of 4 divisions of NF Railway, 3 divisions have been covering the North
-
east 
Region.    The Committee  were  not convinced about the method of this 
computation of the data regarding allotment and expenditure,  as there are five 
divisions in
 Northeast Frontier Railway as on date and the same three divisions 
are serving the Northeast Region even now.   They found that the figure so 
computed and provided are misleading as they reflect ¾ instead of 3/5.  
Considering the un
-
organised upkeep of th
e records the Committee first and 
foremost emphasize on maintenance of data relating to allocation and 
expenditure on Northeast Region separately forthwith.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The Budgetary Support exten
ded to the Railways by the Govt. also 
includes specific allotments for various projects like Udhampur
-
Srinagar
-
Baramulla New Line project, which is a national project; Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd., 
externally aided projects, contribution to Special Railway Safety
 Fund and also 
inflows from the diesel cess for undertaking road related safety works.  While 
calculating the net Budgetary Support available to the Railways for distributing to 
other Railway projects, the outlays given on above account are subtracted.  Th
e 
10% budgetary support to be earmarked for North Eastern Region is worked out 
on this Net Budgetary support available.  
 
 

 
18
 
 
For computing the investment being made by the Railways in the North 
Eastern Region, the following norms are adopted:
 
 
1.
 
All projec
ts/investment in Northeastern region,
 
 
2.
 
Projects taken up in other than Northeastern region of Northeast Frontier 
Railway, on the basis of justification that includes benefits for traffic 
movement in Northeastern region too.  This criteria applies to pro
jects 
under planheads 
–
 New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling, Traffic 
Facilities, Rolling Stock and Bridge Works.  The outlay for Eklakhi
-
Balurghat New Line project is excluded under this criteria as it will not 
benefit any traffic movement in the Northea
st region.  The investment 
being made for the Doubling project of Radhikapur
-
Barsoi is also now 
being given the same treatment as Eklakhi
-
Balurghat New Line project, 
that is to say it is not being treated as an allocation to the Northeast.  
 
  
 
3.
 
Earlier 
for planheads other than New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling, 
Traffic Facilities, Rolling Stock and Bridge Works, a ratio of 3:1 was 
adopted for distributing the Capital funds as out of four divisions of 
Northeast Frontier Railway (prior to 01.04.03), th
ree fell in NE Region.  
After creation of the fifth Division of Rangiya w.e.f. 01.04.03, this ratio is 
now being modified to 3:2 as now two divisions, viz. Katihar and 
Alipurduar divisions fall outside NE region (the former fully outside NE and 
the latter 
mostly outside NE)
 
 
4.
 
As already mentioned only three divisions of Northeast Frontier Railway 
fall in North
-
Eastern Region.  Separate data of allocation and expenditure 
thereof are already being maintained division
-
wise/project
-
wise in the form 
of Revenue
 Account Current and Capital Account Current.  At the same 
time a collective record of expenditure on a sanctioned work is maintained 
to have a permanent record of expenditure in requisite details and also to 

 
19
 
exercise control over expenditure during its ex
ecution with reference to the 
budget grant.” 
 
 
 Allocation of funds for on
-
going projects in NE Region
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.5)
 
 
16.
 
Six new lines and 5 gauge conversion projects with a total throwforward of 
Rs.6494 crore are at present in execution i
n Northeast Region.  The Committee 
had noted that many of these projects were sanctioned and included in the 
Budget prior to the year 1999. However, the progress of work in majority of these 
projects are minimal.  The Committee had expressed their concern 
on the slow 
progress of these projects. However, they had noted with satisfaction that 
recently two of these ongoing projects, namely Lumding
-
Silchar
-
Jiribam(gauge 
conversion) and Kumarghat
-
Agartala (new line) have been declared as National 
Projects by the
 Government.  Further they had noted that Jiribam
-
Imphal new 
line project is also being proposed for declaration as a National Project.  The 
Committee were aware that when a mega Project is declared as a National 
Project it is assured of requisite funds an
d as a result gets completed in a fixed 
time schedule.  The Committee had recommended that for other  ongoing 
projects,  funds should be made available adequately so that these could also be 
completed  at the earliest and rail density ratio in the region i
s increased apart 
from providing efficient line of connectivity.
 
 
17.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“The various ongoing projects in N.E. Region have a throw
-
forward 
of about Rs. 6500 crore.  The outlay being provided
 for projects in a year 
has been of the order of about Rs. 400
-
500 crore in the last few years.  
Considering the demands for expediting progress of projects in the region, 
Hon’ble Prime Minister has approved 3 projects as National Projects, 
namely Lumding
-
Silchar
-
Jiribam gauge conversion, Kumarghat
-
Agartala 
and Jiribam
-
Imphal road new lines.  It has been decided that the funds 

 
20
 
required for these projects over and above being provided through normal 
budgetary support would be provided as an additionality so 
as to complete 
them in a time bound manner.  With this, It may be feasible to allocate more 
funds to the projects in the region for expediting their progress.”
 
 
 
World Bank funds for Bogibeel Bridge 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.7)
 
7.
 
The Committee found tha
t the Rail cum Road bridge across the river 
Brahmaputra at Bogibeel is to be funded by Ministry of Surface Transport and 
Highways and Ministry of Railways.  The cost to be shared by these Ministries is 
Rs.666 crore and Rs.1101 crore respectively.  The cons
truction of this bridge has 
been inordinately delayed.  The completion target, which was initially fixed at 
2005 has been deferred to 2008
-
09.  The major cause of delay has been the 
non
-
availability of their share of funds by Ministry of Road transport and
 
Highways.  The Committee were apprised that discussions with World Bank 
Authorities indicated that since the project requires heavy investment and is 
financially unviable, the project could be considered if it is posed as a socio
-
economic project of the G
overnment, rather than a railway sector project.  
Accordingly  the position was advised to Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance.    The Committee  emphasized that the Railways should 
further persuade the Ministry of Finance to project Bogibe
el mega bridge project 
as a socio
-
economic project of Government of India to the World Bank as it 
would bring about overall socio
-
economic development of the region.   In case, 
the funding of the project from World Bank does not materialise the Railways 
sh
ould approach the Ministry of Finance to declare it as a National project.
 
 
8.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“As mentioned earlier, the funds for this project are not likely to be 
available through World Bank funding.
 Considering the importance of the 

 
21
 
mega bridge project, Government is being approached for providing funds 
for the project as an additionality”.
 
 
 
Delay in construction of Bogibeel Bridge 
 
(Para No. 5.8)
 
The Committee also found that another cause for the 
delay of the 
construction of Bogibeel project is due to damage of approach roads and north 
bank dykes by recurring floods every year.    They stressed that necessary steps 
should be taken by Railways for the flood protection.  These flood protection 
works 
concerning present and future of Bogibeel bridge should be taken up as a 
component of the total bridge project in association with Central Water 
Commission as well as Ministry of Water Resources and Government of Assam. 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the M
inistry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“As mentioned earlier, State Government is required to maintain and 
repair the damaged dykes on their own or have to entrust the work to the 
Railways on deposit terms.  The Railways have already been advised to go 
ahead 
with the repair works pending deposition of the funds by the State 
Governments.  The strengthening and raising of dykes as required due to 
construction of bridges will be a part of the project.”
 
 
 
Merging of Bogibeel and Rangia
-
Murkongselek Gauge Conversio
n Projects 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.9)
 
 
10.
 
The Committee had found that gauge conversion of Rangia
-
Murkong
-
Selek section of Northeast Frontier Railway is also linked up with the Bogibeel 
bridge.  On southern side of the bridge there is broad gauge line
 while across the 
bridge is meter gauge.  They had felt that Bogibeel bridge will be meaningless if 
gauge conversion of this connecting section on North side is not taken up 
simultaneously with adequate financial arrangement.  Further these two projects 

 
22
 
ar
e important from the point of connectivity between remote areas of Assam and 
Arunachal Pradesh besides defence movement.  The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended that both Bogibeel project and Rangia
-
Murkong
-
Selek gauge 
conversion project should be consi
dered in totality as a single project to tackle 
the flood control, gauge conversion etc. with provision of adequate funds from 
Railway budget/alternative funding.  
 
 
11.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“As mentioned in 
reply to para 5.7, government is being approached for providing 
funds for Bogibeel rail
-
cum road bridge as an additionality to the normal Railways 
plan regarding gauge conversion of Rangia
-
Murkongselek, it is mentioned that 
since major portion of the line 
was constructed on strategic considerations, 
Ministry of Defence had been approached for providing funds for the projects 
through Defence funding.  However Ministry of Defence, though endorsed the 
strategic importance of the line, have not agreed to fund t
he project through 
Defence funds.  The matter will now be taken up for consideration of the 
Government for providing funds for this project.”
 
 
 
Modern machinery and equipments for N.E. Region 
 
(Para No. 5.12)
 
 
 
The Committee found that as part of modernisa
tion plan launched by 
Railways, modernisation of tracks, bridges, signalling, passenger amenities, 
rolling stock etc. are undertaken in Northeast Region also.  They also found that 
the progress of the modernisation works undertaken is very slow due to long
 and 
heavy rainy season, insurgency and non
-
use of mechanized  methods for track 
renewal.     They were of the view  that since there is longer period of rainy 
season in Northeast and work cannot be carried out during this period,  to 
makeup for the reduce
d working period, efficient and effective equipments are 
essential.   They, therefore, stressed that the modern machinery & effective 

 
23
 
equipments for track renewal and coach maintenance facilities should invariably 
be provided to the Northeast Region. Targe
ts should also be fixed for each and 
every work undertaken under the head, track renewal, bridges, signalling etc.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Track renewals are carried out as and when they become due for renewa
l 
on age
-
cum
-
condition basis and availability of funds.  Targets for track renewals 
are fixed annually based on the total quantum of works sanctioned and to be 
executed.  Along with these targets for mechanized relaying are also fixed.  In 
regard to use of
 mechanized means, it is to mention that one modern Turnout 
Changing Machine has been given to Northeast Frontier Railway for turnout 
renewal works there.  Subsequently one plain track laying machine has been 
diverted from Western Railway.  In addition, on
e more new track laying machine 
has been allotted to Northeast Frontier Railway on first priority against the 
contract recently finalized.
 
 
As a part of modernization in the North Eastern region, replacement works 
by panel interlocking have been completed.
  Track circuit works have been 
completed at 141 out of 155 locations and rehabilitations has been done at 51 
out of 76 locations. 
 
 
On the BG route of Northeast Frontier Railway, provision of a 
microprocessor
-
based Anti collision Device (ACD) network is n
earing completion.  
Configuration checking has commenced.
 
 
Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) systems are being provided 
on 688 route kms of NF Railway.  This system is likely to be commissioned by 
June, 2006.
 
 

 
24
 
Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) was c
reated in 2001
-
02 to clear the 
backlog of replacement of bridges on Indian Railways. About 2700 bridges were 
identified & sanctioned for repair/rehabilitation/rebuilding at a cost or Rs. 1530 
crore (Net) under SRSF.  These bridges are targeted to be comple
ted in a span 
of 5 years i.e. from 2001
-
02 to 2006
-
07. Out of these 2700 bridges, a total of 
1602 bridges have been rebuilt/repaired/rehabilitated under SRSF till 31.01.2005.  
It is expected that the balance bridges shall be completed by 2006
-
07.  On India
n 
Railways, yearly targets have been fixed for each balance SRSF bridge work 
planned for completion upto 2006
-
07, which includes the bridges falling on N.E. 
Region also.
 
 
Apart from SRSF, additional funds are also made available annually to 
take up the rep
air/rehabilitation of fresh accruals of bridge works under 
Depreciation Reserve Fund (DRF).  Annual targets are also fixed for bridge 
works sanctioned under DRF. ”  
 

 
25
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
 
Budget allotment for N.E. Region 
 
(Para No. 5.1)
 
 
 
The Committee found that Northeast Region comprising of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Sikkim 
falls under   the zonal   juris
diction of Northeast Frontier Railway based at 
Maligaon, Guwahati.  The Rangia, Lumding, Tinsukia Divisions and a portion of 
Alipurduar Division of Northeast Frontier Railway covers the entire Northeast 
Region so far as development of rail infrastructure i
s concerned. The total rail 
route length in the Region as on 1.4.2004 was 1239 kms. broad gauge and 1360 
kms. metre gauge.  They noticed that the capitals of seven States including 
Sikkim are yet to be connected with rail. The Committee also noted that in 
the 
process of development of rail infrastructure in the region, Railways have 
completed 163 kms. of new lines and 829 kms. of gauge conversion works since 
1992
-
93.  For further expansion of the rail network, six new lines and five gauge 
conversion project
s with throwforward of Rs.6494 crore are at present in 
progress in the region which on completion would add to the existing network  
514 kms. new line and 1210 broad gauge kms. in the region. Further the 
Committee  observed that on the new initiative taken
 by the then Prime Minister 
in 1996, a guideline has been laid down for all the Union Ministries and 
Departments to earmark 10 per cent of their budget for the specific projects in the 
North Eastern States.  A  non
-
lapsable Central Pool of Resources was se
t up 
later on in 1998
-
99 to support the specific projects in the region.  The Ministries 
and Departments are required to contribute fund in the Central Pool to the extent 
of shortfall in expenditure with reference to 10 per cent earmarked for the region.  
  
 
 

 
26
 
 
Railways are spending on an average around Rs.400 crore annually on 
these projects from the Budgetary support received from the General Exchequer 
which according to them is much above the prescribed guidelines of  10 per cent. 
 
However, the Committee 
during the course of examination of the subject found 
that in Northeast Region,  Railways are spending 10 per cent out of the 
budgetary support available  for general distribution  for development of rail 
infrastructure.  The budgetary support available fo
r general distribution is that 
amount which is left over after excluding diesel cess, contribution to Special 
Railway Safety Fund (SRSF), funds allotted for the National Project and funds for 
externally aided projects from the total Budgetary support recei
ved from General 
Exchequer. This according to the Ministry of Railways is done with the approval 
of Ministry of Home Affairs. Further the Committee also found that based on  the 
existing computation method adopted for investment in Northeast Region,  
Railw
ays have been spending on an average 4.2%, 3.7% and 2.8% from their 
internal resources, Railway Safety Fund (Diesel Cess) and  SRSF respectively.  
The Committee are of the view that for development and expansion of rail 
network in Northeast Region, the amo
unt allocated at present is too paltry and 
meager. They, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Railways should 
earmark 10 per cent of the total Railway Budget  as envisaged in the ‘new 
initiatives’ for  Northeast Region  instead of 10 per cent from t
he budgetary 
support available for general distribution alone as is being done at  present.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The investment in the infrastructural development of the region takes 
place through project 
plan heads such as new lines, gauge conversion, doubling 
and setting up of workshops/production units etc.  Investment on these takes 
place through the budgetary support received from the general exchequer and 
through the funding of the identified national
 projects.  As against this, the 
internal resources, in the form of DRF, DF and the safety funds such as Railway 
Safety fund and SRSF are utilized for the maintenance/repair/replacement/ 

 
27
 
rehabilitation, operational upkeep of the existing assets and identif
ied road 
related safety works as per norms.  The latter is required to be done on a need
-
based as per age
-
cum
-
condition requirements and the allocation of funds is done 
accordingly.  North Eastern Region also receives its due share out of these 
resources.
 
 
 
Allotment of funds under DRF, DF, which constitutes internal resources is 
need
-
based and provision of 10% funds under these allocations to North Eastern 
Region is not warranted by the field and operational requirements.  So far as 
Railway Safety Fund is 
concerned, the allotment is based on the number of 
works included under the relevant plan heads, viz., Road Safety Works 
–
 
ROBs/RUBs and Road Safety Works 
–
 Level Crossings, as well as throw
-
forward.  The throw
-
forward for NF Railway in 2005
-
06 for these t
wo planheads 
is in the region of only Rs. 19.56 crore and Rs. 6.05 crore, respectively.
 
 
 
SRSF was constituted to wipe out the arrears in replacements and 
renewals as existed on 31.03.2001.  So far as NF Railway is concerned, 112 
works costing Rs. 421.67 c
rore (for SRSF portion) were included and all the 
works are expected to be completed by 31.03.2007   on the Signaling and 
Telecom side, against works charged to SRSF in the North Eastern region, 
replacement works by panel interlocking have been completed. 
 Track circuit 
works have been completed at 141 out of 155 locations and rehabilitation has 
been done at 51 out of 76 locations.  Under Bridges, total 195 bridges were 
sanctioned under SRSF at a cost of Rs. 46 crore.  Out of these, 185 bridges 
have been co
mpleted by March 2005 and balance 10 shall be completed by 
2005
-
06, for which full funds have been provided this year.  A total of 760 km of 
track renewal costing Rs. 350 crore was sanctioned under SRSF.  Out of this, 
405 km costing Rs. 215 cr have been co
mpleted as of 31.03.05.  Track renewal 
of 148 km., costing Rs. 80 crore, is targeted for 2005
-
06.  the balance works shall 
be completed in 2006
-
07 as per targets for SRSF.
 
 

 
28
 
 
Apart from the above, on the BG route of Northeast Frontier Railway, 
provision of 
a microprocessor
-
based Anti Collision Device (ACD) network costing 
Rs. 65.75 crore, a major safety initiative of the Railways, is nearing completion.  
Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) system is being provided on 688 
route kms of NFR.  This system is
 likely to be commissioned by June, 2006.  
Funds for these works will be provided to ensure completion as per targets.
 
 
 
In light of the foregoing, it will be appreciated that Railway is following the 
guidelines for allotment of budgetary support for plann
ed expenditure to ensure 
growth of basic infrastructure falling under the planheads New Lines, Gauge 
Conversion and Doubling.  With the declaration of three projects as National 
Projects, time bound completion of these is also now possible.”       
 
 
 
Elect
rification/doubling of Guwahati and NJP
-
New Coochbehar line 
 
(Para No. 5.6)
 
 
The Committee found that doubling and electrification of Railway tracks 
have not at all been taken up in North East Region so far.  The Committee were 
apprised that the electrific
ation of Railway tracks is normally done where there is 
double line and substantial traffic.  Further, electrification should be done  
continuously otherwise frequent changing of traction would be technically 
undesirable.    The Committee observed that aft
er conversion of Samuktala 
Road
-
New Bongaigaon section, two BG lines would be available between New 
Jalpaiguri and Guwahati which is the hub of North East and there could be 
possibility of electrification of this stretch.   They, therefore, stressed that 
e
lectrification of the stretch upto Guwahati should be explored and a survey in 
this regard should be carried out.   The Committee also desired that the railway 
track from New Jalpaiguri to Bongaigaon via Jalpaiguri Road 
-
 New Coochbehar 
(main line) may als
o be considered for doubling.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 

 
29
 
 
“The entire route in the North East Region alongwith the approach routes 
are non
-
electrified and the trains are being run with diesel traction.  There is a
t 
present no plans to take up electrification of rail routes upto Guwahati.  As 
regards doubling of New Jalpaiguri
-
New Bongaigaon via Jalpaiguri Road, New 
Coochbehar, it is mentioned that a survey for doubling of this line has recently 
been sanctioned.  Fu
rther consideration of the proposal would be feasible based 
on the results of the survey”
 
 
 
Model Stations in N.E. Region 
 
(Para No. 5.11)
 
 
 
The Committee noted that there are 516 stations under Northeast Frontier 
Railway which caters to Northeast Region, 
of which 30 stations have been 
nominated for being developed as model stations.  They found that  almost, 80% 
of these stations are in ‘E’ category, whose annual  earnings from passengers is 
less than one crore rupees. The basic amenities/ facilities are p
rovided on the 
stations based on the category.  The Committee were concerned that  in case 
the traffic earnings do not increase to the requisite level, then  the stations would 
remain in the same category and the modernisation/better facilities cannot be 
p
rovided on these stations.  They were of the view that criteria for categorisation 
of stations based on earnings should be relaxed in the case of Northeast Region 
and facilities and amenities should be provided accordingly.  They also 
emphasized that more 
number of model stations should be identified in the 
region. 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Indian Railways have more than 8000 stations.  Such stations are 
classified in different categories based on earnings from
 passenger traffic.  The 
criteria for classification is given below:
-
 
 

 
30
 
S.No.
 
Category
 
Criteria
 
 
A
 
Non
-
Suburban stations with an annual passenger 
earnings of Rs. 6 crore and above
 
 
B
 
Non
-
Suburban stations with an annual passenger 
earnings between Rs. 3 cr
ore to Rs. 6 crore.
 
Stations of tourist importance, or an important 
junction station 
 
(to be decided by G.M.)
 
 
C
 
All suburban stations
 
 
D
 
Non
-
Suburban stations with passenger earnings 
between Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 3 crore
 
 
E
 
Non
-
Suburban stations with pas
senger earnings 
less than Rs. 1 crore 
 
 
F
 
Halts
 
 
 
Earnings from passenger traffic at a station is directly related to number of 
passengers handled at the station.  Hence, norms for provision of amenities at ‘A’ 
category station(s) would be higher than th
e ‘D’ category station(s).  About 80% 
of the total stations over Indian Railways falls in ‘E’ and ‘F’ category.  There is 
also a provision to augment the passenger amenities with the growth in 
passenger traffic at a station as per the Recommended Scale lai
d down.  Hence, 
need for review of criteria for categorization of stations is not felt.     
 
 
 
Regarding identification of more number of model stations in N.E. region, 
it is mentioned that nomination of additional Model Stations may be considered 
after am
enities are provided at the existing Model Stations.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
31
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
Priority of funds for N.E. Region 
 
(Para No. 5.3)
 
 
The Committee f
urther noted that out of the funds earmarked exclusively 
for Northeast Region some amounts are being  invested by the Railways on 
projects taken up in other than North Eastern Region of Northeast Frontier 
Railway on the justification that the investment in
 these projects would remove 
the bottlenecks and enhance smooth movement of traffic in Northeast Region 
and also enhance the capacity. While the Committee agreed that enroute 
bottlenecks should be removed, yet they do not approve of the diversion of funds 
specifically earmarked for the Region.  They recommended that the funds for 
projects enroute to Northeast Region should be given priority and sanctioned 
from Railway Budget and not from the funds earmarked  for the Region.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the
 Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
“The investment being done in N.E. Region is being worked out as 
mentioned in reply to para 5.2.  It is mentioned that there are only 2 doubling 
projects in progress between Malda and New Jalpaiguri and the works are be
ing 
executed on priority.  Since the doubling of these leftover sections will add to 
throughput enhancement in the North East Region, it would be appropriate to 
consider the investment as made in North East Region.”
 
 
Economic viability of projects in N.E. 
Region 
 
(Para No. 5.4)
 
 
The Committee found that during the last five years, out of the 16 surveys 
(12 new lines and 4 gauge conversion)  undertaken in the region 10 surveys (8 
new lines and 2 gauge conversion)  have been shelved while 3 surveys (1 new 
lin
e and 2 gauge conversion) have been included in the Budget and 3 surveys 

 
32
 
done for new lines are still under examination.  They were apprised that if an 
expected Internal Rate of return of 14 per cent  is shown by the project during 
economic feasibility stu
dy only then it is considered to be economically viable 
and is included in the budget, otherwise the survey is shelved.  The Committee 
were of the view that because of lack of railway infrastructure, economic and 
industrial development  in Northeast Region
 are not commensurate with the other 
States.   They found that there are some projects which though not financially  
viable but are socially desirable or necessary on account of strategic 
considerations and general development of the Region. 
 
They were of 
the 
opinion that Internal Rate of Return of 14 per cent  is too high for determination of 
economic viability of projects particularly for Northeast Region. Moreover, it is 
also not commensurate with the normal prevailing interest rate on which it is 
based.
   The representatives of the Ministry of Railways as well as  Planning 
Commission during the course of evidence have also admitted that 14 per cent  
Internal Rate of Return  is too high for evaluating the viability of a project.  The 
Committee, therefore,
 recommended that the norms of financial viability for 
projects in Northeast Region should be relaxed since development and 
expansion of rail network in the region is imperative for socio economic 
development apart from strategic relevance.  They also stro
ngly recommended 
that the economic viability of a project should be determined on a more rational 
and realistic basis keeping in view the prevailing interest rate. Therefore, the 
criteria adopted to ascertain the economic viability i.e. Internal Rate of Re
turn of 
projects should be reviewed at the earliest.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“Prior to 1969, financial appraisal of Railway projects was done on the 
conventional system, taking into account a cut 
–
 off return 
of 6% assuming that to 
be the dividend rate.   However, later on, it was considered necessary that the 
productivity from the capital should be improved and one of the ways was to 
undertake new investments only when the return are higher.  It was therefore 

 
33
 
decided to set up a Committee in 1968 which would examine and recommend 
suitable methods of project evaluation and cost benefit analysis to 
supplement/supplant the conventional method of assessment of financial viability 
of projects.  The Committee recomme
nded that the rate of return be so fixed for 
the Railway investment as to leave a surplus, after meeting the dividend liability, 
sufficient to cover Capital formation out of internal resources. The rate of return 
was enhanced to 10% in July, 1969.
 
 
 
Minist
ry of Finance vide their office memorandum dt. 23/8/1984 laid down 
that only those projects with a financial rate of return exceeding 12% should be 
posed to PIB for the consideration in future.  In the background of Ministry of 
Finance’s letter the rate of
 return was further increased to 12%.  Consequent on 
the reduction in budgetary support and limitation on internal generation of 
resources, Railways were required to resort to market borrowing, which was 
done through Indian Railway Finance Corporation and 
the lease charges were at 
the rate of 14.5%.  This led to further increase in ROR from 12% to 14%.
 
 
 
This issue of revision of rate of return has also been deliberated upon by a 
number of high
-
powered Committees.  Their recommendations are summarized 
below
:
-
 
 
5)
 
The Railway Freight and Fare Committee (Dec. 1993) 
recommended vide para no. 8.6.9 of their report that Indian 
Railways might have to earn a minimum of 16% return if it were to 
meet its investment needs. 
 
 
6)
 
Standing Committee on Railways (2001) 
in the n
inth report have 
stated as under “The Committee are of the firm opinion that the 
time has come to stop the blanket liberty presently in practice in the 
Railway Board to distribute the largesse resulting in spreading the 
rare resources thinly.  They are of 
the opinion that those projects 

 
34
 
which are near completion stage/viable must get priority.  The 
projects which are socially desirable be taken up only when 
matching funds are either assured by the States concerned or the 
Central Government.  They strongly r
ecommend that existing 
priority or on
-
going projects be reviewed critically and it must not be 
a mere categorization of projects but realistic enough in terms of 
funding requirement.”
 
 
7)
 
One of the recommendations of 
Railway Safety Review 
Committee, 
1998 bet
ter known as Khanna committee (para 2.3.2) 
which submitted its Report in Feb 2001,s is as following:
 
 
“Financial justification should be the only consideration for 
approving the prioritizing an investment proposal.  Further 
projects which yield a minimum r
eturn of 20 percent, slightly 
more than the prevailing market rate of interest, should 
henceforth be undertaken.”
 
 
8)
 
 
Rakesh Mohan Committee 
in Chapter IV of their Report, have 
observed that Indian Railways are at a crossroads.  All the 
indications are that 
Indian Railways is facing a financial crisis and 
without a strategic change in direction its further as a viable entity is 
dim.  There is a need for a more focused investment programme 
that enhances IR’s productivity and which expands its capacity to 
cope 
with traffic growth projected.  Investment expenditures that do 
not result in additional revenues must be eschewed.  At another 
place in the same Chapter, the Committee has drawn attention to 
the great difficulties IR faces in keeping adequate level of 
inv
estment priorities where attention has been given to 
unremunerative projects.  also projects funded out of internal 
resources need to be selected through a rigorous screening 
process and identified as being of the highest organizational priority 
on which t
he limited internal resources should be invested.  It has 

 
35
 
also been observed by the Committee that “an inherent conflict of 
approach is evident in the promotion of an investment strategy that 
perpetuates resource constraint”.  
 
 
Railways are conscious of t
heir responsibilities towards socio
-
economic 
and industrial development of backward areas not connected by a reliable 
transport network.  Regardless of the benchmark of 14% many projects on Indian 
Railways including works on NE region are sanctioned on soc
io economic and 
developmental considerations.  At present, 6 new line projects and 5 gauge 
conversion projects which are not financially viable are being executed in North 
Eastern region.  Jiribam
-
Imphal road (Tupul), Kumarghat
-
Agartala new line 
projects a
nd Lumding
-
Silchar
-
Jiribam gauge conversion project have recently 
been declared as National Projects.  the cost of Senchoa
-
Silghat gauge 
conversion work is being funded through Ministry of Defence on strategic 
consideration. 
 
 
The prescribed cut
-
off rate o
f return being followed in Indian Railways for 
determining the financial viability of projects constitutes not only the cost of 
capital but also provision for capital formation, risk factors etc.  Besides paying 
dividend to General revenue, the Indian Rail
ways are required to make 
provisions for Depreciation Reserve Fund (DRF), Pension Fund and 
Development Fund (DF).  Since Railways have initiated a plan to cater to the 
modernization, operational improvement and throughput enhancement for 
quantum jump in th
e traffic expected on Indian Railways, it has become 
imperative that adequate surplus is generated to take care of the requirements of 
Development Fund (DF).
 
 
It is also relevant to point out here that only about 50% of the total Plan 
Expenditure of IR, wh
ich is Rs. 15,000 crores in 2005
-
06, gets Budgetary support 
from the Central Govt.  The balance 50% has to be necessarily funded through 
internally generated surplus and other market borrowings.  There is a crying 

 
36
 
need to increase the internal generation o
f resources for financing projects 
(through DRF, DF etc).  Therefore only those projects, which are capable of 
generating high returns, need to be taken up.  To enable selection of such 
projects, it is necessary to keep the cut off percentage of ROR at suf
ficient high 
level and this justifies 14% ROR as cut off percentage for selecting projects for 
investment”.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
 
Rail Link to State Capita
ls in North East Region 
 
(Para No. 5.10)
 
 
The Committee noted that capitals of seven States in North Eastern 
Region are not linked with rail lines at present.  During the course of examination 
they found that surveys for linking the capitals of  Nagaland, 
Mizoram, 
Meghalaya and Sikkim have already been conducted and the survey reports are 
under examination.  The State capitals of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and 
Tripura will however be linked up with rail on completion of the ongoing projects 
in the Region.  
The Committee recommended that as the Railways have given 
priority in their Perspective Plan for connecting of State capitals by rail lines, the 
examination of survey reports  be completed  at the earliest.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the f
inal outcome of these surveys.
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:
-
 
 
 
“The survey for new line from Dimapur to Kohima linking the state capital 
of Nagaland has recently been completed and the report is under examination.  
Th
e surveys for new lines for the State capitals of Mizoram and Meghalaya are in 
progress.  The Committee would be apprised of the final outcome in due course.”
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
 
                            
 
                (BASUDEB ACHARIA)
 
August, 2005     
   . 
 
 
  
 
                                               Chairman, 
 
Sravana, 1926 (Saka)
 
 
 
       Standing Committee on Railways
 
 
 
 