25 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the 13th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2005-06) on ‘Procurement of Wagon’]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 2
 
SCR No. 108 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendation/ 
Observations contained in the 13th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2005-06) on ‘Procurement of Wagon’]  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.11.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.11.2006 
 
     
  
             
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)  
 
 

 3
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
                  P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
Report………………………………………………………………………………   1
            
  
  
Chapter – I   Introductory  
 
Chapter – II Recommendations/Observ ations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
Chapter – III Recommendations/Obse rvations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
 
Chapter – IV Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which requires reiteration. 
 
Chapter – V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
 
 
  
APPENDIX 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Railways held on 31.10.2006 
 
 
(ii) 

 4
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman  
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3 Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Ramdas B. Athawale  
7 Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8 Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
11. Shri Anwar Hussain 
12. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
13. Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  
15. Shri Ananta Nayak 
16. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
17. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
18. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
19. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan  
21. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
28. Shri Isam Singh 
30.       Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
     31. Shri Abani Roy 

 5
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr,(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director  
4. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Sr. Executive Assistant  
 
 

 6
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2006-07), 
having been authorised by the Committee to present on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2006-07), 14 th Lok 
Sabha on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2005-06 14 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement of 
Wagons’. 
 
2. The Thirteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 
24.08.2005.  The action taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 23.12.2005.   
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
31st October, 2006. Minutes of the sitting held on 31st  October, 2006 form Part-II 
of the Report.  
  
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
November, 2006                                   Chairman, 
Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
(v) 

 7
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations an d observations contained in the 13 th 
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2005- 06) on ‘Procurement of 
Wagons’.  The Report was presen ted in Lok Sabha on 24.08.2005 and 
simultaneously laid in the Rajya Sabha.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 7 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have 
been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government – Para Nos. 2(ii), 2(iii), 2(iv), 3, 4 and 6. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies – Para Nos. 1, 
2 ( i ) ,  a n d  7 .         
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration - Para Nos.5.       
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which final replies 
are still awaited  Para Nos. – Nil.     
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations. 
 
Coordination Mechanism 
(Para No. 2 (ii)  
 
4. In this Sub-paragraph the Commi ttee had suggested that the Railways 
s h o u l d  w o r k  w i t h  t h e  M i n i s t r y  o f  H e avy Industry & Public Enterprises while 
finalizing the new orders from distributi on quota for the Public Sector Units and 

 8
review the performance of these Units regu larly.  Both the Ministries must have 
a Coordination Committee at least at the level of Secretary in Department of 
Heavy Industries and Chairman, Railway  Board, to cope up with crisis-
management situations such as supply of  raw materials particularly to see the 
configuration of steel in correct proportions  to these units through regular 
meetings.  An institutionalised and syst emic approach and support should be 
created.  The Railways should also hold regular ‘Buyer Seller’ meet.  
 
5. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
  “The timely supply of steel in matching sets to all wagon builders 
is monitored by Director (Iron and Steel) of this Ministry, who has his 
office in Kolkata. 
 
  Director level Coordination Committee consisting of Directors from 
Ministry of Railways  and Ministry  of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises is being set up.  The Committee may review the supply of 
free supply items to PSUs wagon builders and may also help in allocation 
of wagons. 
 
 The system of one to one discussion with every wagon builder is 
already in vogue to sort out their pr oblems pertaining to wagon orders.  
However, the suggestion of the Commi ttee to hold regular “Buyer Seller” 
meet will be implemented soon.”  
 
6. The Committee find from the Action Taken Reply that the 
Ministry of Railways are in a process to set-up Coordination 
Committee consisting of Directors from Ministry of Railways and 
Heavy Industry and Public Enterprise s to review the supply of ‘free 
supply items’ to Wagon Manufacturing Public Sector Units and also to 
help in allocation of wagon orders.  Similarly. they also find that 

 9
holding of regular ‘buyer-seller’ meet is going to be implemented 
soon.  The Committee desire that th e final action taken on these two 
aspects be placed before them at the earliest. 
 
Freezing of Backlog Orders 
(Para No. 2 (iii) 
 
7. The Committee in this sub-paragrap h while taking note of the sizable 
backlog of orders with Wagon Manu facturing Public Sector Units had 
recommended that an undisputable way ou t to the existing backlog orders with 
these wagon manufacturing units  be expl ored amicably without disturbing the 
extant contract regime and the obligations and it could be suitably done through 
mutual discussions between  the Ministries of the Railways and the Heavy 
Industry and Public Enterprises.  Freezin g of those backlog orders might be one 
of the possible options.   
 
8. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
  “The main reasons that PSUs are not able to complete their 
backlog orders are their inefficiency and financial constraints.  Freezing of 
backlog orders may not be a long term solution unless these PSUs strive 
hard to improve their performance. 
 
  However, recommendation of th e Committee regarding freezing of 
old orders are being examined as a special case.”  
 
9. The Committee had suggested th at freezing of the backlog of 
orders might be one of the possible options as a way out for the Public 
Sector Units to get enhanced new orders.  However, the Committee 
find from the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry of Railways that their 
suggestion regarding freezing of backlog orders are still being 

 10
examined as a special case.  The Comm ittee, therefore, desire that the 
examination be made at the earliest and the final outcome be 
intimated to them. 
 
Association of Wagon Manufacturers in Development of Wagon Design 
(Para No. 2 (iv) 
10. In the above sub-paragraph the Committee had recommended for 
associating wagon manufacturers in the development of new design of wagon 
right from the beginning, so that they are aware and prepared for 
manufacturing wagons of new specifications.    
 
11. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“RDSO, who is the nodal agency for design and development of 
wagons for Railways, will be advi sed to keep the Wagon Industry 
involved with new design developments.” 
 
12. The Committee are constrained to note from the Action Taken 
Reply that the Ministry of Railway s have taken their recommendation 
in a very casual way.  They find th at even after a lapse of almost 13 
months, the Ministry are yet to advi se the RDSO, the nodal agency for 
design and development of wago ns, for associating the wagon 
manufacturers in development of new designs of Wagons.  They, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should advise the RDSO 
immediately in this regard and ac tion taken by the RDSO on their 
advise be placed before them within a period of three months.  
 
Option Clause 
(Para No. 5) 
 
13. The Committee had come across a fa ct that the Railways had an option 
clause in their order that the latter can increase or decrease the quantity of 

 11
order by 30% at the same price.  This clause proves detrimental to the interest 
of the wagon manufacturers in both the ca ses.  In the first case, if the tender 
price of the wagon increases in the su cceeding year, the wagon manufacturers 
may get 30% more orders at the price offered during the preceding year and 
hence it may cause loss to th e manufacturer.  Similarly,  if the tender price for 
the next year go below that of the preceding year, the Railways may cut the 
order by 30%.  Such arbitrary and no t market savvy condition in the order 
should be done away with. These type  of clauses be invariably withdrawn 
without any delay from the order of pla cement for wagons bo th for Private and 
the Public Sector Companies. 
 
14. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“(-) 30% Option clause has al ready been deleted since 2001-2002 
in view of the represen tations received from Wago n Industry.  Thus, at 
present only +30% Option Clause is there in the contract, which is found 
v e r y  u s e f u l  t o  c a t e r  t o  a d d i t i o n a l  d e m a n d  o f  w a g o n s  d u r i n g  c o n t r a c t  
period.” 
 
15. The Committee find from the Action Taken Reply that the (-
) 3 0 %  O p t i o n  C l a u s e  h a s  b e e n  d e l e t e d  b y  t h e  M i n i s t r y  f r o m  t h e  
Contract.  However, the (+)30% Option  Clause is still in vogue.  They 
feel that (+)30% Option Clause is also not in the interest of the 
wagon manufacturers as they are bo und to supply the additional 30% 
orders on the same prices offered during the preceding year and hence 
not market savvy.  The Committee, ther efore, desire that the Railway 
should re-consider withdrawing the (+)30% Option Clause also. 
 
 
 
 

 12
Performance of Wagon Industry 
(Para No. 6) 
16. In the above paragraph the Committee had noted that PSUs 
manufacturing wagons were continuously  under performing for the last three 
years mainly due to coherent problems such as continuous and steep rise in 
steel prices, irregular supply of variou s free items, low e fficiency level, 
inadequate working capital and low morale of workforce.  They also found that 
now the proposed revival package for th ese PSUs includes concrete measures 
such as new remunerative prices taking into account the rise  in cost of steel, 
liberal policy of free supply items vi z. bogie and couple rs and providing 
adequate working capital etc.  The Committee felt that with this revival package 
and coordination the concerned PSUs sh ould be able to execute the orders 
placed with them and enhance their supply percentage as compared to the 
previous years by optimum utilization of their capacity.  They emphasized that in 
addition to the revival measures by th e Government, these PSUs should make 
all out efforts to improve the efficiency and motivate their manpower.  They also 
stressed that wholesome effort should be made by these PSUs with adequacy of 
material and motivated staff to enhance their performance and produce ordered 
number of wagons within the given time frame.  This enhanced performance 
would also justify their demand for enhan ced orders for the next year and lead 
to more capacity utilization. 
  
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Ministry of Railways agrees with  the observations of Hon’ble 
Standing Committee.”  
 
18. The Committee had recommended for wholesome efforts to be 
made by the PSUs manufacturing wa gons with adequacy of material 
and motivated staff to enhance their performance and produce 
ordered number of wagons within the given time frame which would 

 13
also justify their demand for enhanced orders for the next year and 
lead to more capacity utilization.  The Committee find from the Action 
Taken Reply that the Ministry of Railways have not taken any concrete 
action on their observation.  Mere  acceptance of their observation 
would not suffice the purpose for which the Committee had expressed 
their views.  They, therefore, desi re that their observation should be 
brought to the notice of all the Wagon Manufacturing PSUs either 
directly or through the Ministry of Industry (Department of Heavy 
Industry) so that  PSUs may mo tivate their manpower and improve 
their efficiency and execute the orde rs within the given time frame.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.
 
 
 
 

 14
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Coordination Mechanism 
(Para No. 2 (ii)  
 
(ii) The Railways should wo rk with the Ministry of Heavy Industry & Public 
Enterprises while finalizing the new or ders from distribution quota for 
these Units and review the performan ce of these Units regularly.  Both 
the Ministries must have a Coordination Committee at least at the level of 
Secretary in Department of Heavy Industries and Chairman, Railway 
Board,   to cope up with  crisis-management situations such as supply of 
raw materials particularly to see th e configuration of steel in correct 
proportions  to these units through regular meetings.  An institutionalised 
and systemic approach and support should be created.  The Railways 
should also hold regular ‘Buyer Seller’ meet.  
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
  “The timely supply of steel in matching sets to all wagon builders 
is monitored by Director (Iron and Steel) of this Ministry, who has his 
office in Kolkata. 
 
  Director level Coordination Committee consisting of Directors from 
Ministry of Railways  and Ministry  of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises is being set up.  This Committee may review the supply of 
free supply items to PSUs wagon builders and may also help in allocation 
of wagons. 
 

 15
 The system of one to one discussion with every wagon builder is 
already in vogue to sort out their pr oblems pertaining to wagon orders.  
However, the suggestion of Hon’ble Standing Committee to hold regular 
“Buyer Seller” meet will be implemented soon.”  
 
Freezing of Backlog Orders 
(Para No. 2 (iii) 
 
(iii) An undisputable way out to the existing backlog orders with these wagon 
building units in Public Sector be explored amicably without disturbing 
the extant contract regime and the ob ligations and it could be suitably 
done through mutual discussions betw een the Ministries of the Railways 
and the Heavy Industry & Public Ente rprises.  Freezing of those backlog 
orders might be one of the possible options.   
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
 “The main reasons that PSUs are not able to complete their backlog 
orders are their inefficiency and financial constraints.  Freezing of backlog 
orders may not be a long term soluti on unless these PSUs strive hard to 
improve their performance. 
 
  However, recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee 
regarding freezing of old orders are being examined as a special case.”  
 
(Para No. 2 (iv) 
 
(iv) Associating wagon manufacture rs in the development of new 
design of wagon right from the be ginning, so that they are aware 
and prepared for manufacturing wagons of new specifications.    
 

 16
 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“RDSO, who is the nodal agency for design and development of 
wagons for Railways, will be advi sed to keep the Wagon Industry 
involved with new design developments.” 
 
Timely Placement of Orders 
(Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee were given to understa nd during the examination of the 
subject that there is a considerable delay in placement of orders with the wagon 
manufacturing units after finalisation of  bids. According to the Ministry of 
Railways as soon as tender is finalized  wagon orders are released immediately 
between 15-20 days.  However, the Secr etary, Department of Heavy Industry 
while contradicting this informed the Committee that on an average there was a 
gap of minimum 3-4  months between the tender opening and placement of 
orders. The Committee noted that the RS P/05-06, the tender were opened on 
18.2.2005 but orders have not been placed up till now i.e. even after lapse of 5 
months. The Committee deplored this tendency of late finalisation of orders and 
recommended that Railways should take invariably minimum time while placing 
new orders after the opening of the tender and the finalization of L1 rate.  The 
Committee felt that early finalisation of te nder and release of orders should be 
emphasized so that the PSUs are able to accomplish their task of supplying 
wagons as per the orders placed during the same year. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The observation of Standing Commi ttee in this para is based on 
two different statements from Minist ry of Railways  and Ministry of 
Industry regarding time for tender fi nalization.  The time frame given by 

 17
Ministry of Railways was for the time ta ken after finalization of tender to 
release of contract as per the word ing of the Question.  Whereas the 
time frame of 3-4 months quoted by Ministry of Industry is for the time 
taken from tender opening to release of contract. 
 
So far as delay in finalization of tender for 2005-06 is concerned, it 
is informed that wagon manufacturers have quoted abnormally high 
rates.  Though during negotiations pr ices for some type of wagons have 
been reduced by a firm by 15% but ev en then the rates were considered 
on higher side.  besides, this ye ar, 3 new types of wagons are being 
procured for which no last purchase  rates were available.  All these 
factors contributed to delay in finaliz ation of tender.  However, concern 
of the Standing Committee has been noted and all possible efforts would 
be made to ensure that tender case is finalized well in time.”  
    
Supply of Free Items 
(Para No. 4) 
 
 Ensuring of timely availability of free supply items like steel, wheel sets, 
bogies and couplers had been an area of discord between the Railways and the 
wagon manufacturers in the Public Sector.  The latter had submitted that erratic 
and delayed supply of these items by the Railways had resulted in the cost 
escalation of wagons and resultantly the concerned PSUs suffered Liquidated 
Damages.  The Committee desired that   the Railways should ensure adequate 
and regular availability of free supply it ems such as wheel sets, Steel, Couplers 
etc. Further, the liquidity damages should not be imposed on account of failure 
on the wagon manufacturers wherever thes e items are not supplied on time by 
the Railways or by any agency on beha lf of the Railways.  Imposition of 
liquidated damages for delays beyond co ntrol of wagon manufacturers should 
be exempted. 
  

 18
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Supply of free supply items to wagon manufacturers are planned 
based on the projections furnished by respective wagon manufacturers 
for next six months.  After finalization of the contract, supply of ‘free 
supply items’ is closely monitored by Railway Board.  Special Attention is 
paid for timely supply to PSUs. 
 
In case it is found that deliver y of wagons was delayed due to 
non-availability of free supply items, the request of wagon builders for 
waiver of LD is always considered.” 
 
 (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee noted that PSUs manufacturing wagons were 
continuously under performing for the la st three years mainly due to coherent 
problems such as continuous and steep ri se in steel prices, irregular supply of 
various free items, low efficiency level, inadequate working capital and low 
morale of workforce.  Th ey also found that now th e proposed revival package 
for these PSUs includes concrete measur es such as new remunerative prices 
taking into account the rise in cost of steel, liberal policy of free supply items 
viz. bogie and couplers and providing adequate working capital etc.  The 
Committee felt that with this revival package and coordination the concerned 
PSUs should be able to execute the orde rs placed with them and enhance their 
supply percentage as compared to the previous years by optimum utilization of 
their capacity.  They emphasized that in addition to the revival measures by the 
Government, these PSUs should make all out efforts to improve the efficiency 
and motivate their manpower.  They stre ssed that wholesome effort should be 
made by these PSUs with adequacy of material and motivated staff to enhance 
their performance and produce ordered number of wagons within the given time 

 19
frame.  This enhanced performance would also justify their demand for 
enhanced orders for the next year and lead to more capacity utilization. 
  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Ministry of Railways agrees with  the observations of Hon’ble 
Standing Committee.”  

 20
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
A Perspective Plan  
(Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee had noted that the proj ected target of freight traffic for 
the year 2005-06 had been revised from 635 million tonnes to 675 million 
tonnes during the mid term appraisal of  the X Plan keepin g into account the 
buoyancy in general economy  and steady growth in fr eight sector.  With the 
sustainable growth in the general eco nomy over the last few years, the 
requirement of adequate number of wagons had assumed a significant role.  
Though the total number of wagons ha d declined to about 4,40,000 in 2004-05 
from 4,85,000 in the years 1991-92 and  1992-93, the loading of freight by the 
Indian Railways had registered an upsurg e particularly during the years 2001 to 
2005.     
 
 The Committee appreciated the effici ency acquired by the Railways in 
terms of better utilization of their assets and scientific management of their 
freight operations.  However, transparen cy in the availability and equitable 
distribution of wagons had been a prime concern of the Railways and the feeder 
industry.  The Committee were  equally concerned over the state of affairs of 
five wagon manufacturing units in the public sector, which were beleaguered 
with low level of morale  and effici ency, inadequate,  working capital and 
inadequate, untimely and unviable wagon orders from the Railways.  As per the 
Railways the total installed capacity as on date is 35,296 FWUs consisting of 
15661 FWUs in the public sector and 19635 FWUs in the private sector.  The 
Railways also had an in-hou se wagon manufacturing ca pacity of around 2200 
FWUs which is fully utilized.  The off-ta ke of wagons by the Railways had never 
crossed 24000 wagons a year during the last 6-7 years.  The average off take of 

 21
wagons  had hovered around 15000 FWUs per year, which was much below the 
installed capacity of wagon manufacturing units.  The ut ilization capacity of the 
wagon manufacturing public sector units  had touched the lowest figure of 
22.3% in the year 2004-05 due to unrealist ic perspective Plan of the Railways 
particularly while projecting their wagon requirement and delay in placement of 
orders. Considering the current trend of upbeat growth in the industrial and 
services sector, the Committ ee were of the view that  there would be a huge 
requirement of wagons in the years to  come. They, therefore, recommended 
that the Railways must formulate a pers pective plan for th eir requirement of 
wagons on the realistic basis and simultaneously apprise the wagon 
manufacturing industry of the same we ll in advance.  The Committee opined 
that this will go a long way in spikin g the wagon industry to chalk out their 
strategy to meet the projected demand in  time.   They had also stressed that 
while placing orders to PSUs manufacturing wagons,  Railways must avoid sharp 
variation in the  order quantity. 
  
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
 “As the Hon’ble Committee has b een apprised that Rolling Stock 
Procurement is based on the broad ba sed requirement assessed for Five 
Year Plan Period and fine tuned on an nual basis from year to year on the 
basis of trend analysis considerin g future commodity-wise potential, 
condemnation of overaged wagons  and the impact of projected 
operational  efficiencies likely to be achieved in the wagon utilization 
performance as a result of system improvement.  The fleet of the Rolling 
Stock including wagons is being upgr aded with incorporation of modern 
technologies.  Apart from above, th rough maintenance has improved the 
mobility of wagons KMs per wagon day.  It has helped Railway to carry 
additional freight with existing rolling stock.  
 

 22
 Ministry of Railways  have always  considered to utilize the capacity 
of PSUs to the extent possible with in the existing policy framework.  
Though the total installed capacity of PSUs is 15661 FWUs.  But actual 
production was at much lower side, despite the fact they had adequate 
orders.  Thus there is a wide gap between the installed capacity and 
actual production from Public Sector Units. 
 
 Despite poor performance over the years and heavy outstanding 
load, orders for adequate numbers are being placed on these Public 
Sector Units to help them out.” 
 
 
Procurement Policy 
(Para No. 2 (i) 
 
 The Committee found that up till 1993-94, Railways used to place orders 
for wagons directly on member units of  Wagon India Limited without calling for 
tender and prices of wagons were determ ined on the basis of cost analysis. But 
this policy underwent a tremendous ch ange after the year 1993-94 when the 
partial introduction of open tender was introduced.  At present Railways execute 
100% procurement of wagons through open  tender. However, they followed a 
distribution system of tendered quan tity amongst all the established wagon 
manufacturers both in the Public and Private Sector based on their past 
performance with a view to make the di stribution more broad based.  All the  
wagon builders were required to supply  orders at the lowest rate determined 
by the open tender.  The bidder who quot ed the lowest price was provided with 
25% of the quantity of wagon requirement and the remaining 75% were 
distributed in the ratio of 60:40 to the Public Sector Units and Private Sector 
Units respectively.  
 
 The Committee noted that the wagon manufacturing units in the Public 
Sector were facing crisis.  Their share in the new orders for wagons has 

 23
drastically declined to 4057.5 in 2004-05 from 8760 in 2003-04.  These units  
could not go for cost cu tting beyond a certain limit due to their coherent 
limitations such as overhead costs.  As a result their utilization capacity had 
touched the lowest figure of 22.3% in 2004-05 from 40.4% in 2000-01.  In view 
of  the extant criteria of distribution of orders and their incompetitiveness, the 
PSUs, could not get more than 45% of the new orders every year.  Moreover, 
new orders would further go down keepin g into account the sizeable backlog of 
orders pending with these PSUs, which could not be honour ed due to certain 
disputable reasons. Under these circumstances the Committee visualized an 
imminent critical situation where no new orders would be awarded to these 
Units.   
 
The Committee were also  informed that all th e wagon manufacturing 
PSUs were slated for disi nvestments but with the ch ange in disinvestments 
policy of the Government, an attempt wa s being made to revive these public 
sector companies.  In sequel to that, the Board for Reconstr uction of Public 
Sector Enterprises had approved three out of four cases and the same was  
being placed before Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for approval of 
revival package. In this backdrop of  affairs, the Committee were of the 
considered view that a holistic approach was required to deal with the revival 
and viability of these sick units.  They  were of the opinion that the Railways 
cannot formulate their persp ective plan in isolation, and therefore they must 
work in tandem with the Government an d supplement latter’s efforts in this 
sacrosanct cause of revival.  Howeve r, the Committee were  equally concerned 
over the constraints of the Railways partic ularly in the context of maintenance  
of transparency and open bidding system in a contract regime prevailing all 
around.  Nonetheless, they urge upon th e Ministry of Railway s to consider the 
following:- 
Preferential Distribution  
(i) The Committee found that Public Sector Units were solely dependent 
upon the Railways for orde rs. They, therefore, de sire that these PSUs 

 24
should be given a probation period of 4-5 years to get adequate new 
orders at workable price as worked out mutually in  consultation with the 
Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public  Enterprises under the preferential 
distribution quota of 75 %  in ca se they don’t bid or are found 
incompetitive in the tender .  In any case, placemen t of orders should be 
made on workable and reasonable price to avoid unhealthy competition. 
 
 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 “Railways are following a system of distribution of 75% of the quantity 
against the tender amongst all the es tablished wagon building units as 
per their past performance with a view to make the distribution more 
broad based.  Remaining 25% is consid ered for ordering  on competitive 
basis with certain preference to PSUs  as per Government Policy.  By 
following this method of  distribution, all the es tablished wagon building 
units are assured of orders on thei r past performance and at the same 
time it helps Indian Railways to obta in competitive price in the tender.  
With this equitable method of distribution, there are hardly any chance of 
wagon Industry becoming sick unless any particular unit does not keep 
appropriate efficiency in  manufacturing of wagons.  Ministry of Railways 
have always extended full support to  the Wagon Industry specially PSUs 
in their revival process.  As the Ho n’ble Committee is aware that keeping 
in view the hardships being faced by the wagon manufacturing units 
especially PSUs in procurement of bogies and couplers, Ministry of 
Railways  have decided to provide bogies and couplers also as free supply 
items from 2005-06 onwards. 
 
  In regard to price of the wagon,  it may be pointed out that market 
forces ensure that quoted  prices are reasonable unless there is a cartel 

 25
f o r m a t i o n .   S o m e  o f  t h e  P S U s  m a y  f i n d  t h e  e x i s t i n g  p r i c e s  
unremunerative only due to delay and inefficiency on their part.”   
 
(Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee had earlier recomme nded for making Public Sector 
Wagon manufacturing units as its captive units.  The Committee reiterated that 
the Ministry of Railways must examine this proposal for assured supply of 
wagons. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The issue of taking over of Pu blic Sector Wagon manufacturing 
units by Railways was examined by a High level Committee of this 
Ministry and the same was not found feasible.” 

 26
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND 
WHICH REQUIRES REITERATION 
 
  
Option Clause 
(Para No. 5) 
 
 During the course of examinatio n of the subject the Committee came 
across a fact that the Railways have an option clause in th eir order that the 
latter can increase or decrease the quantity  of order by 30% at the same price.  
This clause proves detrimental to the interest of the wagon manufacturers in 
both the cases.  In the first case, if th e tender price of the wagon increases in 
the succeeding year, the wagon manufacturers may get 30%  more orders at 
the price offered during the preceding ye ar and hence it may cause loss to the 
manufacturer.  Similarly, if the tender pr ice for the next year  go below that of 
the preceding year, the Railways may cut the order by 30%.  Such arbitrary and 
not market savvy condition in the order sh ould be done away with. These type 
of clauses be invariably withdrawn without any delay from the order of 
placement for wagons both for Private and the Public Sector Companies. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“(-) 30% Option clause has al ready been deleted since 2001-2002 
in view of the represen tations received from Wago n Industry.  Thus, at 
present only +30% Option Clause is there in the contract, which is found 
v e r y  u s e f u l  t o  c a t e r  t o  a d d i t i o n a l  d e m a n d  o f  w a g o n s  d u r i n g  c o n t r a c t  
period.” 
 
 
  

 27
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
November, 2006                                                        Chairman, 
Agrahayana, 1928 Saka                Standing Committee on Railways 
 

 28
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 st October, 2006 from                 
1100 hours to 1145 hours in Committee Room  ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
  SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal  
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Ramdas B. Athawale 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda   
6. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
7. Ch. Lal Singh 
8. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan  
9. Shri K. Subbarayan 
10. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
12. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi  
13. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
16. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary        
2.      Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3.      Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
 

 29
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed Shri H.D. Devegowda former 
Prime Minister and a Member of the Comm ittee to the sitting  of the Committee 
and expressed confidence that the Committ ee would definitely be benefited by 
his vast experience and contributions. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered  the draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the recomme ndations/observations contained in their            
13th Report (2005-06) on -  ‘Procurement  of Wagons’ and adopted the same 
with minor changes. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Report and 
present the same to the House during Winter Session.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 30
      APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVTIONS CONTAINED IN THE 13 th 
REPORT 2005-06 (14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘PROCUREMENT OF WAGONS’. 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations    07 
 
(i) Recommendations/observation s which have been accepted  
  b y  G o v e r n m e n t             0 4  
(Vide recommendations/observations)  
   
Para Nos. 2(ii), 2(iii), 2(iv), 3, 4 and 6. 
 
 Percentage of total                 5 7 . 1 %  
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observation s which the Committee do not   
Desire to pursue in view of Government replies       02 
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
  Para Nos. 1, 2(i) and 7 
 
Percentage of total               28.6% 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in  respect of which replies of  
 which replies of Government have not been accepted by the      01 
Committee which require reiteration.  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
 P a r a  N o .  5           
 
Percentage of total               14.3% 
     
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
 Government are still awaited.          Nil 
(Vide Recommendations/observations) 
   
Para Nos. Nil. 
 
 P e r c e n t a g e  o f  t o t a l         
   
 
 