           
4 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
PASSENGER AMENITIES  
 
 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
                
   
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Agrahnaya, 1926 (Saka) 

 
 
SCR No. 83 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PASSENGER AMENITIES 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2004 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2004/Agrahanaya, 1926 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
Report………………………………………………………………………………   1       
     
 
Recommendations/Observations………………………………………………… 41        
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2004) 
   
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
   
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5          Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7          Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Under Secretary 
5. Smt Archana Srivastava   - Sr. Executive Assistant  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2004), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2004) on ‘Passenger Amenities’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of t he Ministry of Railways on  
2nd and 17th September, 2004.  
 
3. The Committee considered an d adopted the Report at their sitting held on 7 th 
December, 2004. Minutes of the sittings held on  2 nd September, 17 th September and 7 th 
December, 2004 form Part-II of the Report.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to  the officers of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the information which 
the Committee desired in con nection with the examination of the subject ‘Passenger 
Amenities’ and sharing with them  the issues concerning the subject which came up for 
discussion during evidence. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
December, 2004                                                  Chairman, 
Agrahanaya, 1926 Saka                              Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
A. Introductory 
  
  Indian Railway, one of the largest railway systems in the world under a single management, 
plays a key role in meeting the transport needs of the country.   Being the principal carrier of goods 
and passengers from one part of th e country to another, Indian Rail ways not only performing social 
function but also promoting a national integration.    It is ideally suited for movement of bulk 
commodities and for long distance travel.    Railw ays manage to run 14,761 trains daily including 
about 8,927 passenger trains.  They carry more than a million tonnes of freight traffic and about 1.3 
million passengers daily covering 8018 number of stations.  
 
Categorisation of Passenger Amenities  
2. Railways has a Citizens Charte r in place which pledges to provide bonafide passengers to 
access to the minimum facilities on board as well as off board.   Ever since 1952, when the Railways 
had issued for the first time a guidelines with regard to providing of passenger amenities, two 
categories of amenities were provided to the passengers namely ‘Basic Amenities’ and  ‘Additional 
Amenities’.    Basic Amenities were those which were inescapable and which were necessarily 
required by passengers at any statio n, big or small, at the time of its becoming operational and these 
amenities were Booking arrangements, Waiting Hall, Rail level platform, Be nches, Drinking water, 
Latrines, Lighting   and  Shady trees. 
3. Over and above these basic/minimum amenities, other amenities called as ‘additional 
facilities’ were being provided at various stations as per requiremen t of individual station.   These 
additional amenities were Pucca platforms surface fo r whole or part length, Platforms covers for 
adequate length, Raising of platforms from rail level to low level/high level, Coolers where piped 
water is available, Provision of retiring rooms as  required, Upper class waiting rooms, Bathrooms, 
Enquiry offices and Refreshment rooms. 
4. In pursuance to the recomme ndations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Railways, 
passenger amenities provided at the stations were reviewed by the Railways in the year 1995.   As a 
result of this review, passenger amenities were re defined and excluded the  facilities which were 
operationally required and were an essential feature of the infras tructure of the station. These 
facilities were classified as ‘Infrastructural facilities’ and were as follows:- 
(i) Booking facility 
(ii) Platform 
(iii) Drinking Water 

(iv) Waiting Hall 
(v) Seating  Arrangement 
(vi) Platform Shelter 
(vii) Lighting 
(viii) Fans  
(ix) Urinals  
(x) Latrines 
(xi) Foot Over Bridge (First) 
(xii) Time Table Display 
(xiii) Clock 
 
The amenities and facilities pr ovided over and above such infr astructural facilities were 
covered under ‘Passenger Amenities’.  These included pucca platforms surface, water coolers, 
retiring rooms, upper class waiting rooms, bathrooms, enquiry offices, refreshment rooms and any 
other amenity based on actual requirement. 
 
5. Although in the guidelines issued in 1995, wh ile no amenity was specifically left out, 
however, it did not address the ne eds of passengers in an objective manner as there were three 
deficiencies viz: 
(i) Scale/quantum of amenities to  be provided was not addressed. 
(ii) Halt stations were not dealt with separa tely.  Category ‘E’  included all stations not 
covered in category ‘A’ to ‘D’. 
 
(iii) It was not specified that additional faci lities, as per norms, will be a continuous 
process with growth of passenger traffic. 
 
6. During the oral evidence, while replying to a query of the Committee about the specific   
amenities which were not addressed to objectively by the 1995 guidelines, the Chairman, Railway 
Board stated as under:- 
“The lacuna in the 1995 guidelines was th at it was not related to the number of 
passengers using a particular type of stat ion.  For example, category B and category C 
stations was shown with the same standard of facilities, regardless of number of 
passengers using a station.” 
  
7. To overcome these deficiencies and also to meet the present day passengers expectation for 
visible, qualitative and effective improvements on each and every item of public utility provided at 
the stations, Railways in 1999 reviewed the guidel ines of 1995 and issued a revised guidelines in 
September, 1999 followed by further revision in 2003 by wh ich the facilities at stations have been re-
classified into three categories namely ‘Minimum  Essential Amenities’, ‘Recommended  Amenities’  

and ‘Desirable  Amenities’.  Since then Railways have been following this guidelines while providing 
the amenities at stations and in trains. 
(i) MINIMUM ESSENTIAL AMENITIES – Wh en station is constructed, certain 
minimum  amenities should be provided at each category of station.  These amenities are 
termed as ‘Minimum Essential Amenities’ and are listed in Annexure ‘I’. 
(ii) RECOMMENDED AMENITIES – After the es sential amenities ar e provided at the 
stations, further augmentation as per the norms  will be known as ‘Recommended Amenities.’  
These norms are recommendatory,  Railway sha ll, however, make efforts to provide these 
amenities as per the norms given in Annexure ‘II’ 
(iii) DESIRABLE AMENITIES – Desirable amenities are considered desirable   to 
improve customer satisfaction and interface pro cess at the station.  The quantum of these 
amenities would depend upon the category of station.  A comprehensive list of the desirable 
amenities is given in Annexure ‘III’. 
  
According to the Ministry of Railways the prov ision of desirable amenities need not to wait 
for complete provision of the recommended amenities  and should be provided based on the need and 
relative importance of the station. 
 
Categorisation of Stations 
8. The Indian Railways at present are having 8018 stations under various Zones.  Under the new 
guidelines of 1999 these stations have been categorized into followi ng 6 categories (Categories A to 
F) based on the passenger earnings of the station, for the purpose of providing passenger amenities.    
 
S.No. Category Criteria 
1. A Non-suburban stations with an a nnual passenger earnings of Rs. 6 crore 
and above. 
2. B 1. Non suburban stations with an annual passenger earnings between 
Rs.3 crore to Rs.6 crore. 
2. Stations of tourist importance, or  an important junction station (to 
be decided by G.M). 
3. C All suburban stations 
4. D Non-suburban stations with passeng er earnings between Rs.1 and Rs.3 
crore. 
5. E Non-suburban stations with passenger earnings less than Rs.1 crore. 
6. F Halts 
 

 
The yardsticks/extent to which the amenities were  to be provided was linked to the category 
of station.    The categorization of  stations was to be reviewed afte r every five years.  The number of 
stations in various categories are as below:- 
Category No. of Stations 
A 228 
B 195 
C 501 
D 328 
E 5264 
F 1502 
Total 8018 
 
9. On being asked why halt stations have been ca tegorized separately as category F station when 
there is no difference between treatment of E & F categories of stations, the Chairman, Railway 
Board responded:- 
“If we see the Circular, its basis is the annual passenger earnings because most of the 
halt stations are hardly having 10-12 passengers per day.” 
 
10. Further he added:- 
“There was a lot of demand as to why the ha lt station have remained neglected in the 
guidelines of 1995.  It was felt that we should specify certain minimum level of 
amenities for the halt stations also, and fo r this reason we went in for F category 
station also, i.e. halt stations.” 
  
11.  When it was pointed out that 92 to 93% of th e stations falls in the categories E & F, the 
majority of passengers using thes e stations are deprived of the basic minimum essential amenities 
although they too are valued customers of Railways just as others who use category A,B or C stations 
and thereby categorizing long dist ance passengers and short distan ce passengers,  the Chairman, 
Railway Board stated during the oral evidence:- 
“Out of 8,018 stations, we have 5,264 E category stations and 1,502 F category 
stations.  Perhaps E&F category stations are 90 per cent  of the tota l  stations, but the 
total number of passengers using these two cat egories of stations is not 90 per cent.  
Actually, maximum number of passenge rs are coming from the A category, B 

category and C category stations.  C categor y stations itself includes all suburban 
stations, and 60 per cent of the total daily passengers are only coming from C category 
stations. We are transporting 60 per cent of the total passengers of the Railways every 
day on suburban stations.  It is the reason for us to take into account the annual 
passenger earnings as the guiding factor for  categorisation of stations while going for 
the revision of  1999 Circular….. Whether it is for the short distance passengers or the 
long distance passengers, we do not have any categorization”. 
 
 12.  Further he assured the Committee that:-   
“Even in the Railway Budget we have said  that the Minimum Essential Amenities as 
prescribed in the circular will be provided  by the end of this fi nancial year i.e. by 31 st 
March, 2005. If we have alr eady provided the Minimum Esse ntial Amenities, then we 
should try and go for the Recommended Level of Amenities.  The Desirable 
Amenities which has 23 items like waiting r ooms with bathing facilities, retiring  
rooms, IVRS, NTES, Public Address System  etc. will not be provided in series. 
Depending on the importance of the stations we decide on the stations that would have 
these Desirable Amenities, and we do go in fo r that.  We also make provisions for the 
same in our Budget.” 
 
13. When asked whether the amenities being provided are commensurate with the number of 
passengers, the Chairman, Railway Board stated: 
“All the more the pass engers belonging to the cross-s ection should be satisfied with 
such amenities.  More number of passengers should be satisfied .  We have got as 
many as 90% ‘E’ and ‘F’ category station but the passengers on these stations will be 
less than 10%.  We want to satisfy the pa ssengers, this is the basic thing.  Larger 
section of passengers should get satisfied.” 
 
14. He further added: 
“We laid down the norms for quantum of Minimum Essential Amenities for various 
categories of stations, an algebraic yardstic k for each category of stations that was 
related to average number of passengers during the peak hour etc.  We also envisaged 
in the Circular that every five years – when the number of passengers goes up, 
classification should be revised and perh aps E category station may come into D 
category station, or  D category station may come into B category station – the scale of 
facilities for each category should change automatically.’ 

 
Customer Satisfaction Year 
15. The year 2003-04 was declared by the Railway s as ‘Customer Satisfaction Year’.   The 
Committee desired to know the spec ial attempts made by Railways to improve the conditions in the 
Railways during the year. The Chairman, Railway Board enumerated the steps taken during the 
customer satisfaction year as under:- 
- Introduction of new trains, expansion of  trains, frequency raise in the trains. 
- Concessions to Railway users. 
- Expansion of PRS programme-97% of pa ssenger reservation is fully covered by 
computers. 
- Introduction of Un-reserved Ticketing System(UTS). 
- Extension of refund period from 12 hrs. to 5 days from the time of departure of trains. 
- Tatkal scheme was envisaged. 
- ‘E’ Ticketing and rese rvation through Cell. 
- Introduction of frequent traveller scheme. 
- NTES was expanded and is now working at 145 stations and nearly 56 control points 
are covered under this. 
- Introduced ‘Enquiry’ on website on the Internet. 
- Training of frontline staff-as  may as 46000 people were trained. 
- SLR modifications were make. 
- Deployed Mahila squads in 2 or 3 trains of the type of Surakshini and Tejaswini. 
- Crash worthiness of coaches was look into. 
- Took out two Prayag Raj rakes. 
- Use of tight lock couplers. 
- Mechanised cleaning of coaches at 31 stations. 
- Modular type of toilets envisaged which is very success full in Jan Shatabadi trains. 
- Use Pay and Use toilets at the stations. 
 
16. On being further enquired by the Committee wh ether the views of passengers and customers 
were taken about the impact of customer Satisf action Year on them and how they have been 
benefited by the declaration of satisfaction year.  In reply the Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“Limited way, Zonal Railways have been s eeking the views of the passengers, but not 
in general in view of the cu stomer satisfaction year.  The feed back should have been 
taken from the customers, we will keep it in mind in future.” 

  
17. The Committee found that amenities are provided mainly on the basis of passenger earnings.  
Stations also have been categorized based on the earni ngs.  At halt stations ha rdly one of two trains 
stop there.    Then how can this halt station can have more earnings.  Passengers may even come from 
‘E’ or ‘F’ category of station and they should be  treated as passengers and basic minimum amenities 
should be provided to them also.   On being enquired why Railways have not taken this approach 
while providing the amenities,  the Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“The scale of the Recommended Level of Amenities are related to the average number 
of passengers during the peak hours.  If th e number of passengers is more during the 
peak hours, then the scale of amenities at that given Category of station will be more. 
Secondly, as regards the halt stations, if the trains that are presently running are 
well patronized, then first we try to increase the quota on those trains.  If there is 
further demand, and we also f eel that more trains should have their stoppages there, 
then we have been adding more trains.  It  is a continuous exer cise undertaken by the 
Railways.” 
 
18. Railways have been taking number of steps from time to time to provide  better amenities   
and  to attract more passenger traffic.    A number of steps taken by the Railways in this regard are as 
under:- 
(i) Model Stations 
The year 1999-2000 was declared as ‘Passenge r Year’ by the then Railway Minister.  
Further it was also declared that all efforts would be made to make at least one station of each 
Division as Model Station where higher level of passenger facilities would be provided.  
Consequent upon this, Railway Board initially in the year 1999 selected 61 stations in 
different Zones where the higher level of passengers  facilities were to be provided.  The area 
of upgradation and also implementation plan for these stations were circulated to the Zonal 
Railways. The Ministry of Railways have  informed that as on 01.03.2004 there are 317 
stations under different Zones whic h have been   selected as m odel stations.  A list of these 
model stations and upgraded amenities to be provided at these stations are given in Annexure-
IV & V.  Railways have prepared an action plan  on model station and endeavour is to provide 
upgraded amenities at all the selected model st ations by March, 2008.   So far, 61 stations 
have been provided with these upgraded amenities.  
 

19. With regard to the query of the Committee abou t the criteria adopted fo r selection of  model 
stations, the Chairman, Railway Board stated during the evidence as under:- 
“We go by the importance of the stations regardless whether it is A or B or C Category 
station.  It may be even D Category station.  But if it is important, may be tourist or 
religious point of view or any other reasons , we take it up, although it is not having 
that much of passenger earnings per year as required.  So that is the criteria.” 
  
(ii) Passenger Reservation System 
To improve  the ticket dispensation, 96% of reserved booking have been 
computerised.  As on 15.08.2004, computersied reservation facilities have been provided at 
1086 locations. 
 
(iii) Unreserved Ticketing  System 
Railways have introduced the concept of unr eserved ticketing system (UTS) in Delhi 
area in August, 2002.  The UTS enables the passenger to buy unreserved segment tickets from 
any cluster location 3 days in advance.  Encouraged by the response to the pilot project  of the 
Unreserved Ticketing System in Delhi, the concept is now being extended to all Zonal 
Railways. 
 
(iv) Internet Ticketing System 
Railways have introduced the concept of Internet Ticketing System (ITS) in more than 
100 major cities of the country.   This system en able the passengers to log on to the Internet 
and block his ticket in the convenience of his own home/office.    
  
(v) Training to frontline staff 
Indian Railways have initiated training fo r its frontline staff like Assistant Station 
Master, on board staff viz. catering & Train Ex aminers, TTEs, RPF etc. and those manning 
enquiry, Reservation, Booking, Parcel Office, Telephone Enquiry, ‘May I Help You’ counters 
for improving their interpersonal skills and to e quip them for dealing with the rail customers 
in a better manner.  The programme aims at in culcating value system among them which help 
to increase performance level of employees by sensitizing them to the needs of the customers, 
thereby solving their problems more effectively and in a positive manner. 
 
20. The status of availability of important Passenger Amenities in Indian Railways have been 
discussed in subsequent chapters. 

CHAPTER – II 
 
FUNDING OF PASSENGER AMENITIES 
 
21. Passenger amenities are part of the Devel opment Fund and through Development Fund works 
like passenger amenities, staff amenities, traffic faci lity works, operational efficiency works etc. are 
funded.  The appropriation to the Development Fund is  made through internal generation component.   
As such the Head ‘Passenger Amenity’ is not s upported by budgetary support i.e. capital outlay.  
However, certain things like UTS which though comes under computerization plan-head, is a 
passenger amenities, but is not charged to the Head passe nger amenity.    It is partly financed by the 
budgetary support.  
 
22. As a percentage of the internal generation component, passenger amenities  is given its due 
share.  It was only 2.2 per cent in the year 1995-96 and in the last year th e share was 7.5 percent an 
increase of almost three times as percentage of  the internal generation component.    
 
23.  The Ministry of Railways has proposed for the X Five Year Plan a tentative allocation of Rs. 
650 crore for passenger amenities as against a to tal plan size of Rs.49100 crore (without Special 
Railway Safety Fund).   Though amenity-wise financial targets  are not prepared by the Railways, the 
requirements at different places depends on the tra ffic pattern and accordingly the selection of works 
is done considering total requirement of works on All-India basis vis-à-vis funds available during the 
year.   
 
Fund allocation to Zonal Railways 
24. Funds for the passenger amenities are allocate d to the Zonal Railways by Railway Board at 
the Budget formulation stage.  
 
25. When asked about the procedure being adopted  in allocating the amount Railway-wise, the 
Ministry of Railway informed that funds are allotte d Railway-wise out of the total funds that become 
available for passenger amenities based on the require ment projected by the Railways in the works 
programme for work-in-progress and new-works as also relative priority of such works on an over all 
basis. 
 
 26. About the ceiling fixed internally by the Railway  Board for final allotment of funds to the 
Zonal Railways under the plan head ‘Passenger Amen ities’ and ‘Other Railway users amenities’, the 
Ministry informed that funds are allocated to various plan heads depending on the total fund available 
under each source, the relative priorities and the cap acity of the Railways to  progress with various 

works.  Railway Board holds an annual exercise of conducting works programme meetings in which 
various ongoing works on the Railway s are scrutinized and new works/ projects, which the Railways  
propose for inclusion in the next year’s budget, are deliberated upon, with reference to the total 
availability of funds and the th rowforward of the ongoing works in hand.  Based on the outcome of 
these meetings, the prioritisation of the ongoing works and the desirability of including new works 
for the next year are decided.  At the time of Budge t preparation, funds are al lotted keeping this in 
mind.  During the course of the year , if the need arises, the plan expenditure is  regulated so as to 
remain within the overall resource availability. 
 
27. While deliberating upon the allocation of Funds  to Zonal Railways, the Chairman, Railway 
Board informed:- 
“we have got the Standing Committee for Passenge r Amenities at the Railway Board and the 
Standing Committee  for the Passenger Amenities which is headed by the Additional General 
Manager and supported by the Principal HOD from electrical, mechanical, civil, engineering, 
commercial and operating departme nts.  The Railways have interactions with the Zonal 
railway user Consultative Committees and with the Parliamentary Committees.  Similarly, the 
Divisions also send the proposal to Zones by in teracting with the Divisional Railways user 
Consultative Committees and the public representatives.  We have various tiers of inspections 
by the Zonal General Manager downward.  So, the passenger amenities  are also one of those 
plan heads which are scrutinised by the Standing Passengers Amenities  Committee of the 
Zonal Railway.  Then they send the proposal to the Railway Board.  In the Railway Board, the 
Standing Committee for the Passenger Amenities scrutinises that.  In addition, we have got 
the additional members’ Committee. Additional members scrutinise these proposals and  their 
justification vis-à-vis, which work should be sanctioned.  Then, we at the full Board meeting 
discuss the various programmes  in which we clear various works under various plan heads 
and there is a separate meeting also as to how much funds should be allocated….. so far as the 
allocation of funds is concerne d, the concerned Board Members, in consultation with the FC 
allocates the funds plan-head wise to all the Railways.” 
 
28. On the query of the Committee about the time taken in approving the projects the Chairman 
Railway Board responded: 
“As far as works above Rs.5 crore and below Rs.5 crore are concerned, we have got the 
different time calendar.  We have never found any delay in such cases because the calendar is 
laid down.  After getting the proposal from th e Railways.  We discuss it in a time bound 
manner in the Railway Board excepting in some out of turn proposal.” 

 
29. On being asked how do Railways ensure that the amount allocated under the Head ‘Passenger 
Amenities’ is being actually spent only on the items included in this Head, the Ministry of Railways 
replied that this is ensured by not allowing any re-appropriation fr om the Plan head  “Passenger 
Amenities” to other Plan heads wi thout prior approval of Railway Bo ard and such an approval is 
normally not given. 
 
30. Regarding the re-appropriation of funds from one category to another category,  the Ministry 
of Railways informed that the Railway Board has the powers to re-appropriate from one plan head to 
another within the same source.  Depending on the overall availability of funds, progress of 
expenditure in each Railway and the requirement of  funds for progressing some identified important 
works, the funds can be redistributed in the budgetary review stages in the course of the year. 
 
Utilisation vis-à-vis allocation of  Funds of Passenger Amenities 
31. The details of funds allott ed and actual expenditure on wo rks of “Passenger Amenities” 
during last 10 years is tabulated below:- 
Budget Allotment, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure on Passenger Amenities 
                 (Figures in crore of Rs.) 
Period Budget Allotment Revised Estimates Annual Actual Expenditure 
1993-94 60 63.49 67.84 
1994-95 60 67.26 73.63 
1995-96 90 90.68 87.98 
1996-97 120 103.59 87.96 
1997-98 80 80.47 89.35 
1998-99 100 89.99 90.61 
1999-00 130 132.16 115.25 
2000-01 190* 143.56 136.50 
2001-02 190* 169.01 168.87 
2002-03 200 200.1 175.11  
2003-04 205 215            180.89(Prov.) 
       
* excludes Rs.10.00 crore as allotment under BOLT 
 
32. As regards the non utilisation of funds allocated, the Chairman, Railway Board during the oral 
evidence stated:-  
“We have not been  able to utilise the funds fully.  If we take the figures right from  
1994-95, the amount spent has been progressively increasing but we have not been able to 
spend fully the budget allo cations by the end of the year.  The basic reason for this is we do 
plan for the whatever amount is allocated in the budget.  Howeve r, if a mishap occurs during 

the year, the plan gets stalled….. Very recently we  have taken a decision that we will plan for 
15 to 20 per cent more works than what is budgeted and still we will keep the responsibility  
on our Zonal Railways for the financial manageme nt so that they should review every month. 
At times they are not able to give platform line for construction of washable apron or for 
extension of the platform or construction of so me foot over bridge.  Be cause of this we are 
planning that 15% to 20% more each Railway will plan for the Passenger Amenities.  They 
are not able to grant blocks for that. By this , we would be able to spend each penny of it.  
Nonetheless, right from 1994-95, our expenditure has been progressively increasing in this 
case. I am very sure that there should not be any occasion to surrender any fund any more.” 
  
33. The Ministry further in a writte n reply have informed that the funds could not be fully utilized 
in some years for various reasons, such as slow pr ogress of works due to contractual problems, delay 
in finalisation of plans and esti mates, difficulty in executing work  under traffic conditions and, 
sometimes due to regulation on Plan expenditure im posed in the course of the year on account of 
lesser generation of internal resources. 
  

 
CHAPTER – III 
RESERVATION SYSTEM 
 
Reservation Procedure 
34. Reservation of accommodation in the Indian Railways is done upto 90 days in advance 
through the computersied reservation facility which have been provided at 1086 locations all over the 
country.   
 
35. The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that a pilot project had been initiated in 
Delhi regarding booking through SMS on mobiles.   They  further informed that this facility is being 
extended to other States as well such as Andhra Pradesh. 
 
Internet  Ticketing System (ITS) 
36. Railways have introduced the Internet Ticketing System (ITS) in 2001-2002 in more than 100 
major cities.  This system enables the passenger to log on to the internet and book his ticket in the 
convenience of his own home/office.   The tickets are paid for thr ough the credit ca rd system and 
home delivered by courier in any of the covered cities resulting in de-conge stion of th e existing 
reservation counters.   In New Delhi tickets can also be collected from one of the nominated counters.   
37. The Chairman, Railway Board during the oral evidence submitted: 
“This system that we started two and half years ago has become quite popular.  We 
started with hardly 11 passengers.  Now, we are having 3,500 passengers everyday on 
this.  These are available in cities like Hyde rabad, Mumbai, Chennai, Delhi etc. at 120 
locations precisely as on date.  Whosoeve r has done the reservation on the internet, 
then the ticket of that location is sent by the courier.    
There is a popular demand that we should extend the time period of the 
internet.  First it was 0800 hours to 2000 hours.  Then it was made 2200 hours.  Now, 
the proposal is to have it from 0400 hours to 2300 hours.  This proposal is under the 
active consideration of the Ministry.  Its popularity is growing from year to year.” 
 
Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) 
38. In order to facilitate issue of unreserved tickets, Railways ha ve introduced  a project of 
computerised unreserved ticketing system (UTS ) in Delhi area in A ugust, 2002 enabling the 
passengers to buy unreserved segment tickets from any cluster location 3 days in advance.   UTS also 
provides improved accountal of unr eserved segment.  Passenger need  not necessarily buy the tickets 

from the station where the journey is to commence.  This project aims to give flexibility to the 
passengers for buying tickets on a convenient date and time which will reduce the queue lengths at 
the train originating stations  where normally ther e is heavy rush for the unreserved tickets before 
train departure.  The system is planned to be extended to all the zones in a phased manner.    
 
39. During the oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board stated: 
“We have already provided this service at 74 stations and we are adding 200 more 
stations under this UTS Scheme during 2004-05.  Our scheme is that in the next five to 
six year UTS should cover the entire stations.” 
 
40. In UTS central server is used unlike SPTM whic h was having a stand alone server.  As all the 
transaction that are being done at  the UTS point get registered in  the central server also, the 
manipulation in the data can not be done by the booking clerks.  Therefore, no frauds can be done 
with this improved system. 
 
Self Printing Ticket Machines (SPTM) 
41. At present there are about 1621 Self Printing Ticket Machin es (SPTM) installed at 353 
stations of Indian Railways.  The use of Self -Printing Ticketing Machines (SPTMs) has been 
extended for speedy issue of unreserved tickets and have proved very useful in reducing the queue 
lengths at major stations with highe r passenger traffic.  This has also  resulted in better satisfaction to 
the travelling public due to speedier dispensation of tickets.  SPTM have been provided for better 
productivity with universalisation of counters, user  friendly and enhanced accountal system and to 
avoid hassle of indenting, printing, supply, issue a nd accountal as required for the conventional card 
tickets. 
 
42.  When asked whether any fraudulent practices ha ve been found after installation of SPTM and 
the remedial measures taken in this regard, the Ministry of Railways in their written replies stated that  
some cases of  fraud were dete cted.  The modus-operandi in the fraud involved printing of a high 
value ticket on the ticket stationery and accountal fo r a low value ticket by manipulating the printing 
process.  The measures taken in this regard is  that  Railways have introduced the Computerised 
Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) which enables central server arrangement. Moreover additional 
security features have been built in the UTS.  Procurement of normal SPTMs has been suspended. 

43. On being asked what will happened to the existing SPTM,  the Chairman, Railway Board 
stated that existing SPTM are continuing but will be replaced with UTS gradually. 
 
Tatkal Scheme 
44.  Regarding the arrangements provided for inst ant reservation to travel lers requiring high-tech 
treatment in the high-tech health care Centres/Ho spitals in metropolitan cities, the Ministry of 
Railways intimated that the passengers who have to  travel at short notice due to any exigency can 
avail reservation under Tatkal Scheme. 
 
45.  During the oral evidence, the Chairma n, Railway Board apprised the Committee:  
‘Tatkal’ scheme was envisaged last year, but it is getting a final shape this year. The 
Tatkal scheme was confined to 110 Mail/Exp ress trains all over Indian Railways and 
in only nominated classes so far.  We are tr ying to reach it to 100 per cent trains.  All 
the trains will be fu lly covered by the 14 th November this year.  The software is ready 
and we will be implementing it.”  
 
46. Some of the main modifications in the revised Tatkal Scheme (August 2004) are as follows:- 
 
(i) Provision of I/Card has been deleted on an  experimental basis for six months after 
which this will be reviewed.  Zonal Railways are to send the feedback in this regard 
three months after implementation of this scheme. 
(ii) Tatkal charges have been revised as under:- 
Existing Proposed Classes 
 Non-Peak 
(15 July to 15 Sept.) 
Peak 
2AC 200 200 300 
3AC 150 75 300 
Air Conditioned 
Chair Car 
50 75 150 
SL 50 75 150 
 
 Zonal Railways are to take necessary action fo r working out Tatkal quota in each train in 
Sleeper, 3AC, 2AC and Chair Car classes for the trains originating on their railway and take 
necessary action for defining them as Tatkal quota.   
   

 
  The revised scheme will be implemented in all the PRS trains w.e.f. 14 th November, 2004 i.e. 
the booking of Tatkal accommodation in all the PRS trains in 4 defined classes as above will 
commence from 14/11/2004 for journey commencing on 15/11/2004 at the originating point & so on. 
 
‘E’ Ticketing and Reservation through Cell 
47. The Chairman Railway Board apprised the Committee during the course of evidence that   ‘e-
ticketing’ and reservation through cell are other things  that have been conceived.   These are being 
implemented in Delhi on a pilot basis very soon.  Railways are also introducing ‘fre quent traveller 
scheme’ and are giving a final shape to it this year.”   
 
Booking Counters 
48.  In response to the Committees’ observation that at many stations booking windows are 
provided only at one side of the station causing inconvenience  to the passengers.  At times leading to 
mishappenings  and accidents apart from evading buying ticket in the pro cess leading to revenue 
loss/leakage for the Railway, the Ministry stated that generally bookings windows are provided only  
at one side of the station from where most of the passengers and users come to  the Railway Station.  
Additional booking windows are also provided on the other side of those stations where there is 
increase in the population and a large number of passengers come to the station on that side. 
 
Monitoring of Reservation Counters  
49.  The functioning of the reservation counters is monitored on  regular basis and all efforts are 
taken to ensure proper dispensation of reserved tickets. However,  during peak rush periods, like 
summer rush, pooja rush etc. when the demand goes hi gh, additional steps are taken to facilitate the 
passengers in getting the reserved tickets easily.  Some of the steps taken during by the Railways the 
rush periods are as under:- 
(i) Additional reservation counters are opened, wherever feasible, to clear extra rush. 
(ii) Staff is posted at the reservation counters during speci al drives who countersign the 
requisition forms. 
(iii) Flying Squads of Commer cial Officers and the ticket checking staff are formed to 
organise special surprise checks to curb the activities of unsocial elements.  Joint 
check are also organised with vigilance and police personnel. 
 

 
Touts and Ticketless Travel 
50. Touting occurs due to gap between demand and supply of tickets.  Touts operation in 
reservation sites as well as on Railway stations are rampant. As ked about the measures taken or 
proposed to be taken to check the touts involved in  selling the Railway tickets, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated that constant efforts are made by the Railways  to match the demand and supply 
and for this purpose more trains have been pla nned and additional coaches have been attached.  
During summer-2004, 1769 summer specials were run on 49 routs.  Regular and surprise checks are 
conducted by Commercial and Vigila nce Departments in and around reservation offices.  Special 
drives are also launched at impor tant stations associating local ra ilway police.  During peak rush 
periods, staff are posted outside th e reservation counters to countersi gn the requisition forms before 
these are submitted to reservation clerk.  Senior railw ay officers have also been instructed to ensure 
that all reservation coun ters are properly manned.  Action is  taken against the touts as per the 
Railway Act where they are fined and in some cases jailed also.  During the years 2002-03 and 2003-
04, the number of checks conducted against touts and the number of touts prosecuted is as under:- 
 
 2002-03 2003-04 
No. of checks conducted 43422 46898 
No. of touts prosecuted 4535 2450 
 
 
51. On being asked about the connivance of touts with the Railway officials at the Reservation 
office, the Ministry replied that it   is very difficult to establish c ognizable connivance in this regard.  
However, regular preventive and surprise checks are conducted by commercial and vigilance 
Departments of Railways and RPF. 
 
52. With regard to the Committees query about tr ansfer of staff from the sensitive posts, the 
Chairman, Railway Board apprised the Committee:- 
“It has been our instructions that a pers on should not hold a sensitive post for more 
than four years and his transfer should take place on rotational basis.” 
 
53.  There is a vigilance organisati on at the Zonal level and also at Board level to check corruption 
in the mass contact area which br oadly includes ticket booking an d reservation and also ticket 
checking in trains.  On detection of the involvement of staff, penalties commensurate with the 
irregularities detected are imposed under the rele vant provisions of the Railw ay Act.   Railway wise 

checks conducted in mass contact area including re servation and the action taken against the staff 
found at fault during the year 2003 is as under:-  
Railways No. of Checks done No. of staff taken up 
Central 2361 417 
Eastern 1711 401 
Northern 1966 834 
North Eastern 1283 346 
Northeast Frontier 1543 133 
Southern 2832 394 
South Central 745 384 
South Eastern 465 304 
Western 1921 618 
East Central 397 124 
North Western 287 77 
Railway Board 1999 1159 
Total 17510 5119 
 
54. While deliberating upon the number of  TTEs being deployed to inspect one train and the 
number of TTEs inspecting each coach, the Ministry stated that the total numb er of Ticket Checking 
Staff deployed on a train depends upon the composition of the train as there are laid down norms for 
manning the reserved coaches as under: 
 
Shatabdi Express trains: 
In the first leg of journey, one Conductor for three Upper Class Coaches. 
 One TTE for each Sleeper/3AC/Chair Ca r coach in non-vestibuled trains. 
 One TTE for two Sleeper/3AC/Chair Car coaches in vestibuled trains. 
For subsequent legs of journey, One Conductor for five coaches, on e Travelling Ticket 
Examiner for three Sleeper/3AC/Chair Car Coaches. 
 
55. In Rajdhani/A.K. Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express Trains, one Train Superintendent and two to 
three Ticket Checking  Staff man these trains for the entire run of the train.  
 
 

No. of Tickets issued  vis-à-vis Availability of Ticket  
56  In the case of general compartments sanctions more number of tickets are issued than the 
availability of seats, which leads to occupation of space available in front of the doors/toilets/passage  
which causes a lot of inconvenience to other passengers the Ministry of Railways informed that  as 
per Section 50(1) of the Railway Act, “Any person desirous of trav eling on Railway shall, upon 
payment of the fare, be s upplied with a ticket……”.  In compliance with this  section, unreserved 
tickets are issued to all those passengers who ask for the same.  These tickets are valid for a particular 
date and are not train sp ecific.  In order to alleviate the problems of unreserved passengers, the 
number of unreserved coaches have been increase d in the new trains.  Moreover, fully unreserved 
trains have also been introduced for general sec ond class passengers.  In addition, regular checks are 
also being carried out against unreserved passengers occupying the reserved coaches. 
  
57.  On being enquired about the measure/steps taken by the Railways to prevent non-reserved 
passengers from forcibly occupying the seats of l ong distance second class sleeper coach passengers 
thereby causing inconvenience to th e genuine Railway passengers duri ng the day time,  the Ministry 
of Railways informed that there have been some instances of unauthorised travel mostly by short-
distance/local passengers.  In or der to prevent this type of i rregular travel, regular checks are 
conducted by Commercial and Vigilance Departments associating both Railway Protection Force and 
Government Railway Police Force.  The number of  persons apprehended and amount realised from 
them for irregular or ticketless travel for last two years  is as under:- 
 
 2002-03 2003-04 
No. of checks conducted (in lakhs) 12.07 12.17 
No. of persons apprehended (in lakhs) 148.05 154.61 
Amount of fare and penalty realized 
(Rs. in crore) 
192.07 205.54 
 
58. Another step taken to further discourage unaut horised travelling in the reserved coaches for 
ticketless/irregular travel has b een enhancement of minimum penalty from Rs.50/- to Rs.250/- with 
effect from 01.07.2004. 

CHAPTER – IV 
TRAIN ENQUIRY AND PASSENGERS INFORMATION SYSTEM 
 
59. Public Address System, Electronic Train Display Board, Auto answering system, Interactive 
Voice Response System (IVRS), National Train Enquiry System (NTES) are being used by Railways 
to provide information to the passengers about train running.  The staff manning the enquiry counters 
get details about train running from  control office or Central Enquiry  and about platform information 
from operating staff on duty before making any announcement.  These announcements which are 
based on estimation of late running of trains are generally correct except when train make-up or lose 
time on run due to various factors.   The announcements made at the station are regularly  monitored 
by Station Manager as well as by railway officers and supervisors.   
 
60. The Committee were informed during the course of evidence that out of the total number of 
complaints received, 9 per cent complaints were about the improper behaviour of  staff and 7 per cent 
were regarding enquiry that comes at fourth and fi fth place respectively.  When asked about the steps 
taken by Railways to minimize the dissatisfaction of  the general public and the action taken against 
the staff found delinquent or otherwise negligent in  responding to the enquiri es made by the public, 
the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated that enquiry complaints ge nerally relate to phones 
not being picked up or put off receiver, giving in correct information, rude behaviour on phone etc.  
There is, therefore, a need to minimize the human  element in the enquiry systems by automising the 
same.  Railways have initiated a 2 pronged action to improve the e nquiry system by minimizing the 
human interface through installing high capacity integrated computerized enquiry systems, and also 
by planning other means of non telephone based e nquiry systems, e.g. enquiry through railway’s 
websites on internet, SMS on mobile phone, radio & TV channels, etc. in order to off-load the 
telephone enquiries  
 
  Staff manning the enquiry system who do not perform their duties pr operly are counseled 
appropriately and training is also given to the staff found deficient in the working knowledge.   
 
61. During the oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board stated: 
 
“We are making effort for providing more a nd more computerised information at the 
enquiry counter.  Along with it we, are also making efforts to provide information 
through internet.  In the same way we ar e also making provision for railway enquiry 
by SMS in Mobiles.  We are also making ef forts to provide information through TV 
and AIR.  We have taken steps to increase the channels.” 

62.  Further he informed:-  
“Our persons who are manning the enquiry b ooths are not very happy that is why 
Customer Care Institute is required to give  them proper training so that they behave 
properly.  
    Training of the frontline  staff is another area in Customer Care Institute.  By 
now, we have trained about 46,000 people because there have been complaints even 
now about the improper behaviour of our staff.  We are trying to sensitise them in this 
field.” 
 
63. In reply to a query about the number of stations where Passenger Information System is in 
existence and how is it ensured that the announ cement through this system is comprehensive, 
accurate, timely and audible to the commuters, the Ministry informed that communications with 
passengers is considered to be a very important area.  Following means are considered for providing 
better information to the passenger:- 
(a) Computerised announcement system at stati ons.  These have been provided at all ’A’ 
class stations and are being extended. 
(b) Display boards at large number of stati ons – dynamic as well as static have been 
provided. 
(c) Standarised signages have been pr ovided at all ‘A’ class stations. 
(d) Information through Indian Railw ay websites like www.indianrail.gov.in, 
www.trainequiry.com  &  www.irctc.co.in and through Interactive Voice Response 
System is also given to the passengers. 
 
64. With the computerisation of announcement system there has been a qualitative improvement 
in the Passenger Information System.  Now updated pos ition to all the sub systems is being provided  
through an all India backbone of National Train Enquiry System which is working at 145 stations and 
nearly 56 control points ar e covered under this.  It has been made  available to all the control offices 
where updated position is fed into the computer system. 

 
SIGN BOARDS 
65. In Indian Railway Works Manual there is a deta iled guidelines for provision of Station Boards 
of suitable design and size.  Often these sign Boards are either missing or are wrongly spelt and 
inappropriately placed on many a stations.  The Committee enquired as to who monitors these 
facilities.   In reply Ministry stated that the availability of sign Boards at a ppropriate locations etc. is 
ensured during the inspections conducted by the officers/supervisors. 
 
66. With regard to the query about displaying of  signboard at stations stating the category of 
stations and the facilities available on the station, the Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
  “We take note of if.” 

 
CHAPTER – V 
 
CLEANLINESS AND WATER AVAILABILITY  
 
A. Cleanliness in Train and Stations  
 
67. Cleanliness is Railways thrust area in this curr ent financial year as declared by Minister of 
Railways. Cleanliness and hygiene are the high priority items that are monitored through an elaborate 
system over Zonal Railways 
 
Cleanliness in Trains 
 
68. The Indian Railways system covers over 8018 st ations and carries over 13 million passengers 
daily.  The clintele is varied in view of the soci al background/culture.  Railway users stretch over a 
wide spectrum from extremely sensitive traveller to those who have a lesser sense of cleanliness  
 
69. Asked about the initiative taken by the Railways to ensure cleanliness, the Ministry informed 
that a number of initiatives have been taken in th is regard which include introduction of mechanized 
cleaning processes at major railway stations by private professional agencies, mechanised cleaning in 
running trains, supply of special uniforms and protec tive gear to staff engage d in cleaning activities, 
undertaking publicity campaigns and education of travelling public besides planning for modification 
of coaches by providing toilets of improved design as well as toilets with controlled discharge facility 
which open up when the train is in motion and therefore the station areas does not get dirty.  Besides, 
cleanliness is checked at different levels starting fr om the supervisors in char ge at the stations to 
officers of different departments lo cated at the station, Division or Headquarters.  Also it has been 
decided to give special attention to and focus on ‘pay & use’ toilets.   
 
70. In order to further enhance th e standard of cleani ng of toilets, a new scheme ‘Clean Train 
Stations’ has been developed in which mechanized cleaning facilities will be provided at selected 
stations enroute on the entire system to ensure e ffective cleaning of coaches toilets during day time.  
This scheme will cover most of the long distance trai ns and all reserved coach including sleeper class 
coaches. 
  

 
71. Pilot project of mechanized cleaning has been  implemented at Ratlam, Western Railway since 
August, 2003.  This scheme shall be extended to othe r stations also.  Modular  toilets with improved 
aesthetics and cleanability have b een provided on some coaches of Jan Shatabdi Expre ss trains.  All 
new AC coaches (except First AC), all coache s with Centre Buffer Co uplers (CBCs), and 280 non 
CBC Sleeper coaches (GSCNs) being manufactured at ICF and RCF in the year 2004-05 will also be 
provided modular toilets. 
 
72. During oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board informed:- 
“In 31 stations, mechanized cleaning is going on.  The ‘Ratlam’ type of experiment 
has been very successful.  Under this model, when the train stops at a station for 15 to 
18 minutes, each toilet in the train is clean ed thoroughly.  We will be expanding it this 
year.  Our aim is to take ‘Ratlam, type of mechanized cleaning of all coaches to 
another 15 stations.  During 2003-04, we had en visaged modular type of toilets.  Most 
of the Jan Shatabdi and LHB type coaches ha ve been fitted with modular toilets as 
well as discharge control toilets i.e. wherev er the speed is less than 30 kmph, that is, 
while approaching or standing at a station, it should not discharge excreta.  This 
concept is being extended to other trains also”. 
  
73. Further he added:- 
“These control discharge type and modular ty pe toilets have been very successful.  
Most of the new type of coaches we pick ed up last year are easily cleanable and 
maintenance effort is less.  It maintains good hygiene.  Besides this, we have gone for 
mechanized cleaning and ‘pay and use’ toilets at the stations. That is well held and we 
are expanding very fast.     Mechanized cleaning has been now in use at Hazrat 
Nizamuddin for nearly one year and at Ne w Delhi and Delhi stations it started 
recently.  In most stations we have given im plements to our ‘safaiwalas’.  They have 
been well trained in that activity.  They ha ve been given the attire because of which 
they have developed a sense of pride while working there. There are problems because 
of the limited strength of the ‘safaiwalas’ but  we have tried to take care of that.  We 
provide the implements from the outside so that their productivity goes up.  We 
provide all proper mechanical implements.  We  have seen that the productivity of the 
‘safaiwalas’ with mechanized cleaning goe s ten times higher than when they use 
ordinary brooms, implements and manual methods”.       

    
74. Regarding fixing of accountability on the de linquent employees for not performing their 
duties, the Ministry intimated that the staff found lacking in performing of cleaning duties are 
counselled and taken up as well.  The effort is as much to motivate the staff as on taking punitive 
action.   
 
75. The Ministry of Railways in their written rep lies stated that there are 186 train maintenance 
depots on IR and high pressure pi peline systems are planned to be installed at pit lines of these 
Depots in a phased manner subject to availability of resources.  However, high pressure jet cleaning 
arrangements for cleaning trains enroute are available at 188 stations on IR. 
 
Improvements in cleanliness in trains 
76. Giving details about long term and short term measures taken for improvements in cleanliness 
in trains, the Ministry in their written replies have stated as follows:- 
 
Improvements in cleanliness of trains 
 
S.No. Action taken/planned Time Frame 
1. Use of High-pressure jet cleaning machines on about 200 station to clean 
coach toilets enroute. 
Implemented 
2. Monthly intensive cleaning of each passenger carrying coach. Implemented 
3. Deployment of travelling safaiwals on 71 important long distance trains. Implemeted 
4. Pest control on coaches through specialised agencies. Short term 
5. Renovation of rakes at depots Short term 
6. In order to bring about a quantum jump in Enroute cleaning of trains, a new 
scheme ‘Clean Train Stations” has been  developed in which mechanized 
cleaning facilities will be provided at selected stations enroute on the entire 
system to ensure effective cleaning of coach toilets and coaches during 
morning and evening hours.  This scheme will cover most of the long 
distance trains and all reserved coaches including sleeper class coaches. 
      Pilot project has been implemented at Ratlam station of WR since 
August, 2003.  This scheme shall be extended to other stations also. 
15 stations to be 
covered in short 
term and the 
scheme to be 
extended to 35 
more stations in 
long term. 
7. Installation of high pressure jet pipe lines at all pit lines. Long term 
8. Provision of modular toilets on new coaches of all reserved coaches. Already 
introduced  in 
Jan Shatabdis.  
All AC coaches 
are now being 
fitting with 
modular toilets. 
9. Installation of automatic train washing systems at large depots Long term 
 
 A list of existing and planned clean train stations on Indian Railw ay, Zone-wise is enclosed  at 
Annexure-VI. 
 

 
Cleanliness at Stations 
77. At stations, day-to-day cleanliness, functi oning of booking windows, reservation system, 
waiting room furniture are being looked after by Station Managers.  The day-to-day upkeep of station 
building, PF Sheds, Waiting Halls, water supply, lighting are looked after by Junior Engineers.   
 
78. Regarding the provision of ‘Pay  & Use’ toilets at stations, a nd the number of stations where 
this facility is available, the Ministry of Railways stated that since the task of bringing about 
perceptible cleanliness is stupendous, it has been d ecided to give focused at tention to certain areas 
and one of them is introduction of ‘Pay & Use’ sche me of toilet. The facility  is available at over 400 
stations.  Though no formal survey has been undert aken to get the response of the public yet the 
feedback indicates this facility is considered highly desirable and representations are received from 
various quarters to extend the same to more stati ons.  However, about the plans to extend this facility 
at more stations the Ministry st ated that it is proposed to provide  ‘Pay & Use’ toilets at A to E 
category of stations.  
 
   
79. On being asked that  the clean liness is not properly done at the terminal stations because of 
shortage of staff, the Chairman, Railway Board explained:-  
“We have got the vacancies because we had been introducing new trains.  After introduction 
of the trains, we were having the process of creation of posts and filling up of posts.  So, 
recently last year we have taken a decision that whenever we declare any new trains, 
immediately the posts will be automatically crea ted like the running staff.  In the six monthly 
review, the posts will be automatically created a nd they will be filled up.  So far as filling up 
of vacancies is concerned, we are going for an all out drive for this.” 
 
B. Availability of Water 
 
Drinking water at stations 
 
80. Railways endeavour is to provide drinking water to passengers at all stations.  Explaining 
about the provision of drinking wa ter at stations specially duri ng the summer season and making 
provision of drinking water available to passengers during journey in trains, the Ministry of Railways 
stated that some small stations do not have adequate water source either due to absence of water 
supply from municipality or pres ence of brakish water, inadequate  ground water yield from hand 
pumps.  Further even at some of those stations  where piped/hand pump supply exists, water scarcity 

comes up in summer due to lesser  supplies by municipal ity, lowering in ground water table etc. and 
increased demand. In such cases, availability of drinking water is ensured at stations by arranging 
water through private water tankers.  Even water special trains are r un in areas facing heavy shortage 
of water.  Water coolers, mobile water trollies, ma tkas are arranged for better availability of drinking 
water to the passengers.  Many NGOs also supplement  water to passengers by pios.  In addition to 
normal facilities provided for drinking water at st ation premises, packaged drinking water/packaged 
natural mineral water in pouches/bottles is made av ailable for sale through static as well as mobile 
catering/vending units.  Private li censees have also been authori zed to procure and sell any ISI 
approved brand packaged drinking water/natural mineral water.   
 
Availability of water in Trains 
 
81. Regarding the provision of drinking water  in the trains, it was stated that in Rajdhani and 
Shatabdi Express trains, drinking water bottles ar e supplied to all the passe ngers.  In other trains, 
sachet/pouches alongwith meals is supplied to th e passengers.  Moreover, in the past, water 
containers in AC-2 tier  and jerry cans in 1 st class and Sleeper class coaches of Mail/Express trains 
were provided but it was found that drinking water from these contai ners/jerry cans was not used by 
the traveling passengers for drinking purposes and as such the usage of this facility was minimal.      
 
Watering of Coaches 
82. Railways provide elaborate arra ngements for watering of coaches both at starting stations as 
well as enroute.  The watering installations are pr ovided at nominated stati ons enroute and work is 
regularly monitored to ensure proper filling of water.  Adequate halts are provided at these stations in 
a systematic manner to ensure availability of water in toilet of coaches throughout the journey. 
 
83. During oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board informed:-  
“As regards water in the toilet, our efforts are that we have got  watering station for 
every four to five hours.  We are trying to ensure that afte r every 200 to 250 km 
coaches are watered.  There should be sufficient pressure available for water filling, 
like 100 liters per minute or so, so that whatever is the capacity, half of it is at least 
filled.   Sometimes there is sudden water failure somewhere may be because it was a 
summer season and it could not be watered du e to some reasons like water failure.  
Even in that case we do not allow a longer r un without watering.  We try to stop it at 
another watering station even though it may not  be a scheduled watering station.  We 
try to relay the message on  the control.”   

CHAPTER – VI 
 
WAITING ROOM AND OTHER PASSENGER AMENITIES 
 
Waiting Room/Rest Room Facility 
84. Waiting rooms at stations are intended only for bonafide passengers waiting for or arriving by 
trains, for short duration.   The passengers arrivi ng by night trains may remain in the waiting room 
until morning.   Similarly, outward passengers travel ing by night trains may remain their till the 
departure of their train.   Waiting rooms are occ upied by the passengers according to class of ticket 
held by them.   Ladies waiting room are reserved exclusively for use of lady passengers.   
As a part of the passenger amenities waiting room s at the stations have been provided   under 
the direct control of the stati on masters/station superintendents.   At big stations, waiting rooms 
remain open round the clock.   
 
85. When it was asked that these waiting rooms ar e mostly found closed or  are dirty with very 
few facilities, the Ministry stated that at im portant stations, waiting room remains open round the 
clock and at smaller stations, these are opened only during  the passing of the trains or on request by 
the passengers.  This practice is adopted to prev ent unauthorised occupation of waiting  rooms by 
unscrupulous elements and to ensure the proper upkeep of these rooms. 
 
86.  The Chairman, Railway Board a dded during oral evidence as under:- 
“In certain stations where th e users or the passengers ar e not many, to avoid or to 
ensure that there is no misuse of these waiting rooms by the miscreants, it is kept 
under lock and key of the Station Manger.  Station Managers room is nearby.  He can 
be approached and he will open the waiting room.”  
 
Retiring Rooms 
87. Retiring room is one of the desirable amenities to  be provided in stations of category ‘A’, ‘B’ 
and ‘D’.  The retiring rooms are pr ovided at stations where a number of 40% occupation is expected.  
Retiring rooms are normally reserved for a pe riod upto 24 hours but are not allowed beyond two 
days.   For subsequent day 25% extra charges are levied. 
 
  

88. When asked about the reasons for not allotti ng retiring room for ‘C’ category stations even 
though the same has been provided for ‘D’ categor y stations, the Ministry explained that ‘C’ 
Category stations are suburban stat ions which cater to only local passengers and therefore retiring 
room facility is not provided at these stations. 
 
89. On being further asked as to  why no separate ladies and ge nts retiring rooms have been 
provided at  ‘B’ category stations, the Ministry while clarifying the position stated that the retiring 
room at ‘B’ category stations can be fully occupied by ladies also.  In view of this it is not considered 
desirable to earmark separate retiring room for ladies. 
 
Medical facilities 
 
90. To provide medical facilities to the passengers First-Aid boxes are provided with Guards of 
all passengers trains at all Railway Stations.  Stat ion staff and Guards are trained in First-Aid skills.  
Railway doctors (as well as) privat e doctors are summoned at stations  en-route and their services are 
availed by needy sick passengers in extreme emergencies.  According to the Ministry of Railways in 
a year on an average 12,000 passengers are given medical treatment/attended by doctors. 
 
91. When enquired about the medical aid Railways ar e providing to the pass engers travelling by 
162 long distance trains where stoppages are very less, the Chairman, Railway Board replied:-  
“To provide medical assistance in  long distance trains a syst em was introduced nearly two 
years back that doctors who are travelling in a tr ain will be given ten pe r cent concessions if 
they give an undertaking that whenever called for they will be giving me dical attention to the 
co-passengers, who need medical assistance, wh ile travelling.  It has been quite successful 
since then.” 
  
92. He further added: 
“It was implemented in February, 2003.  Since then 29,000 doctors have availed the 
concession and their services have been availed.  In all these trains, First Aid Boxes 
are provided with Guards, etc. and now these have been augmented so that in cases of 
simple medical assistance like fever, etc. these type of medical assistance can be 
provided  to the passengers.  In those boxes resuscitation equipment are also there in 
case of emergency.  This has been well  received in all these trains. 

We have kept these augmented first aid boxes at 156 stations and 39,038 staff 
have been trained in this connection, whethe r he is a Guard or Ticket checker or other 
persons on the train.  We are also planning to train RPF personnel in this regard.  They 
are required where the doctors are not availa ble, but if doctors are there, it becomes 
binding on them to give medical advice.” 
  
Availability of Chemists  
93. As per extant policy guidelines Railways are to  provide exclusive chemist shops at all large 
and important railway stations.  At all other class ‘A’ Stations  chemist corners as an extension of 
existing bookstalls/curio stalls is to be provided by Railways.   Stand alone chemist shops are also 
provided at a number of stations.    
 
Foot over bridges 
94. Foot over bridges are provided to connect the main plaform with the area having main 
habitation.  With the passage of time, there is no extension of FOB for the otherside of the station, 
which has developed as a result of increase in population at that side. 
 
95. During the oral evidence when it was suggested  that the extension of FOB should be done and 
approach roads provided, if it is felt that it is  required because of development or increase in 
population on the otherwise of the station.  The Chairman, Railway Board stated:- 
“As regards FOB, it is provided to  take care of the safety aspect  as it connects one plaform to 
the other plaform.  Normally, we extend the FOB up to the booking o ffice on the circulating 
area at all the important ‘A’ category stations, and other important stations, but it is not done 
in all the stations.  It is provided only from the point of view of sa fety, but wherever booking 
offices have some in the circulating area, and if it is an important station, then we do extend it 
up to the booking office, that is, the circulating area. 
As regards stations where the city has developed on the other side also, we have 
reviewed a number of demands, and we have sanctioned a number of works of second entry, 
namely, for providing booking offices on the other side also.  At places where FOBs already 
exists connecting the first entry, and if we have  provided the second entry also, then we will 
give instructions that logically it should be extended to the other side.” 
 
 
  

96. When asked whether there was any proposal to  construct foot over br idges near yard to 
facilitate the staff as well as the passengers to cro ss the lines to go on the othe r side so as to prevent 
any mishappenings/accidents, the Ministry in thei r written reply stated that under the Plan Head 
‘Passenger Amenities” Railways provi ded FOBs only for the use of bonafide railway passengers to 
the Stations to approach Railway platforms.  Howe ver, where there are large number of staff residing 
number off-side of stations, small width FOB are provided only from the point of view of use by staff 
and not for facilitating general public. 
 Bonafide passengers are required to cross the platforms, lines etc. at the stations only.  As 
regards, the staff on duty in yards, they are guided by guidelines for safe ty while in the yard area.  In 
view of the above, FOBs for passengers & staff in the yards are neither required nor provided. 
 
Platform Height 
97. When the Committee pointed out during the evid ence that at number of stations platforms 
have became lower than the track after track re newal work was completed, the Chairman, Railway 
Board explained:- 
“For all major projects like gauge conversion works, new lines, doublings, etc. we have 
already given instructions that there will be no rail-level platforms for the broad gauge.  As 
regards the existing rail-level pl atforms, we are debating on it in our full Board Meetings that 
there should be no rail-level platforms in th e broad gauge, and we should at least go for 
middle-level platforms” 
 
98. On the suggestion of the Committ ee that guidelines should be issued to all the Zonal Railways 
for including the expenditure for raising the platfo rm with the track renewal works, the Chairman, 
Railway Board assured:- 
“We should try to maintain the platform levels , as per the schedule of dismensions, at the 
places where we have done the track renewal wo rk, gauge conversion work, etc., and there is 
no debate on it.  You are fully right in saying  it, and we will reiterate these instructions.  
These instructions already exist, and we will reiterate if it is a rail-level platform, then the 
required height should be maintained.” 

Complaint Books 
99. Asked about the maintenance of complaint book and the areas where maximum number of 
complaints reported, the Ministry  of Railways informed that complaint cum suggestion books are 
maintained at stations/trains.  Any complaint regarding waiting room s can also be lodged in station 
complaint book.  Complaints are mainly in respect  of working of booking, reservation and enquiry 
offices, punctuality of trains and improper behaviour of  railway staff.  The acknowledgement of the 
complaint/suggestion is given to   the   passenger  at   the   point   of   registration   of  
complaints/suggestions  and each complaint/sugges tion is investigated/examined properly and reply 
sent to the complaints.  Whenever  system corrections are called for action is taken to undertake  the 
same. 
 In regard to touts CRB submitted before the Committee. 
“They are generally in tout  with railway personnel at mass contact areas such as 
booking & reservation office, ticket checking etc.  We have conducted many checks 
about it, we have made it a thrust area.  Catering and cleaning are such departments 
where many complaints are received.  We  have made ADRM in region and AGM in 
Zonal Railways the incharge of public grievance cell” 
 
He further added. 
“At every station the guard is  in possession of compliant bo ok.  If a superintendent is 
present in train, he has the complaint book, under present circumstances, the RPF is 
also being provided this book.  The AGM and ADRM review it every month. 
 
100. When asked about the mechanism regarding redr essal of grievances,  the Ministry in their 
written replies stated that it is an important thru st area with the Ministry of Railways.   Indian 
Railways have a well knit Public Grievances Redr essal Machinery which takes prompt action on the 
complaints registered by the travelling public.  In this regrd instructions have been issued to the Zonal 
Railways. 
 
101. When further enquired whether there was any practice of replying to the complaints about 
progress in his complaint the Ministry stated that  as per existing instruct ions and practice, the 
complaints/suggestions are being acknowledged by the Railway and after due investigation, a full and 
self contained reply is sent to the complaint.  

AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINES FACILITIES 
102. ATMs are installed at important stations of In dian Railways to facilitate the passengers to 
withdraw cash though their Credit Cards and performing other activities.  ATMs are intalled and 
operated by reputed banks, which are selected through press advertisements. 
 
 When asked whether ATM facilities have been pr ovided at any of the station the Ministry in a 
written reply stated that as per information recei ved from eleven Zonal Ralways, ATMs are available 
at about 40 locations. 
 
 The Ministry of Railways also informed that  the proposal are also in hand to extend this 
facility at other locations 
 

   
CHAPTER – VII 
 
CATERING FACILITIES 
 
103. The catering activities  of the Indian Railway s are presently being l ooked after by the Indian 
Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) which has been fully operational from August, 
2001.  All the catering activit ies of the Indian Railways either depa rtmental or franchised, have been 
taken over by the IRCTC alongwith the staff which wa s deployed at the time of  taking over.    The 
staff is being trained by the IRCTC to give professional touch before th ey are put on regular duties.    
IRCTC have been  enforcing and insisting that whatever private catere rs come, their staffers are also 
well trained. 
 
104. When asked whether the entire catering staff and the catering department have been taken 
over by IRCTC or an option was offered to staff to join IRCTC, the Chairman, Railway Board 
stated:– 
“The decision is that whatever is the priv ate or departmental staff, both will be 
transferred to IRCTC.  As regards department al staff, whatever staff are there, they 
have to go there.  They will be taken to start with as on deemed deputation with 
IRCTC because we will have PV, DP, and PSP departments also.  They will be trained 
and they will become the staff of IRCTC.  But we are having a dialogue with the 
federations and we are making sure that their emoluments are, in no way, retarded.   
All their emoluments that they were getting are duly protected.” 
 
105. He further informed about their service condition:- 
“ Initially, they have placed under IRCTC on deputation, but they have an option that 
within three years they can give an option to come  back to the Railways.  We will 
have to then keep them on supernumery  posts and redeploy  them after training 
wherever we have vacancies.”  
 
106. Asked about the grant of licen se/contract to the major pantry  or catering contract on food 
plazas, the Chairman, Railway Board intimated:- 
“As regard IRCTC awarding the major pantry or catering contract, it is a two packet 
system and we are following the rules of the contract.  Anybody who is capable, who 
have fulfilled all the eligibility criteria and who is financiall y capable and who is 

experienced can apply.  So, a ll the leading players in this  field are competing and we 
cannot have any restrictions, as per the la w of contract. If anybody is capable and is 
able to grab more than one, he can have it . We cannot give for one year or two years, 
because unless we give for a sizeable period in which they have to do a lot of 
investments it will not be useful but nonetheless, we are also reviewing this policy that 
these major awarding contracts whether we s hould have these for optimum five years 
or three years, and we have taken a consci ous decision on that.  But it cannot be for a 
very short period as we want some real good professional players in  this field.  They 
have to make investments.  So, unless he  can get back the di vidend out  of the 
investments, he will not come forward.” 
 
107.  When asked whether pantry cars are availa ble in all the trains Chairman, Railway Board 
informed: 
 
“Out of 680 Mail-Express long route trains, arrangement for pantry car has already 
been made in almost 234 trains.  There are 17 Sampark Kranti Trains out of which one 
has already been introduced and there is arra ngements for pantry car in it.  Provision 
for pantry car would be made in the rema ining 16 trains also.  We try to provide 
pantry cars in accordance with the number of pantry coaches being manufactured 
every year.   In case we fail to provide pa ntry car in long distan ce trains, train side 
vending is provided.”   

CHAPTER – VIII 
 
MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE OF PASSENGER AMENITIES 
  
108. Railways endeavour is to keep the amenities provided at the stations as per the norms.   Any 
short coming/mal functioning noticed in the amenitie s provided at the stations and trains, either 
during inspection or through passenger complaint, are attended to.     There is a system of review and 
updating of available facilities at the stations and trains.  Statistical data  is maintained in this regard.  
The available facilities at stations/trains are periodically checked by inspecting officials.  Deficiencies 
noticed or brought to their noti ce by general public and people’s re presentatives are attended to.  
There is a system for monitoring passenger complaints and ensure regular follow up. 
 
Maintenance  of Passenger Amenities 
109. Regarding the mechanism for provision/upkeep of  various amenities at stations and on trains 
and for taking long and short term remedial measures, the Ministry of Railways intimated that certain 
facilities are provided at the time of  construction of new stations ba sed on anticipated traffic.  Such 
works are done as a part of projects like Traffi c Facilities, Yard Remodeling, Gauge Conversion, 
New Lines etc.  Amenities are further augmented from time to time based on the needs and 
expectations of the travelling public and as per growth  of traffic.  Works in this regard are processed 
through the annual Works programmes of the Railway s.  Station-wise data is maintained on 
passenger amenities availability, required and shortf alls.  Where there are shortfalls, works are 
planned to make up the same. Annual review of these data helps in planning to remove deficiencies.  
The works costing Rs. 50 lakhs and above are a pproved by the Parliament.  The works costing 
between Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs are approved by Railway Board and work costing less than Rs. 
30 lakh can be approved by General Managers of the Railways. 
 
110. Regarding the checks/inspections conducted by the concerned authorities specifically the 
inspection Report of Shri Panjhazari, Chairman of Personnel Amenities Committee at National level, 
the Ministry of Railways informed that the Insp ections are carried out by various officers from 
Railway Board, Zonal Railway and Divisional o ffices, including Executive Director Passenger 
Amenities (now re-designated as Executive Director Passenger Marketing) as per their respective 
schedules.  The respective quota for inspection as la id down for various officers is maintained in 
Zonal Railways and Divisions. 
 

111. The passenger Amenities Committee consis ting of Chairman and a few members is 
constituted by the Ministry of Railways at Nati onal level to check the passenger amenities provided 
at railway stations and on trains.    
 
112. The Committee inspects various stations and holds discussions with officers of the zonal 
railways and submit their inspection reports from time  to time.  The various features reported in the 
inspection reports of the Passenger Amenities Committee are generally with regard to the cleanliness 
and environmental conditions, drinking water arra ngements, dissemination of information to the 
passengers through enquiry offices, public address system, indication boards, provision of lights, fans 
and other electrical amenities, provision and mainte nance of public convenien ces, reservation and 
booking arrangement for passengers, s ecurity of passengers in carriages  and station premises,  losses 
in railway revenue etc.   The suggestions and ob servations of the committee are referred to zonal 
railways for taking appropriate action.  
 
113. To monitor the work of the Standing Acti on Committee, a committee consisting of Advisers 
(now Additional Members) was also constituted.  The Report sent by the Committees indicated that 
action to make good deficiencies had been in progress and the upgradation and provision of 
passenger amenities is a continuous process depending upon various constraints including the funds 
availability etc. 
 
114. When asked if any survey has been conducted to ascertain whether the basic amenities at 
various stations are commensurate with the level of traffic handled, the Ministry have stated that the 
survey had been conducted and the data on availability of passenger amenities are updated every year 
on 1st of April by regular survey. The Division-wise surveys are conducted ove r a period of time in 
the course of a year.  Last survey was cond ucted about a year back.  Functionally, minimum 
amenities have been provided at all stations.  Howeve r, deficiencies still exists in terms of quantum 
of amenity at number of stations e.g. 10 taps against 12 required etc.  Railways have been directed to 
give top priority to elimination of deficiencies  in minimum essential amenities at stations.  The 
deficiencies are planned to be eliminated by March, 2005. 

 
Maintenance of Passenger Amenities in Trains: 
115. Indian Railways provide several passenger amenities in trains like cushions on seats and 
berths, curtains, fully equipped toilets with running water in taps, lights, fans etc.  Also, cleanliness is 
ensured on trains, which forms an important part of  passenger comfort.   A well-equipped system is 
in place to ensure proper upkeep of these passenger  amenities on day-to-day basis and also complete 
overhaul on periodic basis. 
 
116. Day to day maintenance of rakes is carried out  in washing lines at coaching depots which are 
equipped with facilities like pit, pressurized air,  electrical charging faci lity, watering hydrants, 
lighting arrangement etc.  This includes preventive maintenance as per predetermined schedules to 
ensure desired level of safety and reliability in which thorough attention to passenger amenity fittings 
is also provided.  All missing fittings are replaced and damaged ones are repaired.  Coach toilet water 
tanks are filled and the train is cl eaned from both, inside and outside.  Trains leave washing line only 
after a detailed check in fully fit condition, ready for service. 
 
 117. During the oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board informed the Committee:- 
“So far as the maintenance of the passenger amenities in the coaches of running  trains 
and the cleanliness thereof is concerned, we  have  the system by which every train 
after completing its journey comes back and it is again given a primary maintenance.  
At the other end, if it is a long distance train, whatever are the deficiencies like some 
switch is not working, some bulb is fused or some upholstery is given away, these 
things are definitely attended to in that.  The mopping or the floor  cleanliness is done 
over there.  This is the basic minimum amenity which is prescribed.  Every train in the 
primary depot will be given a thorough cleaning every month and it is ensured that 
everything is all right.  If the shutters are not  working, they are also repaired once in a 
month in the depot during the primary maintenance itself. 
 
 Another system which we have introdu ced is that on long distance important 
trains, we have gone for the rake renova tion.  We attend three to four coaches 
thoroughly.  We ensure one hundred per cent fittings, window s are functioning 
properly, all the electric gadgets are properly functioning, and if the upholstery is torn, 
it is also set right.  This is  called ‘rake renovation.’  Beside s this, after 10 to 12 years, 

we send our coaches to Bhopal and in B hopal we do the mid-life rehabilitation of 
these coaches.  It gives a lease of another 15 new years for the coach.” 
 
118. He further added: 
“We are doing roughly 350 coaches per year in  Bhopal.   The coaches which have 
become old definitely need more maintenanc e effort, more cleanliness effort and we 
have to look into that. 
We have roughly 44,000 coaches.  We are not able to cater to all.  But all the 
long distance, mail and express tr ain coaches are sent.  We ar e able to cater for nearly 
350 coaches per year.  That is the capacity.  We want to increase it to 425 in the near 
future.  We are not sending ordinary passenger train coaches there.  We are not able to 
send them there.” 
 
119. When asked about coaches in short distance tr ains, the Chairman, Railway Board explained: 
“We are able to do rake renova tion.  We do it locally.  We  give a thorough attention.  
We have got two systems, namely Inte rmediate Overhaul (IOH) and Periodical 
Overhaul (POH).  We are doing POH for a ll the passenger train coaches every 18 
months.  In the POH, we try to see that  all the passenger amenity items are fully 
attended.  In the IOH, they normally attend to the safety items mainly besides some 
items of  amenity.  They thoroughly attend to that so that the ordinary passenger 
coaches get a treatment during POH.” 
 
120. When enquired further whether the system is  working well, the Chairman Railway Board 
responded: 
“This is working well.  But there may be some overdue arrears some where which we are 
looking into.  As a special drive, we launch it  also.  There are some sort of anti-social 
elements are also there.  They try to fiddl e with the coaches.  But nonetheless we are 
responsible for that.” 
 
121. Asked about the steps taken to  effect better coordination among the various agencies involved 
in upkeep of passenger amenities,  the Ministry inform ed that in order to ensure better coordination 
amongst various agencies involved in upkeep of passenger amenities, Additional General Managers 
at Zonal Railway Headquarter le vel and Additional Divisional Railway Managers at Divisional 
Headquarter level have been nominated as nodal offi cers.  These officers interact with the concerned 

officers of various departments from time to time  and take short term and long term measures to 
ensure provision and maintenance of the passenge r amenities.  Besides, multi-discipline Service 
Improvement Groups at the zonal, di visional headquarters and stations level have also been activated 
to inspect amenities at stations and to sugges t/take remedial measures for rectifying the 
deficiencies/shortcomings in passengers amenities.   
 
122. While commenting upon the query that in some of the trains there are no light/lights are not 
working with the result many a times passengers are put to inconvenience  and at time they pay 
through their lives, the Ministry of Railways stated that all endeavours are made by Railways to make 
good defects of electrical equipments including lights whenever it comes to the notice.  These defects 
are attended to and rectif ied promptly as soon as these are reported.  After lodging the complaint of 
poor light/no lights by the passengers to the station master, the train lighting staff, if available, at that 
station attends the fault.  Else, the message is passed on by the station master to the next major station 
where the train lighting staff is ava ilable and the fault is rectified.  Further, instructions have been 
reiterated to keep a regular watch on the maintena nce of lights in passenger coaches.  No serious 
accident has been reported on accoun t of no lights/poor lights in the passenger coaches.  As regards 
broken vestibule, it is stated that after the one unfortunate incidence when the lady passenger fell 
through vestibule, there was recommendation to switc h over to UIC vestibule which has since been 
completed on all coaches. 
 
Onus of Proper Maintenance of Passenger Amenities 
123.  When asked as to who is directly responsible for proper maintenance and availability of 
facilities for passengers in trains and station, the Ministry  in a written reply stated that coaching 
depot in-charge is responsible for maintenance of  amenities in trains.  The major maintenance of 
coaches is done in the Workshops.  The smaller deficiencies  in the coaches are attended  to in the 
sick lines and even at stations.  Deficiencies which come about dur ing run such as failure of air 
conditioning, shortage of water are taken care of as  far as possible at the next halting station where 
facilities are available. 
  
124. At stations, day-to-day cleanliness, functi oning of booking windows, reservation system, 
waiting room furniture are being looked after by Station Managers.  The day-to-day upkeep of station 
building, PF Sheds, Waiting halls, water supply, lighting are looked after by Junior Engineers. 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
CATEGORISATION OF STATIONS  
 
125. The Committee note that the guidelines governing passenger amenities issued in 1952 
were reviewed by the Railways for the first time  in the year 1995 and Ministry of Railways 
issued revised guidelines under which the facilities which were operationally required and were 
an essential feature of the infrastructure of stat ion such as booking offi ce, platforms, platform 
shelter, lighting etc. were excluded from th e list of passenger amenities and termed as 
‘infrastructure facilities’.   The facilities pr ovided over and above this infrastructure facility 
were covered under the passenger amenity.   As so me deficiencies were found in the guidelines 
issued in 1995 such as scale/quantum of amenit ies to be provided, whether the additional 
facilities as per norms would be a continuous pr ocess with growth of passenger traffic etc., the 
Ministry of Railways had made a further revisi on of the guidelines in 1999 to overcome these 
deficiencies and issued revised guidelines classifyin g the facilities to be provided at stations into 
three categories viz. ‘Minimum Essential Amenities’, ‘Recommended Amenities’ and ‘Desirable 
Amenities’.  Since then the Railways are followi ng these guidelines of 1999 till date while 
providing passenger amenities.   However, th e Committee were informed during evidence that 
further revision of these guide lines were made in 2003.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
in view of the change in living standard of people at large and technology developments these 
guidelines should be updated and reviewed regula rly so that any deficiency occurring in the 
guidelines with the fast changing time could be rectified immediately.  
 
126.  The Committee further find that under the ex tant guidelines, Railways have categorized 
their entire 8018 stations into 6 categories (category ‘A’ to ‘F’) on the basis of the passenger 
earnings to provide the amenities on that particular station.    The yardstick for providing the 
facilities is linked with the category of statio n.   The Committee were informed during the 
evidence that the Railways transport 60 per cent of total Railway passengers every day on 
Suburban Railways, that is why Railways had taken into account the annual passenger 
earnings as a guiding factor while going for the 1999 circular that catego ries the stations.   
Though the passenger earnings of some stations  may not be substantial or upto the requisite 
level to place a particular station in a higher  category, the Committee are of the view that 
factors like geographical location, religious im portance and commercial significance of the 
place may be considered while deciding the ca tegorization.    Similarly, there are other 
categories also like the places where educational institutes for sp ecialized studies are located in 

remote areas and the suburban stations where the number of passengers are more but the 
earnings are less due to various concessions provide d, such stations also require desired level of 
amenities because they are frequently used by a large number of passengers during peak hours/ 
periods.  Hence, the Committee a re of the view that the categorization of stations may not be 
done merely on the basis of the earnings but th e relative importance of station such as number 
of tickets sold at that station also be duly considered while making such categorizations.   The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
  
127. The Committee further note th at more than 90 per cent of th e stations are in ‘E’ & ‘F’ 
category.  These stations are used mostly by the rural people/people residing in remote areas.  
Moreover, the stoppage of train at these stations is also very less and for short time.    Besides, 
usually the passengers do not board the train instead they only get down at these stations as the 
duration of stoppage is very less, with the result the passenger earnings from such stations is 
very less though number of passengers using these stations is much more.  Taking into account 
that the Railways are the service providers,  the Committee opine that larger sections of 
passengers should get satisfactory amenities at  all stations.  Keepin g this in view, the 
Committee desire that at least basic facilities like water coolers, FOBs, platform shelters, 
waiting hall, announcement system in Eng lish, Hindi and regional languages about 
arrival/departure schedule of trains in both E and F category stat ions and some other facilities 
at ‘F’ category stations such as seating arrangements, lavatories,  urinals, fans etc. may be 
provided at these stations on priority basis.  They also impress upon the Ministry to chalk out 
an action plan for upgradation of these stations  over a given period of time depending on usage 
of these station by passengers, to a higher  category and provide amenities accordingly.  
 
MODEL STATIONS    
128. The Committee note that in 1999 the Ministry of Railways had selected 61 stations as 
model stations in different Zones to provide higher level of passenger facilities.  They 
appreciate that as of now 317 stations have been selected in various Zone s to be developed as 
model stations by March 2008, so that  they may function as trend setters for other stations for 
the purpose of providing passenger amenities.  In this regard Railways have prepared an action 
plan also.   The Committee have been apprised th at so far 61 stations have been provided with 
upgraded amenities.   The criteria adopted for se lection of these model stations depends on the 
importance and significance of the station rath er than the category of the station.   The 
Committee, however, feel that there could be ma ny more aspects also such as population 
growth, geographical location and educational significance in determining the criteria for 

selection of model stations.  They urge the Mini stry to review and make the basis/criteria more 
elaborate, transparent with well defined parameters in regard to the  selection of Model 
stations.    They also desire th at the development work of the re maining selected model stations 
be taken on priority basis by fixing Zone-wise targets for each year so that maximum number 
of these stations can be developed much be fore the targeted date of March, 2008.   The 
Committee also emphasise that in the case of th ose stations which will be categorized afresh as 
model station, the infrastructure/facilities should be developed within a period of two years. 
 
 The Committee also note that every year new stations are being incl uded in the list of 
model stations.  They, therefore emphasize that the amenities on the stations selected earlier as 
model station should be provided in a time bound manner. 
   
129. The Committee find that on number of occasions the basic amenities such as drinking 
water taps, lights, fans etc. are not functional in trains and at stations.  At the same time the 
passengers are unaware of the facilities/amenities which are actually sanctioned or available at 
that particular station and the authority wi th whom the complaint  can be lodged for 
rectification. The Committee, theref ore, desire that category of stations should be displayed 
appropriately at stations through signboards indicating the sanctioned list of facilities/amenities 
and those which are available, together with th e name, designation, telephone number of the 
officer responsible and accountable for maintaining these amenities.  They are of the firm view 
that this practice will make the passengers aw are of the various amenities which they are 
entitled to and help them to procure the same. 
 
UTILISATION OF FUNDS 
130. The Committee are constrained to  note that for the last several years the funds allocated 
for passenger amenities are not being utilized fully  by the Railways.   They were informed by 
the Ministry of Railways that because of slow progress of work due to contractual problems, 
delay in finalisation of plans and estimates, difficulty in executing works under traffic 
conditions, regulation on plan expenditure imposed in the course of the year, the funds could 
not be utilized fully in some years.  With regar d to the finlisation of plan and estimates, the 
Committee were informed that the proposal for passenger amenities like other Plan Heads is 
scrutinized by different Committees such as Standing Passenger Amenities Committee of Zonal 
Railway, Standing Committee on Passenger Amenitie s in Railway Board, Additional Members 
Committee and at Board level.   The Committee feel that this is a very lengthy process which 
consumes a lot of time.  The planning itself takes a substantial portion of time during the 

financial year thereby causing delay in completion of projected works resulting in cost and time 
over runs.   The Committee, therefore, desire that an action plan must be prepared by all Zonal 
Railways well in advance so that the fund is allo tted in time and work s completed within the 
same financial year.  
 
131. The Committee were apprised that for full ut ilization of allotted fund, a  decision has 
now been taken by Railway Board that henceforth, each Zonal Ra ilway will plan 15 percent to 
20 percent more works than what is budgeted dur ing the year and Zonal Railways would be 
responsible for financial management.   By planning excess works the Zonal Railways would 
fully utilized the funds allotted for passenger amenities.    The Committee appreciate the 
decision of the Ministry of Railways accord ing to which the responsibility of financial 
management now rest on the Zonal Railways, wh ich would review the fund utilization status 
every month rather than every quarter of the year.  They are hopefu l that under this new 
methodology the Railways, would be  able to spend all the funds  allocated to them under the 
head ‘Passenger Amenities’ instead of surrendering unutilized funds at the end of the year.   
They desire that the directions in this re gard may be given to all Zonal Railways and 
scrupulously  implemented so as to complete all the projected works as per the time schedule.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the co mpletion status of the projects as well as the 
utilization of the funds during the financial year.  
 
TICKETING 
132. During oral evidence, the Committee were in formed that internet kiosk system for 
ticketing has been introduced in 2001-02 in more than 100 major cities.  As on date these are 
functioning at 120 locations all over the country a nd it has become quite popular now.  Nearly 
3500 passengers are using this facility everyday.  The ticket is delivered to the person by 
courier and  if one happens to be in Delhi he  can also collect from one of the nominated 
counters at Delhi.  The Committee were further info rmed that this system is well hailed by the 
users and there is a popular demand for extension of    internet time p eriod from 0400 hours to 
2300 hours in place of 0800 hours to 2200 hours.    Taking the above facts into account, the 
Committee desire that this network may be expanded further to oth er cities also so that more 
and more passengers can use this facility rather than waiting in queues for long hours.   
Keeping in view the popularity of the system th ey also urge the Railways to extend the time 
period of the internet ticketing from 0400 hours till 2300 hours at the earliest. 
 

133. The Committee were informed that a pilot proj ect had been initiated in Delhi regarding 
booking tickets through SMS on Mobiles.  They w ere also apprised that this facility is being 
extended to other States such as Andhra Pradesh a fter the success of the pilot project in Delhi.   
The Committee feel that people have easy access to mobiles in the present times.    They are of 
the opinion that this would not only be the easi est method for the passengers to book the tickets 
but also would reduce the queues at the booking counters.   They, therefore, emphasise that the 
facility for booking tickets through SMS on mob iles should be extended all over the country at 
the earliest.  
 
134. The Committee were informed that the faci lity of ‘Tatkal Reservation’ which is 
presently available on 110 Mail/Express trains in nominated classes only is being extended to all 
the trains by 14 November, 2004.   The Committee note that of late the charges for tatkal 
reservation have been raised drastically to Rs.150/- and Rs.300/- for sleeper class and first class 
respectively.   The Committee de sire to know the logic in dras tic and abrupt raising of the 
charges for ‘Tatkal Reservation.’   They would also like to be apprised of the status of extension 
of the scheme to other trains. 
 
ENQUIRY SYSTEM 
 
135. The enquiry system consisting of Public  Address System, Electronic Train Display 
Board, Auto Answering System, Interactive Vo ice Response System (IVRS), National Train 
Enquiry System (NTEs) and the Staff manning the enquiry counters play a vital role in 
enhancing the customer friendly image of Railways .  However, the behaviour of front line staff 
at the enquiry booths are often found to be improper to the extent of being, rude and non-
cooperative at times.    Sometimes the informatio n given by them is also found to be incorrect.   
During the examination of the subject, the Co mmittee were informed that 9 per cent of the 
complaints received were regarding improper beh aviour of the Railway staff and 7 per cent 
were regarding the enquiry.   The Committee opin e that to improve the enquiry system by 
minimizing this human interface, though comput erized enquiry system has been started by the 
Railways and non telephone based enquiry system  is also being planned such as enquiry 
through website, SMS, Radio, TV etc., yet the human factor cannot be eliminated completely. 
The Committee, therefore, stress that the front line staff manning the enquiry booths must be 
imparted training for effecting improvement in their behavior/attitude before being deployed to 
man these counters so that they are available at the counters alert with updated information, 

well behaved, helpful and courteous in their approach while dealing with customers.  The 
Committee also emphasize that at ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ category stations enquiry system should 
function round the clock and at the same time more telephone lines shou ld be provided at the 
enquiry offices so that the public in general and passengers in particular may not face 
inconvenience. 
 
136. The Committee further note that the information aired through the enquiry 
booths/display boards, voice recording system regar ding the arrival/departure time schedule of 
trains based on the details provided by control office or central enquiry and from operating 
staff on duty are found to be delayed, incorrect  and incomprehensible as the process of 
transmission of information is very long and  passes through many hands before being 
announced.  The voice recording system particularly is so bad that it becomes difficult to know 
the exact timings of the trains.  They also find that there is a lack of  cooperation between the 
coaching/commercial control sta ff and the enquiry staff. Besides, the audibility of the 
announcements made on stations is  very poor. The Committee, theref ore, strongly recommend 
that immediate rectification   regarding transmission of information be made and co-operation 
between the coaching/commercial control staff and enquiry staff enhanced.  They emphasise 
that all out efforts be made to  ensure that display through this system is clear comprehensive, 
accurate and timely.  The Committee desire the some system should be developed to provide 
updated information.   The arrival and departure of the train should be electronically displayed 
at all the platforms.  They also stress that th e announcements should not be made hurriedly it 
should be at a proper pace, accurate and audible to commuters.     
 
137. The Committee find that announcements are made in a very few superfast trains only.    
They suggest that a brief announcement should be made in the train about the approaching 
station with its topography, historical background, cultural, tourist and pilgrimage significance  
to make the commuters aware about the place even if they are not getting down there and make 
their journey interesting. 
 
CLEANLINESS 
138. The Indian Railway system carries over 1.3 m illion passengers daily.  The cleanliness is 
supposed to be checked strictly at different levels  from the supervisors in charge at the stations 
to officers of different departments located at stations, divisions or headquarters.  However, it 
is a common experience that the cleanliness in trains and at stations is not maintained properly.  

Given the mammoth size of the Railways, the Commi ttee do appreciate that it is not physically 
possible for the Railway Board to verify and check each and every station and train.  
Nevertheless, the Committee desire that a system of random checking by special inspection 
teams may be conceived at the Railway Board level and based on the feed back of reports of 
these teams, corrective measures may be taken to improve the cleanliness at stations as well as 
in trains.  They urge the Railways to extend further the innovative and mechanized cleaning 
method of Ratlam type to other stations as well at the earliest.   They emphasise that control 
discharge type and modular type toilets may be installed in new coaches and in coaches which 
are sent to the coaching depots for maintena nce.  The Committee also  recommend that manual 
& physical cleaning of tracks at stations, platforms and trains ma y be carried out regularly till 
the aforementioned systems are inst alled.   They also desire that  cleanliness should be ensured 
by spraying of bleaching powder etc. so that no  stench is their.  Speci al attention should be 
given towards the cleanliness as well as maintenance of the toilets.   Since this year has been 
declared as a cleanliness year by the Railways,  the Committee desire that the precincts of the 
Railway Stations including the tracks be kept th oroughly neat and clean as this would provide 
desirable environment  to the tourists/passengers from all over the world.     
 
139. The Committee were also informed that due to  shortage of ‘safaiwalas’ the cleanliness 
on the station premises and in the trains is hampered considerably.  They, therefore, 
recommend that the vacancies in the category of ‘safaiwalas’ may be filled up on priority basis 
so that the cleanliness may not su ffer on this account.  They emphasize that the decision of the 
Government for automatic creation of posts as soon as the new trains are declared should be 
implemented forthwith.   
 
140. The Committee were further informed that the response to the ‘Pay & Use’ toilets at the 
station premises had been commendable.  Cons idering the fact, the Committee desire that the 
Railway should explore more possibilities of setting up of ‘Sulabh Sauchalayas’ in collaboration 
with the ‘Sulabh International’  or any other non-governmental organisation so as to maintain 
certain level of cleanliness in and around station premises.   Apart from this they stress that in 
case of deliberate shirking of work by delinque nt employees, punitive or deterrent action must 
be taken against them.  
 

WAITING ROOM/RETIRING ROOM 
141. As per the category of station, facilities/ amenities are provided at stations.  These 
facilities include provision of waiting rooms at A,  B&D categories of stations.  Instructions are 
there to keep the waiting rooms open round the clock. However, the Committee were informed 
that sometimes just to avoid the misuse by the miscreants, these rooms are kept under lock and 
key by the Incharge/Station Manager.  It is generally noticed that  the waiting rooms at stations 
lack basic facilities/amenities a nd if at all these amenities are ava ilable, they are inoperative.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Station Managers may be made accountable for 
providing/maintaining the amenities in the waiting rooms and any lapse on this account should 
be taken up seriously.  
 
142. The Committee also find that there are no se parate ladies retiring room at ‘B’ & ‘D’ 
categories of stations.  They are of the view that during late nights and odd hours the women 
passengers cannot relax in the presence of wait ing male co-passengers in the common waiting 
rooms.  They, therefore, desire that separate la dies retiring rooms be provided in ‘B’ & ‘D’ 
category stations also. 
 
COMPLAINTS  
 
143. The Committee observe that there  is no proper system of registration of complaints at 
Railway stations.  They were informed that the complaint books are available with the Guards 
at stations, Superintendent if he is present in train, RPF personnels and in coaches.    However, 
in practice these complaint books are not s upplied to the complainan ts on demand by the 
railway staff nor the complaint books are available/to be seen in the coaches.  Moreover, the 
procedure for disposal of these co mplaints is also not transparen t.   The Committee, therefore, 
desire that a system of registering the complaints  may be developed  at each of the Zonal and 
Regional level so that every co mplaint is duly recorded.   Furthe r, they stress that adequate 
publicity be made about the availability of comp laint books, the mann er in which complaint 
could be lodged, on a display board at a prominen t place in each and every coach.  They desire 
that AGM and ADRM who have been appointed as  the incharge of public  grievance cell in the 
Zone and Region respectively should review the st atus of disposal of co mplaints every month. 
The Committee also desire that the status/outco me/action taken on these complaints, may be 
communicated to the complainants in a time bound manner within three months.  
 

TRANSFERS 
144. The Committee note that though the policy of rotational transfer of staff on commercial 
seats is there but these are not st rictly followed in practice.  The person deployed on one seat is 
allowed to continue there for years together.  This may develop personal vested interests 
leading to corruption.  Many a times it has been found that the touts operate in connivance with 
the railway staff.   The Committee are of the op inion that the surveill ance maintained by the 
vigilance department needs to be further stre ngthened.  They empasise that Railway should 
ensure that as per the instructions  no person is allowed to hold a sensitive post for more than 
three years and the policy of rotational transfers may be strictly followed in letter and spirit. 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING AND TOURISM CORPORATION (IRCTC) 
145. IRCTC had been established in 2001 to take care of the catering activities of Indian 
Railways and it has taken over all catering acti vities of Indian Railway either franchised or 
departmental alongwith the staff which was de ployed at the time of take over.   IRCTC 
emphasise that all the staffers  from private caterers besides the staff taken over from the 
department by IRCTC should be imparted professional training in sanitation and hygiene.   
 
 The Committee note that still a dual system of catering exists in the railways.  The 
IRCTC is further engaging private contractors for fulfilling the catering demands of the Indian 
Railways.  There are so many complaints receiv ed by the Railways against these private 
contractors regarding the quality and quantity of the foodstuff provided by these contractors.  
The Committee further observe th at under the extant policy thou sands of static and mobile 
catering workers, who were taken over by the I RCTC at the time of taking over of Railway 
catering activity, are likely to be rendered su rplus on reversion to Railways.  The Committee, 
therefore, emphasize that the earlier system of dual catering should continue.  They also stress 
that extant policy with regard to awarding of contracts by IRCTC to private operators should 
be reviewed at the earliest.  The Committee urge the Ministry to check regularly the quality of 
food served in the trains as well as at stations , besides the prices of th e food items supplied by 
these contractors should be regulated and monito red regularly so that the food items are not 
overpriced.   Special effort should be made to  ensure that these are prepared in hygienic 
condition and the quality is not allowed to suffe r at any cost.   The Co mmittee also desire that 
wending machines for beverages should be installed at ‘A’ and ‘B’ stations. 

146. The Committee find that out of 680 Mail Exp ress trains pantry car has been made 
available on 234 trains only.  During the evid ence it was submitted th at all the 17 Sampark 
Kranti Express Trains would also be provided with  pantry cars.  They were also informed that 
as per the number of coaches manufactured every year provision of pantry cars are made 
accordingly.  The Committee desire that Ministry  of Railways should make efforts to enhance 
manufacture of pantry coaches so that at least pantry cars may be made available in all long 
distance trains, where journey of more than 15 hour s is involved.  They also emphasise that 
necessary steps may be taken at the earliest in order to provide  hygienic food with quality 
assurance to the passengers of long distance tr ains rather than providing food from train side 
vending. 
 
FOOT OVER BRIDGES 
 
147. The foot over bridges (FOB) are provided to connect the platforms with the area having 
main habitation of the city.  The Committee find that over the year s as a result of increase in 
population, the cities have developed on the oth er side of the stations, but no extension of FOB 
connecting other side of the stat ion has been constructed, which causes great inconvenience/ 
safety hazards to the passengers.  They feel that  necessary guidelines in  this regard should be 
issued to all the Zonal Railways that such stat ions should be identified where the city has 
developed on the other side while the FOBs have  not been extended so far.    The Committee 
desire that extension of FOB be pr ovided in these identified places on priority basis.  They also 
desire that the expenditure on FO B may be incurred as an integral  part of rail infrastructure 
and not from ‘Passenger Amenities Head’. 
 
 The Committee also observe that at certain stations there are high level platforms and 
FOBs where it becomes difficult for the heart patients and ha ndicapped to climb.  Similarly, 
the booking counters are also situated at 1 st or 2nd Floor of the building in some places.  They, 
therefore, recommend that ramp type FOBs should be provided  atleast at the busy stations for 
the handicapped persons and passengers suffering from heart ailment, arthritis, asthmatic 
disease etc.  Also booking counters for such passengers should be provided at ground floor. 
 
148. The Committee also observe that in certain stations the booking windows are provided 
only at one side of these station after they have been extended or their category has been  raised 
due to increase in population on the other side of the city.  They are of the opinion that this 

causes inconvenience to commuters and may lead  to mishappening, accidents or evasion in 
buying a ticket.  They stress that  Railway should identify such st ations Zone-wise and open the 
booking windows on either side of the stations al so.  They also emphasise that in such cities 
more number of booking offices be set up to facilit ate passengers to buy Railway ticket as this 
would ultimately increase revenue of Railways. 
 
RAISING OF LEVEL OF PLATFORMS 
149. The Committee find that due to adoption of uni gauge system in Indian Railways i.e. 
gauge conversion from NG and MG to BG or due to change in classification of stations or 
material modification works such as new line works or doublings, at stations the platform level 
has become lower than even the level of tracks .  They find that this is hazardous for the 
passengers.  They have been informed that instructions have been given that there should be no 
rail level platforms and at least middle level pl atforms should be constructed.  The Committee 
recommend that the height of the pla tform should be raised at all the stations on priority basis.  
They desire that the expenditure on these works should be incurred  from the funds allotted for 
rail infrastructure rather than from ‘Passenger Amenities’ head. 
 
COACH MAINTENANCE 
 
150. Every passenger is a valued customer for Ra ilways irrespective of the strata in society 
from which he comes.  In fact IInd  class passengers contribute a major portion of Railways 
income, hence the amenities provided to these passengers has a vital importance.    The 
Committee were informed that there is a well e quipped system in place to ensure proper 
upkeep of these passenger amenities on day to day basis and also complete overhaul on periodic 
basis.  They were also apprised that day to d ay maintenance of rakes is  carried out in washing 
lines at coaching depots which are equipped with  facilities like pit pres surized air, electric 
charging facility, watering hydrants, lighting arrangements.  Further th e trains leave washing 
line only after a detailed check in fully fit condition, ready for service such as all missing fittings 
are replaced and damaged once are repaired.   However, the Committe e observe that the 
facilities in  II Class/General compartment coaches are ill maintained.  It has been noticed that 
in some of the trains there are no lights/fans or they are not in working condition.  These 
deficiencies can be attributed  to lack of maintenance/poor  supervision.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a system of surprise  checks by the SMs/higher officers may be 
introduced to oversee the maintena nce work before the train is br ought to the platform and at 

the stations.  This team may also be authoriz ed to fix the responsibility on the delinquent 
employees in case any lapse is found so that appropriate action could be taken against them. 
 
151. The Committee were informed that in ord er to enhance the life of a coach rake, 
renovation is done at Bhopal after 10 or 12 years of use which is called as mid-life rehabilitation 
of coaches.  This gives a lease of another 15 years’ life for the coach.    Roughly 350 coaches of 
Mail/Express Trains per year are sent to Bhopal   for renovation, as that is the capacity.   
Railways have now proposed to increase it to 425.  This renovation is carried out only in case of 
the coaches of long distance trains.  The coache s of passenger trains are being taken care of 
locally by Intermediate Overhaul (IOH) and Periodical Overhaul (POH) which is done after 
every 18 months.  The Committee note that the coaches of the long di stance trains and the 
passenger trains get renovation/  overhauling but there is no  set procedure/pattern for 
renovation/overhauling of coaches of local trains.  The Committee, therefore, desire that atleast 
IOH/POH of the coaches of the local/suburban trains may be carried out regularly. 
 
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE 
 
152. The Committee note that Automatic Tell er Machines(ATMs) are installed at 40 
important stations to facilitate the passengers to  withdraw cash through their credit cards and 
perform other activities.  They were informed that ATMs are installed and operated by reputed 
Banks which are selected through press advertis ements.  The Committee urge the Ministry to 
take steps to tie up with various Nationalized/P rivate Banks to extend this facility of ATMs to 
the passengers at all the other important stations as well at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
December, 2004                                                         Chairman, 
Agrahanaya, 1926 Saka                           Standing Committee o n Railways 
 
 

          Annexure-I 
 
S.No. Page No. Para No. Line Addition/modification 
1. 42 2 3 from  
below 
After ‘station’ add –  
such as number of tickets sold at that station. 
2. 43 3 6 from 
below 
After ‘shelters’ add – 
Waiting hall, announcement system in English, 
Hindi and regional language about arrival/departure 
schedule of trains. 
3. 44 4 8 
 
 
 
 
 
Last 
line 
Add after ‘March, 2008’. 
The Committee also emphasise that in the case of 
those stations which will be categorised afresh as 
model station, the infrastructure/facilities should be 
developed within a period of two years. 
 
Add sub para – 
The Committee also note that every year new 
stations are being include d in the list of model 
stations.  They, therefor e, emphasize that the 
amenities on the stations selected earlier as model 
station should be provided in a time bound manner. 
4. 48 11 Last 
line 
Add – 
The Committee also emphasize that at ‘A’, ‘B’ ‘C’ 
category stations enquiry system should function 
round the clock and at the same time more 
telephone lines should be provided at the enquiry 
offices so that the public in general and passengers 
in particular may not face inconvenience. 
5. 49 12 9 from 
above 
and 6 
from 
below 
 
Line 4 
from 
below 
After ‘coaching’ add – 
/commercial control 
 
 
 
 
Add after ‘and timely’ 
The Committee desire that some system should be 
developped to provide updated information 
6. 50 14 4 from 
below 
Add after ‘installed.’ 
They also desire that cl eanliness should be ensured 
by spraying of bleaching powder etc. so that no 
stench is there.  Special  attention should be given 
towards the cleanliness as well as maintenance of 
the toilets.  
7. 54 21 1 Substitute the lines after ‘contractors’ by 
following:-  
          The Committee further observe that under the 
extant policy thousands of static and mobile 
catering workers, who were taken over by the 
IRCTC at the time of taking over of Railway 
catering activity, are  likel y to be  rendered sur plus  

reversion to Railways.  The Committee, therefore,  
emphasize that the earlier system of dual catering 
should continue.  They also stress that extant policy 
with regard to awarding of contracts by IRCTC to 
private operators should be reviewed at the earliest.  
The Committee urge the Ministry to check 
regularly the quality of food served in the trains as 
well as at stations, besides the prices of the food 
items supplied by these contractors should be 
regulated and monitored regularly so that the food 
items are not overpriced.   Special effort should be 
made to ensure that these are prepared in hygienic 
conditions and the quality is not allowed to suffer at 
any cost.   The Committee also desire that wending 
machines for beverages should be installed at ‘A’ 
and ‘B’ stations. 
 
 
 
8. 54 22 3 from 
below 
After ‘trains’ add – 
Where journey of more than 15 hours is involved. 
9. 55 23 05 Add sub para – 
      The Committee also observe that at certain  
stations there are FOBs where it becomes difficult 
for the heart patients and handicapped persons to 
climb.  Similarly, the booking counters are also 
situated at 1
st or 2 nd floor of the building in some 
places.  They, therefore, recommend that ramp type 
FOBs should be provided at least at the busy 
stations for the handicapped persons and passengers 
suffering from heart ailment, arthritis, asthematic 
disease etc.  Also bo oking counters for such 
passengers should be provided at ground floor. 
 
 