39 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the 34th Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways (2007-08) on ‘Suburban and Metro Railway’] 
 
 
 
THIRTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) 

 2 
 
SCR No. 134 
 
THIRTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
  
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendation/ 
Observations contained in the 34th Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways (2007-08) on ‘Suburban and Metro Railways’]  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.10.2008  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.10.2008  
 
     
  
             
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)  

 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
            
                              PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….…………………          (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………… … …..            (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
  
Chapter – I  Report ……………………………………………………          1 
 
Chapter – II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
   by the Government…………………………………………         9           
 
Chapter – III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies…....       19        
 
Chapter – IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which requires reiteration………………………………..      21  
 
Chapter – V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited…………………       23      
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on 02.10.2008………………………………………….       24 
 
Appendix II Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 21st Report  
of the Standing Committee on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) 
 on ‘Terminal Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’……………        26 
 
    
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2008-09) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.         Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.         Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Smt. Suman Mahato 
7. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8.       Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9.      #Vacant 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
11.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
12.       Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
13.       Ch. Lal Singh 
14.       Shri Ananta Nayak 
15.       Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
16.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
17.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19.       Shri Manik Singh 
20.       Shri K. Subbarayan  
21.       Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.       Shri Motilal Vora 
23. Shri Nandi Yellaiah  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri N. Balaganga 
29. Shri Abani Roy 
30.     *Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
31. Vacant 
 
# Shri Kishan Lal Diler passed away on 04.09.2008 (Ref: LSS Bulletin No.6009, 
dated 11th September, 2008) 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12.08.2008 vide Rajya Sabha 
Bulletin Part-II No.45235 dated 14.08.2008 

 5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Secretary 
2. Shri S Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Sunita    - Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv)

 6 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2008 -09), having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Thirty Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2008 -09), 14 th Lok 
Sabha on  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on 
‘Suburban and Metro Railway’. 
 
2. The Thirty Fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 
06.11.2007 and presented to Lok Sabha on 19.11.2007. The action taken replies of the 
Government on all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
10.03.2008.   
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at thei r 
sitting held on 2nd September, 2008.  
 
 4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                   (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
15 September, 2008                                                         Chairman, 
24  Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 7 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 
Thirty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08) 
on ‘Suburban and Metro Railways’.  The Report was pre sented to the 
Hon’ble Speaker on 06.11.2007  and  to the  Lok Sabha on 19.11.2007. 
Simultaneously, the Report was also laid in  the Rajya Sabha on 
19.11.2007.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 10 recommen dations/observations contained in the 
Report.  These have been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government –  
 
Para Nos.  2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 , 9 and 10. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos. 4 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
 
Para No.1 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -  
 
Nil    
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government 
on some of their recommendations/observations.   
 

 8 
A. Suburban Services in Major cities 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
 
1.4 The Committee felt that besides, Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai where the 
Railways have provided Suburban Services, there are other cities with a huge population 
of commuters from suburban areas and are badly in need of Suburban Rail Serv ices.  
They urged the Railways to undertake a detailed study of the need for providing 
Suburban Services in other major cities and apprise them of the outcome.  
 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have inter alia started as 
under:- 
“As regards providing suburban services in other cities, as per amendment made 
in 1986 to the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, Planning & 
Coordination of stand alone rail based urban transport systems is the responsibility of 
Ministry of Urban Development. Thus, for all such systems, the nodal ministry is the 
Ministry of Urban development and the State Government are required to interact with 
the Ministry of Urban development. However, Railways are providing all assistance in 
the for m of technical planning, in setting up of new metro systems in the country in 
coordination with the Ministry of Urban Development.  Delhi Metro and other new metro 
systems are under the control of Ministry of Urban Development 
 
1.6 The  Committee do not  a gree with the reply of the Ministry that providing 
Suburban system in major cities is the responsibility of the Ministry of Urban 
Development thus equating the suburban services with the Metro system.  They 
reiterate their earlier view that Suburban Servic es, which run along the existing 
Railway System and primarily ferry people from suburban areas cannot be 
classified as a Metro Railway system which comes under the Ministry of Urban 
Development and these services are operated essentially as inter -city and intra-city 
services.  While reminding the Ministry of Railways of their social obligation, the 
Committee hope that the Railways would not  forsake their responsibility to 
transport workers from surburban areas within a radius of 50 -60 Kms. into the 
main metrocities.  They feel that this step will not only control migration to urban 
areas but also distress the pressure on urban civic services.  They, therefore, 
strongly feel that the suburban services should be brought under the Ministry of 
Railways by revie wing the Government of India (Allocation Business) Rules, 1961 

 9 
and the Railways should undertake a detailed study of the need of providing 
suburban services in other major cities.  
 
B. Augmentation of line capacity and passenger carrying capacity 
in suburban section 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
 
1.7 The Committee had inter -alia observed that the doubling work 
between Ranaghat  and Krishna Nagar has not been sactioned which is 
necessary to improve the line capacity in Kolkata Suburban section. The 
Committee recommended for  further extension of Kolkata Metro upto 
Baranagar and separate Suburban Terminal for Howrah in Eastern 
Railway in order to augment the  line capacity and passenger carrying 
capacity in suburban sections.  
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:-   
 
 “On Eastern Railway, the following works are in progress for 
improving carrying capacity in suburban Section: 
 
(i) Extension of Platform from 9 coach to 12 coach length from 
Howrah to Tarakeshwar. 
(ii) Extension of Platform from 9 coach to 12 coach length are in 
progress between   Howrah  and Shaktigarh Chord  line and 
between Bandel and Shaktigarh (Main Line). 
(iii) On Sealdah Division, the extension of Platform to 12 
Coaches is under execution on Sealdah -Diamond Harbou r, 
Sealdah-Namkhana, Sealdah -Canning and Sealdah -Budge 
Budge, Sealdah –Bongaon, Sealdah -Ranaghat, Sealdah -
Dankuni and Naihati-Bandel. 
 
 
For extension of Metro Railway from Dumdum to Baranagar, a 
survey has already been sanctioned and the feasibility report  is expected 
very shortly. 
 
A proposal for separate suburban terminal at Shalimar to 
segregate EMU services from mail express services is under 
examination.” 
 

 10 
 
1.9 The Committee would like to know the outcome of the 
examination of the proposal for providin g a separate suburban 
terminal at Shalimar and the feasibility report of extension of Metro 
Railway from Dumdum to Baranagar. They also  desire to know   the 
number of platforms in Eastern Railway extended so far to 12 coach  
length and the status of the s anctioning of   doubling work between 
Ranaghat and Krishna Nagar.   
 
C. Earnings in Suburban Sections. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
1.10 The Committee observed that to bring down operational cost and 
augment earnings in suburban sections, t he Railways have among other 
steps  proposed commercial  exploitation of  land in suburban areas, 
curbing ticket less travel and setting up Automatic Ticket Machines over 
the Suburban sections. The Committee  trusted that effective 
implementation of all these measures in a time bound manner would 
result in substantial improvement of the financial results of the 
Suburban Sections.   
 
1.11 In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have  stated as 
under:- 
 
“……Regarding development of land,  Ministry of Railways is in 
touch with Govt. of Maharashtra for part funding of Mumbai 
Urban Transport Project by developing land at Bandra.  In this 
regard it is stated that it is being contemplated and 
correspondence with Govt. of Maharashtra is on for giving higher 
FAR so that land at Bandra be developed.” 
 
 
1.12 The Committee note that nothing has been mentioned in  the 
reply given by the Ministry about  the steps taken to curb ticketless 

 11 
travellers and the number of Automatic Ticket Machines set up over 
the suburban sections. They expect the Ministry to furnish the  
details in this regard. As regards the commercial exploitation of the 
land in suburban areas, Railways are in correspondence  with the 
Government of Maharashtra for part funding of Mumbai Urban 
Transport Project by developing land at Bandra. The Committee 
would like to know the final outcome thereof.  
 
D. Model stations 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
1.13    The Committee observed that out of the 500 Suburban stations, 
21 stations have been identified by Railways to be  developed as a model 
stations by March 2008.  So far only 2 Suburban stations have been 
provided with all desirable amenities and fully developed as model 
stations. The Committee desired that the works at the remaining 19 
identified model stations should be completed by March 2008 as 
planned. 
 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 
“ Out of 22 suburban stations identified for development as model 
stations, two stations have already been developed as model 
stations. At the remaining 20 stations, work of development of 
stations as Model stations is in progress . 
 
In view of the observation of the Committee and as planned earlier, 
the concerned Railways, viz. Eastern Railway, South Eastern 
Railway and Western Railway have again been directed to complete 
the work of development of the remaining stations as Model 
stations very early.” 
 
 

 12 
1.15 The Committee find that the stations on suburban sections  
selected for development as model stations were to be  completed 
by Mar ch, 2008.  However, only two suburban stations have been 
developed so far as model stations with all the desirable amenities. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of reasons for the non 
completion of the work by the targeted date i.e. March, 2008.  They  
desire that the zone -wise details  of stations so far developed as 
model stations be intimated to them  and hope that work at 
remaining stations will be completed at the earliest. 
 
E. Resolving  jurisdictional issues 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
1.16 The Committee observed that t here had been as yet unresolved 
jurisdictional issues between the Ministry of Urban Development and the 
Ministry of Railways in the matter of application of Metro Railways 
(Construction of Works) Act, 1978 to Delhi Metro in the y ear 2000 and 
administering Delhi Metro (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002 in the 
context of safety certification of Delhi Metro. On the one hand, the 
Ministry of Urban Development appears to have overstepped its 
jurisdiction in extending the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 
1978 which is administered by the Ministry of Railways and on the other, 
though the Ministry of Urban Development is the administrative Ministry 
for Delhi Metro (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002, the Ministry of 
Railways we re required to discharge the responsibility of safety 
certification of Delhi Metro. The Committee were surprised at the lack of 
coordination and cooperation between the two Ministries of Central 
Government resulting in persisting inter Ministerial wrangles .  All this 
was caused and compounded by the Ministry of Law and Justice which 
gave contradictory views as to whether or not Delhi Metro comes  

 13 
under the definition of ‘railway’.  The Committee felt that such sorry state 
of affairs can not be expected from  any quarter.  The Committee have 
been informed now by the Ministry of Urban Development that it would 
propose amendment of Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 to enable it to 
take over the responsibility of technical planning and safety of Delhi 
Metro, once the panel under the Chairmanship of Chief Commissioner of 
Railway Safety which is looking into the issue submits its Report.  The 
Committee trusted  that this would be done expeditiously as the matter 
had been in dispute for quite long. 
 
1.17 In their ac tion taken reply, the Ministry of Railways has stated as 
under:- 
 
“Regarding unlawful extension of Metro Railway (Construction of 
Works) act, 1978 to Delhi Metro in the year 2000 and 
Administering Delhi Metro (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002, 
Ministry o f Urban Development has been requested repeatedly to 
set right the anomaly created by them.  
 
Regarding amendment in Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 to 
enable Ministry of Urban Development to take over the 
responsibility of technical planning of Delhi M etro, it is stated that 
it would not be in the interest of traveling public as the Ministry of 
Urban Development has no competence/experience in train 
operations, whereas Ministry of Railways has experience of more 
than 150 years in controlling a large Railway network.” 
 
1.18 The Committee are distressed to note the slow progress  in 
resolving the jurisdictional issues with  the Ministry of Urban 
Development  in the matter of application of Metro Railways 
(Construction of Works) Act, 1978 to Delhi Metro and  in  
administering the Delhi Metro (Operation and maintenance) Act, 
2002 . They   stress that the Ministry of Railways should take up 
the matter with the Ministry of Urban Development at the highest 

 14 
level so that the  long pending dispute is settled once f or all. They                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
expect  to be intimated of the  final  out come in this regard.  
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendations (Para No.2) 
 
The Commi ttee regret that growth in the number of rakes and line capacity in 
Suburban Sections has not been commensurate with growth in suburban traffic.  There 
has been over crowding in the rakes.  The number of rakes in Western -Central Suburban 
Section is stated to be not commensurate with traffic growth due to delay in manufacture 
of EMUs.  Such delays reflect failure of Railways.  In Kolkata Suburban Section the 
Bundel-Katwa doubling work and Jirat -Katwa Section have not been sanctioned which 
are necessary to im prove the line capacity.  Similar is the case regarding doubling work 
between Ranaghat and Krishna Nagar.  The Committee recommend that works of 
augmentation of line capacity and passenger carrying capacity in Suburban Sections 
should be assigned due prior ity with sufficient fund allocation.  The Committee also 
recommend the following in this connection:- 
 
(i) Integration of Kolkata Metro with Circular Railway at Dum Dum Station. 
 
(ii) Expeditious construction of Kolkata Metro connecting Garia and 
integration with Suburban Section. 
 
(iii) Further extension of Metro upto Baranagar. 
 
(iv) Doubling of Circular Railway to make it popular. 
 
(v) Separate Suburban Terminal for Howrah in Eastern Railway. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
The Committee’s observation that growth in the number of rakes and line capacity 
in Suburban sections has not been commensurate with growth in traffic in western and 
suburban sections of Mumbai is accepted. In order to tide over the problem, Mumbai 
Railway Vikas Corporation was set up jointly by Ministry of Railw ays and of 
Government of Maharashtra and two major projects viz. MUTP Phase I (Cost: Rs. 3480 
crore) and MUTP Phase II (Cost: Rs. 4500 crore) have been processed of which, MUTP 
Phase I is targeted to get completed in Dec 2009 and MUTP Phase II is in advanc e stages 

 16 
of sanction. Together these projects will provide dedicated corridors with AC traction on 
Western and Central suburban routes and will bring down the crush load in peak hours 
from 5000 per 9 coach rake to 3000 per 9 coach rake. 
To partly meet with  the growth of passenger traffic in Mumbai area, the number 
of EMU suburban services in Central & Western Railways during the year 2006 -07 & 
2007-08 (upto Nov’07) have been increased as follows. 
Railways Total number of services as on Number of services increased 
during 
1.4.2006 31.3.2007 30.11.2007 2006-07 2007-08 (up to 
Nov’07) 
Central  1212 1255 1296 43 41 
 
Western  1017 1043 1088 26 45 
 
 
SUBURBAN SYSTEM IN KOLKATA 
 
On Eastern Railway, the following works are in progress for improving suburban 
services:- 
 
(i) Extension of platform from 9 coach to 12 coach length from Howrah to 
Tarakeshwar. 
(ii) Extension of platforms to 12 coach length are in progress between Howrah 
and Shaktigarh Chord line and between Bandel and Shaktigarh (Main 
Line) 
(iii) On the Bandel -Katwa li ne doubling of Bandel -Jirat has also been 
sanctioned. 
(iv) On Sealdah Division, the extension of platforms to 12 coaches is under 
execution  on Sealdah -Diamond Harbour, Sealdah -Namkhana, Sealdah -
Canning and Sealdah -Canning and Sealdah -Budge Budge, Sealdah -
Bongaon, Sealdah-Ranaghat, Sealdah-Dankuni and Naihati-Bandel. 
 
The works that have been mentioned above on completion will add to substantial 
carrying capacity on suburban traffic. 
 
(i) Passenger interchange system between Metro & Circular Railway is 
already available at Dum Dum station. 
 

 17 
(ii) Work of extension of Kolkata Metro from Tollygunj to Garia is in advance 
stages of completion and shall be completed by March 2009. 
 
(iii) For extension of Metro Railway from Dumdum to Baranagar, a survey has 
already been sanctioned and the feasibility report is expected very shortly. 
 
(iv) At present no proposal for doubling of Circular Railway line has been 
finalized.  Moreover, since the service caters primarily to Urban Transport 
System, the issue of cost sharing by the State Govt. needs to be addressed. 
 
A proposal for separate suburban terminal at Shalimar to segregate EMU services 
from mail express services is under examination. 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.3) 
 
The Phase-I of Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) which was originally 
scheduled to be commissioned by June 2008 at a cost of Rs.3125 crore is anticipated to 
slip up badly in adhering to the schedule and is now expected to be commissioned in 
December 2009 after a time overrun of seventeen months. The Committee feel that the 
delay attributed to order placement procedure taking longer time was avoidable with 
better planning.  The Committee would like to know the extent of cost escalation 
consequent on the delay in execution of MUTP and whether the time overrun and cost 
escalation, if any, would have any adverse impact on the funding by the World Bank.  
The Committee feel that the Railways would do well to learn from Delhi Metro which 
has a remarkable record of project planning and implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
DELAY IN EXECUTION OF MUTP PHASE I 
 
The commissioning of  Phase -I of Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) is 
getting delayed by 1 ½ years  (From June’2008 to Dec.2009) due to problems in the 
Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R) of around 15,000 ‘Project Affected Hous eholds’ 
(PAH) in Mumbai suburban area, which is being done by ‘Mumbai Metropolitan 
Regional Development Authority’ ( MMRDA) under Govt. of Maharashtra. There has 
also been some delay in procurement of new rakes for Mumbai.  

 18 
The abstract cost of MUTP Phase I  (Rail Component) was Rs. 3125 crore at 
December 2001 prices.   During negotiation with the World Bank in 2002, the 
completion cost of MUTP was worked out as Rs. 3480 crores.  It is now expected that 
the project would be completed at a total cost of around Rs. 4100 crores.  However, this 
increase in cost is not on account of time overrun but for the following reasons: Increase 
in number of rakes  proposed to be procured under MUTP Phase I has resulted in to an 
increase of Rs.300 crore. An expenditure of Rs.60 crore extra is on account R&R of 
PAHs to ensure that all civic amenities are provided to resettled and rehabilitated 
families. There has also been a disproportionate increase in the cost of steel, cement, 
aggregates and non-ferrous metals during the course of project implementation, which 
resulted in an increase of Rs.250 crores. 
As far as impact of time/cost overrun of World Bank funding is concerned, it is 
clarified that the World Bank has been fully associated and they have confirmed that 
there would be no difficulty in providing funds for timely completion of this project.  
Situation in Delhi Metro and in Mumbai Suburban System is not comparable 
because MUTP is not a Greenfield project  and involves laying of tracks and 
augmentation of facilities along an  extensively busy suburban rail network of Mumbai.  
Suburban rail network of Mumbai is considered as the lifeline of the city and runs for 
almost 20 hours a day and any disruption to it can bring the city to grinding halt.  Most of 
the work involves requir ed traffic and power blocks and can be done only during limited 
period available for such activities.  It is, therefore, not comparable to any other 
Greenfield project being undertaken by Railways, DMRC, etc. 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.5) 
 
 
The steps propo sed to bring down the operational cost and augment earnings in 
Suburban Sections include augmentation of 9 car EMU rakes to 12 car rakes (which will 
increase capacity of each rake by almost 30 percent), conversion from DC/AC traction in 
Mumbai areas (expected to result in 25 percent reduction in energy bill), fully exploiting 
the potential for advertisement revenue, commercial  exploitation of the land in Suburban 
areas, curbing ticketless travel and setting up Automatic Ticket Machines over the 
Suburban Se ctions.  The Committee trust that effective implementation of all these 

 19 
measures in a time bound manner would result in substantial improvement of the 
financial results of the Suburban Sections.  The Committee in this connection desire that 
immediate action should be taken to lengthen all Suburban Section platforms to enable 
them to handle 12 car rakes. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
At the end of MUTP Phase I, which is under execution, 100% trains on through 
lines and 20% on local lines of Central and Western Railways will be converted 
from 9 car to 12 car . Conversion of balance 80% trains on local lines of Central and 
Western Railways from 9 car to 12 car will be taken up under Phase II, which is under 
advance stages of sanction. 
 
DC to AC conversion  in suburb an sections of Western Railway and Central 
Railway (excluding Thane -CSTM section) is part of MUTP Phase I. The Thane -CSTM 
section of Central Railway will be taken up under MUTP Phase II. 
 
Regarding development of land Ministry of Railways is in touch with Govt. of 
Maharashtra for part funding of Mumbai Urban Transport Project by developing land at 
Bandra.  In this regard it is stated that it is being contemplated and correspondence with 
Govt. of Maharashtra is on for giving higher FAR so that land at Bandra be developed. 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.6) 
 
At present, operating ratios are not calculated for Suburban Sections because of 
limitation of accounting procedure. Calculation of these would be possible on completion 
of the accounting study, undertaken at t he instance of the Asian Development Bank, 
which is Scheduled to be completed by the end of 2008. The Committee are of the view 
that operating ratios of suburban sections unlike those of Zonal Railways, can be a fair 
index of operational performance of the  suburban section and accordingly desire that the 
operating ratio of each suburban section should be worked out annually soon after 
implementation of the accounting reforms. 

 20 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Suburban services are largely subsidized services provided by Indian Railways for 
the citizens of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Hyderabad. Suggestion of calculating 
operating ratios for suburban section is however noted for necessary action. 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.7) 
 
The punctuality ratio of Kolkata Subur ban Section of South Eastern Railway and 
Mumbai Suburban Section of Central Railway have been poor during the last three years 
as compared to those of Suburban Sections of other Zonal Railways. The punctuality 
ratios of South Eastern Railway Suburban Secti on was between 77.8 percent and 92.3 
percent and those of Central Railway Suburban Section was between 91.8 percent and 
93.9 percent which were far below 97 percent and above achieved by Suburban Sections 
of other Zonal Railways. The Committee hope that th e causes for this poor punctuality 
performance by the South Eastern Railway and Central Railway would be studied and 
necessary remedial steps taken to effect improvement in punctuality of Suburban 
Services. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
On South Eastern Railw ay during the year 2003 -04 the punctuality percentage of 
the suburban section (EMU trains) was 77.8% which was mainly due to installation of 
new Route Relay Interlocking at Howrah  from 17.9.2003 and the teething problems 
after commissioning of the same. 
 
During the year 2004-05 the punctuality performance had improved to 90.5% and 
further to 92.3% & 90.4% during the years 2005 -06 & 2006 -07.  During 2007 -08 (upto 
Dec. 2007) , the punctuality was 91.4% as on many occasions suburban trains lost 
punctuality as they were held up for reasons beyond Railway’s control, i.e. public 
agitation, bundhs by political parties  etc.  Close monitoring and liaison with State 
authorities is being maintained to improve punctuality further.  
 

 21 
On Central Railway during the year 20 04-05, 2005-06 and 2006 -07 punctuality 
performance was 91.8%, 93.6% and 90.0%.  In the year 2007 -08 average punctuality 
performance of the suburban system from April to Dec. 2007 was 89%.  The reasons for 
the drop are non-interlocked working for provision of two additional lines in Kalyan yard 
during April -May 2007, bad weather in the month of June 2007 and construction 
activities. 
 
Instructions have been issued from time to time to the Zonal Railway to run 
commuter and suburban services as per the schedule. 
Intensive monitoring  has been taken up at the Divisional, Zonal and Railway 
Board level for improving the punctuality of the suburban services. 
Recommendations (Para No.8) 
 
The Committee observe that out of the 500 Suburban stations, 21 stations have 
been identified by Railways to be developed as a model stations by March 2008.  Model 
stations are those which are provided with ‘desired amenities’ such as inquiry and 
computer based announcement, public address system, book stalls, parking area etc.  So 
far only 2 Suburban stations have been provided with all desirable amenities and fully 
developed as model stations. The Committee desire that the works at the remaining 19 
identified model stations should be completed by March 2008 as planned. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
Out of 22 suburban stations identified for development as model stations, two 
stations have already been developed as Model Stations.  At the remaining 20 stations, 
work of development of stations as Model Stations is in progress.   
 
In view of the observation of the Committee and as planned earlier, the concerned 
Railways, viz. Eastern Railway, South Eastern Railway and Western Railway have again 
been directed to complete the work of development of the remaining stations as 
Model stations very early. 
 
 
 
 

 22 
Recommendations (Para No.9) 
 
 
Following the serial bomb blast in Mumbai’s Western Railway on 11.7.2006, 
Railways have taken several measures for security of commuters such as minimizing the 
number of entry points, installing 68 CCTVs and 100 Do or Frame Metal Detectors at 
various Suburban Stations, use of 27 dog squads, passenger awareness campaign and 
such other steps. It has been stated that in future, all the vulnerable stations will be 
provided with CCTVs and access control gadgets and in eac h vulnerable Division, a RPF 
bomb detection and disposal squad will be raised. The Committee suggest that there 
should be a regular mechanism of intelligence agencies transmitting Railway related 
security information to Government Railway Police and RPF an d alerting them to 
maintain extra vigil in order to pre-empt terrorist attacks. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Security equipment required by RPF for the Security of Railway Passengers & 
Passenger area, have been identified.  These are being procured & installed in a phased 
manner at sensitive stations of Indian Railways. It includes CCTV, DFMD & BDDS 
along with other equipment.  Dog squad has been strengthened over Indian Railways.  At 
present RPF is having 182 sniffer and 54 Tracker dogs. WR has been sanction ed Rs. 4.11 
Crore for procurement of 06 sets of BDDS equipment. 
 
A regular mechanism of co-ordination between RPF, GRP, Local Police and 
other Intelligence Agencies already exist  at various levels for transmitting Railway 
related security information to Go vernment Railway Police and Local Police for alerting 
them to maintain extra vigil in order to prevent and detect terrorist activities on the 
Railways.   
 
Further, for bringing about smooth and better coordination between the Railways 
and the Police, coordination meetings are being organized .  State level coordination 
meetings are being held by the General Managers of the Zonal Railways with GRP 
Chiefs and CSCs / RPF wherein, inter -alia, problems of robbery, dacoity, theft of 
passengers’ belongings and othe r offences against Railway passengers are discussed and 
action plan formulated.  Periodical coordination meetings are also held by DG/RPF with 

 23 
the GRP Chiefs and DGPs of the State to discuss various issued relating to security of 
passengers and the Railway system. 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.10) 
 
There have been as yet unresolved jurisdictional issues between the Ministry of 
Urban Development and the Ministry of Railways in the matter of application of Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 to Delh i Metro in the year 2000 and 
administering Delhi Metro (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002 in the context of safety 
certification of Delhi Metro. On the one hand, the Ministry of Urban Development 
appears to have overstepped its jurisdiction in extending t he Metro Railways 
(Construction of Works) Act, 1978 which is administered by the Ministry of Railways 
and on the other, though the Ministry of Urban Development is the administrative 
Ministry for Delhi Metro (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002, the Ministr y of 
Railways were required to discharge the responsibility of safety certification of Delhi 
Metro. The Committee are surprised at the lack of coordination and cooperation between 
the two Ministries of Central Government resulting in persisting inter Minis terial 
wrangles.  All this was caused and compounded by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
which gave contradictory views as to whether or not Delhi Metro comes under the 
definition of ‘railway’.  The Committee feel that such sorry state of affairs cannot be 
expected from any quarter.  The Committee have now been informed by the Ministry of 
Urban Development that it would propose amendment of Allocation of Business Rules, 
1961 to enable it to take over the responsibility of technical planning and safety of Del hi 
Metro, once the panel under the Chairmanship of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
which is looking into the issue submits its Report.  The Committee trust that this would 
be done expeditiously as the matter has been in dispute for quite long. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Regarding unlawful extension of Metro Railway (Construction of Works) act, 
1978 to Delhi Metro in the year 2000 and Administering Delhi Metro (Operation & 
Maintenance) Act, 2002, Ministry of Urban Development has been requested 
repeatedly to set right the anomaly created by them.  

 24 
 
Regarding amendment in Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 to enable Ministry 
of Urban Development to take over the responsibility of technical planning of Delhi 
Metro, it is stated that it would not be in the interest of traveling public as the Ministry of 
Urban Development has no competence/experience in train operations , whereas 
Ministry of Railways has experience of more than 150 years in controlling a large 
Railway network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 25 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.4) 
 
The operational losses incurred by Suburban Services in the three cities viz. 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai during the year 2005 -06 stood at Rs. 837 crore.  Of this 
Kolkata Suburban Section alone accounted for as much as Rs. 692 crore loss and Chennai 
around Rs. 132 crore.  A scrutiny of the information available for the last five years 
indicates that the Mumbai Suburban Section ma de a profit between Rs. 26 crore and Rs. 
51 crore in three out of five years whereas Kolkata and Chennai Suburban Sections have 
been incurring substantial losses year after year.  
The Metro Railway of Kolkata has also been incurring losses in the range of Rs. 61 crore 
to Rs. 77 crore each year during the last five years.  The Committee desire that specific 
reasons for mounting losses incurred by Kolkata and Chennai Suburban Sections and 
Kolkata Metro Railway should be gone into in the light of the performan ce by the 
Mumbai Suburban Section and appropriate steps taken to ensure that they break -even, 
without additional financial burden on travelling public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Kolkata Metro: 
 
It Kolkata Metro,  there have been losses because there has been no change in the 
fare structure in Metro Railway since 1998 , while expenditure has gone up primarily 
on account of staff expenses, electricity cost and stores maintenance etc. The increase in 
the earning has flown from the increased  patronization of th e Metro system and this 
could not match the increased expenditure. 
In order to supplement the earnings of Metro Railway, apart from the passenger earnings, 
various avenues have been explored by the Metro Railway.  Over the years, the earnings 
from such sou rces namely Commercial publicity, licensing of station space, kiosks, 
use of Metro buildings and structure for locating BTS, Repeaters, Micro Cell 
providers have brought in earnings.  

 26 
Further efforts are on for identifying vacant/spare able space in Metro Railway for 
Commercial use as well as for larger use of station buildings, platforms etc. for 
advertisement.  
These earnings are sundry however and it may be difficult to bridge the losses 
unless fares are revised. 
 
Chennai: 
Subsidized fare structure of suburban services is the main reason for the losses, 
in spite of improved efficiency in the operation of suburban services.  Further the 
working expenses for the suburban services including the depreciation and interest 
charges have gone up steadily. The efficiency parameters indicate marked improvement 
in the year 2006-07 compared to 2005-06 as under:   
Description 2005-06 2006-07 
No. of Coaches(On line) 597 650 
No. of Suburban Passengers Originating (in 
Millions) 
260.12 290.93 
Train Kms.(in 000s) 6944 7245 
Vehicle Kms (in 000s) 57921 62485 
No. of Trains per day 621 648 
Average Lead (Kms/Passengers) 22.27 22.34 
Total Passenger Kms (in 000s) 5792665 6500024 
Earnings per train km. (in rupees) 122.23 125.30 
 
Railway is taking special steps to fully expl oit the potential for advertisement revenue, 
Commercial exploitation of the land in suburban area, curbing ticket-less travel and 
stepping up of automatic ticket vending machine over the suburban sections. However, 
the above area will not match with the lo ss sustained in the suburban sections, though it 
will contribute to some extent. 

 27 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendations (Para No.1) 
 
Suburban services of Indian Railways provide vital link between suburbs and the 
city in three metropolitan cities viz. Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai.  Suburban Sections 
of Kolkata have a length of 705 kms., Chennai -162.56 kms. and Mumbai -135 kms.  The 
average number of passengers originating daily in suburban services of these three cities 
has been as high as 9.1 million in the year 2005 -06.  The Committee feel that there are 
other cities with a huge population of commuters from suburban areas an d are badly in 
need of Suburban Rail Services. It has been contended in this context that urban transport 
is a State subject and Metro Railway System form an integral part of the Urban Transport 
System.  In the opinion of the Committee, the Suburban Servic es, which run along the 
existing Railway System and primarily ferry people from suburban areas, cannot but be 
bracketed as a Metro Railway System which essentially operates intra -city.  The 
Committee also do not agree with the other reasons cited by the Railway Board Chairman 
against taking up new suburban systems that they are very capital intensive and incur 
huge losses.  The Committee wish to remind the Railways of its social obligations and of 
the existing mechanism of meeting such obligations through c ross subsidization. The 
Committee urge the Railways to undertake a detailed study of the need for providing 
Suburban Train Services in other major cities and apprise the Committee of the outcome. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
It is a fact that the average num ber of passengers originating daily in suburban 
services of Metro cities - Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Delhi and Hyderabad is  increasing 
day by day  due to fast pace of urbanization and development of infrastructure, in and 
around the rail network.  
 
 
Despite the fact that suburban services due to subsidized fares of these services 
are by and large a loss making proposition, Indian Railways have taken up many 
suburban projects to improve suburban services in Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai and 
Hyderabad.  Important projects being executed at present to improve suburban services 

 28 
are Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) Phase I, MUTP -II, Extension of MRTS 
Phase II in Chennai from Velachery to St.Thomas Mount and Extension of Metro 
Railway from Tollyganj to Garia.  For  the city of Hyderabad, Multi Modal Transport 
System (MMTS) Phase II is also being considered by the Ministry of railways. 
 
 
As regards providing suburban services in other cities, as per amendment made in 
1986 to the Government of India (Allocation of Bus iness) Rules, 1961, Planning & 
Coordination of stand alone rail based urban transport systems is the responsibility of 
Ministry of Urban Development. Thus, for all such systems, the nodal ministry is the 
Ministry of Urban development and the State Governme nt are required to interact with 
the Ministry of Urban development. However, Railways are providing all assistance in 
the form of technical planning, in setting up of new metro systems in the country in 
coordination with the Ministry of Urban Development.  Delhi Metro and other new metro 
systems are under the control of Ministry of Urban Development.   

 29 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                  BASUDEB ACHARIA, 
15 September, 2008                        Chairman, 
24 Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Railways.

 30 
APPENDIX I  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2008-09) 
 
The Committee sat  on Tuesday, the 2 nd September, 2008 from 1500 hrs. to                        
1540  hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
7. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
11. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
13. Shri Motilal Vora 
14. Shri Nandi Yellaiah  
15. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
17. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18. Shri N. Balaganga 
19. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Deputy Secretary - II 
 

 31 
 
2.  ***  ***  ***  ***  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Reports on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 34 th Reports on ‘Suburban and Metro 
Railways’.  The Committee adopted the Report with  minor modifications and 
authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports and present the same to the 
House.   
 
4.  ***  ***  ***  *** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
       

 32 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 34th REPORT        
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘SUBURBAN AND METRO RAILWAY’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     10 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by   08 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 2, 3 ,5 , 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
 
Percentage of total         80% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   01 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
Para No. 4 
 
Percentage of total         10% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    1 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para No. 1 
 
Percentage of total            10% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   1 
replies of Government are still awaited  
NIL 
 
Percentage of total            NIL 
 
 
  
  
 