 
   3 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
[Action taken by the Government o n the R ecommendations/Observations contained in  
the 17th Report of the Standing Co mmittee on Railways -  2004 (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Railway Recruitment Policy’]  
 
 
  
 
THIRD  REPORT 
 
 
         
  
      
                 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana,1926 (Saka) 
 

 2
 
SCR No. 81 
 
THIRD  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
  
[Action taken by the Government o n the R ecommendations/Observations contained in  
the 17 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways – 2004 (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Railway Recruitment Policy’]  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2004 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 

 3
  
CONTENTS 
 
 
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
Chapter-I - Report            1 
Chapter-II - Recommendati ons/Observations which have been         
   accepted by the Government          7 
 
Chapter-III - Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     10 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   r e p l i e s  
 
Chapter-IV  Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which      14 
   replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which requires reiteration 
 
Chapter-V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final      15 
   replies of the Gove rnment are still awaited 
    
         
  
APPENDIX 
  
PART-II 
  
(I)  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on  
Railways held on           17 
 
(II) Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the        
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
17th Report 2003 (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Railway  
Recruitment Policy’.            19 
     .      
     
        
  
 
 
 
 

 4
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atique Ahamad 
5.         Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Subrata Bose  
7.         Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamaraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 

 5
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri P.D.T. Achari  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Under Secretary 
 5. Shri. Pankaj Kumar Sharma - Sr. Exe. Asstt. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 6
 
  
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Railways (2004) having been authorised 
by the Committee to present t he Report on their behalf, present  this Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2004), on Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 17 th Report of t he Standing 
Committee on Railways(2003) (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Railway Recruitment Policy’. 
  
2. The 17 th Report of the Committee was pres ented to Lok Sabh a on 04.02.2004 
and it contained eight recomm endations/observations.  The ac tion taken replies of the 
Government on all the recommendations/obs ervations contained in the Report were 
received on 26.05.2004 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Railways (2004)  considered the draft Action Taken 
Report and adopted the same at  their sitting held on 23 rd November, 2004.   Minutes of 
the sittings held on 23rd November,2004 form Part-II of the Report. 
  
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 17 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2004), 13 th 
Lok Sabha is given in Appendix – II. 
 
New Delhi;                                            (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
1st December, 2004                                                      Chairman, 
10 Agrahayana , 1926 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on Railways 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
  

 7
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations and observa tions contained in the 17 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004) on ‘Railway Re cruitment Policy’.  The Report was 
presented in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 04.02.2004. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received fr om the Government in respect of all 
the 8 recommendations/observations contai ned in the Report.  These have been 
broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government – Para Nos.1, 4, 5 and 8.    
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies – Para Nos. 3, 6 and 7.  
      
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – NIL.      
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies are still 
awaited  – Para No. 2.     
 
 
3. The Committee desire that fi nal reply in respect of the 
recommendation/observation for which only in terim reply has been given by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on some of 
their recommendations/observations. 

 8
Provision of more RRBs 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
5. The Committee had in paragraph 1 of the Report noted that there were 19 
Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) all ov er the country to meet the need of 
recruitment of Group ‘C’ and  Group ‘D’ posts for the Railways and their Production 
Units.  These RRBs have been set up k eeping into account the administrative 
convenience of the Railways to cater to the recruitment needs of certain Zonal 
Railways/Railway Divisions and the Railwa y  Production Units based in a specific 
geographical area.  The Committee had also  noticed that these RRBs were not 
geographically State-based. As a result of this, the applicants  from all over the country 
compete for the posts advertised for recruitm ent by any of the RRB s resulting in the 
multiplicity of contenders for a few posts t hus causing a great inconvenience to the 
candidates from other States regarding tr avelling, accommodation etc. on the one hand 
and huge administrative, managerial and financial burden on the RRB of the area on the 
other. 
 
The Committee were of the considered view that the RRBs should have been 
established on more rational and practical criteria after taking into account not only the 
administrative convenience of the Railways but also the convenie nce of the applicants. 
They, therefore, strongly recommended to revi ew the jurisdiction of all the existing 
RRBs and reshuffle/relocate the same on more practical and ra tional basis.  In this way 
not only the unmanageable burden of the RRBs will get r educed but hardships of 
travelling and accommodation etc. to the exam inees from far flung States will also be 
addressed to.  Moreover, if need be, more RRBs can be est ablished to provide equal 
opportunity and level playing field to all sections of Indian society both urban and rural.  
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Jurisdiction of RRBs has since been reviewed and changes, where 
required, are being effected to suit  the administrative convenience and 
aspirations of the people of those areas”. 
 

 9
7. The Committee in their Report ha d expressed their view that the RRBs 
should have been established on more rationa l and practical criteria after taking 
into account not only the administrative convenience of the Railways but also the 
convenience of the applicants.  They had,  therefore, recommended to review the 
jurisdiction of all the existing RRBs a nd reshuffle/relocate the same on more 
practical and rational basis.  They were of the opinion that in this way not only the 
unmanageable burden of the RRBs will ge t reduced but hardships of travelling 
and accommodation etc. to the examinees fr om far flung states will also be taken 
care of.   The Ministry in their reply have stated that juri sdiction of RRBs has 
since been reviewed and cha nges, where required, are being effected to suit the 
administrative convenience and aspirations  of the people of those areas.  The 
Committee desire that the Railways shoul d provide details of  changes which 
have been brought about by the Railways  in RRBs’ jurisdiction.  They would also 
like to know the manner in which such ch anges, would provide equal opportunity 
and level playing field to all sections of  the society both urban and rural.  They 
desire to be apprised of the status of implementation of the said changes within a 
period of three months.  
 
Expediting the Selection Process 
Recommendation (Para No.  4) 
8. The Committee had been apprised by the Minist ry that normally     9-18 months 
time is taken to hand over the panel of se lected candidates to t he indenting Railway 
Departments/Production Units.  However, sometimes the time ta ken by the Railway 
Recruitment Boards in preparing final result extends upto 2 years.  Though the Railways 
count this time from the dat e of indent of requirement, it  was noticed that the time 
schedule for final selection had not been strict ly adhered to.   The Committee were of 
the opinion that this not onl y creates uncertainty in the minds of the unemployed youth 
but also results in keepi ng the vacancies pending in the indenting Railway 
Departments/Production units.  They also cautioned the Mi nistry that during the period 
of this delay meritorious candidates, who had been selected, could join elsewhere 
thereby making the entire process of selection futile.  The Committee had lamented that 
despite making use of computerisation in the selection process, the RRBs had not been 
able to reduce the time taken in preparing t he final results.  Th ey had, therefore, 

 10
strongly recommended that the results of all examinations be necessarily declared 
within a period of 3 months from the date of conducting the examination. 
 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken replies stated: 
“In view of the position given to the Committee, normally nine to eighteen 
months time is taken for finalization of panels of various posts depending on their 
selection procedure.  Keepi ng in view the essential requirements with regard to 
issue of call letters, physical checking of all rejected applications, processing of 
application data by computer agencies, taking out applications of large number of 
candidates qualifying written examinati on, including verification of their 
particulars before declaration of the result  and various types of incidents taking 
place during different stages of examination etc ., it is not possible to adhere to 
the recommendation of the Committee.  However, all necessary steps will be 
taken to reduce the time taken in finalization of the recruitment process.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  5) 
 
10. The Committee had  taken a serious no te of the fact that the number of 
vacancies in Group ‘D’ increased to 39759 in 2003 from 4293 in 1999 while the 
vacancies in Group ‘C’ also continued to hover around one lakh.   The Committee were 
of the view that the main r eason for such a large number of vacancies was on account 
of the fact that the examinat ions were not conducted regular ly by the respective RRBs. 
Besides, time consuming process involved in  the recruitment was another big factor 
which had contributed towards this.  They, therefore, were of the considered opinion 
that the pace of recruitment  be expedited in view of hu ge backlog of vacancies in 
aforesaid categories. 
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken replies stated; 
“Despite several factors contributing to delay in the process of 
recruitment, all out efforts will be made fo r accelerating the pace of recruitment, 
as recommended.”  
 

 11
 
11. The Committee had recommended in th e above paras that the Ministry of 
Railways should reduce the time taken in the selection process   in view of the 
huge backlog of vacancies in group ‘C’ & ‘D ’ categories as normally 9-18 months 
time was taken to hand over the panel of selected candidates to the indenting 
Railway Departments/Production Units.  The Ministry have in their action taken 
replies stated that despite several factors contributing to  delay in the process of 
recruitment all out efforts will be made  to accelerate the pace of recruitment.  
They have also stated that all necessary efforts will be taken to reduce the time 
taken in finalisation of th e recruitment process.  However, the Committee are not 
satisfied with the replies of the Government.    They desire to be apprised of the 
specific steps taken/proposed to be taken to expedite the pace of recruitment so 
that the huge backlog of vacancies are filled up at the earliest. 
 
Transparency in the Process of Recruitment by RRBs 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
12. The Committee had in paragraph 8 of the Report noted that the Railway Board 
have taken a number of steps to ensure trans parency in the process of recruitment by 
RRBs. Appreciating the initiatives taken in  this regard by the Railway Recruitment 
Control Board, the Committee opined that still a lot was required to be done at the grass 
root level viz. examination cent res.  Further in order to ensure that the malpractices in 
the examination centres also do not take place, the Committee opined that it was 
equally essential to enhance th e surveillance, through the Vi gilance Department of the 
Railways by conducting greater number of ra ids through the flying squads during the 
examinations.  They also des ired that the present system of ensuring transparency and 
impartiality be kept up”. 

 12
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Mi nistry of Railways have stated:-    
“The suggestion  of the Committee to conduct more number of preventive 
checks during the examination conducted by Railway Recruitment Boards has 
been accepted and necessary instruct ions in this regard have been 
communicated to all the Zonal Railways”. 
 
14. The Committee note that the Mini stry of Railways have accepted the 
suggestion made by them to conduct more number of preventive checks during 
the examination conducted by RRBs and nece ssary instructions in this regard 
have been communicated to all the Zonal Railways.  However, they desire to 
know the content of the instructions gi ven to the Zonal Railways in this regard. 
The Committee are of the view that such  measures, if implemented in the right 
spirit would go a long way in ensuring transparency in the process of recruitment 
by RRBs.  They would also like to know the extent to which these instructions 
have been implemented.   
  

 13
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  1) 
 
The Committee have noted that there are 19 Railway Recruitment Boards 
(RRBs) all over the country to meet the need of recruitm ent of Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ 
posts for the Railways and their Production  Units.  These RRB s have been set up 
keeping into account the administrative conv enience of the Railways to cater to the 
recruitment needs of certain Zonal Railways/Railway Divisions and the Railway  
Production Units based in a specific geog raphical area.  The Committee have also 
noticed that these RRBs are not geographically State-based. As a result of this, the 
applicants from all over the c ountry compete for the posts adv ertised for recruitment by 
any of the RRBs.  They observe  that the present location of these RRBs has resulted in 
the multiplicity of contenders for a few posts ultimately causing a great inconvenience  
to the candidates from other States regarding travelling, accommodation etc. on the one 
hand and huge administrative, managerial and financial burden on the RRB of the area 
on the other. 
 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the RRBs should have been 
established on more rational and practical crit eria after taking into account not only the 
administrative convenience of the Railways but also the c onvenience of the applicants. 
They, therefore, strongly recommend to the Minist ry to review the jurisdiction of all the 
existing RRBs and reshuffle/relocate the sa me on more practical and rational basis.  
They are of the opinion that in this way not only the unmanageable burden of the RRBs 
will get reduced but hardships of travelli ng and accommodation etc.  to the examinees 
from far flung States will also be addresse d to.  Moreover, the Committee are of the 
view that if need be, more RRBs can be es tablished to provi de equal opportunity and 
level playing field to all sections of Indian society both urban and rural.  
 
 
 

 14
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Jurisdiction of RRBs has since been re viewed and changes, where required, are 
being effected to suit the administrative convenience and aspirations of the people of 
those areas.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  4) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised by the Mini stry that normally     9-18 months 
time is taken  to hand over the panel of selected candidates to the indenting Railway 
Departments/Production Units.  However, sometimes the time ta ken by the Railway 
Recruitment Boards in preparing final results extends upto 2 years.  Though the 
Railways count this time from the date of indent of requirement, it has been usually 
noticed that the time schedule for final select ion has not been strictly adhered to.   The 
Committee are of the opinion t hat this not only creates uncer tainty in the minds of the 
unemployed youth but also results in keeping the vacancies pending in the indenting 
Railway Departments/Production units.  They also cautio n the Ministry that during the 
period of this delay meritorious candidates, who have been selected, may join 
elsewhere thereby making the entire process of selection futile.  The Committee lament 
that despite making use of computerisation in the selection process, the RRBs have not 
been able to reduce the time taken in preparin g the final results.  They, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the results of all examinations  be necessarily  declared within 
a period of 3 months from the date of conducting the examination. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In view of the position given to the Committee, normally nine to eighteen months 
time is taken for finalization of panels of  various posts depending on their selection 
procedure.  Keeping in view the essential requirements with regard to issue of call 
letters, physical checking of all rejected applic ations, processiong of application data by 
computer agencies, taking out applications of large number  of candidates qualifying 
written examination, including verification of their particula rs before declaration of the 
result and various types of in cidents taking place during diffe rent stages of examination 

 15
etc., it is not possible to adhere to the re commendation of the Committee.  However, all 
necessary steps will be taken to reduce the time taken in finalization of the recruitment 
process.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.  5) 
 
 The Committee have also taken a serious note that the number of vacancies in 
Group ‘D’ has increased to 39759 in 2003 from 4293 in 1999.  The vacancies in Group 
‘C’ also continued to hover around one lakh, whic h is also matter worth considering.  
The Committee are of the view that the main reason for such a large number of 
vacancies is on account of the fact that the examinations are not conducted regularly by 
the respective RRBs. Besides, time consumi ng process involved in the recruitment is 
another big factor which has contributed towa rds this.  They, ther efore, are of the 
considered opinion that the pace of recruitment be expedited in view of huge backlog of 
vacancies in aforesaid categories. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Despite several factors contributing to delay in the process of recruitment, all out 
efforts will be made for accelerating the pace of recruitment, as recommended.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8) 
 
 The Committee note that the Railway Board have taken a number of steps to 
ensure transparency in the proce ss of recruitment by RRBs.  They certainly appreciate 
the initiatives taken by the Railway Recruitment  Control Board in this  regard.  However, 
the Committee think that still a lot is required to be done at  the grass root level viz. 
examination centres.  No  doubt, Question Papers are opened in the presence of 
examiners and a certificate  to this effect is obtained from them. Nevertheless, in order 
to ensure that the malpractices in the exami nation centres also do not  take place, it is 
equally essential to enhance th e surveillance, through the Vi gilance Department of the 
Railways by conducting greater number of ra ids through the flying squads during the 
examinations.  They also desire that the present system  of ensuring transparency and 
impartiality be kept up. 
 

 16
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The suggestion  of the Committee to conduc t more number of preventive checks 
during the examinat ion conducted by Railway Recruitment Boards has been accepted 
and necessary instructions in this regar d have been communicated to all the Zonal 
Railways. 

 17
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  3) 
  
The Committee have noted that the mini mum academic qualification for Group 
‘D’  & Group ‘C’ posts has  been specified as  8 th standard and 10 th standard 
respectively. As in most of t he States no board ex amination for 8 th Standard is being 
held, it becomes very difficult to che ck the veracity and authenticity of the same. 
Moreover, prescribing lesser qualification for Group ‘D’ posts often results in getting a 
large number of applications. The Committee, t herefore, are of the unanimous view that 
the minimum academic qualification for Group ‘D’ post be fixed as 10 th standard which 
will not only ensure veracity of the certificate but also reduce t he number of contenders 
and enhance the general awareness of Group ‘D’ st aff.   They also stress that in the 
advertisement for the examination itself  the pay scales  of Class ‘D’ post may be 
specified. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Group “D” posts on the Indian Railways co ver a large number of categories like 
Khalasis, Khalasi Helper, Safaiwalas, G angmen, Malis, Lampmen, Peons, Porters, 
Watermen and so on.  The work performed by t hese various categories is not identical.  
While the duties of some do require some tec hnical knowledge, it is not so in the case 
of other categories which are involved in activities like material handling, cleaning 
sanitation etc. which are essentially unskill ed in nature and are performed by unskilled 
personnel. 
 
 Further, the implications of intr oducing Class X as minimum educational 
qualifications for recruitment to all Group “D” posts with the minimum qualification as an 
unequivocal nexus has been established by 5 th CPC between the recruitment 
qualification of matriculation and recruitment grade of Rs. 3050-4590.  It may be difficult 
to enhance recruitment qualification to matriculation without attracting corresponding 

 18
demands for allotment of the commensurate pay sc ale.  This is neit her administratively 
desirable nor financially prudent. 
 
 Further, even with Class VIII as the qualific ation, there have be en protests from 
the organized labour on the gr ound that many of the jobs in Group “D” on the Railways 
such as Safaiwalas do not require any qualification. 
 
 In view of the above, a conscious dec ision has been taken by the Board to 
prescribe Class VIII as the recruitment qualification for Group “D”. 
   
 
Recommendation (Para No.  6) 
 
 During the course of exam ination of the subject in question, the Committee have 
come across the fact that there were  4700 requests pending for compassionate 
appointments as on 31.03.2003.  They were also briefed by  the Ministry that the 
compassionate appointments are provided as a matter of  compassion and not as a 
matter of right.  The Ministry  further informed that on the basis of Welfare Inspector’s 
Report regarding the financial health of the family, the appointment on compassionate 
ground is decided.  The Committ ee are not inclined to agree with the methodology that 
is being presently adopted by the Railways for appoint ments under the compassionate 
category.  They are of  
the view that such cases need to be treat ed on a different footing altogether.  They 
therefore, desired that for such cases the eligibility criteria for Group ‘C’ posts should be 
based on minimum educational qualification and in the case of Group ‘D’ posts it should 
be based on medical fitness of the c andidates besides the minimum required 
qualification.    In case thes e requirements are fulfilled the ot her criteria such as testing, 
ascertaining the financial position etc. should be dispensed with. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The scheme of appointment on compassi onate ground to a dependent family 
member of a Railway employee who die in harness or who is retired on medical 
grounds is to relieve his family from financial destitution and help the family to tide over 

 19
the immediate financial distress.  Offering compassionate appointm ent as a matter of 
course irrespective of the deceased or m edical retired Government servant is not 
permissible. 
 
 Ministry of Railways, in this regard fo llows the guidelines laid down by the nodal 
department i.e. Department of  Personnel & Training (DO P&T) which is as per the 
judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  7) 
 The Committee also note t hat the Railway Safety Re view Committee (Khanna 
Committee) had recommended for enhancement of  qualifying marks in the written 
examination to 50% for general candidates  and 45% marks for reserved category 
candidates.  However, the Railway Board  raised the same to 40% for general 
candidates, 30% for SC & OBC and 25% for ST candidates w.e.f. 1.11.2003.  The 
Committee are of the view th at the paramount aspect of safety and security of the 
Railways have touched the lowest ebb nowadays. They, therefore, consider it expedient 
to urge upon the Ministry that the qualifying marks in the written examination at least for 
safety related posts be invariably enhanced to 50% in case of general candidates and 
45% for all reserved candidates as per t he recommendation of th e Khanna Committee.  
They emphasize that such an   important aspect of safety  of passengers and Railways 
should not be compromised with.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Railway Board had reviewed and revise d minimum qualifying marks percentage 
to the existing level based on the recomme ndation of Khanna Commi ttee.  Revision of 
minimum qualifying marks was kept at the exis ting level in view of the shortfall in 
reserved categories, especially in Scheduled Tribes. 

 20
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION   
 
  
  
 
 
- NIL -

 21
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  2) 
 
 The Committee find that the RRBs are holdi ng examinations as per the indent of 
requirement of posts furnished by the Z onal/Divisional Railways and the Production 
Units of the Railways falling under their respective jurisdiction.  Each RRB conducts 
these examinations independently on separate dates.  Multiplication of application for a 
few posts has posed a challege for each RRB to conduct the competitive exams in an 
efficient and effective way.  The Committee have been appris ed by the Ministry of the 
fact that the RRBs are bound by the Guid elines of the Depart ment of Personnel & 
Training dated 18.05.1998 issued in pursuance of the Supreme Court’s Verdict on 
22.08.1996 (Excise Super intendent  Vs K.B.K. Vishve shwra Rao). These guidelines 
permit every prospective candidate  irrespec tive of his geographic location to apply to 
any RRB for any post, which ultimately leads to duplicity of applications. It has led to a 
chaotic situation where for even very few pos ts innumerable applicants from  all over 
the country apply for the exam ination conducted  by each RRB.  Moreover, this has 
increased monetary, manageria l and supervisory burden on the RRBs. Simultaneously 
examinees also suffer a lot in terms of non-availability of adequate rail reservation, road 
transport and accommodation facilities.   
 
The Committee therefore, express t heir unhappiness over such huge amount of 
wasteful expenditure.  They, t herefore, are constrained to  recommend that the Railway 
Recruitment  Control Board (RRCB) in coordination with all RRBs must ensure a 
common advertisement of all po sts of all categories, required to be filled up once or 
twice a year as per their administrativ e and managerial convenience, the written 
examination for common categories in al l the RRBs be held simultaneously in a 
synchronised way.  They are of  the firm view that by resorting to such practice, the 
duplicity of applications  will get drastically reduced to  manageable level ultimately  
benefiting at large the local  people of the area, exami nees and excess monetary  & 
managerial burden on Railways. 

 22
 
 During the course of oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways apprised the Committee that the Ministry would look into the matter 
concerning the recruitment of Group ‘D’ posts from local areas.  They also opined that it 
would be much easier and practical if it is  made local based.  The Committee, keeping 
into account the legal aspect and the aspira tion of the local people desire that the 
Ministry may seek legal opin ion from the concerned Mini stries/Departments in this 
regard so that their aspiration may be, if possible, accommodated.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The matter regarding common advertisement of all posts of all categories is 
being examined keeping in view all aspects of the matter. 
 
 The matter regarding recruitment of Group “D” posts from local areas is under 
consideration of the Board. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23rd November, 2004                                    Chairman,  
2nd  Agrahayana , 1926 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on Railways 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 