 2 
 
 
SCR No. 81 
 
SECOND  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
  
[Action taken by the Government o n the R ecommendations/Observations contained in  
the 15 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways – 2003 (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Ongoing & Pending Projects’]  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2004 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana,1926 (Saka) 

 3 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
 
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
  
Chapter-I - Report              1 
Chapter-II - Recommendations/O bservations which have been 
   accepted by the Government           6 
Chapter-III - Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   r e p l i e s              1 0  
Chapter-IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
   replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which requires reiteration         17 
Chapter-V  Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of which final 
   replies of the Government are still awaited          20  
    
         
  
APPENDIX 
 
PART - II 
   
I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on  23.11.2004.             21 
 
II  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 
15th Report  2003 (13th Lok Sabha)  on  ‘Railway 
 Recruitment Policy’.             23  
    
     .      
     
        
  
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atique Ahamad 
5.         Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Subrata Bose  
7.         Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamaraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri P.D.T. Achari  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Under Secretary 
 5. Shri. U.C. Bharadwaj  - Executive Officer 
   
(iv) 

 5 
 
 
  
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Railw ays (2004) having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on  their behalf,  pres ent this Second Repor t of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004), on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways(2003) (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Ongoing and Pending Projects’. 
  
2. The 15 th Report of the Committee was presen ted to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2003 and it 
contained nine recommendations/ observations.  The action taken re plies of the Government on 
all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 26.05.2004 
 
3. The Standing Committee on Railways (2004) considered the draft Action Taken Report 
and adopted the same at their sitting held on  23.11.2004.   Minutes of th e sittings held on 23 rd 
November,2004 form Part-II of the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 15 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2003), 13 th 
Lok Sabha is given in Appendix – II.  
  
 
 
New Delhi;                                              (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
1st December, 2004                                                         Chairman, 
10 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Railways 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
  

 6 
 
  
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in th e Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways -2003 (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Ongoing & Pending Projec ts’which was presented in Lok 
Sabha on 16.12.2003. 
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from  the Government in respect of all the 9 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been broadly categorized as 
follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government- 
Para Nos. 3.5, 3.6 and 3.8, 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies – Para Nos. 3.1, 3.3, 3.7 and 3.9 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – Para Nos. 3.2 and 3.4  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which final replies are still awaited 
                                                           –Nil 
 
1.3. The Committee will now deal with the Ac tion Taken by Government  on some of their 
Recommendations/Observations. 
 
Introspection by the Railways 
Recommendations (Para No. 3.2) 
1.4 The Committee had in paragraph 3.2 of the Re port opined that it was high time for the 
Railways to introspect themselves and opt for a stocktaking exercise into their objectives 
and achievements.  They therefore, recommen ded that the Railways should restrain their 
market borrowings and operating cost to th e minimum and increase their internal 
generation of revenues to th e optimum extent, Railways mu st overcome their built-in 
inefficiency and increasing operative costs.  Th ey were of the firm view that it can be 
done only by restructuring the entire administrativ e edifice of the Railway Board, 

 7 
 
rationalizing the freight and passenger fare policy, establishing a mechanism for tariff 
fixation, improving operational productivity and efficiency, undertaking a vigorous 
commercial management and upgrading safety infrastructure.” 
 
 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Minist ry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“The Railways are aware of the fast cha nging scenario in tr ansport sector and 
economy in general and are taking required steps to meet the growing demands of 
passenger and freight traffic, capacity enhancement, resource mobilisation and achieving 
reduced operating ratio. 
  
The level of market borrowings which is need based, has remained steady and has 
been kept under control.  Ma rket borrowing through IRFC is resorted mainly to meet the 
funding requirement of Rolling Stock acquisi tion/replacement and modernization.  This 
figure is restricted to the assessed requireme nt to meet the traffic demands only.  As a 
percentage of total Plan outlay, market  borrowing has come down from 36% during 
1998-99 to 22% during the year 2003-04(RE).  Railways efforts to control expenditure 
and augment earnings have begun to fructif y visibly as a result of which, the operating 
ratio has improved considerably from 98.3% in 2000-01 to around 92% in 2003-04.  The 
rate of growth of Ordinary Working Expenses  has now come down to less than 4% from 
8 to 14% in the pre-Fifth Pay Commission era.  The internal resource generation for Plan 
has also improved progressively from Rs. 2831 crore after deferring dividend to the 
extent of Rs.1823 crore in 2000-01 to Rs.3837 crore in 2003-04(RE).  The Railways’ 
efforts to augment earnings inter-alia cove r rationalization of th e traffic structure, 
innovative marketing strategies and focused business organisation. 
 
The efforts of the Railways will be to concentrate on core ac tivities of passenger 
and freight transportation.  Improvement of safety infrastructure on the Railways is given 
utmost priority and a Special Railway Safe ty Fund has been created to wipe out the 
arrears of replacement/renewal of assets.  Besi des, a Corporate Safety Plan has also been 
formulated to guide the future investment on the Railways.”  
 
  

 8 
 
 
1.6 From the action taken replies of the Mini stry, the Committee find that the share of 
market borrowings in the Plan outlays has witnessed a downward trend from 36% in 1998-
99 to 22% in 2003-04(RE) and in the case of Ordinary Working Expenses from 8-14% to 
4% in the pre-Fifth Pay Commission era.  Ho wever, they are of the view that more 
concrete measures are still required to be ta ken in this direction.  They express their 
apprehension over the Operating Ratio which has been fluctuating in between 92% to 
98.3% for the last few years.  They are of the view that although net revenues in absolute 
terms have increased but the surplus revenues h ave not been adequate enough to meet the 
investment needs in the rail in frastructure.  They further ob serve that in their reply the 
Ministry of Railways  have not intimated the corrective steps taken on the issue of 
restructuring railway administ rative edifice and tariff fixation policy nor adequately 
elaborated the measures taken for commercial management.  
 
1.7  The Committee, therefore, de sire that the Ministry of Ra ilways should give utmost 
importance to their considered views/observat ions and sincerely cons ider all the issues 
contained in the said para and take adequate measures as suggested by them.    They would 
like to be apprised of the further action taken in these matter. 
 
Project-wise priority fixation 
Recommendation (Para No.3.4) 
1.8 The Committee had in paragraph 3.4 of the Report noted that as per the Ministry of 
Railways, the Budgetary Support as  a part of the Annual Plan had witnessed a decreasing trend.  
It was 75% in the V Plan, which has drastically  came down to 23% in the VIII Plan after the 
establishment of the Indian Railway Finance Corporation in December, 1986, which was 
incorporated with the sole objective of raising m oney from the market to finance partly the Plan 
Outlay and the developmental needs of the Railways.  The Budgetary Support had now increased 
to 35% (approximately) in the year 2003-04.  During the course of evidence, the Committee 
were apprised by the representati ves of the Ministry of Finan ce and the Planning Commission 
that the Budgetary Support had in creased in terms of percentage as well as in absolute term 
during the last 5-6 years.     It has increa sed to 6.46% in 2001-02 from 3.97% in 1995-96 as a 
part of Central Plan.   In absolute term also  it had increased from Rs .1141 crore (75% of the 
Annual Plan) in the V Plan to Rs.14445 crore appr oximately (average 31% of the Annual Plans 
of the Railways) in IX Plan.  Further they stat ed that providing additiona l funds to the Railways 

 9 
 
to execute the ongoing projects was not a probl em provided the Railways  assure to deliver 
results.  However, they emphasized that the Ra ilways must select the last-mile projects and 
prioritize them realistically enough to co mplete the same in a time-bound manner. The 
Committee, having analyzed the scope of funding from the Central Exchequer, had reached the 
conclusion that the Ministry of Railways must  workout an effective strategy and prepare a 
project-wise priority of their projects in consultation with the Pl anning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance within three months so as to execute those projects first which ensure 100% 
results.  They further emphasized that the project executing author ities must be made 
accountable for all causes of dela y in execution except in the case of natural calamity and want 
of funds.  
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“So far as prioritization exercise is concer ned, it is pointed out that categorization 
of projects was earlier done in 1998 and approved by the Government in November, 
1998.  As per this, new line and gauge conversi on projects were categorized in different 
categories.  Further, as directed by the Gove rnment, re-prioritization exercise was again 
carried out duly identifying the projects for co mpletion during Xth Plan and XIth  Plan.  
The proposal was considered by the Government in August, 2003; however, the same 
was withdrawn.  There is a system for mon itoring of projects and the project executing 
authority is accountable for timely completion of projects except where the delay is not in 
his control.” 
 
1.10 The Committee were apprised by the Plan ning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance that providing of addi tional funds to the Railways to  execute the ongoing projects 
was not a problem provided the Railways assure to deliver results by realistic prioritization 
of projects with weightage to last mile projects.  The Committee had, therefore,  
recommended for working out an effective stra tegy to prepare a project-wise priority in 
consultation with the Ministry of Financ e and the Planning Commission within three 
months.  They had also emphasized for fixi ng responsibility/accountability of project 
executing authorities  for all causes of delays except in case of natural calamity and want of  
funds. 

 10 
 
 
1.11 The Committee find that the ongoing proj ects especially New Lines and Gauge 
Conversion projects were prioritized by the Ministry of Railways in November, 1998 and 
thereafter, on the direction by the Governme nt, reprioritization exercise was again carried 
out by the Railways identifying the projects for completion during X and XI Plan.  This 
proposal was considered by the Government in August, 2003 but was withdrawn.    The 
Committee fail to understand as to why the advice tendered by the Ministry of Finance and 
the Planning Commission to the Ministry of Railways to reprioritise the ongoing projects 
for X & XI Plan has been withdrawn.    During the examination of the Demands for Grants 
2004-05 the representatives of the Railways  informed the Committee that while the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Fina nce are emphasizing for fresh fixation of 
priority of projects the Cabine t is not agreeing to it.   The Committee would, therefore, 
desire to be apprised of the reasons for withdrawal of the above proposal of re-
prioritization of projects.    They would also like to know the specific reasons for which the 
Cabinet has not agreed to the proposal.    Taki ng the perspective view of the subject, the 
Committee are constrained to recommend that the Railways should sincerely address the 
issue of reprioritization of projects at the earl iest so that scarce and valuable resources are  
utilised productively.   

 11 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.5) 
 
The Committee noticed that the Ministry of Railways have included in the past 103 
projects (41 new lines, 51 gauge conversion, 3 doubling, 5 MTP and 3 Railway Electrification) 
in their Pink Book in between 1992-93 to 1998-99 w ithout requisite clearance from the Planning 
Commission, Expanded Board and Cabinet Committ ee in Economic Affairs (CCEA) with the 
stipulation that these would be taken up after taking necessary clearance from these agencies.  
They also note that since the year 2001-2002, the  Railways have taken a policy decision not to 
include any project in the budget in future w ithout obtaining necessary clearance from the 
required agencies.    However,, it has been no ticed by the Committee that new projects are being 
included in the budget without the consultation and clearance from the aforesaid agencies in the 
garb of material modification and extension of the project.  The Committee categorically 
disapprove of such tendencies on the part of  the Railways and strongly recommend that a 
complete moratorium be imposed on inclusion of new projects in the budget at least for the next 
five years, except those which are required on strategic, opera tional such as new Mayanguri-
Jogighopa New Line Project and safety requirements, so that the existing shelf of pending 
projects is cleared to a maximum extent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It may not be desirable to impose strict moratorium on taking up new projects as 
recommended by the Committee as certain proj ects may be required to be taken up on 
operational/strategic importance and other consider ations.  However, as per the decision of the 
Government no new projects is being included in  the budget without obtai ning prior clearances 
of the CCEA. 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 

 12 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3.6) 
To mobilize alternative resources for funding and expeditious completion of its existing 
projects, the Railways have issued in Februa ry, 2001 policy guidelines for participation by 
outside agencies on the basis of various models of public-private partnership schemes.  During 
the evidence, the Committee were apprised that  under the Built, Operate, Lease and Transfer 
(BOLT).  System certain conditions were fram ed and the tenders were called, but due to 
deficiencies in these conditions, private investors were hesitant to invest in Railways.  Therefore, 
the Railways have now reframed these conditions in the form of Built. Operate and Transfer 
(BOT) in consultation with the financial instituti ons such as ICICI, IDBI and major construction 
agencies.  These conditions have now been clear ed by the Ministry of Law and a fresh tender 
would be called for.  They have further inform ed that the Railways have already entered into 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU ) with the State Governments of Karnataka, Jharkhand, 
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu for sharing capital cost of certain identified projects to the extent of 
2/3rd of the project cost.  Similarl y, in case of Andhra Pradesh, shari ng of cost of certain projects 
has been agreed upon 50:50 basis and in case of West Bengal, sharing of 1/3 rd of the cost by the 
State for extension of Metro Railway from Tollygunge to Garia.  Though the Committee note the 
efforts made by the Ministry of Railways in mobilizing alternative sources for funding the 
projects, however, they are of th e firm view that serious efforts are still required to be made by 
the Railways to actualize the private sector pa rticipation.  They recommend that a Task Force 
consisting of the representatives of the Planni ng Commission and the Mi nistries of Railways, 
Finance and Programme Implementation be const ituted to look into afre sh into the entire 
perspective of private sector pa rticipation in the development of  rail infrastructure and make 
recommendations thereon in a time-found manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Rail Vikas Yojana, a non-budge tary initiative, was announced on 15 th August, 
2002 by the Hon’ble Prime Minister.  Subsequentl y, Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd. has been formed to 
implement National Rail Vikas Yojana. 
  

 13 
 
 
In accordance with the Hon’ble Prime Mi nister’s announcement at the National 
Development Council meeting held in December, 2002 for forging public-private partnership in 
the widest possible range of ac tivities in the both phys ical and social infr astructure and the 
decision taken in the Committee of Secretaries’ meeting held on 9.9.2003, Planning Commission 
has decided to constitute the PPP Sub-Gr oup on Infrastructure in October, 2003.  The 
Composition is as follows: 
   Secretary, Planning Commission    - Chairman 
  Secretary, D/o Economic Affairs,  Ministry of Finance - Member 
  Chairman, Railway Board     - Member 
  Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways - Member 
  Secretary, Ministry of Shipping    - Member 
  Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation    - Member 
  Secretary, Ministry of Power     - Member 
  Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources   - Member 
  Advisor, Transport, Planning Commission   - Member  
 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
Recommendations (Para 3.8) 
 During their study visit to Srinagar in June, 2003, the Committee were informed that the 
Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla 287 Kms. New Li ne National Project was sanctioned in two 
phases.  Udhampur-Srinagar section was sanction in the year 1994-95 at an estimated cost of 
Rs.1500 crore and later in 1995-96 it has been m odified and extended upto Baramulla at an 
estimated cost of Rs.3400 crore.  The Committee were  apprised that the cost of the project had 
now escalated to Rs.5400 crore reasons being the in itial cost was calculated on comparative cost 
analysis method as the final location survey wa s not conducted due to project alignment passing 
through difficult terrain in some section.  Th e Committee were given to understand that the 
location survey has now been completed.  The la nd acquisition process by the State Government 
particularly in Qazigund-Baramu lla stretch is slow despite th e deposit of Rs.377 crore by the 
Railways with the State Government for disbursement of compensation.  The target date for 
phase-I Udhampur-Katra is achievable if the requi red level of funding is made available, Katra-
Qazigund depends upon adequate secu rity cover and handing over th e required land by the State 

 14 
 
Government and Qazigund-Baramulla depend s upon timely acquisition of land by the State 
Government. 
 
 The Committee while identifying the gray areas  such as availability of proper security to 
the man power executing the projects, allocati on of adequate fund as per requirement, 
recruitment of man power and acquisition of land from the St ate Government express their 
apprehension about the further cost escalation and timely completion of this project.  They are of 
the view that for timely implementation of th e project, integrated coordination among the 
concerned agencies like Prime Minister’s Office, Planning Commi ssion, Ministries of Finances, 
Home Affairs and Railways and the State Govern ments of J&K are necessary.  This integrated 
coordination among these agencies will definitely provide a synergic effect to boost the 
implementation of the project.  They, theref ore, recommend that a Project Management 
Authority under the administrative control of PMO, involving the representatives from the PMO,  
the Ministry of Railways, the J&K Government and the Project executing agencies be constituted 
to coordinate and oversee the progress of the pr oject in a holistic and synchronic manner.  The 
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
For monitoring of Central Projects for Railw ays and Roads in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, Standing Committee of  Secretaries or Development Programmes of J&K under the 
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary review s the progress of projects periodically.  A Sub-
Group-I under the Chairmanship of Special Secret ary (Home) has also been formed comprising 
officials from PMO, Planning Co mmission, Ministry of Finance a nd other concerned Ministries.  
The progress of the projects is being reviewed by this Group once in two months. 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
  

 15 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVTINS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.1) 
 The Committee note that as on 1.4.2003 th ere are 300 ongoing, 7 pending and 3 frozen 
projects in the Railways’ Pink Book.   Out of these ongoing/pending projects, 233 projects are in 
progress at present having a throwforward of RS.44,733 crore while 74 projects have been 
completed with some residual works to be ex ecuted.  These ongoing projects comprise of 82 
New Lines, 70 Gauge Conversions, 116 Doublings, 15 Metropolitan Transport (MTP) and 17 
Railway Electrification Projects with a th rowforward of  Rs.24,450 crore, Rs.10149 crore, 
Rs.4911 crore, Rs.4385 crore (including the shar e of State Government) and Rs.838 crore 
respectively which poses a severe financial bu rden for the Indian Railways.  The Committee 
further note that the Railway Projects are mainly financed through general budgetary support and 
also from the revenues generated from market borrowings and internal generation.  The total 
outlay for these projects during 2003-04 is a bout Rs.4800 crore including Rs.2210 crore from 
sources other than normal Budgetary Support like State Governments sharing, funds from 
Ministry of Defence and through Built Operate and Transfer (BOT)/special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV).  As per the Ministry of Railways at th e present rate of allocat ion, without considering 
escalation, the expected time for completion of these ongoing projects, category wise, would be 
13 years for New Lines, 10 years for Gauge Conversion, 6 years for MTP, 5 years for Doubling 
and 4 years for Railway Electrification.  Due to acute constraint of resources, the completion 
target of projects at present are fixed on year to  year basis keeping in view the progress of the 
work and availability of resources.  The Com mittee also find that after excluding the projects 
which have been completed physic ally, the percentage viability of the existing ongoing projects 
is very low particularly in the case of New Line projects (10%), Ga uge Conversion (38%) and 
MTP (33%).  The Ministry of Railways have attributed this low viability to the projects taken up 
for providing rail infrastructure in backward and other regions on social consideration and 
projects taken up in far flung areas such as Ja mmu & Kashmir and North East region to bring 
socio-economic development. 

 16 
 
 
 According to the Ministry of Railways, the throwforwards in majority of the projects 
under plan heads viz., Doubling, MTP and Railway Electrification are manageable and expected 
to be completed by the end of 10 th Plan but the real problem of  funding lies with the New Line 
and Gauge Conversion projects which will depend on actual av ailability of funds.  The 
Committee attributes the present precarious financ ial state of the Railway s to unabated addition 
of new projects every year without  ensuring adequate allocations, declining  share of internal 
revenue from 58% in VIII Plan to 21% in the 2002-03, increase in market borrowings from 19% 
in VIII Plan to 36% in 2001-02 and increase in staff cost upto 56%  of the total working expenses 
from 1998-99 onwards.  The Committee, having taken into account all these factors, find that the 
Indian Railways are actually at cross-roads at pres ent, finding difficult to realize their identity, 
objectives and goals.  Taking a holistic view of the entire economic, administrative and social 
perspectives of the Indian Railways, the Com mittee strongly recommend for an urgent crisis 
management approach on the part of Railways to r eassess and rejuvenate their financial health in 
view of the mammoth throw forwards.” 
  
Reply of the Government 
The availability of resources for the projects has increased considerably in the past two 
years as a number of initiatives have been ta ken for generation of reso urces other than normal 
budgetary support.   These include public/private  partnership, sharing of cost by the State 
Governments, Defence funding for strategic line s, National Rail Vikas Yojana and projects 
specific funding for National Project of Udhampu r-Srinagar-Baramulla.  Further, Minister of 
Railways in his interim budget speech 2004-05 has announced Remote Area Rail Sampark 
Yojana with an additional outlay of Rs.20,000 crore to be completed in next five years.  With 
this, it is expected  that all the ongoing projec ts would get completed in a period of next five 
years. 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3.3) 
 The Committee have reasons to believe the funding is not the sole cause of the slow 
progress in the execution of projects.  There are varied drawbacks such as spending capacity of 
the Railways and lack of proper and effec tive coordination between the project executing 
authorities at project site and administrative machinery at the Centre.  There is also a major 

 17 
 
defect in the planning of a project where no time frame for completion and phase to phase 
funding is ensured.   The Committee are of the considered view that  unless a vigorous and 
professional approach towards the project selection, proper planning and execution of the same is 
adopted, nothing is going to deliver tangible results.  Therefore, they recommend that a 
mechanism like a Project Management Cell be evol ved and established at all levels from the 
projects sanctioning authority to the executing authority in the Railway Board to ensure effective 
implementation of the projects in a time-bound manner and for planning and to see each and 
every project separately so that funds required over different pe riods of time for completion of 
the projects is known.” 
  
Reply of the Government 
A well established and effective system of mon itoring of projects at various levels exists 
in the Railways.  The progress is being monito red continuously at the field and Zonal Railway 
level by appropriate officers.  General Managers of the Railw ays also review the position 
regularly.  At the Boards level also, progre ss is being monitored through monthly progress 
reports and through regular review meetings with Railways.  The project monitoring system is 
effective and by and large the projects are being implemented as per the annual targets fixed.  
However, some times there have been delays due to various reasons beyond Railways’ control 
like prolongation of monsoon, failure  of contractors, adverse law and order situation, delay in 
land acquisition, forestry clearances etc.   Such constraints also are being addressed in the regular 
review meetings and remedial action taken wherever required. 
 
The projects can be implemented in a tim e bound manner only when required funding is 
assured.  There is a heavy throw-forward of  ongoing projects on the Railways and with the 
limited availability of resources, it is not feasible to assure funding for most of the projects.  
However, with augmentation of additional resources through various initiatives taken up in the 
last two years and with announcement of Remote Area Sampark Yojana, it is expected that the 
implementation of projects would get expedite d and all the ongoing projec ts are likely to be 
completed in next 5 years. 
 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 

 18 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.7) 
 The Committee note with concern that the existing criteria for prioritization of projects as 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economi c Affairs in November, 1998 has led to 
unproductive results.  They find that because of the large shelf of ongoing projects particularly 
under New Lines and Gauge Conversion, the limite d resources available with Railways get 
spread thinly over a large number of projects leading inevitably to a very long completion period.  
The fund invested in the project gets locked up  and does not yield any return.  The Committee, 
therefore, are of the view that under the prev ailing financial situati on, the existing criteria 
requires a thorough review so as to allocate the funds to the on going projects based on realistic 
needs.  The priority criteria mu st lead to a result oriented f und allocation process.  The Railways 
should give priority to those projects  which augment the capacity of the Railway system in high 
density corridors apart from investment needed for ensuring safety and reliability of the services.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways should carry out a fresh 
exercise on prioritization of pr ojects considering th e available budget alloca tion as well as need 
to complete as many projects as possible within a reasonable time period.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As mentioned in reply to para 3.1, all the ongo ing projects are likely to be completed in 
next 5 years and there may not be any need for reprioritization of the projects. 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
 Para No. 3.9 
 The Committee would also like the Ministry of Railways to expedite the implementation 
of the projects as mentioned in the minutes of  the Eighteenth sitting of  the Committee held on 
24.09.2003.’ 
Reply of the Government 
The progress of works mentioned by the Committee have been expedited.  The detailed 
project wise progress is as under:- 
 
 Amravati-Narkher - (New Line)  
The work of earthwork of bridges has b een taken up in the entire stretch from 
Amravati to Narkher.  In phase-I, work from Amravati-Chandurbazar (44 kms.) is 
planned for completion during 2004-05. 
  

 19 
 
 Miraj-Latur - (Gauge Conversion)  
The work from Khuruduwadi to Pandharpur (52 kms.) and Latur – Latur Road (33 
kms.) has already been completed and lines commissioned.  The work is in progress in 
rest of the section.  Latur – Yedshi is being planned for completion during 2004-2005 and 
Yedshi-Khuruduwadi during 2005-2006. 
 
 Viramgam-Jodhpur, Bhildi-Samdari-Luni     -  (Gauge Conversion) 
Viramgam-Jodhpur gauge conversion consis ts of two project s namely Bhildi-
Viramgam gauge conversion and Bhildi-Samdar i Gauge Conversion project.  Samdari to 
Luni is already Broad Gauge. 
 
On Bhildi-Viramgam Project, gauge conversion of Viramgam-Mehsana (65 kms.) 
is under progress through BOT and targeted for completion during 2004-2005.  The work 
of Mehsana-Patan gauge conversion is also being planned to be taken up. 
 
As regards Samdari-Bhildi gauge Conversion, it is mentioned that the project is 
being implemented under Nationa l Rail Vikas Yojana.  Tenders  for ballast supply and 
civil works for part length are under finalisation. 
 
 Tamluk-Digha  -   (New Line) 
New Line from Tamluk to Kanthi (56 km s.) has already been commissioned for 
passenger traffic on 20.11.2003.    The balance s ection is targeted for completion during 
2004-2005. 
 
 Neemuch-Ratlam  - (Gauge Conversion) 
Earthwork, bridge works and ballasting is in progress.  The work will be 
progressed and completed in the coming years as per availability of resources. 
 
 Gandhidham – Palanpur  -   (Gauge Conversion) 
This work is proposed to be implemented through SPV named Kutch Railway Co. 
Government of Gujarat has shown willingness to  share part cost of the project along with 
other beneficiaries namely Ka ndla Port and Mundra Port.  MOU in this connection has 
been signed on 03-01-04 and Kutch Railway C o. has been registered by RVNL.  A total 
of Rs. 200 crore shall be the eq uity for SPV in which Railways, Government of Gujarat, 

 20 
 
Kandla & Mundra Ports have share of 50% , 4%, 26% and 20% respectively.  A 
shareholder agreement in this connection is under finalisation. 
  
The work is under National Rail Vikas Yoja na and is being executed by Railway 
for Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd.  Earthwork, bridge works, ballasting etc. are in progress. 
 
 Rajkot – Veraval (Gauge Conversion)  
Rajkot-Junagarh section (102 km) opened for goods traffic on 30.03.2003 and 
passenger traffic on 27.07.03.  Junagarh-Verav al (86 km) section has also been 
completed recently.   Extension of Veraval upto Somnath (3 kms) is in progress. 
 
 Udhna-Jalgaon  -  (Railway Electrification) 
  Work completed and commercial services introduced on 29.08.2003. 
 
Jayanagar-Darbhanga-Narkatiaganj (Gauge Conversion) 
 Jayanagar-Darbhanga-Narkatiaganj (268 kms. ) gauge conversion was included in the 
Budget 1997-98 and an expenditu re of Rs.32.5 crore has been incurred upto March, 2004.  An 
outlay of Rs.25.04 crore has been provided for the project during 2004-05.  The work is being 
progressed in phases. 
 In Jayanagar-Darbhanga-Sitamarhi (136 km) se ction, earthwork in a length of 127 km 
has been completed.  Out of 90 minor bridges, 8 bridges are being retain ed.  24 minor bridges 
and 1 major bridge have been completed.  Work on 2 major bridges is in progress. 
 In Sitamarhi-Raxaul-Narkatiaganj (132 km s.) section, the earthwork tender has been 
awarded for the entire length and work is in progress. 
 
 Karur-Salem (New Delhi) 
 The work was included in the budget 1996-97.  The anticipated cost of the work is Rs. 
229.88 crore and an expenditure of  Rs.64.69 crore has so far been incurred upto March, 2004.   
An outlay of Rs.5 crore has been provided for the project during 2004-05. 
 Out of the 14 reaches (85 km.), contracts fo r earthwork and bridges have been awarded 
and works are in various stages of progress in  10 reaches (69 km.).  32.76 lakh cum out of 54.89 
lakh cum earthwork, 21% work on major bridges,  49 out of 117 minor bridges and 5 out of 29 
ROBs have been completed.  Tenders for balance 4 reaches have been processed. 

 21 
 
 There have been litigations regarding la nd acquisition in some areas which are being 
sorted out.  In one of the court cases, the High Court has given stay order to the Government 
Order. 
 As a first phase, completion of works between Salem and Namakkal (51 km) is being 
given priority. 
[M/o Railways O.M No. 2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 8.9.2004] 

 22 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVTIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.2) 
 
 The Committee feel that it is a high time fo r the Railways to introspect themsevels and 
opt for a stocktaking exercise into their obj ectives and achievements.   They therefore, 
recommend that the Railways should restrain th eir market borrowings and operating cost to the 
minimum and increase their internal  generati on of revenues to the optimum extent, Railways 
must overcome their built-in inefficiency and incr easing Operative Costs.  They are of the firm 
view that it can be done only by restructuring th e entire administrative ed ifice of the Railway 
Board, rationalizing the freight and passenger fare policy, establis hing a mechanism for tariff 
fixation, improving operational pro ductivity and efficiency, undert aking a vigorous commercial 
management and upgrading safety infrastructure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Railways are aware of the fast changing scenario in transport sector and economy in 
general and are taking required steps to meet the growing de mands of passenger and freight 
traffic, capacity enhancement, resource mobilisation and achieving reduced operating ratio. 
  
The level market borrowings which is need based, has remained steady and has been kept 
under control.  Market borrowing through IRFC  is resorted mainly to meet the funding 
requirement of Rolling Stock acquisition/repl acement and modernization.  This figure is 
restricted to the assessed requirement to meet th e traffic demands only.  As a percentage of total 
Plan outlay, market borrowing has come down from 36% during 1998-99 to 22% during the year 
2003-04(RE).  Railways efforts to control expe nditure and augment earnings have begun to 
fructify visibly as a result of which, the operating ratio has improved considerably from 98.3% in 
2000-01 to around 92% in 2003-04.  The rate of growth of Ordinary Working Expenses has now 
come down to less than 4% from 8 to 14% in the pre-Fifth Pay Commissi on era.  The internal 
resource generation for Plan has also improved progressively from Rs. 2831 crore after deferring 
dividend to the extent of Rs.1823 crore in 2000-01 to Rs.3837 crore in 2003-04(RE).  The 
Railways’ efforts to augment earnings inter-alia cover rationalization of the traffic structure, 
innovative marketing strategies and focused business organisation. 

 23 
 
 
The efforts of the Railways will be to con centrate on core activities of passenger and 
freight transportation.  Improvement of Safety Infrastructure on the Railways is given utmost 
priority and a special Railway Safety Fund ha s been created to wipe out the arrears of 
replacement/renewal of assets.  Besides, a Corpor ate Safety Plan has also been formulated to 
guide the future investment on the Railways.  
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No.3.4) 
  As per the Ministry of Railways, the Budge tary Support as a part of the Annual Plan has 
witnessed a decreasing trend.  It  was 75% in the V Plan, which has drastically come down to 
23% in the VIII Plan after the establishment of  the Indian Railway Finance Corporation in 
December, 1986, which was incorporated with th e sole objective of raising money from the 
market to finance partly the Plan Outlay and the developmental needs of the Railways.  The 
Budgetary Support has now increased to 35% (a pproximately) in the year 2003-04.  During the 
course of evidence, the Committee were apprised by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commi ssion that the Budgeta ry Support has increas ed in terms of 
percentage as well as in absolute term during th e last 5-6 years.  It has increased to 6.46% in 
2001-02 from 3.97% in 1995-96 as a pat of Central Plan.  In absolute  term also it has increased 
from Rs. 1141 crore (75% of the Annual Plan) in the V Plan to Rs.14445 crore approximately 
(average 31% of the Annual Plans of the Railways) in IX Plan.  Further they stated that 
providing additional funds to th e Railways to execute the ongoing projects is not a problem 
provided the Railways assure to deliver results.   However, they emphasized that the Railways 
must select the last-mile projects and prioritize them realistically enough to complete the same in 
time-bound manner.  The Committee, having analy zed the scope of funding from the Central 
Exchequer, have reach the conclusion that the Ministry of Railways must workout an effective 
strategy and prepare a project-wise priority of their projects in consultation with the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance within three months so as to execute those projects first 
which ensure 100% results.  They further emphasi ze that the project executing authorities must 
be made accountable for all causes of delay in execution except in the case of natural calamity 
and want to funds.   
 

 24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 So far as prioritization exercise is concer ned, it is pointed out that categorization of 
projects was earlier done in 1998 and approved by  the Government in November, 1998.  As per 
this, New Line and Gauge Conversion projects were categorized in different categories.  Further, 
as directed by the Government, re -prioritization exercise was ag ain carried out duly identifying 
the projects for completion during X Plan and XI   Plan.  The proposal was considered by the 
Government in August, 2003; however, the same  was withdrawn.  There is a system for 
monitoring of projects and the project executing authority is accountable for timely completion 
of projects except where the delay is not in his control.” 
[M/o Railways O.M No.2003/BC-II/XIII/300/2 dated 26.5.2003] 
 
  

 25 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMNET ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                      BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23.11.2004                                                          Chairman, 
2 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 